This is our October interim
committee of courts, Corrections
and Justice. I'm Representative
Christine Chandler, the chair.
I think we're starting in a
subcommittee at this point. We
don't quite have a quorum, but I
don't want people waiting and we
have a full agenda for the day.
Why don't we have the members
who are present introduce
themselves. We'll start to my
left with Representative Al Ken
will come around.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
good morning everybody. I'm
sorry that I'm not mingling with
the group, but I've got a cold
and allergies and everything is
just.
Doing its thing to me here in
Las Cruces. So, uh, I'm going to
hide on this corner and just
listen as much as I can, but let
me tell you, you know how I'm
here. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. I
hope you feel better soon, um,
senator.
Thank you. Good morning, Madam
Chair. My name is Crystal
Brantley. This is not my
committee. I'm visiting as a
guest today, but it is my
district, so I reside in
Elephant Butte and I have, uh,
Hidago, Luna, Sierra, and Donana
County.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
everyone. I'm Katie Duhig and I
represent Senate District 10 in
Albuquerque. Albuquerque is
North Valley and part of the
west side.
Good morning, Madam Chair. I am
State Senator Mimi Stewart from
District 17 in Albuquerque, the
International District and East
Gateway area. Love to be down
here and beautiful Las Cruces.
Good morning everyone. Peter
Worth, Senate District 25 in
Santa Fe, also glad to be here,
spent the night last night Truth
or Consequences, and Senator
Brantley's district and drove
down this morning, but happy to
be here.
Dat with Representative Hall.
Good morning, Madam Chair. I'm
Bill Hall. I'm representing
District 3 out of San Juan
County. Uh, I am an Aggie, my
kids are Aggies, and it's good
to be in Aggie land. Go Aggies.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee members, uh, I'm Greg
Nibert, senator from District
27, which is over on the central
east side, Chavis Curry, Debaca,
Lee and Roosevelt counties.
Good morning, everybody, Madam
Chair.
My name is Alan Martinez. I
represent the 23rd House
District.
Which is the uh northern part of
Rio Rancho.
And the western side of the town
of Berlio and I'm excited to be
here.
There you go. Good morning.
Yeah, I'm the guy who lives two
blocks away and shows up late
disheveled, that's me. Oh.
Thank you, I want to thank all
of you, Lee and Mimi, Peter,
everybody who's come, you, Madam
Chair, for coming to Las Cruces.
It's a long hike. I'll let you
know that we're used to it going
from this direction up north,
but it's nice to have you come
down south and, uh, the
university, and this is you
can't get a better place to have
a committee meeting in terms of
the view and the weather's
pretty nice down down here too,
so we appreciate all of you
being here, uh, coming all the
way to Las Cruces, Madam Chair.
I represent Senate District 31,
which is about 1/4 of Donana
County. It includes the areas
going down to
Texas border or the Mexican
border at Sunland Park, Anthony,
and about about 1/4 of the city
of Las Cruces.
Um, well, good morning,
everyone. Uh, as I said,
Representative Christine
Chandler, I chair this committee
and it is lovely. This is a
beautiful time of year for this
part of the state, so I'm glad
we're able to meet here and I
want to acknowledge the
hospitality of NMSU. They've
been very great to work with in
terms of organizing and making
sure we had the refreshments
that we need, so thank you very
much, um, so, uh, the first item
on our agenda is corrections
overview.
A little early. Madam, no, no,
President, excuse me, we have
President Monica Torres. Madam
Chair, before we do that, can I
just take a moment, please?
Absolutely, Madam Chair, I think
it's important for us to do two
things before we get to the work
at hand. One is to recognize the
passing of John Arthur Smith,
um, days ago, uh, terrible loss
to all of us that served with
John in many capacities, but
John was here when I when I
arrived, I think Peter and Mimi
as well too, and we learned a
lot from him. I know a lot of
you all did as well too, so.
Um, I'd like to take a moment to
be thinking of John and his
family. We had the privilege of
joining him down in Palomas a
couple of weeks before he passed
away and joined him and his
family, a lot of his close
friends to celebrate his life
and he he was he was ready, um,
and that's the way John always
was. John was always ready uh
for just about anything and
everything, so if we could do
that, Madam Chair, and then, and
then while we're thinking of
that, please keep Donna Irwin in
your prayers. Donna is in very
poor health right now, um, and,
uh, so please keep her and her
family in your prayers as well
too.
Thank you. Thank you very much,
um, well, President, uh, interim
president, I welcome and again
thank you for the hospitality
that you all have shown us.
Good morning and welcome to New
Mexico State University's
beautiful Las Cruces campus.
We're very proud to host the
interim legislative courts,
Corrections and Justice
Committee this week. I want to
particularly thank
Representative, uh, Christine
Chandler, chair, and Senator
Joseph Cervantes vice chair and
all the committee members for
the opportunity to host you and
share a few updates from NMSU.
Uh, we're always really happy to
have people in Southern New
Mexico.
Uh, we're looking forward, as,
as you all have read in the
papers, we're looking forward to
welcoming our new permanent
president, Dr. Valerio Ferme.
I'll tell you there's a lot of
excitement across campus and in
the community about his arrival.
Uh, Doctor Fermay comes to us
from the University of
Cincinnati, whereas Provost, he
oversees a quite substantial
portfolio.
That includes oversight of 12,
uh, main campus colleges, two
regional campuses, the graduate
school, the library, all of
academic affairs and enrollment
management. Uh, Cincinnati is a
large institution, about 52,000
students, almost 5000 faculty,
another 5000 staff and a budget
of $1.2 billion. He brings to us
incredibly impressive experience
and, and if you've met him or
had a chance to watch some of
his presentations. He also
brings a calm and compassionate.
Focus that I think will help him
strengthen and stabilize our
university community and build
productive relationships with
legislators, other state
leaders, and stakeholders who
play a role in moving New Mexico
State University forward.
Um, it, it relative to or
relevant to this committee, I
just wanted to highlight a few
points of pride for our
university in terms of rankings
for our criminal justice
program. We're proud to share
that NMSU's program is ranked a
top school again in 2024 by the
US News and World Report for a
number of its programs,
including our online master's
program in criminal justice, uh,
where we're tied for fifty-3rd
nationally. Our NMSU Global
online campus has also been
recognized by Forbes' advisor as
the best online school in the
state of New Mexico.
Go for 2024.
Our criminal justice program was
recently highlighted for
Professor Ida D'Antonio's
amazing work in integrating
virtual reality into a forensic
science class and how VR
supported that pedagogy.
Our criminal justice faculty are
developing several
microcredential courses to
enhance our educational
opportunities for students.
These includes topics like
forensic analysis, human
trafficking, human rights,
cybercrime prevention,
corrections, and community
policing.
Earning microcredentials enable
students to showcase their
expertise in areas of criminal
justice which can significantly
boost employability and
professional advancement in a
competitive job market. In
addition to that, these sorts of
microcredential opportunities
give students already and I mean
people already in the, in the
profession, a chance to, to
upskill or reskill and be more
competitive in the market.
I'm also proud to highlight a
partnership that we're excited
about between the Department of
Criminal Justice and the Tulsa
Police Department. It is a paid
internship that offers students
hands-on law enforcement
experience while earning the
final 15 credit hours for their
bachelor's degree in criminal
justice. This project is not
only been driven by people at
New Mexico State University, but
by NSU alumni in the field,
including, and most
particularly, um, Jesse
Guardiola, who was a 1995
graduate of the
program
And one of our criminal justice
master's degree graduates, Wyatt
Green, most of us don't
recognize that name, but he
spent 4 years entertaining Aggie
fans as our NMSU mascot, Pistol
Pete, who also joined the Tulsa
Police Department's May 2024
Academy.
You can read more about that and
many other, um, exciting stories
about our alumni in the magazine
that we call Panorama. Uh, it'll
be around, it'll be out
somewhere around, uh, our
homecoming time. We hope that if
you have an opportunity to join
us in Las Cruces for homecoming,
that'll be November 8th and 9th
on campus. Thank you again,
Madam Chair. Mr. Vice Chair, for
the opportunity to speak with
you today. We really hope that
you enjoy your time on campus
and in Las Cruces. And if
there's anything that we can
provide
To you, please just get one of
our attention and, and we'll be
on it. Um, thank you very much
and go Aggies. Well, thank you
very much, President Torres, as
I said, everybody has been so
helpful and really appreciate
it.
So thank you.
Madam,
just a couple of things too. I
don't mean to take get you
behind schedule. I know you're
good about that, but before we
let the president or the I guess
the interim or chancellor or
whatever title we're going to
give you, um, Moni as I know
her, grew up in a house beside
my grandparents' house here in
Las Cruces in the old
neighborhood La Colonia, so I've
known her since we were kids,
um, and family in the
neighborhood. It's now owned by
Cristina Chavez Kelly, our
family home there and many of
you may know her very successful
author and performance artist,
nationally known. um.
I wanted to recognize for the
Aggies benefit Johnny in the
room and others this last
weekend, number one Alabama
upset by Vanderbilt, uh, in
college football led by a NMSU
football star here that we lost,
but, um, well, I'm happy for him
and I think we should all be
happy for him that he would be
on to national stage and
everybody's talking about, uh,
our former quarterback Pavia. So
that, that's an exciting thing
to be here at the football
stadium to to realize that we're
kind of playing on that
national, national.
Stage 2, so I appreciate the
fact that you stepped in when
you did Moni for the time in
some difficult times, and I
think it's important to
recognize too that we had some
outside interference, uh, with
the, the process that the
regions followed here in the
university adopted for itself.
We had the Secretary of higher
ed, deemed it a failed search
and encouraged the regions to go
a different direction and we
should at least acknowledge that
sometimes the state oversteps
local authority, local control,
and I'm excited by the choice.
I'm glad to know that the fact
and others, and you are
embracing that and we're going
to wish him a lot of success.
It's hard to come in to a
position for an institution like
this as a university, when the
Secretary of higher eds already
said you're not the right person
for the fit or the
administration, and I, I think
that's unfortunate, so we should
be cautious. I think all of us
should be cautious when we maybe
step out of our lane, so I think
that's worth mentioning. Wish
you all the luck. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. We're a
little bit ahead of schedule,
but that's not a bad thing. If
we could ask the Secretary of
Corrections to come up and
Share with us her presentation.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members. It was a really fun
driving on campus today. I went
to NMSU also, but only for the
first year. And then I ended up
moving to Albuquerque, but my
sister graduated from here and
so my dad is always sporting an
Aggie's hat and a Lobo's shirt
because he's always trying to
represent all of the, the
universities. So today I will
just give you guys an overview
of, I mean, you all know the
department
already, but just of some of the
things that we've done recently
and some of the innovations in
education and in our vocational
training area.
And then, uh, I'll give you
guys, I'll give you all a ton of
time to ask me questions and,
uh, really get to whatever it is
that you're really interested in
hearing from me. Um, so,
I'll first start by telling you
some new.
News some exciting news. It was
all over our social media and
and we we've publicized it quite
a bit, but you may recall, uh,
last year that we beat all of
the other higher education
institutions in earnings of high
school equivalencies, uh, for
adults. And this year we beat
our numbers from last year and,
uh, we remain in that top
position, so we're very excited
about that. Our goal is to
continue on getting every single
person who might possibly be
eligible.
in our custody, a high school
equivalency and, uh, and doing
that until everybody in our
custody has that credential.
And, uh, so for, for us, that
was a very exciting thing. Our
educators have really expanded
the amount of time that the
students are spending in the
class and the number of students
that are in each class. With
that, we've also done a lot of
expansion with higher education,
so we're now able to do
partnerships with colleges and
Universities that we were not
previously able to or maybe we
had a small relationship, but we
had a small footprint. And so
what we've done is we've brought
in a lot more colleges and we
have been able to expand course
offerings and
Make it such that the locations
that we were working with before
have expanded to more
institutions and just a couple
of those uh universities of
course are two states are two
big state schools here in MSU.
They're doing some classes with
our, uh, inmates and in higher
education and of course UNM is
as well, but we also have
relationships with Messlands
and, um, ASU works with us on
the Penn project and, uh,
another local school, the
University of the Southwest,
does.
A seminary program in our Hobbs
facility. Ashland University,
California Coast University, and
so forth, but we've been able to
expand those classes by working
with, um, the people actually at
workforce Solutions have really
helped us a lot with the
expansion of those, uh, services
and of course, at the higher
education department as well.
Um,
That career technical is the big
one though, and I, I that's the
one I feel really excited about
and I've talked to you all a
little bit about some of the
offerings. We started out sort
of small. We had initially some
simulator machines where we were
teaching people at two
facilities, how to do heavy
equipment operations, so they
were learning how to drive
backhoes and forklifts and
things of that nature. And we
were able to get a small number
of people certified prior to
their departing our prisons by
bringing the RLD team in.
To come and do the testing for
licensure before people were
able to leave, but we only had
that at two of our facilities.
And so we've now expanded that
and we have different types of,
uh, simulator machines at
various different locations. So
we're now able to do on a
simulator machine welding CDL,
uh, the heavy equipment
operation. And so that means
we're able to offer it at more
sites and we have um sites
offering.
Those courses, I think, well,
every single facility has at
least one of these different
elements and some facilities
have multiple elements like the
Las Cruces facility, for
example, has, uh, several
different SIM options, including
the CDL, the heavy equipment
operation and uh we're working
on expanding them to welding,
starting off with a SIM, but
moving on to the actual
equipment and, and doing welding
work.
In the Santa Fe facility, we're
starting off a new program to
teach people HACC, and that one
we were able to work to get WIOA
funding so that we would be able
to essentially charge the, the
federal government to put on the
class. So we have a contract
with a person out in the
community who does this work for
a living and they will be coming
into our facility actually they
already are coming into our
facility, teaching our inmates
how to do air conditioner,
heating, cooling, repair.
And uh we also have expanded to
create two shops where we're
doing automotive work. And, uh,
we're working also on on local
community colleges Dona Anna is
one of them where we're trying
to get them to come into our
institutions and teach some more
of those auto mechanics courses
and as many populations as we
possibly can.
Um,
I'm not sure that I've talked
with this committee about it,
but I've mentioned it
previously. This year we finally
introduced tablets into our
facilities. You may have seen
some press or some social media
about that.
But what that has done for us.
It allows us to offer lots of
materials, legal libraries, uh,
education applications like the
type of things we would see in a
high school classroom or on our
kids' laptops and, um, tablets
that they're using in their
schools, they get things like
Khan Academy and those other
types of applications that are
available to the community for
their studying. And we're
working right now with the
tablet provider to be able to
stream our own education courses
across facilities so that
If we don't have the ability to
in person offer a course in
every institution, we would be
able to make that offering wider
by offering it to people on the
tablet. So our intention, our
goal will be to be able to teach
a course at one site and offer
it to people at every site. Uh,
and we're getting really close
to that situation, but the
tablets have really been a game
changer. We um,
we're able the, the inmates are
now able to do things like video
visitation at their own
really, because we do have video
visitation right now, but it has
to be scheduled. It's in the
visitation room and it's, it's
handled on a really old school,
uh, desktop computer where we
just sort of sign them into a
Zoom account or whatever the
account is that we're using and
they're able to interact with
their family like that, but this
allows them to do it any time of
day, and, uh, there's, of
course, security features that
are built in to prevent any sort
of inappropriate behavior and we
have gone live with our tablet
right now and one of
Our state facilities, but we
have not fully gone live with
our our private facilities,
which is the Hobbs facility and,
uh, the Otaro County facility,
but we do expect that we will
have the tablets rolled out
before the end of the year at
both of those locations and then
um another item that I don't
know that I've shared with you
all is, this is many years in
the, in the making, and I think
that I've shared with you the
struggles along the years that
we've had.
But we were finally able to
bring the MVD's equipment into
our institutions and we're now
able to offer and we've we've
actually been doing it in the
state facilities for a while
now, but we're able to do it in
all of our facilities right now
where before a person gets out
of prison, they are able to
leave with a real valid
state-issued ID and, uh, it's a
huge, a huge improvement from
what we did previously, which is
we take a copy of their inmate
ID and laminate it and.
You know, expect that people out
in the world are going to see
that as a real identification,
which they did not. And it made
it difficult for people to do
basic things like go to get
their vital records, but all of
those things we're doing with
them now before they get out.
We're helping them get a hold of
any vital records, any
documentation that they might
need that would help to reduce
some of those barriers that make
it difficult, that can make it
difficult for people to succeed,
so it's been, um,
it's a drastic change for any
person who's leaving prison and
we might not as citizens think
of it as such a big deal, but
the
concept or the thought of being
in an institution for a very
long period of time and then
having to navigate the
bureaucracy of what it takes to
get a hold of all of those vital
documents in order to get your
ID, it can be very frustrating
and for some people, it can lead
to relapse, it can lead to them
saying, you know, I don't feel
like doing this. I'm just going
to go back and, uh, we believe
that it's really made a very big
difference in people's lives.
As far as their
Removal of barriers to success.
A few other things that we're
doing in our, um, corrections
industries, which I've
Rarely talked about. We have had
some slow starts there, but just
to share with you right now, we,
we've started up a bakery
program at the Springer
facility. Um, we are working in
every single one of our
facilities to do food
certifications. We have inmates
enrolled in those classes
everywhere. We did a culinary
class also using WIOA funds at
our penitentiary of New Mexico
and Santa Fe. I invited all of
you, uh, to attend and some
folks did, but we had a chef
Fernando Ruiz, who beat Bobby
Flay and he won chopped. Uh,
he's, he, he recently opened a
restaurant in Santa Fe, but he
was in our penitentiary teaching
our inmates how to cook and
teaching them how to present a
dinner and, uh, we held a dinner
that was cooked by them and, um,
overseen by, by Chef Ruiz, just
really exciting things. So he's
still very eager to work with
our populations and so we're
hoping not only can we bring him
back into the institution, but
our
Hope is that we might be able to
work with him at a commercial
kitchen in a location that's
convenient for him, where we can
take people who are on probation
and parole to that commercial
kitchen and he can teach them
courses there. So that's
something that we're working on
now.
And
Another
Item with corrections industries
and waned for a little while,
but it's working again. We have
these weaving machines at the,
uh, Santa Rosa facility. I'm
sure many of you have seen them,
and they were up and running for
a while and then they weren't
and we had some staffing issues
and so on and so on. A lot of
barriers that prevented us from
having it going on, but it is
active. We have several inmates
that are participating in that.
And the reason I bring it up is
because of the next thing and
it's not something that's
happened yet, but it will, and
I, I was there the other day.
Ready to go. We'll be having a
grand opening of our corrections
industries store at, uh, the,
the grounds right outside of the
central office building in Santa
Fe off of Highway 14. It's right
where those corrals are. I'm
sure you might all be familiar
with that road. But if you
remember the craft fairs of old,
people used to like those things
we would have them about once a
year and lots of people from the
community would come in and
they'd get to see inmate artwork
and woodwork.
And and metalwork and all these
different things that they did
and they were able to to
purchase these items. And so
what we've done now is we've
integrated that little store
with our old main tours. So
right now we offer the tours to
the public. People will purchase
a tour, they'll meet at the
store. They get an opportunity
to shop and look at some of the
items and then we load them onto
a transport vehicle and take
them on the tour of the old
Maine and then they can go back.
But what our hope and our goal
is is to open up that store to.
Just the general public, um,
about once a month is what we
expect to start with. It will
just depend on how many inmates
we have participating and how
many goods and, and, and items
that we're able to sell in that
area, but it looks so neat. I
was just there the other day,
uh, furniture weaving, crocheted
blankets, and all of the things
that I'm talking about, you'll
be able to see those things in
uh in real life and um take a
bit of that history home with
you if, if you're, if anybody.
is so inclined. Um,
So those were the the main new
highlights that I, I wanted to
share with you. Um,
I have a lot of other data and
things like that with me, but I
think I'll leave that up to you
and so, uh, Madam Chair and
members, I'll gladly stand for
questions.
Senator Dehig, let's see if, uh,
who else is, OK.
Alone.
Cervantes, anyone else? Myber.
All right.
Senator Dohick.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Secretary. Um,
I want to
Secretary Kaju, yeah.
Uh, I, I've been seeing in the
paper about this lawsuit that
happened because we changed the
law and, uh, 2023 to make it so
that folks who'd been convicted
of a felony as long as they
aren't currently incarcerated.
They are eligible to vote. Um,
and my understanding is that
updated lists of folks who had
been released and therefore
should be eligible, wasn't
getting to the Secretary of
State or and that therefore, not
the county clerks.
folks were not being allowed to
register, even though they and
and vote even though they are
entitled to do so. What I heard
was that you all were updating.
You were doing it like a system
update to be able to get that
information passed on so that it
works the way it was intended
and that for some reason that
update got scrapped, uh, and so
two questions for you. One is
what, what's the, what's the
progress on the new system, uh,
so that this can all work the
way way we intended when we
passed the Voting Rights Act,
and also why did that other
update get scrapped?
Madam Chair, Senator Dehig.
Yeah, so that system has been
complicated and I'll, I'll start
with that. Um, we have been
operating in our old system,
CMIS for many years, right,
since like 1999, it's an old
power builder computer system
and so we've been working on
this online version called Omni,
and when we first went live with
Omni, what happened was, and it
was unexpected, we had tested it
and it didn't make sense, but a
lot of the data didn't transfer
and it was really basic
important data that didn't
transfer.
So we stayed live with it for
about 2 weeks and then I said,
this is, I mean, I, I went to
facilities. I was talking to
staff and they were explaining
some of the glitches that they
were experiencing and just how
significant they were oper they
were affecting their day to day
operations. And so I said, well,
we need to roll back and uh we
need to pull the Omni from
production for the prison side
of the house, but not for
probation and parole. It was
working well on the probation
and parole side of the house.
And so, uh, it, it meant that we
had to do a lot of manual
data entry. I mean, a lot of
manual data entry, our team at
the offender management services
office in Albuquerque spent a
lot of time and, um, they might
even still be working on some
finalizations there to manually
enter.
Every individual, every case
that was active, and then they
went in there and they started
entering information on people
who were already released from
the system, but we're on
supervision. And so there've
been probably 2 or 3 updates
since that time and we're, we've
been working with the vendor to
resolve the issues. What we
didn't realize was that when we
made the switch, our old system
used to automatically send this
data to the Secretary of State's
office, and we, we just didn't
notice, right? And um they
Uh, they didn't alert us, but
more importantly, we didn't
know. We just, we didn't know
that that had happened. And so
then we end up
Talking about this lawsuit and
figuring out what happened
there. And so sort of two issues
happen. One was that our
computer was not talking to
their computer like it used to.
So we've resolved that, uh, and
now we are going to be
producing, in fact, the opposite
of what we used to provide, but
it makes sense. Uh, previously
we would send them information
of people who discharged their,
their number. So anybody who
completed their case in full, a
person who paroled, completed
parole, completed probation,
then we would send them the
discharge.
Discharge certificates to the
Secretary of State, and we'd
also give a copy to the, uh,
individual, and that way it
could be covered on both ends if
they wanted to register to vote.
But with this situation, they
need the opposite of that. They
need to know who's incarcerated
instead. And so, I mean, I think
even if we had been sending the
information, it would have been
the opposite information of what
they needed because it would
have been people who were out
and done instead of people who
were out of facilities but not
done.
On paper with their case. And so
we, we have resolved the
situation now, um, we've, we've
been working with, uh, the
Justice Department, Secretary of
State's office to make sure that
we're in compliance with the
law. And on the back end we've
had our IT people working with
the SOS IT people to make sure
that in the event that there's
any kind of data interruption,
which is still possible because
we're still not fully live. um,
that we just stay on top of it
and keep it.
Communication with each other
when our systems should talk.
Madam Chair, Secretary, thank
you. I appreciate your answer.
That's all. Thank you, Senator,
Senator Worth, thank you, Madam
Chair, and good morning, Madam
Secretary. It's good to see you
and uh it did make me realize
having been
On this committee for the 20
years I've been in the
legislature, you know, we used
to, it used to be courts and
corrections, and every year we'd
spend at least one meeting in a
facility, which I think is a
really
Important thing to kind of see
what's happening to hear from.
Administrators but also to hear
from
Inmates themselves. And I think
I remember being with
When I was then representative
Worth and Representative
Cervantes down in Hobbs, uh,
being in there and having pretty
amazing conversation and it was
constructive and I think that's
a really good thing. You've got
a tough job to say the least,
and we appreciate you doing it.
Uh, my question today involves
good time.
And I'd like to get a
perspective from you. We've had,
we've had, uh, bills.
In front of us and I think
nationally Colorado has a ballot
initiative in a month, uh,
seeking to eliminate good time
on a lot of different crimes and
one of the arguments, I think
Senator Maestiss made very well
during the special session on
the floor was the importance of
good time from an administrative
standpoint, so I'd be curious to
hear from you, your take on that
and what you see kind of as
hands on the ground with with
inmates and
The good time rules that we have
now.
Thank you, Madam Chair and Mr.
Leader.
So that's interesting about
Colorado. I didn't know that
because they are really similar
to us in that they have a lot of
good time laws, just lots of
different laws over different
years and they get complicated
and it makes it difficult to
operate an OMS and a vendor
management system when you have
like different laws that do
different things over different
period of time, and then you're
trying to tell a computer
application to do all those
different things with a a
strange number in the calendar
year, right? Like it's not
always 360.
5 and, uh, it can be complicated
in computer language speak. And
I also find it interesting I say
that because I was just speaking
with the secretary in Idaho and
he tells me that they are
considering.
for the first time having a good
time, and I said you don't have
a good time? Oh my goodness,
this is amazing. So, uh, it
just, it's, it's interesting to
hear that and I'll have to do a
little bit more research and
reach out to my counterpart in
Colorado, but so yeah, good
times a complicated issue and,
and first of all, from my
perspective, I do think that
there's value in good time
because it gives a person an
incentive to work towards. I do
think it's complicated the way
that it functions in actual
statue. And it is something that
we are
looking at right now and I, I
have, um, been working with the,
the governor and, uh, Holly
Holly Againian from, uh, of
course, the governor's office to
figure out if there is a way for
us to simplify, um, for a few
reasons, so for first, yes, I do
believe there's some value
there, but I think that the
frustrating part for us is when
the public and the courts and
all of the attorneys involved
believe that a person
Get sentenced to 10 number of
years, and then that's just not
really how it works in in
actuality, right? They get a big
10-year sentence, say, and they
get 5 years of it suspended and
then it's not a violent offense.
So people think they're going to
do at least the 5 years, but
that's not real. I mean, they,
they will probably do about 2.5
in all likelihood. So I'd really
like to do something where it is
more clear to everybody at the
time of sentencing, how much
time the individual will
actually
spend incarcerated. And so we
have a few ideas about how we
might think that that how how we
might be able to make that work,
um, and we're, we're trying to
really fine tune it before we
get to the session so that we're
able to talk more clearly. But
I, I do think there is an
incentive there. I mean, we have
seen certain times where an
individual maybe has a
disciplinary situation where
they've lost good time
Right? And, and the other
inmates are talking to that
person like, oh my gosh, I can't
believe you lost so much time
and from my perspective, I think
it maybe makes them think twice
when they're engaging in
negative behavior inside if they
have something to lose, and that
is via forfeiture of good time.
But if you don't have that
carrot, then you can't bring the
stick. And so I do think that it
is an important element of uh of
sentencing, but the frustrating
part from
perspective is just that it's so
unclear and it's so complex. And
I'm, I'm sure for many years,
uh, especially those of you that
have been on this committee for
a while, you have probably heard
from constituents over the
years, how difficult it has been
classically to get a date when
somebody's going to leave.
People just don't know and then
they call us and then we tell
them a projected release date,
but that could change if this
then that and and it can be very
complicated. Our OMS people do
an excellent job now and they're
able to
give a much more solid, stable
date. We stopped doing any
changes to Good Time at a
certain period, uh, before
release to eliminate that uh end
of, end of time complication.
But, uh, I do think it needs to
be worked on a bit. The the
system that we have in place
right now.
So Ma, I appreciate that, and it
is the Colorado. It's, it's a
ballot initiative.
So brought around the
legislature and you're right,
there's a lot of different.
Framework there in Colorado and
they're having the same public
safety debate that we're having,
and I just, it's helpful to hear
your, your take on that. Thank
you.
Thank you, Senator.
Representative Martinez.
No, my fault. 00.
Represent about cone, so I can't
read my own writing, so that's
OK. I know I can't read. I'll
see you in right now either.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I just,
uh, thank you, Madam Secretary,
for being here. I just think,
uh, you're doing a great job
except that every so often I
because everybody knows who I
am. I worked on both sides of
the aisle. I'll come about and
let me know they're having
problems and uh the last
comment I can, I heard uh.
Madam chairs that the staff and
The department heads or knocking
heads, and I was just wondering
because uh
My, my thinking is that somehow
this is becoming or it is it is
going to get resolved or it is
working on resolution. Am I
correct or not?
Madam Chair and representative
Alcorn, you are correct and
they're definitely have been
some things that, you know, we
don't agree on and then we have
to go through the processes to
go back and forth. Um, we did
enter into an agreement with,
uh, with that group of folks
that you're talking about. And,
uh, I believe that we're very
close. We have an agreement. The
the next step is really that we
just need to meet and, uh, do
some negotiations together, but,
uh, we've had several meetings.
Recently and of course all of
the work that led up to that
agreement being made in the
first place, uh, but we're
close, and I do believe that,
uh, we'll reach a place where
we're able to resolve all of
those concerns in a way that
works for, uh, both management
rights and for, um, the, the,
the Labour representatives.
Thank you. I'm, I'm just happy
to hear that. I know that I've
been hearing some, some uh
static and it's looking a little
better than what it was before,
uh, back to, uh, uh,
representative leaders, uh, you
was question about good time.
See this pin here?
When that correctional officer
goes to work in the morning or
in the swing shift or the
graveyard shift. That's his only
weapon.
Whenever somebody says let's
take away good time.
Uh,
What's that officer going to do
to keep that inmate in line if
he could not write him up,
that's all he can do.
So anytime somebody says let's
take your time away,
uh, pretty much let's take uh.
The sit our officers in with a
complete shields and uh and uh
protection gear 24 every time
they go to work because that's
the only weapon they have.
Believe me, I know as 23 years
old or 100 and about 135 pounds
or 140 pounds.
And I worked there 5 ft 4, and
that's it.
And they feared that Ben.
That's all I can tell you. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you very much,
Representative. Um, we have
Senator Nibert and then Senator
Cervantes.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you, Madam Secretary.
The programs, the training
programs that you talked about,
uh.
Do we have enough time that
gives us some data as to whether
or not those programs are
effective in.
Keeping those people gainfully
employed and maybe
Coming back into the system and
having to deal with them, uh.
Again on the criminal justice
front.
Madam Chair and Senator Nibert,
no, not yet. Uh, we haven't had
enough time lapse for us to say
that this individual completed
and now they're doing X, Y, and
Z. I mean, we,
we can provide
some um qualitative information,
you know, people that we have
followed, uh, people that are on
supervision with us afterwards
and we're following them into
their employment and all of the
next steps and in fact, we've
some of those people.
You'll find their videos on our
website. We, we've been putting
up success stories of people who
are doing well, but definitely
not on a quantitative level. I'm
not able to do that and you
know, I, it's been a, it's
complicated for me, like I just
want to add as many activities
to any institution that I can,
right, whether it's got a
certification attached to it or
whether it's just something that
can keep a person occupied doing
something that is meaningful,
you know, like crochet, right?
You're not going to get a job
doing crochet necessarily, but
it's something.
that can keep you occupied. And
so in the beginning, we weren't
necessarily tracking every
individual who is participating
in every little thing and we
will be now and it has a lot to
do with that SP 58 and the data
that we report through there
about programming, but this year
they added a section where it
will allow us to track an
individual and so we'll start
collecting that data we've
started collecting that data now
to make sure we're in compliance
with that, but previous years,
not only has enough time not.
past, but I couldn't say with
confidence that we have been
tracking these individual people
through the system.
Well, Madam Chair, Madam
Secretary, I hope we can get to
the point where we can show that
because I think if we can show
that it's, it's working that
these people are.
No longer taking from the
system, but they're actually
contributing to to government
and contributing to society, I
think that will really um.
Help expand those, those
programs so I wish you the best
on that. Um, Madam Chair and
Madam Secretary, with respect to
Uh, programs.
How, how are our corrections
officers and and uh uh are there
any programs for them to
advance? Are there any programs
to uh maybe keep their morale
and and uh keep them, uh.
Feeling like they're also an
important part of the, the, the
process because I know there
have been times when, when we've
had real struggles with not only
vacancy rates, but, but also
just uh uh trying to keep uh
guards.
In in detention centers and in
our, our prisons. So could you
speak a little bit about that?
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator Nibert,
I'm actually really glad you
brought that up because that is
uh to me that's like my
You know, I have a, I have a I
have a couple of years, um.
And uh I really, I've I've, you
know, because I came up in the
system, right? I've been part of
the system. Staff wellness is a,
a big deal for me, and I think
it means a whole lot of things,
so first place that I've started
and I can say that we're doing
some things, but we're not doing
enough and we will be making
some significant additions, but
in our training academy. So I, I
personally went and I sat in on
a bunch of those classes. I we
had these 8 week academies and
then other academies where we
bring people in.
For more advanced learning and I
was
You know, I mean, I was bored in
some of the classes and I
thought, well, if that's how I
feel and I'm excited about this.
I wonder how these kids feel.
And so I spent some time in the
classes, not saying anything,
not interfering, but I met with
that group of students, uh,
before they graduated and got
their opinions and they shared
with me what was working, what
was not working, and, uh, and
then in addition to that, I've
been going around to various
facilities visiting with staff
and I was, I said, we, we need
your.
But right, people, they, they
tell us all these different
ideas they had people with 20
years, 2 years, 5 years,
different, different amounts of
time. They are really different
perspectives. So I had my
academy staff go out to every
facility, conduct focus groups,
and then I had to focus groups
where I uh led those groups that
brought them up to to the
academy and we talked about
their ideas and so with their
ideas, we have added now a whole
lot more scenario training to
our courses. There were courses.
That were only a certain length
of time, but they're part of the
job, that's like a day to day
part of the job, and people felt
like the the new people felt
like they
Didn't necessarily know what
their duties were because they
spent a lot of time on this one
thing, but not necessarily on
that other thing, which means
that the people who are already
in the job felt frustrated that
these new people weren't able to
contribute in the way that they,
you know, thought that they
should be able to. So we've made
some very, very significant
changes at the academy and every
single eight-week class that
completes where continuing to do
that and bring in um other
companies and contractors that
we're working with are sending.
Our staff out to get certified
to do different types of
training, things that will
really focus on, um, things like
de-escalation report writing,
use of force, but as one
component because those are all
things that all work together on
I'll touch each other. And uh as
far as staff wellness, we do
different events at facilities.
Some facilities are better than
others at it. That's definitely
the truth, but I'd like to do
something more uniform across
the way. And so for
Be one of the main things, if
not, you know, the main thing
that I want to focus on is staff
wellness, bringing specific
programs and opportunities to
the correctional officers over
the next couple of years and
months that I have.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, the, uh,
my last comment would be, I
think, uh, Leader Worth is
correct. There is something to
be gained from.
Decision makers going into
places and seeing what the
conditions are and as a county
commissioner, we forced county
commissioners to go see
detention centers by statute.
Every year
And I think it would behoove us,
uh, occasionally, uh,
particularly this committee to
uh
Have a day where we can go in
and and actually observe uh the
conditions and talk to some of
the people that are are involved
because we, you get a lot of
insight and, and oftentimes, uh,
you know, just appropriating
money and expect problems to get
solved when you actually see the
brick and mortar.
Actually see the conditions.
You realize sometimes it's not
just uh it's not just money
that's gonna solve a problem.
It's having to get training,
it's having to devote resources
elsewhere. So thank you very
much.
Thank you, Senator. So I have
now Senator Stewart,
Representative Chasey, um,
representative Madrid.
OK, so Senator Stewart, and then
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Madam Secretary, for being
here today.
So
I've been on this committee for
quite a long time, um, Senator
Wirth's comments made me, uh,
remember some of these things
that I've seen in the
corrections visits that we've
done.
So an incredible barbering
process at Santa Rosa.
Uh, where these inmates were
working on each other and
creating all these hairstyles
and everything. They wanted to
have a license so that they
could start when they got out.
Um, I don't know if that ever
came about. They were really
looking to try to get something
that would get them a job when
they got out instead of what
really happens, which is you're
a felon, we're not interested.
Uh, so that, and let me just
mention also, and I, I'm not
sure where this was, but, um, I
was able to see an echo, uh
generated process where they had
trained inmates to talk to each
other about hepatitis C.
And that was pretty phenomenal
where the inmate was so
knowledgeable about it and
walked through uh the inmates
that they were talking with, you
know, the echo people, experts
on the screen.
So
But what I'm questioning about
is
I'm very frustrated with our
re-entry programs.
You know, those trainings are
really good, but it seems as
though every time we hear from
corrections there, you're about
to do something or you're about
to have someone come in. You
know, we've passed legislation
for you all to start getting
these inmates ready to go with
Medicaid if they need that with
prescription, uh, treatment,
etc. and I think the last bill
we said, you know, the 90 days
before they're released, get
them ready.
ID, etc. I wanna hear that
that's working better cause
that's not what I hear. What I
hear is it's just really not
working that well and you know,
you talk about MVD coming in
with real ID. That should have
been happening for several
years.
So I'm frustrated that the
things that we've tried to do
haven't really produced a robust
reentry program and I want to
know what you need.
To have that work better, that
we are not providing.
armchair.
Madam Chair and Senator Stewart.
So I'll, I'll, uh, dissent a bit
because I don't think that it's
accurate to say that they're not
working, although to Senator
Nibert's point, I can't show
enough time has passed that
these, these programs have made
a difference necessarily in what
people stay out or not. But we
do have active programs in all
sorts of technical vocational
programs that are happening that
aren't just, uh, about to
happen, right? And so maybe I
doesn't do a great job of
explaining that, but we have
active those HVAC programs,
those welding programs, those
auto programs, automotive
programs, uh, the, the simulator
machines, uh, for heavy
equipment that eventually end up
leading to a person taking an
actual test on a heavy piece of
heavy heavy equipment,
machinery, and uh like in our
Roswell facility we have an
actual CDL class with uh the,
the vehicles and uh so we do, we
do have all of those things
taking place and it's taken.
Madam Chair, if I could
interrupt you, and I apologize
for that, I, I, I'm not talking
about the programming. I am
talking about the efforts to get
people ready to exit.
The facility with ID with, uh,
uh prescriptions with uh medical
program with getting on to
Medicaid. I know you're doing as
good as you can with the
programming and we've seen good
evidence of the programming
your, your, uh, high school
equivalency is very exciting
that you have focused on that,
but I'm talking about the fact
that people come out of prison
and they just don't have a
They don't have pathway to get
housing. They don't have a
pathway to get a job. They don't
know where they're staying. You
don't let them out unless they
have places to stay, so it's
just the re-entry to me that's
not working well, that we could
do better, and I really want to
know what else you need to make
that work better.
Madam Chair, Senator Stewart, I
misunderstood. I apologize. Uh,
so I will say it's, it has taken
a bit longer to get off the
ground than what we wanted it
to, um, but, but I do believe
that we've made significant
progress and I will say though,
for years, uh, before I was in
this role, uh, we've been doing
Medicaid enrollment for people
leaving for everybody and we
still do. The only people who
don't leave with a Medicaid
enrollment right now are people
who actively don't want to fill
out the application. Everybody
else gets that application.
done. It is true with that
change in the waiver that we
will be able to offer it at 90
days out, but working with the
healthcare authority, they need
to do some things in order to
establish what exactly it will
cover and for what length of
time. And it is looking like it
might be a little bit more
limited than what we thought,
but we have
Nearly always released people
with at least a a certain supply
of medication, certainly not
enough, uh,
but many people will leave with
at least 7 days, but some people
up to a month and that Medicaid
waiver will make a big
difference in that we will not
only be able to provide the
medication, but we will be able
to connect them to an actual
uh doctor or health care
provider before they get out
with using those Medicare MCOs,
which we're not able to do right
now because, of course,
It's paid for by Medicaid, but
we do work with ECO to try to
fill that gap, although not on
the scale that I'd like to see,
right? Um, we have maybe I think
the number last I checked was 9
peer mentors that we have hired
through Echo that work with our
people
outside. So as they're leaving,
as they're making the transition
before they get out, uh, these
are all people with lived
experience. They all have,
that's a requirement for the job
is that you have to have been a
person.
who was inside, who got out, who
did well, and you're now able to
walk a person through the shoes
that you've already walked
through. I, I have tried to get
expansion dollars for that in
the past. And so I would, I
would ask that you help us
support any expansion that we're
doing in the ECO program, not
the echo program inside that is
doing well and has been doing
well for many, many years. Uh,
but the what we started in 20, I
think it was 2020 that we
actually got
Off the ground was, uh, this
echo peer mentor work on the
outside. It's not at the scale
that I'd like to see it. Um, and
I do believe that once that
Medicaid waiver comes into play,
it maybe won't be such an issue
because we'll be able to use
those MCOs to help us with that
connection on the inside out.
Uh, and we also have gotten
other stuff off the ground like
as an example, before a person
is getting out when they're
doing their re-entry planning,
they will have an opportunity to
interact with a probation and
parole employee.
Called the transition
coordinator who's in their
region, uh, whichever region
they're anticipated to release
to and talk about resources and
things like that that they can
get set up with when they get
out, um.
When I think about housing, uh,
I also say that we've in the
last 2 to 3, I think it's 3
years actually. We every year
have year over year, almost
double the number of providers
that, in fact, the first year we
more than doubled our number of
providers, uh, behavioral health
services and transitional
housing living services. And so
we are able to get a whole lot
more people out in the community
than what we were doing
previously. So that means we're
able to get more.
beds it transition living
centers, uh, sometimes it means
that we might pay for a person's
rent or help them get into an
apartment or whatever it is that
they need to live independently,
but we do have resources to do
that and we have done that and
we are doing that. Uh, and in
fact, uh, because you've been on
the committee so long, you may
recall the numbers that we used
to have on that status in-house
parole was in the neighborhood
of 220 any given time, and that
number has been below.
50 for many, many months, uh,
because of those extra resources
that we have gotten for
supportive housing transition,
uh, it doesn't always work for
everybody and there's still that
small handful of people that and
largely it's the people that are
on that 5 to 20 parole term
because I can't send them to a
halfway house. I can't send them
to most apartment complexes.
It's more difficult to place
people like that, but we do have
a team of people in the re-entry
division that are always working
to get people out on time
And for people that we know in
advance and we do know in
advance about 210 days before
they get out, whether they will
be a difficult to place person
and not have places to go, so,
uh, as far as what, what do I
need? I, I think, uh, financial
support, largely, but from what
I can, from what I can glean is
that that echo program with the
peer mentors outside has been a
very valuable tool. It would be
great to be able to scale that
up, um, and on the other
component with
Medicaid
We will need to work that
through all of those details
with the healthcare authority
and really follow their lead as
they uh teach us what that looks
like to make sure people can get
resources before they're
leaving.
OK. Thank you for that answer.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. Representative
Chasey.
Thank you very much, Madam Chair
and Madam Secretary, uh, we were
listening in, but there was an
accident at university in I-25,
so we're a little bit late, but,
um, if I ask you anything that
you already answered, you don't
have to answer it because I can
go back and look at the tape.
But, um, I, with regard to what
Senator Nibert brought up, we
always visited a facility or 2
or 3 during the interim. And I
think I've been to every state
facility.
and I'm sure Senator Stewart,
because we joined this committee
when it began in 1997.
So,
um
yeah, um.
We've been, you know, to
Springer, to, um, Guadalupe
County to, to, uh,
The New Mexico Corrections
Facility here and seeing
programs like um
The, um, auto mechanics,
industrial sewing, gardening.
Uh, training dogs for adoption
both here and then at the
women's prison out in um Grants,
which has been moved to
Springer, and then they now do,
um, have a horse program up
there, all of which are very
good for that, the individuals
who are incarcerated, but um,
I, I, I, um, have some questions
about re-entry as well, but I'm
wondering if you have a quick
answer on the expansion of your
Medicaid-assisted treatment.
And did you already mention
that?
Madam Chair, Representative
Chasey, I did not. OK. So, um,
where we are at with that is,
um, we
Not we necessarily, but HCA, the
Healthcare Authority, they're
the people that are responsible
for publishing the rules and
going through that rulemaking
process, but we worked with
them, participated with them,
finalized the rules, they went
into effect in September, um, I,
I, I think the date was the 16th
and then the rules give us 90
days to go live with it there
and we will be able to go live
with accepting people from
jails, um, at the
We're looking at like the end of
December. Um, what it required
was us going back to the table
with our medical contractors
talking about the price of
medication, figuring out how to
work that into uh the, you know,
what we're doing with them and
then asking for additional
medical resources as far as like
extra nurses and other types of
providers that will be able to
dispense, um, the medication and
so we we will be able to begin
the Medicaid-assisted treatment
this year.
Madam Chair, did you get a
sufficient appropriation and how
is that being spent out?
Um,
Madam Chair, Representative
Chasey, so where it's it's
difficult to anticipate because
we just, we don't know what the
numbers look like yet, right?
Uh, so we have some rough idea
based on our conversations with
the jails that provide it now
and particularly MDC being the
big jail, uh, and, but they're
telling us that there's, there's
people in their population that
maybe would have been on it but
aren't because we didn't do it.
And so the the the way that
we're estimating is really it's
uh.
It, it's just, um, it's kind of
a guessing game right now
because we, we really can't
definitively say how many people
will be getting in from the
jails, uh, on the medication.
Um, so right now what we have is
$1000 appropriation for the
remainder of the fiscal year and
we will be asking for um for,
for funds, but in the form of
grow, um, money for the Medicaid
assisted treatment expansion
because we're hoping by that
time, we will
No more about the number of
people and we'll have a better
idea of what resources we need,
uh, moving forward.
Uh, thank you very much. Um, so
there aren't people being
returned to the jails because of
a lack of um Medicaid assistant.
Assisted treatment at the
prisons. Madam Chair,
Representative Chasey, we're not
receiving them, so the jails
will not transfer them to us
until we start, which won't be
till the end of the year. I got
it. OK. Um, with regard, um,
Madam Chair and Madam Secretary,
to the re-entry, I just wanted
to, um,
Call your attention to uh the
program we've become aware of,
and I know um Alisa Lawer, my
chief of staff, has been working
to get them connected to as
many, um,
Legislators as are interested in
this particular issue of
re-entry because goodwill has a
program that they're funding
completely privately right now,
and they have a pretty good
recidivism rate, and I did not
know about it until we um
connected with them earlier this
year and I'm, I'm just really
hopeful because the governor had
said to me at one point,
There's just never enough help
with re-entry. I mean, it's,
it's like we need all hands on
deck and, um, they do, they're
very professional, and they've
had very good results, so, um,
I think I'm not sure this
committee is going to hear from
them at some time, is that
correct,
Madam,
we heard from them in Espanola.
Oh, that's right, and I, I, I
missed that it's all right, it's
OK, OK, good deal. All right,
and I know, um, I know.
Representative Martinez was on
that bandwagon as well. So, um,
thank you for that. And, um,
I guess that, um,
I, I, I'm wondering, I, I'm with
Senator Stewart. What else do
you need to prepare people for
exits, um, I, I, are things
going well with your planning
for exit at the time that the
inmates are first in the
facility and how are you doing
on things like the inmate
literacy Act. Do you need
greater resources because we
need to know that.
Madam Chair, Representative
Chasey, uh, on the goodwill,
I've met with them as well and
uh we, we actually do work with
them already. Uh, they do a lot
of work at our Western prison in
Grants, uh, with both our males
and our females there, so, um,
we're, we're familiar with our
programs and their plan for
expansion. So thank you for
bringing that up and, uh, I'll
make sure to keep that on my
radar. But as far as, um,
Where we are, what we need.
I will say that and it's, it's,
it's hard to say. I do think I
have the right leadership in
place now though in the re-entry
division. Um, my director and I,
I wish I would have brought them
with me, the director Byron
Brown and Deputy Director Haven
Skin, who I believe is presented
to this committee a number of
times on different issues and,
and subjects, but they are just
like a perfect pair as far as
what skills they bring to the
table, like get things done and
motivate people in the facility.
I do believe we've built the
framework now. Uh, I, I don't
know that it was as
Um, efficiently operated before
those two stepped into those
roles. Um, it was definitely a
place where, uh, it was, it was
a little confusing to figure out
where to bridge those gaps
between what's the duties of a
probation and parole versus
what's the duties of, uh, the
adult prisons division and then
how do we overlay those people
on top of, but I believe we've
done that now and another
challenge that we had
experienced was just the, the,
well, the good time calculation,
right? We, we
had difficulty with getting the
um projected release dates,
right, and getting them right in
advance enough to really make a
difference with connecting
people to services, but because
of our, our OMS staff were able
to do a much better job of
calculating further ahead, and
that gives us a lot more leeway.
You know, there's a certain
time, I think it's 90 days out
where we don't touch the good
time anymore at all, so we're
able to give a more solid date
prior to a person getting out,
um, as, as far as resources.
are concerned, you know, I do
believe that our re-entry
division budget code is, is well
funded. Uh, we've been able to
do a lot of work there, a lot of
expansion, we brought in
additional staff to work as uh
as those people who serve as
intermediaries between the
prison system and the probation
department. Um, and the one
thing that I had mentioned to
Senator Stewart was just our
work with Project Echo peer
mentorship, the people outside
that work with us. Um, I would
like to see an ex
mentioned in the work that we're
doing with them, um, but, but
we've been very much supported
with respect to receiving funds
for supportive housing and other
things of that nature that has
been uh something that the
legislature has been very
generous with us on.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Representative, I have
representative Madrid and then
Representative Laura Cadena and
Representative of Madrid, would
you, um, introduce yourself and,
um, you came in a little bit
after we started.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Willie Madrid,
District 53, um, this is always
an interesting conversation for
me because I feel like I'm
always been at the with my back
against the wall, so I kind of
get the idea where you're back
sometimes feels against the
wall, but I'd like to put a
shout out to the fact that.
We're listening to what is still
seemingly a process of us having
the restorative practices in
place. Uh, I've not heard you
say that it's not funded enough
if, if I've not heard that
clearer than reiterate that to
us because it's important that
we do get this funded in the
practices of what we want in
place,
um, to representative, um,
Uh, Nibert, it's well said and
well put that everybody in our,
in our legislative bodies
through one time or another in a
year, go to a facility to get a
grasp of what is actually
facilitated and, and actually
get a chance is I gathered, um,
be intuitive to the uh
sensitivity of the inmates. Um,
there's still a, a bigger
complex process that whether we
want to get rid of it, we get
with our backs against the wall
to create legislation which on
one end is going to put more
people in the system.
And so I, I fought this for
years on the contradictions of
we don't need it, we do need it,
and here's what my point is
getting to. We do have
facilities, members of the
committee in our state right
here in the South.
By MTC private facilities,
they're running these programs
that she's talking about, uh,
secretary is talking about
getting in laden. They are in
process and are proficiently,
uh, outputting inmates every
year with graduating classes
with GEDs, um, they do HVAC now.
They do welding.
And these are all conducive
resets, I call them to a new
beginning of life. And what I
think I've heard from Mary Ann
is that the gap is a little bit
still there and getting them
placed. But guess what? because
everything else is in place now
they're focus is on the last
place, and that's getting them
reset into society.
Which is what we've all heard,
uh, most of us in the years when
we've had inmates sit here that
have already made it to you and
said there was just nothing
there for him. After all, there
was sometimes laid out for him
to help him and most of the time
not laid out at all.
And we put them back into
society and expect them to uh
conduct differently.
And, and that's the
misconception, but I would
encourage that anybody here in
the South or wants to can go to
the two facilities, they're
federal facilities, one INS
immigration, the other is
federal.
And they have welding and and
things of the sort, and they
will provide a free uh tour of
the facilities. They just
request 24 hours to do a
background check on you and
you're able to go to the
facilities and see these actual
processes. And so, uh, you don't
need my permission. You just
need to let me know if you'd
like, and I can help you set it
up quicker, but I encourage
everybody to take a visit to
this because we're all up here
caring about the human being
part that we forget.
parts that are really intricate
and in creating the, the rest of
the bridge, if you will, to the
other side. Um, you're welcome
to come in, um, Madam Secretary.
Madam Chair, Representative
Madrid, uh, actually I'm gonna
be there later today, uh,
visiting with some folks that
are in town from MTC and uh of
course, every time I'm in a
facility, I do the tour and
visit with the staff, visit with
the inmates and um, it is true
they have a very specialty
population down there and they
do provide very intensive
treatment. It's uh it's been a
very valuable program for that
specific population, which also
happens to be the most difficult
to place population, um.
Because of the extremely limited
housing resources for people
with those offenses.
Uh, but the HAC program they
have is awesome. It's a
beautiful facility. Um, we, we,
we only look at the state side,
you know, we contract a portion
of that facility and the other
half is a federal US Marshals
and other types of holds. Um,
but maybe I'll, I'll take your
advice and visit the entire
place while I'm there. Yeah,
thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Secretary. I do encourage it. I
mean, it's a
Of people working together, um,
to the facets that they found a
way to work within our state
system and, and I think the
equity of monies is always a
differential of what I always
said if we're gonna get out of
this business. We can't get rid
of the folks that we are
dependent to put back into
society, uh, functional, not
dysfunctional. And I think uh
they do other things. They also
provide university that's all
tooous you.
And I can tell you that
throughout the state, I've
talked to other smaller
universities, uh, up in the
north like Espinola. They had
sincere interest in trying to be
part of this process, uh, within
the facility. So there is
sincere interest in helping us,
uh, educational process that I
think is the only salvation to a
better way of life. Thank you,
madam, sir. Thank you,
Secretary. Thank you,
Representative Representative
Laura Cadena, could you
introduce yourself as well?
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Mikaela
Laracadena um here in Danana
County I represent most of the
west side and south side of the
cities of Las Cruces, 3
historical communities in
Tartuga San Pablo, and Messia
where I raised my little ones,
um, this morning, one of our
site experiment stations, the
Fabian Garcia was having their
field day, um, just down the
road, so I stopped foolishly in
my heels to check in and hear
about the ag research that
happens there. I remember one of
our NMSUGA members, Clayton I'll
be.
There the first time he visited
Fabian Garcia, he was in a white
blazer, and never lived it down,
and today, without thinking, I
stopped by in my heels. So now
I'm on the, the funny list like
Clayton, but Madam Secretary, I
really wanted to appreciate you
for being here today, um, I
wanted to share.
As, as you know, as many know,
um, my dear friend and, um.
rabble rouser Baron Jones passed
away earlier this year.
And, um, you and Baron and I
have spent lots of hours in my
office, um, with a shared
commitment to figuring out
corrections and what it means to
do corrections with ethics and
integrity, um, to follow
policies and procedures that
uphold public safety, um,
including for those locked up
and, and the thousands of New
Mexicans who go into your
facilities every single day, um,
Baron and I talked a lot all the
time and as it happened, the
last time I talked to him was
the day.
Before he passed and he called
frantic with some concerns about
Um, potential grooming that was
happening at a transitional
facility and, and we talked
about who we should reach out to
and we talk lots of shit about
people neither of us ever found
confidence in, um, but one of
the last things he said, I said,
reach out to the secretary,
right? And, and that was on his
to do list, um, because even
though we could go head to head,
and I imagine we will again,
and, and as we should, right?
Because the responsibilities you
carry your immense. um, in that
last conversation.
Ben and I were, you were, you
were on the list of like.
She, she has a commitment to do
right, um, and when we turn to
your leadership, we will at
least have a conversation. Your,
your door was open and you're
willing to listen, learn, and,
and sometimes catch up on pieces
that were beyond, um, what you
could see from your position. So
I just wanted to share that
shout out to Ben, but also, um,
let you know that he, he very,
as much as we will get into it
again. Um, he very much
appreciated your willingness to
be in conversations like those,
um, very quickly, I just
As you know, I, I keep circling
back to this piece in New Mexico
about how this department
uniquely, um, among many, does
not have requirements to go to a
rulemaking process. And when I
had my turn working in state
government, which was immensely
important for me before coming
into this kind of role. Um, one
of the things that I got to work
on was implementing Medicaid for
incarcerated individuals. So at
the time, we had a Len prison
facilities,
Privately operated and I was the
bureau chief of recidivism
reduction work to get that
legislation signed into law with
correctional leaders from across
the state. Um, but then again,
we're in this process where we
had, um, a new responsibility.
And we didn't have a rulemaking
process to be transparent with
the public or advocates or
lawmakers about how we were
going to establish that new law.
And it's, it's sat with me ever
since that we often point new
mandates at you.
You do your best under limited
resources with incredible staff
but limited resources to try to
bring them to life and we don't
have a way of engaging with them
through rulemaking like we do
with overwhelmingly, like most
of the agencies in New Mexico.
In the meantime until we could
imagine something like that and
some legislative future, how do
you, um, take legislation we
pass or directions we send, how
do you move them into policy and
procedures in a way that is not.
But something else and as such,
how do the people incarcerated
in your facilities, advocates,
policymakers, and others. How,
how do we have an opportunity to
weigh in or even know what is in
place any given day without a
rulemaking requirement like
other agencies hold.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Kenna.
Yeah, in fact, the first time I
participated in a rulemaking
process was recently with HCA
because it was something that
was entirely unfamiliar to me
and when you were initially
talking with me about it, I, I,
I was, what is that? I, I, I
wasn't familiar with, with what
that was. So, um, you know what,
what we'll do now, and it's all
I can really say is post it on
the web, right? We post all of
our information on the web, but
when we see a change in law, we
have our general counsel
typically.
it, um, I directly personally
work with the policy writers at
my department. We have a
standing meeting where for hours
we work together to clean up and
fix the policies that over years
have just, uh, you know, a
paragraph here, a paragraph
there to make them cleaner and
cohesive. So what we'll do is
we'll, um,
Take the actual statute, right?
Uh, incorporate that into the
policy and sometimes that means
completely scrapping the policy
and redoing it. And then, uh, we
have the legal people look over
it, but, um, we haven't posted
it in facilities for inmate
input. Uh, we do send it out to
our staff, uh, letting them know
which policies are up for
review, and we have a process
for them to send input in, let
us know what they think may or
may not work or
just give us their ideas on how
they think a thing might work
better. Uh, but I, I definitely
can see value in, uh, opening
that up to the inmate
population, uh, putting notices
and things like we do for other,
uh, other important things that
our populations need to know.
And in fact with the tablets,
one of the things we're able to
do is, uh, send notifications
out to specific housing units. I
mean, it's really neat the way
that we're able to dig down into
where it needs to go or widely
sent to the entire population.
asking for their feedback and
then they can actually send us a
little, a message back. So, um,
we'll, we're, we have a new, uh,
method of communicating with the
population, um, at a different
level, right? So it's not just
like inmate to caseworker or
inmate to unit manager, but it
can go, uh, in inmates are
higher than that and, uh, it has
a lot to do with this technology
change. I definitely can see the
value in that. Uh, but for right
now, it is, uh, a bunch of
subject matter experts at the.
So if it's an issue with
probation and parole, we bring
in the probation and parole
leadership and so forth.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I do
appreciate that and in many ways
it feels like what a rulemaking
process would be in, and
certainly look forward to
conversations about where we
might formalize something like
that or make sure it's a public
and documented process for New
Mexico and then my last
question, um, Madam Chair, um, I
also was listening in on the way
in, but I, I'd heard you might
have proposed legislation moving
forward in this session. Is
there anything else you want to
add or share? I was grateful
that years ago, um, right when
we ran out of, we
Out of an hour on the Senate
floor. We got a really good
bill, um, to the Senate floor
with bipartisan support,
anything like that coming
forward. I know we've talked
about Good Time but also on the
probation and parole side,
that's what that bill concerned
back in the day.
Madam Chair, Representative
Cadena, I'm still sad about
that. I mean, wasn't it just so,
uh, for me, being part of that
process, uh, and seeing
something get so far, it was,
uh, it was, uh, it was like
watching a sporting event like a
some big important sporting
event, and I'm like, oh, come
on, you know, they just got to
get it over the finish line. Um,
but you know, we're still in the
in the phase right now where
we're developing the language
and figuring out which of the
items we want to bring forward.
Um, I have several.
Ideas and uh different,
definitely different things that
I've discussed, um, with a
variety of people in the
executive office and, um, we
just, we haven't settled on
which things are priority, but
that bill actually that exact
bill, I mean, it was just such a
a a wonderfully bipartisan
effort that I think that might
be something that is brought
back quickly, will you just give
the two sentence highlight of
what that was as a reminder for
the. Yes, uh, Madam Chair,
Bill, uh, would have allowed for
people who are on probation
serving low-level probation. So
these are the people that are
already successful, right?
They're doing well. They have a
job. They're going to treatment,
they're, they're paying their
fees, they're meeting all the
requirements of their
supervision. So people who are
on that low level of supervision
and doing well when they hit the
halfway point of their
supervision, it would have made
it such that they would
automatically be able to be
discharged from probation and
come off.
Paper and, um, with that, what
that meant was that for the
department, that meant people
wouldn't have to be spending
human resources supervising
those people. But we also had a
lot of research and studies,
information that told us that
the longer a successful person
stays on supervision, the more
likely they are to then become
unsuccessful. And that was a, a
really interesting thing to read
about and learn about, but, um,
the bill would have just made it
automatic. The way it works now
is
We might make a recommendation
to the court, um, but then it
ties up the docket and it takes
a bunch of time from them. So,
um, it just would have really
simplified the process for those
people doing really well.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Cervantes.
Uh thank you, and I want to make
sure all the committee members
know that I'm sure that speaking
for the chair, both of us, uh if
I chair next year, this
committee that will take to
heart your suggestions that we
be back in a correction
facility. It has been too long
since we've done that. Well, I
think last time we did it may
have been down here in Las
Cruces.
Go to Southern, uh, which is not
too far down the road, and we
can always get over to Southern
and still have a pretty full
agenda outside of the facility
and come back here and that's
usually been pretty instructive
too is to go there and come
back. Yeah, a representative
Chasey reminded us we probably
got out of this cycle when uh
COVID hit and we get that's
that's probably a very good
point. Um, so we'll get back and
I think that the chairs and the
leadership that's here will,
will make a point of doing that
coming up. So I wanted to, um,
recognize that.
I saw Senator Worth make a note.
I think we've been working
together too long. He made a
note about the same time I did,
which is Secretary, when you
said you see the value in good
time. Um, I think the the Las
Cruces chief of police is back
here. He's get his attention and
the sheriff too. I appreciate
all of you being here very much
and we look forward to your
comments. It's also an
opportunity with, with you,
sheriff and Chief, to recognize
that after the last special
session, the legislature
predictably received a great
deal of.
criticism here in the community,
um, in the media and the press,
the Albuquerque Journal, etc.
And, and this committee, um,
were some of the leading, uh,
targets of some of that
criticism. I would note,
Secretary, you said that you see
value in good time, so do we. We
see the value in good time and
I'll just tell you the only
legislation that I recall in the
last special session that
remotely touched on what you do,
corrections, anything, was an
elimination of good time for the
crime of a felo in possession.
Unprecedented to my knowledge,
unprecedented in our state
governance and our system of
corrections is to is to have the
executive suggest that we
eliminate good time. As a tool
which you said you find value
in.
So I, I bring up this not to
Continue to put salt in the
womb, but to encourage you to
please constructively go back to
the boss. Uh, talk to, talk to
the governor and and and talk to
her staff and, and help them
understand why the public, the
press, and they just cannot
understand why the legislature
would reject so summarily uh
something like uh elimination of
good time.
Uh, it's because we've been here
for 20 and something years.
We've heard lots of secretaries
before you, uh, we've been in
the corrections facilities
talking to the staff and, and
the people that are, that are
detained there, and we know good
time works. We know it's a
valuable tool for you. We
understand that. So when we're
asked to eliminate that, yeah,
we get out of town quickly 4 or
5 hours, because we know it's
not a legitimate and thoughtful
agenda. And, and so
I hope you'll, I hope you'll
share with the same candor when
you all roundtable in the
administration. What are you
telling us? Because, because
we're taking what you're saying
to heart and we, and we agree
with you. Uh, and so we've got
to be able to communicate that a
little bit better so there's a
better understanding of really
why that happened and, and the
way it did.
Um, I think it's important to
note that, that uh the attention
that that we're all putting on
crime here is is well placed. I
support it. I've supported the
governors that uh agenda there.
In fact, I supported the idea of
a special session on crime and
have for a long time, um, but I
would note that there was
nothing in the special session
really that I can recall that
really related to what you do in
corrections. We met with a lot
of people in the executive
staff, attorneys, hours, the
leadership, we explored, we
debated, we discussed, but I
don't remember anything coming.
For us really that related to
corrections other than
eliminating the time on on that
one piece of legislation. And I,
I think that was a missed
opportunity that I hope will
correct. Again, I want to be
constructive about this because
I, I strongly believe that you
and what you do and your agency
department is a critical and key
and underappreciated and
unutilized and uh an opportunity
for us that we just haven't at
all considered.
When it comes to attacking
crime, because I think we all
recognize that when people go
into your facility, oftentimes
they come out hardened. Uh, if
they didn't belong to a gang,
they come out belonging to a
gang. I think when we were at
Southern last time around, I
asked Mike Kreia who went to
high school with me too. You'd
think everybody around here went
to high school with me, but
Mike, Mike was the warden at the
time and um I asked him what the
gang participation was in the
correction facility. I think he
told me it was close to 100%.
Uh, and, and, and you, you're,
you're telling me that may not
be accurate, so I'd like to know
from you.
Like the gang participation is,
but the the idea uh breaks my
heart that somebody comes in
they're not associated with a
gang and feels that to survive,
right, and to, and to not be
attacked and not, not
be difficulty sleeping at night,
that they've got to belong to a
gang. And so they come out
belong belonging to a gang, if
they didn't in the beginning,
and if they and if they weren't
hardened, and if they weren't
violent going in, maybe they're
coming out hardened and violent.
And and so that sometimes
explains why we approach with a
great deal of
an agenda to crime by just
saying, let's increase the
sentences. Let's keep them in
there longer, um, so that when
they come out, there's no chance
of them getting employed.
There's no chance of their their
family's broken. Um, their kids
are grown, uh, they, they
spouses have left, and, and
their prospects are, are now
none. And so why are we
surprised they come out and they
are hardened and then they're
exceptionally good criminals,
they go back to crime.
Or why are we surprised when
we're encouraged to detain
people before even a trial,
before there's even a conviction
on the premise they've been
charged with a crime. Let's hold
them. And of course, as you
know, Secretary, you know, it's
a matter of days before they've
lost their job.
employer's not going to hold the
job for them, so they lose their
job. Uh, they lose their income,
they lose their car, they lose
their apartment, they lose their
house, they begin to lose their
family, and, and that
No, it doesn't even get to the.
The dignity and the other things
they lose.
So I know, I know I'm
pontificating a little bit for
you, but, but I, I do believe
strongly, and this has been, uh,
I'm so sorry to see her leaving.
That's why I get a little, a
little hard to see her, uh,
Representative Chasey because
Peter, me, me, and I, we've all
been together so long and, and
Gayle has been such an important
advocate for the corrections
process, and we're losing you
and I hope somebody's gonna pick
it up, um, I don't, I don't know
who's she's she's pointing over
to you, Represent Cadena, so.
Senator Yeah, and, and you're
right, and Senator Maest, so
we're gonna need champions like
you, you've been representing
Chasey to, to say there's this
great opportunity in our
corrections process that we just
don't use. Uh, we, we, we don't,
we enough, and that's not to be
critical of you, but you've got
to do more and you've got to ask
us for more. We want, we want to
be coming out with good
educations, job skills, people
that want to cut hair or fix
cars or do plumbing because we
don't have enough of any of
those things. We all know we
don't have enough of them.
And we need to show them, hey,
here's how you pay your taxes,
here's how you get a hit, here's
how you save some money, here's
how you, uh, uh, live.
Something closer to what I think
we would normalize as, as a
society, right? So, um, I want
you to be part of the criminal
package. And, and I'll tell you
that with my colleagues we're
talking a lot about not being
just the, the no in the equation
and saying no to the special
session or that agenda, but we
want to be part of with a lot of
excitement the coming session
where we're going to be part of,
of, I hope, meaningful changes
as we've done in the past. We
had a
Uh, criminal omnibus package 2
years ago, sweeping, really
sweeping, uh, changes in the
criminal justice system that
quickly is forgotten when we're
accused of well we do nothing
for years on crime, right? Um,
let's do something really big,
please. Uh please be thinking of
what you need. You've been asked
by that, by everybody on this
committee now. What, what do you
need? What do you want?
I want you to use your
imagination, right? I want you
to envision, uh, and, and
imagine a corrections department
where we're turning.
People who are exceptionally
better than when they come in.
And, and I hope you can say
that. So tell, tell me that
they're not coming out gang
affiliated. Tell me they're not
coming out hardened and, and,
and, um.
And understand why a lot of us
don't think the solution to much
of this is keeping them in a
facility longer.
And then turning them back into
society and expecting a
different result.
Madam Chair, and, uh, Vice Chair
Cervantes, Senator Cervantes. So
first of all, the visiting of
facilities, that would be great.
I, I remember uh being a unit
manager and uh giving a tour of
my housing unit to the CECJ and
it was a very exciting thing for
me to be able to get my staff
ready to display their area they
were so proud to show off, so I
always think it's a great thing
too when you're able to come
into our facilities and, and see
them. So definitely we will be.
to bring that back you on
something for a predecessor of
yours, one thing that those of
us that have been around a long
time realized that we'd
oftentimes go to a facility and
the floors have been shined and
the walls have been polished
and, and, and everything was
freshly painted and, and then
words right, we, we, then we'd
start talking to the inmates and
they'd tell us, yeah, we just we
spent the last week cleaning up
for you guys, um, um, and, and,
um, it's kind of like
Albuquerque when dignitaries
come to town they go clean up
the streets and, and, and do
everything really polish it.
And, and one thing that we did
with a predecessor of yours,
which I hope you'll invite us to
do, which is not only to come
see the facility, but, but to
give us the authority to go in
at any time.
Uh, one of your predecessors
gave us that authority, which is
made a, made a promise to us
that any legislator could show
up at a gate and ask to go into
the facility with no notice. Um,
and, and to, and to get a really
a true understanding of what
it's like day to day. So I
appreciate your invitation, but
please, but think about that,
um, because we, we, because we
have, we have.
Yeah, we, we had had that
commitment from a from a
predecessor of yours. We have
not asked you for that
commitment before, but we, I'd
like to have it from you that,
that you can allow us that that
authority because again, we
You all are going to some of you
all are invited to come to
dinner and reception at my house
today. The gardeners at the
house, you know.
Uh, there's people cleaning up
for you all, uh, somebody's
raking the leaves. So we all do
the same thing, right? We all do
the same thing you do, uh, and
so, yeah, we do have leaves
here.
The chair say we don't have
leaves in Las Cruces. And we do
have trees, uh, but anyway,
secretary, you know, I don't
mean to interrupt you, but would
you, would you, would you think
on that? Would you give us that
kind of commitment that, that
the chair and I could go to
Southern this afternoon and say
we'd we'd like to come in and
walk through with, with no
notice.
Um, Madam Chair and Mr. Vice
Chair.
Actually, uh, you know, having
come up in the system, it's
always been my belief that that
was the situation, um, people, I
mean, I've always thought that
and so it surprises me for you
to say that you would need
permission. If I, if I ever got
a call from one of our elected
officials that said, I would
like to go to such and such
location. I'm gonna be there in
5 minutes. I would say, great,
I'll call the warden and let you
in. But I'll tell you why. I
have had the same experience
And I hate it. Oh gosh, it's the
worst when they're preparing for
you and they know that you're
coming, right? I never tell
people when I'm coming and it's
not just me. I have a deputy
directors, directors, and we
make unannounced visits all over
the place and you know, because
the facility I spent a lot of
time at was the penitentiary of
New Mexico and Santa Fe, you
always have to be ready for
administrators and whoever else,
right? So that's how I grew up
in the system and I believe that
that's how all of us should
always be ready for visitors at
any time.
So you're absolutely welcome to
visit any of our facilities
whenever you want. I don't need
to think on it. You have my
commitment. Um, as far as the,
uh, gangs question or concern, I
really appreciated that Mireia
would say that and I could
actually picture him saying that
because I, I remember working
with him. He was a great warden.
Um, but I think we've done a ton
of work to really mitigate a lot
of the influence that those big
gangs had, right? You know, and
you, you've heard, of course,
about the security threat
groups, the LC and the S&M. And
the way that our STIU staff over
the years isolated them. It just
killed their power. We
definitely still see it
happening though, right? You get
people from street gangs,
variety of street gangs from the
same location, and then they
maybe find each other and so
street gangs that might be
rivals out in the community they
Become friends in the facility,
and but we're always looking for
that because we saw what
happened when, because that's
exactly how the LC and the S&M
started in the first place was
people finding commonalities and
we're always, you know,
monitoring mail and talking to
inmates trying to figure out
who's clicking up and, and
making sure that we're, we're
interfering with that to the
extent that we're able to do.
Um, so I definitely don't think
it's that high. I do think the
number's still high though,
because a lot of people that
come through the
Prison system are members of
street gangs. So I, I would put
it somewhere in the high 40s,
but I will actually look it up
for you and um and I'll I'll
send you, uh, you and, and Ms.
Martinez, a message letting you
know what that actual number
looks like. And then just to
make a quick comment on the uh
the good time and, and the
session. So, yes, it was
definitely, um, uh, a strong
stance to take the felon in
possession and not allowing that
individual to have a good time.
And so when we were discussing
that, and we did
I did discuss what the value of
good time can be in
circumstances. But at the end of
the day, with everything that
we've been seeing in the
Department of, uh, felon in
possession and how serious that
is all of the terrible crimes
that happened as a result of it,
uh, we said it there also needs
to be a deterrent on the front
end. And so if they know that
they're coming and the sentence
that they get is a straight
sentence, then that's what we're
going to do. And so I was.
In support of it when we move
forward on that and, uh, as we
move forward, we'll be sure to
continue talking about the
various pros and cons of, of
awarding good time.
Yeah, and I, I, um, I know the
committee, I'll I'll share with
you and the committee we'll get
shared with as well too. We've
looked at the statistics of
felony imposition charges, and
how many of them actually get
charged and actually taken to
trial that's infinitesimally
small. It's really none close I
could say almost next to none.
So you get charged with it
frequently in terms of getting
prosecuted with it through a
verdict and in a sentence, it's
It's really not done. So I
understand the concern. I
appreciate you. I'm glad to know
you were part of the dialogue.
I'm glad the governor included
you and took your advice and
maybe not strongly enough,
because, again, we still were
presented with legislation to
eliminate that and I'm sure you
can understand that that same
argument could be made for all
manner of crimes, right? I mean,
felon in possessions of a bad
crime. Let's eliminate their,
their good time. OK. Why don't
we do that for drug offenses?
Why don't we do that for gun
offenses? Why don't we do that
for other violent crimes, rape
by
by should somebody who's a
rapist convicted.
good time, but a felon in
position not. It's a slippery
slope. You can see the, the, the
problem with that. And once,
once you go there, once you say
we're not going to allow good
time for felons and possessions,
I'm going to argue rapists
shouldn't get it either, or
murderers shouldn't get it
either. And and it doesn't make
any sense to have a system
where, yeah, rapists and
murderers get good time, um,
felons in possession don't. And,
and this is usually where I make
my joke about the fact that
we've got a candidate running
for president who's a convicted
felon. Um, um, you know, are we
going to say that he doesn't get
good time, uh, when
when or if he ends up doing his
time. Um, and so, uh, it doesn't
make sense. So, again, I
appreciate, I really do
appreciate you telling us you
were at the table. That's what I
wanted to hear. So thank you for
that. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator. One brief
question and then we need to
move to the next topic. Um, how
do you use rulemaking?
I've, I've heard concerns
expressed that you don't use it
in the way that many departments
do. So talk to me a little bit
about how you use rulemaking. So
nice, transparent process for
the public and legislators can
have some input.
Madam Chair, actually, when you
look at the rulemaking statute,
there is an exemption for penal
institutions. And so we do not
use the rule-making process.
That's why I was explaining with
Representative Cavena that we
put, uh, it out there to our
staff members, and we haven't
thus far done it with our inmate
population, but uh like I said,
my first experience in in that
was working with HCA on uh MAT
and the way that those rules
would be implemented.
Uh, and the, the reason behind
that largely has to do with the
expedient nature in which
decisions need to be made in
correctional institutions and,
um, I, I wasn't involved in the
process from the start, so I'm
not 100% sure on what that looks
like from the beginning to end.
Um, but I know there's lots of
time frames and things of that
nature that are built into it,
and those things, um, you know,
I think the logic behind the
original statute was that they
would interfere potentially with
safety and daily operations of
Crash.
Institutions
OK, well, I think was it you
represented Karina who had such
a provision in one of your
bills, OK, well, we might be
looking at that again, you know,
I understand the point about um
moving quickly, but um there are
other agencies actually that
have to move quickly too, so I,
you know, um, I'm not sure that
suggestion is has
the strength that we would,
would imagine it might so um
thank you for that answer, and
thank you so much for joining us
and sharing your perspective on
things and I'm really pleased
that the committee had a lot of
really good questions for you.
So thank you very much.
OK. Uh, next item is, um, parole
board modernization.
OK.
Welcome. We have Denali Wilson,
staff attorney, ACLU, um, the
floor is yours.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee and
welcome to Las Cruces, um.
I, I'm based here, um, I thank
you for the introduction. I'm a
staff attorney at the ACLU and,
uh, grew up in Las Cruces.
Went to state for undergrad and
then UNM for for law school, so
get to claim both, but I was
very grateful to have
flexibility in my legal career
as I started out to move home
where my parents live and my two
grand living grandparents live,
so, um, welcome to my hometown.
I am sharing with you today, a
draft bill related to operations
of the New Mexico Adult Parole
Board.
And, um, it's my commitment to
discuss with this committee that
proposal and report back both to
the sponsor and, and
stakeholders, um, some of the
outcomes of this conversation,
the bill is being sponsored by,
uh, Senator Leo Jaramillo, who
I'm sure um that he couldn't be
down here today, would love to
hear from anyone who is also
interested in, in this topic,
um.
Of this committee's input is
very valued and so that's of
course why we're here. My
relationship to the issue, uh,
as an individual attorney, I
have worked closely with the New
Mexico Adult Parole Board
since, uh, 2020. And so in 2020
we worked with the board on an
administrative rulemaking
process. Uh, there was a rule
change that was necessary
constitutionally regarding
The treatment of people who were
sentenced to life for crimes
committed when they were
children. And so we worked on
that rule change and the
implementation and then in, uh,
2023 when this legislature
passed changes to juvenile
parole. We worked with the board
closely on the implementation of
that bill and, um, I'm proud to
have what I believe to be a
strong working relationship with
the board, uh, in executing our
respective
duties and responsibilities and
we're here today because there
are some agreements as to
what are necessary changes and,
and that um those are
conversations that are ongoing
but have resulted in this draft
discussion bill. Um,
I know that the parole board was
invited to participate and had
hoped to and could not, um, and
know also that as an executive
agency, um, the governor does
have to sign off on any
legislation that they proposed.
So, um, I, it is my hope and my
expectation that a version of
this bill is introduced and
introduced as a collaborative
effort.
So you, you have two things, you
have a copy of the draft
discussion bill, as well as a
2018 report from the Robina
Institute that did a survey of
state parole boards across the
country and made recommendations
in a couple of areas, um, the
parole board decision making
process, uh, the administration
of the parole authority itself,
um, and terms and conditions of
supervision post-release. This
bill does not
To make all of the
recommendations that are in that
report and I think there are a
lot of opportunities for, um,
for us to work together in the
future, but there were 3 things,
um, that I think and hope are
doable within this next session.
I'll start with the, the first,
which is actually section 2, but
where the conversation started
and it's related to changes in
compensation. And so if you look
at section 2,
Just a little bit of background
on the board, um, is made up of
15 members. They're appointed by
the governor and they're
confirmed by the Senate under
current law, compensation is
limited to the Per diem Act and
explicitly prohibits
compensation for any additional
services. Um,
and a lot of the board's duties
are executed outside of what our
official meetings are hearings.
And so that includes
investigating and reviewing.
Materials that are relevant to
the parole board's decision,
preparing for hearings,
conducting.
Follow up on decisions and
taking time to ensure that
victim input impact statements
for victims who don't
participate in a hearing are are
heard outside of and considered
outside of that, um, that
hearing setting. So draft
changes would allow for
compensation for these
activities through the creation
of a compensation structure that
mirrors the Per diem Act, um,
for administrative activities
and
You know, I think, and I wish
the board were here to confirm,
I think that for the first time
in a long time there is a full
parole board, right? We have all
15 members. Um, if not, it's
very close, and that's been a
challenge because some of the,
the compensation limits, um,
make it difficult to retain and
to recruit quality members. And
so that's an area where, where
we think these changes would
benefit. They also, of course,
better.
Reflect the value of the
services that, that members
provide the community and you
know, the reason that this is
something that we feel we can
partner on. Uh, we know as
advocates that better resourcing
and fair compensation means that
cases are heard on time.
And that they get the
individualized attention that
they deserve or we at least hope
that that will, that will be the
case. Um.
So that's the first, or really
the 2nd section of this, this
proposal, the first
Section, which makes changes to
um factors to be considered at
hearings. Um, makes those
changes and, and this is really
where the Robina Institute and
those recommendations come in,
um, makes changes to the factors
to be considered and those
changes are in line with best
practices and also, um, closely
mirror current board protocol.
Um,
So what the, the, the hope here
is really to, uh, reflect a
shifted focus from what are
static factors, things that are
unchanging and cannot change,
right? The nature of the crime,
whether a weapon was used, um,
dynamic factors, right? We want
to see the board focusing on
in-prison behavior, um,
engagement in risk reduction
programs. Some of the programs
that we heard about this
morning, right, that that can
really be the focus of of what
this
is because that's one that
actually gives us important
information about someone's, um,
return to the community. And so
the, the amendments in section
one,
address that shift. And this is
a trend that we're seeing across
the country in boards and, and
is reflected in in this best
practices and, um, report from
the Rubina Institute is really
encouraging state boards to make
this shift based on the evidence
of what we know actually makes a
difference.
Um, and, and has an impact on,
on, on public safety and away
from, um, old laws that focused
on the severity of the crime and
the nature of the crime, what
happens habitual offender
status, those kinds of things
that were, were and still are
in, in our state law.
The, um, provisions in that
section also make, uh,
abundantly clear that in those
who are impacted by the harms of
those incarcerated have a right
to participate, um, and to have
their perspectives, uh, on
release considered by the board,
which is a part of, a part of
the practice now and just an
opportunity for us to to codify
what the board already does.
Finally, the, the last section,
section 3, makes an important
change to the way that the
board, uh, schedules parole
hearings. I mentioned that my
role has been as an advocate
before the board for people who
are are applying for release.
And so in those years I've been
before the board and, uh, around
30 different cases, and most of
those are homicide cases.
And, um,
What I noticed, uh, and, and
what we noticed together is that
oftentimes those hearings are
scheduled at the anniversary of
death. And that's, that's not
that's not intentional. Um, but
it is eligibility is set by
years into a sentence. So when
somebody's serving a life
sentence, it's 30 years into
this sentence, now with the
changes we made in 2023. Um, if
you were a child at the time,
it's 1520, or 25 years, and
it's, it's on that date.
people's sentence started at the
time, uh, that life was lost.
And so recognizing, um, that
this process is already, uh, you
know, incredibly challenging for
uh for victims to navigate. Um,
we, we worked in with the board
to come up with a process for
sharing out as we were
anticipating scheduling, looking
up, um,
And sharing out the dates and,
uh, birth dates and death dates
of direct victims in homicide
cases and avoiding scheduling,
uh, in order to avoid, uh,
creating any additional undue
hardship with the victim's
family.
That's a process that we're
committed to continuing but
makes sense to codify and
legislate around so that if the
board changes or if advocates
change, you know, it's something
that we're doing in in all
cases.
Um
As, as I mentioned, the Rubina
Institute, it's a, it's a really
comprehensive report. It talks
about things that this bill
doesn't do but have already been
in conversation today. Good
time, um, early eligibility or
early release for, um, from
Supervision, things that are
very actionable and would be
great for continued
conversation. Um, there are some
metrics that the board already
is.
Exceeding in or doing well, um,
and these others were, uh, you
know, we'll have continued
opportunity to collaborate, but
I hope, I really do hope and
believe that
These 3 things,
um, are possible to act on in
the upcoming legislative session
and would love to hear committee
input.
Thank you very much, Ms. Wilson.
Do we have, um, committee
questions.
Rep Chasey, who else? Anyone
else? OK, um, Senator Neiber,
anyone else? Ara Cadena.
All right. I, I, we're, I want
to try to make up a little time
so if you keep could keep to
about 4 minutes each, that'd be
great. Thank you. Oh, I'm sorry.
Representative Jason
thank you very much, Denali,
and, and just to let you all
know, Denali was a page for, um,
our late great hero, uh, J. Paul
Taylor, when she was a little
kid, so, um, she's, she's
visited us in other roles too.
Um, so, um, I, I just wanted to
say I
I really think the idea of
paying the board members
differently is a is a good one
because we've heard frequently
how hard it is to keep people,
good people on the parole board,
so I really like that change. I
also think that um
By making the changes that you
suggest in section one, we can
Honestly look at how well the
inmate has
Completed his or her sentence,
and whether or not the inmate is
actually ready to re-enter
society safely and contribute to
society rather than
Refocusing on what the crime was
because the time spent is what
the penalty is for the crime.
And, um, I also.
See
I,
I also agree with your third
section 3 change, and I can
understand.
That makes it even harder, I
think, for the, um, family of
the victim to want to
participate or to um.
have input at the hearing if we
don't make that.
That changed and, and I just
wanted to ask real quickly, did
you say that these were
Suggestions.
Primarily coming from this.
Work
Madam Chair, Representative
Chasey, thank you for the
question. So they're both, uh,
so the, the factors changed,
which was the where you started
your conversation, um, and, and
this important shift is a
recommendation of the Robina
Institute. There are a number of
other recommendations that this
bill does not address. The
scheduling issue, I don't know
if that is something that is,
uh, incompassed, um, by, or has
that other state.
have addressed it's not included
in the recommendations and New
Mexico is is really unique in
that we don't already have.
Um, a, a robust structure for
compensating parole board
members. So it's, it's also not
a part of the recommendation for
that reason. It's, it seems to
be a unique New Mexico uh
structure that we have set up as
a citizen's parole board.
Work for free. Thank you very
much, madam, Madam Chair, thank
you Denali. I appreciate it.
You're welcome, Senator Neibert.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Yes, this may be my last chance
to uh.
Pick apart a bill, uh.
Oh, no, we only have 4 minutes.
Just keep that in mind.
I was just wondering why we're
deleting on page two lines 10
and 11.
Because we're, we're basically
saying consider everything
including these things, but now
we're deleting something, but
you can still consider it.
Is there a reason why we deleted
the language.
You're, uh, Madam Chair and
Senator Neibart, this is the
factor mitigating and
aggravating circumstances.
Madam Chair and Senator, I, I
would love to have a discussion
if, if you think that it should
remain.
I think the conversation we had
with the drafter is that it
follows.
a factor that is, is all
encompassing of those things.
So, um, the circumstances of the
offense, which includes
mitigating and aggravating
circumstances, perhaps the
revision though is
To just, um,
make a, uh, line 9, the
mitigating and aggravating
circumstances. It was intended
to remove repetition, not to not
to exclude something that should
otherwise be uh be considered.
then on page 7 line 23, subject
to assignment. I'm not sure I.
Gathered what
you're trying to get there and
then my last comment is time
short is uh the new material on
page 8.
It's duplicative. Do you want
them to consider it, or do you
want to prohibit it?
Just a thought. That's all.
Thank you, Senator. Can you
remind me your second, the page
number and line number for the
second.
This was the uncompensation,
correct?
Yeah page, uh.
Page 7
Line 23, the word assignment
says subject to assignment,
review and approval I I
understand why the chair would
review and approve those items,
but I don't understand what the
assignment is.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator, that would be a great
question for me to ask the
parole board, and I will do
that.
Thank you, Senator, and
Representative Laura Cadena,
thank you. I just have a couple
of comments, Madam Chair. Um, I
am looking at page 15 from the
Rubina Institute on the
recommendations as they relate
to appointments, um.
Specifically, members should be
appointed to the parole board
without regard for political
affiliation or activity.
Um, and then lastly, members
should be protected from removal
in the absence of malfeasance.
Um, I don't feel like that's
been the practice or pattern in
New Mexico the last several
years and as you move forward, I
would appreciate seeing um more
weight to your modernization and
including making sure we have
protections to get qualified
people on the board and then to
trust them to uphold their
responsibilities, um, without
what I've seen in the last
several years, removals based on
political currents and and
Changing political winds, um,
shout out to our, our former
colleague representative Jane
Paldell Colbert, like she often,
um, and for many years was on
had a had a big leadership here
and and she's one of the voices
I trusted in part because she
made it through governor
transitions and otherwise like
they were there to to know the
merits of what was in front of
them to follow those um with
consistency and to make sure
people were getting a fair
process, both the people that
were coming up for parole and
also
So those impacted by criminal
activity. So I'd, I'd appreciate
seeing more that would give us
our stateroom to do that. And
then just secondly, these, um,
compensation rates seem very low
to, um, Representative Valcon
and I and specifically because
you're putting dollars and cents
in statute, of course, within a,
by the time the ink dries, these
are going to be undervalued
again. So we just want you to
consider making sure they have
some kind of an inflationary um
bump along with.
them and just flatly they, they
seem low to begin with, so would
appreciate more thought into
those pieces. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative. I
agree on membership and it's,
it's part of the conversation
that's been had as ways that we
can, um, both, uh, make sure
that we're, um,
Recruiting qualified members and
protecting people from the same
thing that I've witnessed, um,
in, in, uh, changes in, in
leadership,
um, I believe that the
compensation rate is meant to
mirror the per diem Act, but
perhaps there's a way for us to
say any.
Any increases that are made
should be mirrored here because
we're we're expanding per the
per diem Act is only for meeting
time and we're just trying to
create
um instead of the per diem Act
is for non-salaried state
employees. So short of having a
fully professional salaried
parole board that some states do
have, um, if we mirror the per
diem act and create this, uh,
This mechanism for people to be
compensated for administrative
time. I, I think having a, a
mechanism where if we change and
increase those rates that are
incredibly low and definitely
should be should be increased,
um, that that change doesn't
also need to be made here. So I
really appreciate those
recommendations. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you,
Representative. Anyone else?
Right, thank you very much, Ms.
Wilson and Ma we'll be hearing
more about this bill moving
forward from the senator and
others.
Thank you all. Have a great
morning. Thank you. All right,
so next on our agenda before
lunch is local law enforcement
perspectives and I, I know
Sheriff Stewart is here and
Chi story is also here.
Let's see.
Welcome Sheriff. Welcome, Chief.
I just want to set the stage a
little bit for people. Um, I, we
had an agenda like item like
this when we were in Espanola
and we had various
representatives of law
enforcement and we found it very
enlightening, so the agenda item
is intended to give you an
opportunity to share whatever
you wish in terms of, you know,
issues that you're facing and
what you think are things we
should know about. So let's
start with um, Sheriff Stewart.
Thank you. uh, Madam Chair, and,
uh, committee, uh, some of you I
recognize and, uh, I'm happy to
see again the others for the
first time. So, uh, this is a
great opportunity on behalf of
the Donana County Sheriff's
Office undersheriff Tessa Abeta,
my team, welcome, uh, to Dona
Anna County. And uh with that, I
will uh start with just uh a
little bit of introduction.
We do have a mission statement,
just like uh hopefully most
agencies, uh, we do embrace
certain values. I just want to
draw your attention to one
particular area under
professionalism. And that's
education. When I came to the
sheriff's office in January of
2019, uh, this agency, my agency
spent very little on training,
and it was really important to
me, uh, to begin to
look seriously at training for
our entire staff, our budget at
the time was 10,000 a year. The
budget now for training is
nearly 100,000. The other thing
I do is send people out of
state.
I do that for two reasons. One
is bring back some ideas. Other
people have great ideas. Uh, I'm
a great thief of good ideas. I'm
not an originalist. So, uh, I
love to hear what other people
do. So I only ask of people, my,
my staff that I send out is, uh,
bring back one good idea that we
might be able to implement, and
second, don't let anyone recruit
you. That's all I'm asking.
So let's move on to demographics
and of course 3, at least 3 of
you know these demographics, um.
We are, we serve about 223,000
people, but, uh, my colleague to
my right, uh, serves about half
of those, so he has a lot of
that responsibility, so in
unincorporated areas, it's about
125,000 people that we provide
service to. And I, I like to
point out we are 3,813 square
miles, uh, when I go back east
and people tell me about their
big jurisdictions of 400 square.
Miles I do have to laugh. We
don't even have enough gas to
get out to the furthest reaches
and back. So if we have to go,
it can be quite a trek. Uh, with
that, I will tell you we have
147 sworn right now. Uh, I want
to say this loudly and clearly.
I say it everywhere I go. We are
not understaffed. We are fully
staffed. You will notice that
for fiscal year 2020.
I've asked for 23 new positions.
I'm confident we will fill them
for the first time in our
history, uh, we started our
second academy.
Monday. I don't know what day
we're on, but this week, and,
uh,
1717 individuals second time. So
we're doing really well on that
front. I do want to assure our
populists that we are fully
staffed and we are looking to
the future. Um, with that, I do
have 64 allotted civilian
positions you'll you'll see that
I only have 53 of those filled.
The reason for that is we're
constantly looking at
restructuring and reorganizing
how we provide service.
So I leave certain of those
positions open to be reclassed
as we need to go on into the
future. We have to be looking at
what, what is the, what is our
responsibility in terms of
support, uh, processes tomorrow,
5 years out, 20 years out, even
beyond hopefully my life span.
So let's, let's keep that in
mind when, uh, we look at some
of these vacancies, we do it on
purpose. So
Let's, uh, take our uh look to
uh borderland issues.
First and foremost, um, migrant
deaths, undocumented or presumed
undocumented deaths in our
county rose dramatically in
2023. Up to 2023, we had about 8
to 10 a year. In 2023, we
reached nearly 100 in 2024,
you'll see that as of this
weekend, this last weekend, it
was 87 uh deceased in our
desert, um.
I know we know this, but let me
tell you, we don't forget they
are humans, regardless of our
opinions on these matters, they
are humans. So we treat each one
as we would, um, in homicide
until it is proven not to be
homicide. So know that this is a
very, this, this is not about us
making predeterminations about
whose death in the desert, uh,
we need to look at.
Look at all of them, and I also
bring this up to thank our
partners, uh, with the Bureau of
Land Management. Uh, recently,
uh, there was some issue in the
paper about bones that we were
ignoring or not collecting and
uh I, I
I'm so pleased that, uh, BLM,
uh, Mr. Victor Vaughn, he is the
new agent in charge here, and we
reached out to him and said, you
know, sir, we don't know the
difference between a 100 year
old bone and a 10 year old bone.
So would you please go look at
these particular sites and
these, these points and tell us
what you think. They sent their
archaeologist and they found
that those were prehistoric
bones. So know that there are
bones everywhere.
And we, we do our best to, to be
on top of that's a bad way to
say it, but to, to cover deaths
in the desert with all due
respect. So please understand
that. Um, the other issue, uh,
that has
faced us, but I want you to know
how we are approaching this, um,
stolen vehicles, uh, when I
first and, and certainly Chief
Story has a much longer history
of knowing this than I, but
stolen vehicles here often went
immediately across the border.
They, they were, they were gone,
you know, the minute they're
stolen, they're gone. Well, what
we've seen certainly in the last
3 years our vehicles being used
uh for local to commit
crime stolen vehicles are
perpetrators are doing other
crimes using these vehicles so
they're depositing them, uh, 2
or 3 days later, either
somewhere in the desert or um
stripping them and leaving them,
but know that they often remain
here, uh, which is a difference.
Uh, so one thing we have looked
upon, uh, in, in the sheriff's
office strongly is technology.
Uh, we
We are believers, which is odd
from a sheriff who doesn't know
how to turn on her phone. I'm
going to tell you right now I'm
a big proponent of technology.
So we have 35 flock cameras. Uh,
those are cameras placed around
that uh we can enter a license
plate or if for instance, a
plate is a vehicle stolen in the
in the city, that plate gets
entered in NCIC and guess what,
it comes up on our officer's
phone.
It has just hit this camera on
this particular roadway. So we
are often now not only finding
vehicles that are recovered, but
we're finding people in the
vehicles, right? That's a huge
help. It's, it's one thing to
find an abandoned vehicle in the
desert, but we're getting people
in the vehicles. That's leading
us to um other information,
trafficking and smuggling. I
don't have to tell you
trafficking.
Smuggling is an enormous issue.
Uh, it certainly is no small
matter for us, but realize that
we're a pass through, OK? A lot
of the smuggling and trafficking
of, of humans is moving beyond
us quickly, right? We're a pass
through to other areas of the
United States, of our state. So,
uh, we're, we're.
We're a shortstop, if anything.
So we do have, uh, homes, uh,
that are being used for uh
hiding individuals and uh uh
for, for secreting humans and
with that we participated with
Operation Disruption, which was
uh
6 months ago. I think it was
this year where we, uh, teamed
with BLM, uh, with Border Patrol
and uh part of that our, our
contribution was providing intel
about some of these locations so
that uh federal and state
agencies, uh, state police could
come in and uh
You know, pursue further
investigation. So we're, we're
very active participants in this
process, but no, that our role
tends to be supportive as
opposed to hands on these people
and, uh, and drugs and so forth
are moving very quickly out of
our area. So with that, I want
you to know that um I have been
a long standing member of what's
called the Unified Command.
Uh, we were the first, uh,
state, uh, outside of Texas to
be considered part of the
unified command. Uh, we were
written into the charter. I'm
very proud of that because
that's uh all the federal heads
along with El Paso sheriffs and
along with El Paso PD, so D E A
FBI, Border Patrol, CBP, uh,
INA. They are all part of this
monthly meeting, and you might
say, well, why is that
important? The intel
have shared from that has been
terrific for us and I hope we
have given them back
information, uh, in order to
disrupt some of these, um, very,
very large operations, cartel
run operations. So, uh, moving
on.
Those are some of our challenges
right now, uh, that, but, but I
also wanted to tell you what
we're doing about them because
we're trying to actively pursue
them. Um, uh, with regard to
recruitment and officer
wellness. Um, I, I will tell you
that on January 25, 2019, uh,
when I was 25 days in office,
uh, my deputy committed suicide
as a result of that, I went on
a, a
campaign called Wellness. And uh
here we are 5 years.
5 years later, I am so happy to
tell you that not only have we
received enormous federal grants
for a wellness, uh, for our, uh,
deputies and support, but we've
also received what are called
TTA assistance, which is a
training and technical
assistance, uh, to get our
program running. You might
imagine the resistance uh to
wellness, uh, especially from
some of my, well, no, even
younger than me.
Uh, age group, they're very
suspicious. So there is a lot of
cultural, uh.
Culture about getting mental
health help that we needed to
overcome. And I'm pleased to
say, uh, we have, we have
crossed some huge hurdles. Um, I
do have uh 12 peer supporters,
uh, and we are considered, uh,
the go to people on the
international Association of
Chiefs of Police, uh, when it
comes to starting wellness
programs, our, our team has
gone, I've even gone to talk uh
to some of these national.
groups about when you're small
and rural, how, how do you get
this going? How can you take
bite-sized chunks and make it
work. So I'm very pleased to
tell you wellness is a huge part
of retention and uh not only are
we fully staffed, we are
retaining people. And again,
this is certainly not been an
overnight, uh, uh, effort. This
has been the effort from a lot
of, of individuals in our uh
Agency
So moving on to uh projects and
legislative priorities. Um, I'm,
I'm going to say that my
training academy is in a
A condemned building.
When
it was started long before me,
it was, uh, pulled out of a
condemnation somewhere and uh
we've been in it ever since and
I should have probably been on
this 5 years ago, but I had a
couple of other things on my
list. So here we are, we're
going to be asking and hoping
you will help us with a regional
training academy and, and uh
we've reached out to uh Chief
Story and, uh, we, we've see a
need in, in various areas.
is to combine these efforts. One
of them is through what's called
an EVOC course. uh, you know, we
must train people as much as
able to drive and uh drive uh
under stress and duress, and so
an evac is actually a small
track that we're able to um
provide training to our academy.
We have a, uh, plan that uh um
had a plan that is selected a
location
already for this, uh, and we're
hoping to obtain uh support
legislative support to get
funding for that, and that is
something that, uh, Las Cruces
police, but all agencies around
us, including the 5 sheriffs
around us can also come in and
use. We're really looking at
regionality and when you look at
grant money and federal money,
uh, they're very, very focused
on what are you doing regionally
so we hope to
Be moving that needle. Um, the
other, um,
area is and, and I think the
chief probably I, I, I would
like him to speak a little more
to a real-time crime center and
what that is and why that's
important to all of us. And
then, uh, if you, if you want to
know my personal, uh,
Uh
Concern.
Please do something about the IR
laws. Please do something about
IPA. I know it was amended a
couple of years ago. It didn't
go far enough. Nobody is
suggesting that we become a
non-transparent. What I am
suggesting is when you put in an
EPA request, you're a real
person.
You're not a straw person.
You're not a 16 year old boy in
Napa looking to uh put women on
the dark web.
Please, think that through.
Anytime you need help, I'll be
sure to add my 3 cents worth.
Lastly, um, I want to add that,
um.
EEA needs to be reimagined, uh,
the law enforcement Academy
Board, um, is struggling, and I
don't mean that as a, a, a to
cast the director, the current
director under any, any cloud.
That's not the case. It just in
my 5 years I've seen several
areas where it needs some more
structure. It needs to be
brought into really closer to
the 21st century.
So
I I bring that up as my pet
peeve, and then my last comment,
I am a commissioner on the Crime
Victims Reparation Commission.
Uh, I'm serving the first year
of my second term, I appreciate
the governor appointing me
because let me tell you, when
you see, when you hear CVRC and
you hear an increase in crime.
That means an increase in crime
victim reparations. So, uh,
unfortunately, they go together
and as you may know, we support.
People, victims of crime, often
for years. So with that, I'll,
uh, if you have questions or the
chief could go next, however you
choose.
Let's hear from Chief Story and
then we'll have have questions.
Thank you, Chief. Thank you,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, I appreciate the
opportunity to provide a local
law enforcement perspective and
really kind of outline some of
the challenges we face not only
as law enforcement but as a
community and I believe as a
state as a whole.
I don't know if it's gonna work
for me. There we go. Um, I'm
gonna start with just a quick
overview of crime in Las Cruces.
Although the statistics are
local to the city of Las Cruce,
I believe we're seeing the same
trend statewide in most
jurisdictions for violent crime,
we have seen an increase of
approximately 20% in the last
five years. We fortunately had a
reduction of 18% from 22 to 23.
But when I show you the 24
numbers year to date that has
been filing crime is something
we are definitely struggling
with this year.
For property crime, it's pretty,
pretty drastic the increase that
we have seen. Um, it is
essentially a 71% increase in
the last five years in property
crime. We had a slight reduction
last year, which is still
encouraging because that's the
first reduction we've seen in 6
years, and we are continuing
that reduction so far this year,
but the numbers are still much
higher than they should be for
our jurisdiction.
And this really kind of puts it
into context when you look at
the amount of crime per 1000
people compared to the national
average for violent crime used
in our 2023 numbers, we're 31.6%
higher than the national average
and 172.8% higher than the
national average for property
crime. These are not numbers
that I want to give, but this is
the reality of where we are
right now.
And that really, that actually
equals or equates to 1 in 17 Las
Crucess were a victim of a
reported Part One crime last
year. Keep in mind part one
crimes don't include many things
like vandalism or criminal
damage of property, which we've
seen a huge increase in and also
remember that each jurisdiction
has a significant amount of
crime that goes unreported.
I think the property crime is
worse than Albuquerque per 1000.
I apologize.
There's a and the reason I'm
using this is because there's
some videos that I think will,
you know, there's some pictures
and videos that will really
paint a picture of one of the
things that we're struggling
with.
Here we go. Um, so you're to
date for violent crime. We have
a 46% increase. Now that's being
driven primarily by aggravated
assaults and aggravated
batteries, and of course, for
the way it's reported to the FBI
that includes both, so that's
threatening people with guns and
knives and other daily weapons.
That's also using them on
people, stabbing people,
shooting people, um, and that's
the most concerning statistic on
there, but also concerning is
the increase in homicides that
we've seen right now year to
date, we're at 15 which as of
this week, I believe is still
higher than El Paso, who is 6
times.
Bigger than Las Cruces.
For property crime, we have seen
a reduction. There's only two
categories we do not have a
reduction year to date, and
that's in felony theft and
misdemeanor shoplifting, the
felony theft is also being
driven by shoplifting and
organized retail crime. And so
that's one area I think
statewide we've seen an increase
people realize there's less risk
to shoplifting than there is to
break it into somebody's car or
house. So we've seen an increase
in that area and that's one of
the areas that we've tried to
put some focus on for,
especially for the second part
of 2024.
So really some significant
challenges that we're facing.
Yeah, if you can move.
Appreciate it. Um, I'm, I'm not
gonna spend time talking about
this. I was already here, this
committee has heard a nasium
about competency. I believe that
the committee and the
legislature as a whole knows
this is an issue and is
committed to finding a solution
and I'm very confident that in
January and February there will
be something that passes that
will help address the issues
with competency.
So pretrial detention or bail
reform. I'm, I'm just gonna hit
on what the numbers are for
recidivism in Las Cruces. I
showed this chart before, the
1st 3 categories come from
studies that go back to the 50s.
We added the last category of
prolific because recently we've
had so many people with 11 or
more arrests in a single year
that they really needed to be
separated out. And so when you
look at that category, it kind
of tells the tale and paints the
picture. In 2018 and 2019, we
probably won't be having this
conversation because 5 people
with 11 or more arrests in Las
Cruces wasn't that big of a
deal.
But when you have 24 and 21, and
I'll show you in a second, we're
on, we're on track to be right
around there for 2024. People
with 11 or more arrests in a
single year, that's a problem.
That shouldn't be able to happen
in a jurisdiction of 115,000
people.
These are our 2024 numbers. This
is through the end of September,
um, and really this last
category there's a bunch of
numbers on there that are
concerning, but I have one
person with 39 and one person
with 33 arrests so far year to
date for the 1st 3 quarters.
Again, that, that's a problem
that we have to deal with
whether through different
mechanisms, but it's something
we need to address that that
shouldn't be able to happen um
in any jurisdiction in New
Mexico.
Fenno
I'm a firm believer that the uh
One of the primary drivers of
the increase in crime, the
increase in homelessness,
increas in most of the bad
things we have in our
communities is fentanyl and
methamphetamine. I'm only going
to touch on just one kind of
metric of that and that's
overdoses in Donana County. Um,
that's kind of a convoluted map,
but that compares 2023 to 2024,
um, or just shows both the
statistics for overdoses. This
next slide kind of helps a
little bit better. This is for
2022 and 2023, a heat map of
overdoses in Don County, but
that's zoomed in and obviously
State of Las Cruces itself, and
the numbers are 1230 total
overdoses in Donana County, 135
fatal overdoses and 315, or at
least 315 naloxone
administrations. That number is
probably underreported, but 135
fatal overdoses at the same time
we've seen the availability of
Narcan, the use of Narcan
skyrocket as well, so.
Without that, we would probably
see a much higher number for
fatal overdoses. For an
interesting point is if you take
a crime map, a heat map for
crime, a hotspot map for crime,
really no matter how you break
it down, whether you just look
at violent crime or property
crime. All crime or select
crime, and you overlay it on
this overdose map. The hotspots
are going to line up almost
perfectly.
And I want to spend not a ton of
time, but the bulk of my time
talking about juvenile justice
issues. This is something that
we've seen in the last 1.5 to 2
years is extremely concerning,
quite frankly heartbreaking.
When I talk to chiefs around the
state, they're seeing the same
trend in Albuquerque and
Farmington and other places
around the state. And that's
ultimately kids, when I say
kids, 1213, 1415 year old kids
committing a lot of crime,
especially violent crime, and
oftentimes with firearms. Um,
this slide right here is a
screenshot of a social media
post from a kid who's
been involved in a lot of
different crimes. I'll give you
kind of a summary, but he posted
this right after his case was
dismissed by the district
attorney for attempted murder
for in my opinion, no reason
whatsoever. In January of 23, he
was a suspect in a drive-by
shooting, including taunting the
victim of the shooting in April
23, he was cited and released
for a person or possession of a
firearm by a person under 19
years old. He was given a class
recitation released in August of
23, he was charged with
aggravated battery, great bodily
harm for his uh
For the injuries he
cause on another child in the
next month in September of 23,
he was charged with attempted
murder for shooting a kid 5
times with an AR-15. That's the
case that was dismissed when he
posted this picture right here
in June of 24, after we had uh
we had two double homicides in
one day. He was related to two
of those victims. He stole his
mom's car. He was on pretrial
services in Texas with his mom,
stole his mom's car, cut off his
ankle bracelet, and is a suspect
in two drive-by shootings when
he came back to Las Cruces. Um,
and so
So right now he is in Las
Cruces, not on probation,
completely free and clear with
no conditions whatsoever.
And
And if you can't see it's hard,
I apologize for the audience,
but it says you can get away
with murder if you do it right.
We're talking about firearms
with their kids. Obviously our
kids cannot possess firearms
legally. They're under 19,
they're not positioning for any
of the lawful exceptions, and
almost all all the time, almost
always, they're stolen from
other people, from vehicles or
houses.
But here's just a several, and I
apologize to the committee
trying to see if there's some
videos that I think you have to
see to really paint the picture
and so that's the best I got
with this TV.
This video right here, if you
look at the back of those two
guns, what's called a Glock
switch that is an item that
converts a semi-automatic
handgun to a fully automatic
handgun, making it a machine gun
under federal law. We are seeing
those everywhere with our
juveniles, um, serious problem.
I'll show you some videos of
drive-bys that they're using a
Glock switch to to convert to a
fully automatic farm. There's
one area just to bring it up of
New Mexico law, we do not have
any law prohibiting such items.
It's obviously illegal under
federal law. Um, the problem is
AUS.
are over task, so it's not
they're they're not willing to
take these cases, but they can't
take all the cases. And so we
have really nothing we can
charge for the possession of
these blocks switches which
they're buying on the internet.
They could be 3D printed, and so
they're all over the place.
We have guns in our schools.
This picture was taken at Organ
Mountain High School, um, guns
were recovered both uh children
are currently their cases are
being adjudicated using guns to
threaten our law enforcement.
This is a Glock with a Glock
switch, so a fully automatic
machine gun under federal law
pointed out a Border patrol
agent in his car and posted on
social media.
I think that's probably all the
explanation I need to give the
picture speaks for itself.
This is a picture and it's very.
Difficult probably to decipher
the language unless um you know,
slang and that doesn't make any
sense, but it says emptied the
whole clip on the goofy's crib,
which I think we can all kind of
figure out what that means and
just basically bragging about a
drive-by that was committed in
Las Cruces.
This is a video that was posted
with a stolen AR-15 from an
Anthony police unit, um, and
then a drive by there or
essentially shooting out the
window in the city that they did
with it.
This is another video of a
drive-by now without the sound,
it's not gonna do it justice,
but this is with a fully
automatic Glock with the Glock
switch.
Um, and if, Madam Chair, if you
wouldn't mind if I can turn the
volume on just real quick.
Um
I think the volume on the TV is
going to have to be turned up.
I'm gonna play this 11 more time
because it's, it's hard to see
what or see what's going on
without hearing it.
I'm gonna get tired of doing
this.
Just ran.
This is essentially a gun battle
between a bunch of kids in the
middle of the city that they had
live on social media.
OK.
Uh.
This is a drive-by that happened
2 weeks ago in Las Cruces where
a person is completely unrelated
to anything was shot in the
forearm using again, a, a Glock
with a Glock switch making it
fully automatic.
You can hear it and then you'll
see the vehicle pass on.
This one I, I, I would imagine
would be shocking to everybody
here. This is at Young Park. If
you're not familiar with Las
Cruces, Young Park is in the
middle of the city. It's one of
our bigger parks. It is
surrounded by residential, a
middle school, and a few
businesses, but primarily
residential and apartment
complexes all the way around it.
For those not familiar, this is
Young Park in the middle. It is
surrounded by, it's not in the
middle of the desert, it's
surrounded by mostly houses and
apartment complexes in a middle
school.
And ultimately it's just a lot
of census violence. This is
Not a new phenomenon, but the
level of violence we're seeing
and the frequency and the volume
is, is new. This is not
something that I've seen in my
career. This is really the last
really since COVID, but
especially in the last two
years.
And of course, property crime.
There's
The the auto thefts of stolen
vehicles that the sheriff
reference we have seen a
dramatic increase. A lot of it
is Kia and Hyundaiss which have
a design flaw that you'll see
here. But the property crime is
also part of this, and I have
12 year old girls stealing cars
weekly. It's, it's extremely
shocking and
And even more concerning is how
often they post their crimes on
social media.
You'll see there in the
ignition, that's what it looks
like when they strip everything.
This is just a quick video to
see how fast.
They're still in the cars and
why they steal them so often.
Mhm
So just some statistics on our
juvenile crime. These, these are
just numbers of the amount of
kids that we've detained, that
means when it says arrested or
detained, they were actually
detained by juvenile probation,
went to the jail. Class
citations means they are cited
and released. And then of
course, the totals, that's 2023
and the first nine months of
2024.
This is more telling. This is
the the repeat offenders for our
juveniles. So this again is just
2023 in the first nine months of
2024. So in 21 months, I have
one child with 2 separate
charges. One was 16, 1 was 12, 2
with 11, and at least 5 with 10.
And again, that, that shouldn't
be able to happen. We should be
able to intervene, preferably
long before this, but certainly
before they have 2 separate
charges within within less than
a two-year period.
And here's some of the charges
again, same period of time, 21
months, 5 with homicide. These
are all juveniles. 21 aggravated
assault, 16 aggravated battery,
39 with burglary, 66 misdemeanor
assault, 364 misdemeanor
battery, 12 battery on a police
officer, 32 auto theft, 75
unlawful carrying of a deadly
weapon. That's a combination of
different things including
bringing guns or knives to
school and 7 shooting at a house
or dwelling essentially
drive-bys.
So some of the, some of the
issues that I see driving this
and there's a number of
problems. It's no easy task to
fix any of these things. But
there is a lack of
accountability for repeat
offenders, uh, especially both
adult, but when we're talking
about juveniles again having 20
separate charges in less than 2
years is a problem, especially
with the level of violence that
some of them have. They're not
just shoplifting charges. The
risk assessment instrument
that's used to authorize
attention uh is extremely
inflexible. It doesn't.
Allow us to adapt to the
jurisdiction. We shouldn't
necessarily be using the same
instrument in Las Cruces that
they're using in John, New
Mexico or even Albuquerque for
that matter. Um, there's also
the issue that we can't tailor
it to the trends that we're
seeing in many states, the
juvenile probation or juvenile
justice is left up to the
counties with support and
funding from the state, and that
way they can tailor the
response, of course,
evidence-based response and they
have to justify the response,
but they can tailor it to the
individual jurisdiction, but
also to the trends that they're
seeing, um.
Like right now, again, 2 years
ago, this wasn't the issue, and
now it is, and hopefully soon it
won't be again.
And then ultimately a lack of
resources and programs to
intervene long before we get to
this point. I mean, the, the
reality is we, when we're
talking about kids that are
shooting indiscriminately at
houses and people, we had
another 3 drive-bys last night.
We've, we've already failed when
we get to that point. And so
intervening before they're
committing violent crimes
earlier in the criminal justice
system or preferably before they
ever enter the criminal justice
system. We have to do a better
job of that as a state and as a
city.
My last slide. This is just on a
separate note, just to kind of
illustrate when we talk, we've
talked a lot about fon and
possession, especially this
year. And there's been a lot of
changes made to the statute over
the past several years, and I
think those changes are good
changes. The problem is we're
not seeing those changes have
their intended effect and so on
the ground, it's not
accomplishing what was intended
by the legislature. So just to
paint that picture here in Las
Cruces, we have, we filed the
Las Cruces Police fire 43 felon
in possession cases for 2021 and
2022.
27 of those were dismissed or
nola by the prosecutor. 6 pled
guilty for a sentence of
probation only they pled guilty
to the felon in possession. 4
were incarcerated for other
crimes. So as part of a plea,
the felon in possession was
dismissed and they pled to
murder. They pled to aggravated
assault. 3 were sentenced to
incarceration of of any length
for the felon in possession, but
all three of those cases also
had other crimes with it like
aggravated assault or
kidnapping. So it wasn't just
for the felon in possession.
And 3 are still being
adjudicated. It's important to
note that not a single case in
doing accounting from the Las
Cruces Police Department, at
least, went to trial for felon
in possession in 2021 or 2022.
So that's not a fault of the
statute. That's a breakdown of
the system at every other level.
Madam Chair, with that, we'll,
we'll stand for questions.
Good, thank you.
I have Representative Chasey.
Somebody, oh, could you turn
your um
Thank you. Um, hold on a second,
Jay.
Um, brand, OK.
Uh
Worse
Dog.
Oh
Oh.
Think so. OK. Representative
Chasey, we've, I'd like to try
to
Include this at around 25% of,
so if we could try to keep our
questions to about 4 minutes or
so, OK, and answers and I'm
gonna say what Senator Cervantes
likes to say, that's your 4
minutes and you manage it
accordingly and if people are
going on too long from the
presenters, cut them off.
Uh.
You ready? OK, thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, Cheryl Stewart, I'm
really happy to see you in
person. I remember you from um
testifying in front of the House
Judiciary Committee when we were
Remote because you were one of
the um
Members of the working group to
come up with our Civil Rights
Act. And um I, I want to thank
you for that and I, and I
appreciate the positive
presentation. It sounds like
things are really, really good,
and I hope that um I understand
that the theme of adequate
facilities came up also at our
last meeting in Espanola and the
IPRA issue. So, um, I won't be
here, but the rest of you need
to get to work on those.
Two things and I, I, I did
remember one of your
disappointments with the Civil
Rights Act, and that was that,
um, some, we didn't put anything
into place to ensure that bad
actors don't get passed around
among all the Elias, and I, I
don't know if that isn't
something we still need to look
at in New Mexico, it, it seems
that sometimes when we hear that
there's some real
Egregious violation of civil
rights by a um a law enforcement
officer. Nobody wants that to
happen. I mean, the law
enforcement doesn't want it to
happen in, in neither do they um
members of the public, and so I
guess I, I just wanna.
And encourage you and your
colleagues to let the
legislature know um if what else
we can do to address that. I've
been on a national group on um
safe policing and um I know
there are things going on in in
jurisdictions, red and blue
jurisdictions everywhere and so
that might be something for us
to continue to work on. If you
want to say anything about that
real quickly, very quickly, uh,
I'll
be stoned for saying this by my
own, but we need to do a better
job of not handing bad actors
off. Uh, I, I myself suffered
that you, you may have known,
uh, we had one of our former
deputies sentenced to 9 years.
He was handed off. I won't go
into that, but uh we, we need to
be more honest as well. I think
this is a two-way street and
while I appreciate what you're
saying, um, we
We can't continue to do that
and, and by the way, that's not
new here and just here. I've
been around. It's, it's
everywhere, right? And, and
that's across the country. I'm
hearing that too, so, um, one,
just a couple quick things with
the chief. um, when you gave the
number of arrests of juveniles.
We
Or even adults were those
without consequences? I know
Senator Cervantes was looking
into an adult arrest in Santa Fe
when we had our last meeting and
the the person who shut down the
Fiesta had been charged dozens
of times and never had any
consequences. Do you, do you
know if any of the
I mean, it seems to me that's
pretty much a problem for them
to continue to get away with
things. I'm sure Representative
Chasey, it is a problem. It's
difficult to tell you the exact
number, but oftentimes because
of competency, there's no
consequences because of the
failure of the prosecutor or the
officer. We didn't provide
discovery. Someone didn't show
up. A number of reasons, but
more often than not, there's not
consequences and it takes a
number of cases before that
person actually feels like
there's consequences.
And um, Madam Chair, I would
submit that's really true with
juveniles too. I, I first
started teaching in high school,
then I taught middle school and
um I, and even when I was
practicing live, it seems like a
lot of people who were in
trouble had gotten away with a
lot of things before and they
didn't, um, uh, they didn't
fully appreciate.
Were their limits were, and this
quick question is the um
The Glock switch is only illegal
federally. Do we just need to
make that illegal at the state
level.
Madam Chair Representative
Chasey, so yes, right now it is
only illegal federally. My
recommendation, obviously
people, there are people who can
legally possess a machine gun by
going through the NFA process.
But using a Glock switch is not
the process, and I think we need
a tool to be able to enforce it
at the state level. Thank you
very much. Thanks, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Brantley.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you guys both for being here and
both of you for being really so
accessible for legislators and
we have questions. When I
started, uh, my term in the
Senate 4 years ago, and one of
the early days of my very first
session, I was called off the
floor with a courtesy call that
uh officer Darian Jarrett had
just been murdered in my
district. And his murder has
actually had a pretty profound
impact on my term this 4 years
because coming from a small
community of Lordsburg, um,
Just, just the southern New
Mexico family, um, it, it to
this day continues to kind of
shake uh many of my
constituents. At the end of my
final session on year 4 this
year.
I was called off the floor as we
came to a close and was a
courtesy call again to notify me
that uh Officer Jonah Hernandez
had just been murdered and it is
impactful to think that we look
over 4 years in my first term in
office and how little had
actually been done, you know, as
we're patting ourselves on the
back to keeping New Mexico.
Safe, right? And the reason why
it shakes us to our core when we
lose a law enforcement officer
too in my first term is because
if we can't even keep our
guardians and our first
responders and our protectors
safe, then how do we sleep at
night knowing that we're safe
when when even our guardians
are, are not, um, uh, uh,
Senator Cervantes and I had an
opportunity to uh attend the
crime forum here in Las Cruces,
and I want to thank you, Chief,
for putting that on with the
governor.
Um, it was very well attended,
hundreds and hundreds of people.
From very diverse backgrounds
and and areas all coming
together to make sure that we
knew that
Crime is not an Albuquerque
problem anymore, and the impact
that it's having on Las Cruces
and how quickly, um, you know,
crime is just exploded here.
Chief Story, you are very, very,
very popular in this area by so
many people and I think that is
because if you're just
aggressive approach to, to just
make sure that everyone knows
that we're not doing enough to
keep, to keep our citizens safe.
So I would say this, the
disappointing thing is, is that
Solutions exist. You guys are
coming forward saying we have
problems in New Mexico, and I
appreciate that you're also
showing up saying, but there are
potential solutions exist, and I
don't know the details of what
needs to happen, but we know
something needs to happen and it
needs to happen soon. Chief
story, you've sent us a number
of emails in which you have
said, a very specifically ways
we combat crime now is to reform
the competency statute reform,
pre-dial pre-trial detention
changes and bail reform. We
wanted to
US law enforcement recruitment
and retention, felony and
possession, and then
collectively, you guys have both
said we need to make changes to
our IPRA laws. My quick
questions to you would be, did
you support the drafts that were
circulating around special
session.
If there are changes and you
guys are not on the same page,
are you working to make sure
that everybody is before the
upcoming session.
And I'm a little bit concerned,
Sheriff, that that.
While you had some uh capital
outlay requests, you don't have
policy changes in your
legislative priority. And so I
would also ask, are the police
departments working with our
sheriff's association to make
sure that collectively law
enforcement is bringing forward
proposals that everyone's agreed
on because the most difficult
thing for a legislator is we get
there and we have our sheriff
who's not on the same page with
some of our, our police
departments and nothing gets
done. So is the homework being
done in the interim?
With collective law enforcement
agencies to to legislation that
we can assist you with and
getting it done quickly in this
upcoming session.
From the sheriff's no.
No, we don't communicate, uh,
the sheriff's affiliate, we, we
generally do not.
Uh, I don't know why. I think
it's lacked, uh, leadership has
lacked cohesiveness, um, what
I've done is I have 8 or 9
sheriffs around the southern
part of the state, and we have
come together uh to advance some
of our concerns, but it has not
been a Nash or a statewide.
uh forum and also bear in mind
we don't interact with the
municipal league, uh, so that
might be a situation the chief
could speak to in terms of how
he sees that statewide, but we
are a very siloed state. Uh, I,
I think I'm stating the obvious
for everybody who's been doing
this for a while.
Madam Chair, Senator Brantley,
we do not do a good job as law
enforcement of lobbying or
advocating for the positions we
think would would make a
difference. That's the story.
I've learned that very quickly
in this role and the New Mexico
Association of Chiefs of Police
has done an OK job, and I, and I
would like to be more involved
in that, but what we haven't
done is crossed over with the
sheriff's association, so we can
present a united front and one
voice with what our
recommendations are and then
back them up. So we need to do
better with that. To your first
question, the, the legislation
that was circulating for the
Special session. I think, you
know, there, I think there's
some positive stuff in there.
The reality is, can we do better
with like the competency bill,
yes, and so right or wrong, I
understand the position that the
legislature was in is very
difficult, or at least I can, I
can try to understand and it's
done with, and I'm very
confident now that we have the
time that something that's more
robust for competency
specifically, but these other
issues as well will be presented
hopefully next year in passing
the Supreme Court commission on
mental mental health
incompetency has been working
on.
This for a long time and so I,
I'm willing to say that work has
been put in and I, I'll put my
input in where I can with that
draft bill, but I think that's a
really good starting point.
Uh, Madam Chair, let, let me
also just quickly add some of
this has to do with the district
attorney's office. So we have
challenges in our at least I'll
speak for us with our district
attorney. So when you talk about
felon with a gun, they're not
going to file a felon with a
gun. The the DA will not file.
We go federal every time we've
presented felon with a gun, the
federal agencies have filed
immediately.
USA. So I think some of this, it
goes back to the ma'am, the
siloing, right? I'm talking
about their siloed also, so
they're not working with us when
we talk about uh.
Solutions that might work on a
grander scale. I think you bring
up a very valid point. I just
don't see it in my 5+ years.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I've been contacted by
oh, I'm sorry, we, I think
you're well beyond your time.
00, I apologize. Thank you.
Thank you. I'll visit with both
of you guys off, offline to see
how we can help. Senator Worth
and then Senator Dehi. Uh, thank
you, Madam Chair, just a
question first for the sheriff
because I couldn't help but I
think.
Senator Cervantes as well, we
kind of paused when you said you
were fully staffed. One of the
huge issues, I just met with our
chief in Santa Fe. I think he's
short 20 to 25 that are budgeted
positions that we can't hire and
I'm just curious, what, what is
the secret sauce? What are you
doing that's making this, making
you, you able to be fully, fully
staffed. Thank you for the
question, Madam Chair. I'm not
going to say because I have my
competitor here, no.
We do concierge hiring. You
might wonder what is that? Well,
we looked at millenniums, we
looked at people getting jobs
right now, and we said how are
they different from us? Some of
us are motivated in the past by
different things, and we
realized that they love
work-life balance, work-life
balance, we uh embrace that. We
do not have a lot of overtime.
Um, I, I pulled out of a major
grant, not because of any real
objection.
But I don't do overtime. They
won't fill it. So we looked at
millennials primarily and said
what's what's important? They
like to be important and I hope
I'm not offending anybody in the
back. They like to have
something to a bunch of us like
that, OK. Well, we're on the
same page. They like to be
walked along. So from the moment
they express interest to us. We
do what the military has done
brilliant.
we hold their hand from the
first day we ask them every week
we call them. Is there anything
we can do for you? What do you,
do you wanna, do you want a
tour? Can we show you this? What
can we tell you more about us.
The other thing we do is we hire
them the minute they uh have a
contingent job offer. So I bring
them on in advance of the
academy, so they now become part
of our family. They become part
of what we do, what service we
provide.
Like.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Sheriff. That's super
helpful. I'm gonna have our
mayor and my uh in-house city
councilor watched this little
presentation, uh, because again,
I think it's a good, it's a
good, I mean, this is a huge
issue and, and when I visited
with our chief, he said, you
know, I really need 40 officers.
I've got money for 20 some, but
I can't hire them. And so that's
a huge part of the problem. Uh,
there's a whole bunch of things
we can go into, given the time.
I just want to flag for
everyone, uh,
Senator Brantley brought up the
issue of solutions and yesterday
DA Bregman put out a letter to
New Mexicans on fentanyl.
And basically, and you mentioned
it cheap, it's, he basically
said top drivers of crime in
Albuquerque from shoplifting to
armed robberies to murder, and
he then says something that's
really profound and, and jumped
out to me. It's become apparent
that we cannot prosecute our way
out of this problem.
And so he presents and I was
really encouraged by this, and I
think it's the, what I hope is
the start of what we can do kind
of as a statewide discussion
before the session, he goes
through a whole list of
different treatment.
Issues that need to be addressed
and need to be coordinated.
And has given a road map and I
just want to give a shout out to
that.
Because I think that Senator
Brantley is what you're looking
for and it's what I think we all
need to do together because we
have been in silos and we need
to have this discussion and I
and public safety will be front
and center in the upcoming
session and and Chief, you
mentioned the criminal
competency. I know the chairs
are working on that. The court's
been involved and I think that's
going to be center, but also
this treatment piece and re
rebuilding our behavioral health
system, which quite frankly
we're still struggling to do.
I think is part of that. So I,
I'll make sure the staff.
gets this and we get it out to
the committee members and again
I just wanted to to flag that
there's a ton of things we could
get into, but given the time,
I'll I'll yield. Thank you.
Senator Duhig.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you Chief, thank you,
Sheriff. And um I just wanted
to, to mention uh another
potential solution, especially
around juvenile crime, those,
those were very disturbing, um,
and obviously.
We want to be.
Intervening with juveniles far,
far earlier in the process, but
there is also there's a place
called the Mendota Juvenile
Treatment Center in Wisconsin,
where they have taken the
highest risk juveniles and
they're using cognitive
behavioral therapy with them and
they've had amazing results, um,
so with the, the folks who are
getting the juveniles who are
getting this treatment versus
their control group, uh, years
Out there for the folks who were
getting the treatment, there was
a 50% reduction in violent crime
for them, but and no homicides.
I mean, these were all kids who
who had who were there because
they were committing homicides,
um, and it's a great investment
for our state too, uh, every
$10,000 they invested in
treatment, uh, it was a cost
savings of almost $72,000 for
the state over the next 4 years,
um, and so this was a uh.
approach that actually our state
was looking at at the end of
Governor Richardson's term, and
then that ended and it.
The conversation just never
continued, um, so I really hope
that that this is an approach
that and I've, uh, with Doctor
Kent Kiel, who is one of the
nation's leading experts and
psychopaths is in Albuquerque.
He worked with these folks. I
connected him with CYFD. They
had a nice meeting and then
nothing ever happened again
after that. Um, but I'm really
hoping that my colleagues will,
will help encourage our states
to look at and adopt.
A program like this because we
have some scary stuff going on
with juveniles, and this is an
approach that we know works. So,
thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Um, I have
Representative Hall and then
Senator Cervantes.
Madam Chair, Chief Sheriff,
thank you for your presentation.
A lot to cover um in the
statistics.
We're showing the last two years
the big spike in violent crime
and property crime. I know you
covered a lot of things. I
would, is there some way you
could just summarize what you
think is driving this spike in
the last two years.
Thank you.
I'm Chair Representative Hall.
There's obviously a number of
influences, but if you line up
the arrival of Fentanyl in Las
Cruces and the seizures of
Fendel with the same crime
uh graph that I showed you, it
lines up. When we saw Fentanyl
arrive, it's everywhere and it
is really driving a lot of the
property crime and some of the
violent crime along with
methamphetamine. So if there's
one thing you wave a magic wand
and get rid of those two things,
uh, methamphentanyl, you will
see a lot of the bad stuff go
down and go away.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair,
members.
Can I also add that during COVID
years,
This statistics were very
different. OK, for instance, we
answer about 88,000 calls a year
for service. They do about
double that. Well, during the
height of COVID, we were
answering 66,000 calls.
The COVID years, those 3 years
skewed all of these numbers
dramatically. So I respect what
the chief is telling you, and I
don't have a reason to doubt it,
but if you look over a 5 year
period, it's, it's kind of
difficult to draw some of the
conclusions. Do you, does that
make sense? Because they were
really off, for instance, rapes
were in the county were down
significantly, and you might
say, well, what
How, how did that happen? Bars
were closed, right? Restaurants
were closed or less service.
There was less going out, right?
Not that it always happens that
way, but you can kind of
correlate those COVID years and
the crackdown and the shutdown
with some of the social uh
activities to, um, then we see a
big spike, right? 23, you, you
see a big spike. So I bring that
up only because in my own
world, I'm kind of reluctant to,
and we have different kinds of
crime, so please understand to
an extent. I'm kind of diff.
Reluctant to draw those longer
term correlations.
Thank you again for your time,
Madam Chair.
Senator Cervantes.
So Madam Chair, I, I want to
tell both of you how proud I am
today to be part of Las Cruces
in this community. We have city
councilors here. We have the
mayor here. I, I, I wish you all
could know what it's like to be
on this committee and go to
these presentations in
Albuquerque, uh, or even Santa
Fe. The attitude is completely
different. Uh, it's a very
belligerent, it's a very
hostile, um, attitude. You look
at my colleagues, we hear them
in a lot of excuses, a lot of
blame, you all are, are
approaching it very differently
and very proud of you, both of
you. Um, the Glock switch issue,
an important one, we saw that
Well, I introduced legislation
to attack that two years ago. It
got held up over with my
colleagues committee in the
House, what we're doing is we're
trying to go after the
manufacturers of the Glock
switches because that's a
federal area. They're preempted.
We're going to keep trying to do
it is to go after the
manufacturers of the Glock
switches and do so. Uh, we got
it through the Senate. On the
crime statistics, Senator
Stewart is giving it a hard time
for many years. I would always
brag about how crime rates in
Las Cruces were so low compared
to Albuquerque.
And I would do that with a
point, which is the state laws
are the same around the whole
state, but you don't have crime
problems, you don't have them in
Hobbs and Artesia and Carl's
like, you just don't, um, and we
have them in Albuquerque and we
didn't have it in Las Cruces.
We're getting we're going in the
wrong direction, but I
appreciate your candor, Chief. I
mean, you're, you're embracing
and acknowledging it, and you're
not making excuses for it. Uh,
what, what is important is that
although we're not happy about a
31.6% higher than national
average violent crime rate now
in Las Cruces. Um, Albuquerque's
275% over the national average.
That's 9 times more violent than
Las Cruces still, even though
we're not happy here and you're
not accepting it here,
counselors, and we're not gonna
accept it here, but Albuquerque,
you're, you're 9 times higher
and more important than that is
this. El Paso is below the
national average on violent
crime, below.
Right. How is that possible? We
can't blame it on the border. We
can't blame it on immigration.
We can't blame it on poverty.
Albuquerque and El Paso are
about the same size. They're
below the national average.
We're in Albuquerque's 275%
above the national average.
There's something wrong with the
way things are being done in, in
comparison to our two cities and
people have asked me what would
you do about it, Bigmouth? And I
said I'd go find out what El
Paso's doing just like you said
sheriff said, I send people out
to go figure out what they're
doing different, right? Come
back with a good idea. We had to
go send a lot of people to El
Paso. We had to bring a lot of.
People from El Paso into New
Mexico. Uh, the, uh, the
competency bill is important,
but let's, let's talk about
competency when you said, uh,
Chief, you talked about 10
people, people with 10 or more
arrests. You said there's 21
people.
It's important, those 21 people
are a lot of drag on the
resources and the staffing and
seeing them over. It's still
only 21 people. Uh, it is still
the competency issue is a drop
in the bucket in our big crime
picture when we're looking at
the, the, the big, the big
issue. I know it's a lot of, a
lot of uh resources. And I'm
gonna go through this quick. uh,
Sheriff, I appreciate the fact
that you're out in the DA's.
We've been doing it on this
committee. Uh, we look at the
the felon in possession 41 3 43
people charged, only 13 of them
suffered any consequences. Most
of those were.
Only prosecutions, right, 27 DAs
are just not prosecuting the
cases. They're not showing up.
The cops are not showing up. DAs
aren't doing the job. The cases
are getting dismissed. We can
pass laws here all day long. We
can ask, we can add sentences
here all day long, but if the
DA's aren't going to prosecute
them and enforce them. If the
cops aren't going to do their
job, and the courts aren't going
to do their job, we're wasting
our time and we're just shining
everybody on. We really are.
We're just shining everybody on
by saying we're gonna do more
sentences. So I appreciate the
calendar again. I'm saying this
over and over. I'm proud of you
guys. Uh, you're being, you're
being straight
With us and, and we don't do
that in Santa Fe. We're, we're
not straight with people about
crime. Um, I've been talking
about the DA with the Attorney
General to get more involved
with the DAs, right, to, to try
and and deal with that issue.
Your story, chief, about the
juvenile. I hope that we heard
that. I hope people will replay
that. I hope the media, they're
listening today and out of their
pajamas. I don't know if many
are here today. Um, look, uh,
that story about that juvenile
with all the crime that
individuals committed, and
they're on the streets today is
terrifying, right? Violent
crimes, gun crimes.
And that juvenile's out there
today and we're just waiting for
that next shoe to drop, and we
know it, it will. We know it's a
matter of time, so thank you. I
just, Madam Chair, I know I'm
done, but staffing again,
sheriff, brilliant. Thank you
for the point because everybody
in Albuquerque says their crime
problem is that we can't hire
enough cops and, and, and we
give them all the money in the
world. We said, you want more
money, we'll give you all the
money you need. And uh they
still can't hire people and, and
now we know why, right? Because
you've got a different attitude
about how to keep people and I
gotta tell you, Santa Fe, same
story, Chief, you've told me
you've got the same.
problem with staffing. Sheriff,
you got to go around the state
and tell everybody how a how to
hire millennials and how to get
people here because um you,
you're doing, you're the only
person I've heard anybody say
they're staffed. Uh, everybody
else is woefully understaffed.
And so start teaching how to
hire people. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Senator, and I
want to echo that too. I was
impressed by what you were
saying, sheriff, and I frankly
think our state personnel folks
could learn something. We're
understaffed. Some of us in the
legislature.
have offered, um, suggestions
and changes of work times and
more flexibility and all that
kind of thing, and it has been
not well received by virtually
any of the uh department heads
in the state, um, you know, more
flexibility with telework where
appropriate, all of that and um
push back, push back, push back,
and as a result, we are
understaffed, um,
statewide across the board on in
just about every department and
In the, in the state. Uh, one
last thing, and I, and then I'll
let us all get to lunch. Chief,
you mentioned something about
lack of data sharing and data
was something that we've been
talking about. We have a statute
on the book that requires data
sharing, so I'm just trying to
understand what, what, what you
were referencing there.
Madam Chair, a couple of things.
The statue in the book is from
2007 when I started my career,
so things have changed from from
then. It's based under, uh,
based around the UCR reporting,
um, although there are some
Agencies in New Mexico, well,
there's some agencies not
reporting at all, but there's
some agencies still reporting
under UCR and then the rest of
us under neighbors and they're,
they're not apples to apples. So
that creates problems with
reporting. Um, and then I think
the other thing that's missing,
that's new is the ballistic
report and II is a phenomenal
tool, and a lot of crime happens
in Albuquerque that's tied to
Las Cruces or Elmo Gordo and so
having every agency um report
the ballistic data is just one
additional tool, especially with
violent combating violent crime.
OK, so we, that came up during
the session and I think we had a
conversation and we said,
nothing is prohibiting from a
rule change that would require
ballistic ballistic reporting,
right? So that's something we
can do.
OK, thank you.
Let's break for lunch. I'd like
to get back.
just going to expand on that. I
think it's important because
again, we had a data reporting
bill in the last session to we,
we already have a law that
requires the data reporting, as
the chair said, and the argument
was, well, we need to change the
statute to add a requirement for
a ballistic reporting, which is
what you were just talking
about,
the chair was saying the DPS can
do that today.
They, they determine what the
reporting requirement is. They
determine the forms, the
paperwork, the requirements of
local law enforcement. If they
want ballistic information, the
legislature is not standing in
the way. DPS simply has to do
that tomorrow. Say we want
ballistic data and it's done.
It's over.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for supplementing that
discussion. I appreciate it. Um,
so let's start up at 1:15. There
