Um, in the form of the key data
findings. You all should have
the handout in front of you.
Um, so we're here to
Um, share that update. The
working group is in the final
stages of developing policy
recommendations.
Uh, which we'll be sharing with
the committee next month in Las
Cruces.
The analysis that we're
presenting to you today are
imperative to the policy
recommendations that the working
group brings forth.
So as this is a very condensed
version of these findings. Uh,
we're happy to provide more
information and analysis upon
request, as well as, uh,
schedule time with any of the
committee members to follow up
on questions that we might not
get to today.
So just a little bit about CJI
and JRI. Uh, some of you might
be familiar with our
organization, uh, the Crime and
Justice Institute, a nonprofit
organization that works with
local, state, and national
partners to use data and
research to create responsive
solutions to their respective
criminal justice challenges. We
are one of two technical
assistance providers for the
justice reinvestment initiative,
a federal grant funded by the
Bureau of Justice Assistance
that assists states in
addressing their criminal
justice priorities.
Data-driven decision making is
the basis of our approach to
technical assistance here at CJI
whether studying a county or
statewide system. Their
technical assistance begins with
looking at the qualitative and
quantitative data, reviewing
those findings with a working
group or task force and then
facilitating conversations among
the group to develop responsive
policies.
And then it ends with a
comprehensive implementation
assistance to ensure that
recommendations turn into actual
policies and practices.
We'll head to slide 3.
JRI is a public project funded
by the Department of Justice's
Bureau of Justice Assistance.
They work with state leaders who
are committed to using their
criminal justice data, their own
criminal justice data to develop
proven, innovative, and holistic
approaches to reduce crime,
reduce recidivism rates, and
then shift resources toward more
cost effective public safety
strategy.
And I slide 4, this is a quote
that we pulled from the signed
letter to the Bureau of Justice
assistance. Um, JRI technical
assistance was requested through
BJA following the jail
unification task force report
recommendations that were
released last summer.
Uh, one of the recommendations
that came from that effort was
to dive a little bit deeper into
the drivers of the incarcerated
populations, both in jail and
prisons, as well as a broader
engagement with stakeholders at
both the state and local levels.
One of the consistent challenges
that were noted in the letter to
BJA was addressing the
behavioral health needs of New
Mexicans as resources in some
communities are scarce, while
the needs in those areas are
high.
This is especially true of the
incarcerated populations, which
leaves law enforcement, jails
and prisons as the de facto
mental and behavioral health
providers within inadequate
resources to meet those high
needs.
The request to BJA highlighted
that if these practices were to
continue, incarceration costs at
the state and local levels will
continue to absorb resources
from the state's most pressing
public safety issues, which is
unsustainable and more viable
solutions are needed for New
Mexico.
So with that, we'll head into
our first section here.
Uh, again, which is very
condensed. Um, the committee has
seen a lot of data about crime
in the states. So for the sake
of using our time efficiently
today, um, we aren't going to
repeat information that you've
already seen, but we will
acknowledge that violent crime
is very high, uh, across the
state and has grown since the
pandemic. As I stated, the goals
of JRI are to reduce returns to
prison, shift those resources,
and reinvest those savings.
And then improve public safety.
So what we're gonna share here
in this section is some insight
into law enforcement responses
by looking at the top arrest
offenses across 5 different
regions in New Mexico, uh, as
per publicly available data, uh,
from the FBI's uniform crime
reporting system, which all 5 of
the following police departments
that will report on public
report report to you and have no
missing data.
So on slide 6.
Uh, shifting here to the top 5
arrest offenses for each of
these regions. Uh, we,
Um, broken out the top 5 arrest
offenses, um,
It highlights the offenses that
officers are making arrests for
in these regions. It's important
to note that um.
If
Sorry about that.
According to the UCR, um, the
all other offenses category that
you'll see in the next few
slides is sort of a catch-all
for offenses that don't fit into
the FBI's national
categorization of property,
person, or drug, but it includes
possession of drug
paraphernalia, trespassing, a
lot of other public order, low
level offenses, uh, possession
of burglarious tools, anything
that's not otherwise classified.
Um, for reference nationally,
all other offenses does make up
the largest proportion of
arrests for all arrests in the
United States. And then that
drug category, uh, includes
sales, trafficking, and
possession of a controlled
substance.
So, on slide 7, again, that, uh,
catch all, uh, all other
offenses category, but you can
see here that the top arrests in
the state's largest metro areas
are largely for those other
offenses and then simple
assault.
And, uh, both slide 7.
Uh, in Albuquerque.
Simple assault number 1 at 31%,
and then all other offenses
second, and in Las Cruces, 24%,
all other offenses except
traffic and then 23% for simple
assaults.
And on slide 8.
Regionally
Uh, lower level offenses.
Uh, comprise the top offenses
here as well. So we have the,
uh, Farmington, Roswell, and
then Taos, sort of trying to get
a north south east west picture
here in the state. And moving to
slide 9.
some key takeaways from this
section. And again, we have a
lot more information on all of
this condensed from a lot of
slides from all three of our
presentations. Um, we're happy
to follow up on any of this
information. Um, just a few key
takeaways. There are limited
resources and alternatives
available to law enforcement to
deflect and divert individuals
from criminal justice
involvement when they are
responding to crisis calls that
often end, uh, or result in an
arrest.
Uh, law enforcement is
understaffed across the state,
which creates additional
challenges in responding to high
call volume.
And there is a lack of statewide
data collection and reporting
regarding the needs of
community, uh, which limits law
enforcement's ability to deploy
proactive policing strategies to
target violent crime, as well as
identify and manage low risk and
high need individuals, uh, to
deter criminal involvement. Uh,
good afternoon, Madam Chair and
committee members. Um, so I'm
going to start us off with the
next section on low-level
offenses driving the criminal
justice system here in New
Mexico, um, and this is one of
the key findings that came up
during our analysis.
throughout various stages of the
criminal justice system, uh,
with fourth-degree felonies
being the most serious offense,
um, in many court cases as well
as prison and community
supervision admissions, as well
as reentries into prison
facilities. Additionally, the
data indicated that the most
common 4th degree felony
throughout found throughout
stages of the criminal justice
system, with felony possession
of a controlled substance which
we highlight in our data as
well.
So if you had to slide 11, uh,
what we see is that according to
the case filing data that was
provided to us by the AOC, most
adult criminal cases filed in
district court from 2018 to 2023
had 1/4 degree felony as the
most serious offense. Um, and it
consisted of about 60% of all
criminal cases filed in district
court in any given year.
And then if you go to the next
slide, you can see kind of a
similar pattern with, uh,
dispositions. Um, so what we
see, um, here, we're just
showcasing 2019 and 2023 for
simplicity. Uh, but the results
indicate that most disposed
cases again adult criminal cases
in district court, have a
4th-degree felony as the most
serious offense, making up again
about 60% of cases disposed of
in 2019 and about 55% of cases
disposed of in 2023.
Uh, by 2023, 42% of cases with
1/4 degree felony as the most
serious offense did result in a
conviction, which we don't
showcase here, but, um, again,
come from a much more thorough
driver's presentation that we
kind of picked through.
And then on that next slide you
could see another similar
pattern with sentencing data. So
again, 4th degree felonies make
up the greatest number of
criminal cases sentenced in
district court, making up 57 and
5 54% of sentenced cases in 2018
and 2023. Additional analysis
again not seen here indicated
that by 2023, 24% of these
fourth degree felonies received
a conditional discharge and 5
received a deferred sentence.
Meanwhile, about 50% of cases
with a 4.
degree felony had some amount of
suspended time and nearly 40% of
these cases received some kind
of combination of incarceration,
probation, as well as parole.
And then if you go to slide 14
again you see the prevalence of
4th degree felonies among new
prison admissions, um, or
admissions for new convictions
and then later in the
presentation you will see parole
violation admissions, which I
will clarify at that point as
well. Um, and again, this is
into uh New Mexico Correctional
department facilities. Um, and
again, organized by that most
serious offense associated with
that admission.
So the data indicates that those
entering the prison system as a
new admission are overwhelmingly
coming in with most serious
offenses classified between 2nd
and 4th degree felonies across
all fiscal years in the data
with 4th degree felonies being
the most common, reflecting
between 30 to 44% of new
admissions in a given year.
And then on that next slide, you
will see kind of the similar
story with parole violation
admissions. Um, so specifically
when we're talking about parole
violation admissions in the most
serious offense associated with
that admission. We are talking
about the underlying offense
that was originally associated
with their conviction, not an
offense that was committed while
that individual was on parole.
And again, what we see here is
that since 2015, parole
violation admissions associated
with underlying fourth-degree
felonies were the most common,
making up nearly 40% of parole
violation admissions into these
facilities, um, each year.
And then on that next slide, we
turn our attention more towards
community supervision. So
specifically, we see the
percentage of individuals
entering probation over time by
that most serious crime class.
So according to the data, again,
that most common, most serious
offense were 4th degree felonies
across both fiscal year 13 and
fiscal year 22, which was the
earliest and the latest data
point we have for community
supervision data and they made
up about 50% of entries into
probation across both years.
Additionally, the data indicates
that the percentage of
individuals whose most serious
offense was a 4th degree felony
actually increased by 11%
between fiscal years 13 and 22.
And then on slide 17, what
you're going to see are the 5
most common 4th degree felonies
associated with the district
criminal cases that were filed,
as well as new admissions and
parole violation admissions.
These were the only data sets
that we had that included this
kind of detailed information
associated with case filings or
admissions.
And what we see is that felony
possession of a controlled
substance was consistently the
most common 4th degree felony,
making up around 1/3 of all
fourth degree felony court cases
and admissions both into prison
facilities as well as probation.
The next most common 4th degree
felonies that we see in this
list make up about 10% or less
of cases with fourth degree
felonies.
And then on that next slide, we
just kind of summarize that
whole story. Uh, so we see that
4th degree felonies are the
lowest felony cost in New Mexico
with a penalty of about 18
months. And what we see is that
these fourth degree felonies
comprise the greatest percentage
of 2023 case filings,
dispositions, sentenced cases,
new and parole violation
admissions into NMCD facilities,
as well as starts of probation.
And then across all of these
data sets we also see that
possession of controlled
substance was the most common
4th degree felony.
And then I will pass it back
over to my colleague.
Thanks, Mackenzie. Um, heading
to slide 20. Um, so from each
decision point in the criminal
justice system and situation
when a system actor interacts
with an individual, there are
typically a few options that
that actor has available to
them. Uh, these options are
largely dependent on what
resources are available, the
policies that are in place to
support or require certain
decisions, and then what common
practices are in, uh, available
in certain situations. Um, so
whenever there are gaps in that
continuum of care,
Um, the system contact point
ends up being becoming the de
facto behavioral health provider
that we talked about earlier,
um, when they encounter, uh, the
person who is either in crisis
or in need of services. Uh, this
is, can become costly for states
and does divert resources away
from public safety once again.
Heading to the next slide, uh,
this is a national publicly
available data, just a few
slides to just orient the room a
little bit. Um, nationally,
individuals with behavioral
health needs are overrepresented
in the criminal justice system.
These figures here illustrate a
higher prevalence of both
serious psychological distress
and alcohol use or dependency in
both prisons and jails when we
compare those numbers to the
general population.
It's also important to note that
the most recent national data we
have on individuals with
behavioral health needs is from
nearly 15 years ago. You can see
here from 2011 and 2012, uh, for
mental health and 2007 to 2009
for substance use disorder.
Moving to the next slide, in
terms of the history of
substance use disorder and
mental illness in within these
individuals, about 3 quarters
said that they had received
mental health treatment within
their lifetime. About 40% of
incarcerated people who met the
threshold for serious
psychological distress said they
had stayed overnight in a
hospital and about 62% said that
they had taken prescription
medication prior to their period
of incarceration.
Many individuals identified as
having serious psychological
distress also reported receiving
mental health care since
admission or at the time of the
survey?
And on this next slide from
2000, excuse me, 7 to 2009, more
than half the individuals in
prisons and jails met criteria
for drug abuse or dependency?
And next year moving away from
national and back to New Mexico,
uh, since data are lacking
regarding the behavioral health
needs of the justice involved
population specific to New
Mexico, uh, we were able to
provide a bit of anecdotal data
points, uh, to the working
group, um, by gathering
information from reliable
resources within the state. The
Berlio County Metropolitan
Detention Center or MDC was able
to provide us with data from one
day regarding
They have more than just one day
of data. They were just able to
give us one day just to be
clear, madam, uh, chair, um,
from MDC they were able to give
us one day, so this snapshot
gave us some insight as to what
a typical day looks like for the
state's largest detention center
and contributor to the overall
prison population. Uh, from here
you can see that about half of
the individuals reported that
they were unhoused and almost 3
quarters reported that they were
unemployed.
Most notably, since MDC utilizes
validated instruments to to
assess for behavioral health
needs. You can see that about
half of the daily population
scored as medium to high needs
on this.
Uh, behavioral health needs
framework that they use for NMCD
for assessing mental health,
individuals are given an average
score from 0 to 5 at intake.
Um, as you can see, mental
health codes that are higher
indicate a higher level of need.
Mental health needs overall
increased 2 22% since 2019 from
37% to 45% of the incarcerated
people, uh, indicating a need
for any level of care.
The largest percentage of the
population besides those who
indicated that they needed no
mental, no mental health, or
they had no mental health needs,
excuse me, where those with
moderate needs with the need for
psychiatric medication that
those were coded as a 3 out of
5.
Uh, and those that code, uh,
indicates just by definition
that they're stable on
psychotropic medications or that
they're monitored by or referred
to psychiatry and that they are
able to participate in
individual or group treatment.
This group increased 28% since
2019. So on that next slide,
you're going to see an analysis
that we did on new admissions in
2023 into NMCD facilities,
specifically, we compare, uh,
those new admissions in 2023
that had a prior admission
during the time frame of the
data, um, to those whose
admission in 2023 was the first
time since at least 2014.
Uh, one such analysis was
comparing the most serious crime
category associated with that
2023 admission.
And what we see is that
according to the data 31% of the
readmissions or individuals who
had a prior admission, had a
drug offense as their most
serious offense when admitted in
2023. This is almost a third
higher than the 22% of
individuals who was 2023
admission was their first
admission, at least in the last
decade.
And then if you go to our next
slide again we pull the data
point from our community
supervision analysis, um,
specifically that set provided
information regarding various
violations. Originally, about 40
violation types were included in
both the probation and the
parole data. We pulled out 7
that reflect substance-related
violations, and these include
violation of conditions, um,
that relate to alcohol and
drugs, controlled substances,
drug tests, entering of bars and
failed urinalysis?
And the data indicates that
about 80% of violations, um, are
related to substance and alcohol
issues. Um, and that this
percentage is consistent across
time and across super community
supervision types.
So in terms of, uh, barriers to
behavioral health treatment.
They do exist at all points in
the criminal justice system. Um,
it's important to note here
though that New Mexico has made
a lot of progress in each of
these areas over the past 5
years. However, as a behavioral
health field continues to
evolve, uh, opportunities to
further grow do present
themselves?
Uh, in terms of crisis response,
uh, so the time when an
individual first needs help,
right? Uh, there are additional
opportunities about specific
community resources such as
crisis centers beyond those 1st
48 hours, uh, and detox
facilities and funding for those
resources.
Um, in areas of pre-arrest,
diversion and deflection. There
are opportunities to expand law
enforcement diversion programs
that may exist in certain
locations further across the
state. And, uh, adopt adoption
of innovative methods to ensure
that access is available in
rural areas of the state.
In terms of those initial court
appearances and the time of
initial detention.
In jail facilities,
opportunities exist in
standardizing screenings across
jails and courts to ensure that
behavioral health needs are
flagged as early as possible.
And then a variety of different
resources arise.
At the time of sentencing and in
jails and prisons, gaps still
exist in terms of screening and
assessment practices, as well as
building out more robust options
for post adjudication diversion
programs.
At the time of re-entry.
We can identify opportunities
around enhancing re-entry
planning and establishing
connections between facilities
and communities for building a,
uh, that continuum of care.
Once people are in the community
and they're on supervision,
there are still opportunities to
ensure that behavioral health is
still at the forefront of those
supervision practices, and we
can ensure officers have the
support they need when dealing
with this population. Our key
findings in behavioral health,
both nationally and in New
Mexico, there's still a large
percentage of individuals in
jails and in prisons with a
serious mental illness or
substance use disorder who
require treatment.
Studies do show that without
treatment these individuals are
likely to recidivate.
The data shows there's a greater
percentage of prison
readmissions for drug or drug
offenses.
As compared to new admissions
among individuals on community
supervision who have probation
and or parole violations, 80% of
those individuals had at least
one violation that was substance
related.
All right. So then we're gonna
turn our attention more towards
community supervision,
violations, and returns to
prison?
So if you go to slide 31, you'll
see that according to the
community supervision data that
we were provided. There was a
58% decrease in the percentage
of probation sentences with a
violation prior to their
expected end date. Uh, this was
a drop from 60% of sentences,
um, in 2014 to 25% of sentences
in 2022.
Similar, the number of parole
sentences with a violation
decreased by 35% from nearly 65%
of sentences of individuals
exiting parole in 2015 to 42% of
those sentences in 2022.
And then on that next slide,
what you'll see is that while
the percentage of individuals
with violations has decreased
over time. The average number of
both probation and parole
violations has increased. So
specifically, we see that the
average number of probation
violations among those who had
at least one increased nearly
80% from 55 violations among
2014 exits to almost 9 in 2022.
Well, the average number of
parole violations among those
who
had at least one while on
parole, increased about 23% from
6.2 violations among 2015 exits
to almost 8 in 2022.
And then on that next slide
you'll see a percentage
breakdown of kind of the time
till their first violation. And
what we see is that among those
whose probation and parole term
ended in 2022 and who had a
violation, we see that just over
half have their first violation
within 4 months of starting
their probation or parole term.
And then on slide 34, you'll see
that in terms of revocations,
the parole and prison admission
data, which was merged together,
indicated that 52% of
individuals who exited parole in
2023 were revoked to prison
prior to or on their end date.
And then slide 35 just kind of
displays this type of pattern in
another way. What you see is
that when we look at the yearly
prison admissions, we see that
the percentage of admissions
made up of people who violated
their parole, so this parole
violation admissions has
increased from 29 to 34% between
2014 and 2023, concluding with a
total of just over 700
admissions in 2023.
And then lastly, we included an
analysis that looked at the
snapshot of Bernolio County's
detention facility. And what we
see is that according to the
data, 17% of their snapshot
daily population, so just kind
of who was in the facility on a
specific date.
Had a community supervision
violation associated with their
case. um, and then about 16%
had, um, a specific violation
associated with probation. Well,
just over 1% of those within
that daily snapshot population
had a violation specifically
associated with parole.
All right, so just to summarize,
uh, while the percentage of
individuals with a violation has
decreased, the average number of
both probation and parole
violations has increased over
time. Um, and again, it's worth
noting that about 80% of
individuals with violations have
a violation related to substance
use.
And then for the most part, or
at least over 50% of these
individuals, um, have violations
that are occurring within the
1st 4 months of supervision.
Over half of the individuals who
exited parole in 2023 were
revoked prior to their release
date and parole violation
admissions made up about a third
of all prison admissions in
2023, and this is an increasing
proportion of the prison
population since 2014.
Finally, about 17% of
individuals in Bernalio County's
snapshot daily population had a
community supervision associated
with their case.
And with that, I think we opened
the floor to any questions or
discussions.
Uh, thank you. Um, I have so far
represented Martinez,
Representative of Wuhan,
representative Reebresentative
Cedil I mean Senator Cedilia
Lopez. Anyone else? OK, well,
let's, we'll get it started, um,
representative Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, I
just have one question. I, I
missed the first part of the
presentation. I'm confused when
you talk about admissions.
Is that to a hospital?
So thank you, um, Madam Chair
and Representative. Um, so these
are admissions into NMCD prison
facilities, so it's being sent
to jail.
Uh, prison, not specifically the
jails. So we had a separate
analysis that looked at a subset
of jails, um, it included Bernna
Leo and I believe about 7 other
facilities across the state. Uh,
but our analysis primarily
focuses on NMCD prison
facilities.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative. um
Representative Lujan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you presenters. Thank you for
all these, these wonderful data
um
pieces of information, but
correlating them. OK, well. It's
another thing, another process,
and you know, you're summarizing
and doing it, but there's, you
know, as I'm looking at it, I'm
looking at the correlations,
which I'm sure most of us are
trying to do here.
But, but deeper man, I am like 2
weeks ago I attended a um.
The town hall on crime in Santa
Fe, as crime has been on the
rise, violent crime, as you
mentioned, which is detailed in
here. Um, I'm going to another
one tonight in my district. They
both have been held in my
district by our, our city
officials, um, and they've asked
me to attend.
And they're mostly listening
sessions and the last one, there
are over 200.
People attended, most of them my
constituents. Now, when they're
coming to me and they're coming
to us as officials.
They're not, they don't care
about this.
They care about when they open
up the door and they're seeing
this.
What you're reporting. So thank
you for all the research that
helps us to make some policy
decisions and work on policy and
all that. When I go with them
tonight and I.
And I sit with them and I listen
to them and I, and I talk with
them if I want to mostly listen
to them, but
they're pleading and they're
crying for resources and
solutions.
And one of the things I talked
to them, Madam Chair, something
that you're getting at the heart
of this, and maybe there's a
question in this but
I'm just going, this is my
frustration that you're hearing.
And my concerns, um, and I think
it was talked about yesterday
too, uh, we had another incident
in Santa Fe that shut down our
our annual um community fiestas
that we have, and I was on my
way there, um, and where they
apprehended the individuals
literally just.
Feet away from where my brother
lives.
So I saw the whole crime scene.
I saw the whole incident, um.
The complaints are that people
are opening up their doors and
they're seeing open use and
exchange of substances. You
know, one of the questions I
have is when you're recording in
your data, what substance is
being used the most? And if that
is being recorded or reported
out because I know we all know
that opioids and fentanyl are
the number one being reported to
us.
Um, and I, I can't help but look
at, uh, make a correlation that
I think it's on, let me see the
slide, madam chair slide.
26.
And we're seeing, um.
Is it the violent crimes are
going down, but the substance
drug use is going up, is
increasing. Is that how I'm
reading this?
So my question is, and so one of
the things I want to talk about
with the public night like what
are those correlations and
And their correlation with
violent crime when there's
substance use disorder, because
we're just looking at data
points here. I don't know what
the correlation is, and when
people are using these
substances, are they more
violent? Are they, you know,
what, what are the, how do I
address these fears in our in in
our communities because they're
real and what I can tell them
tonight is like yes, substance
use disorder is up. No, we don't
have the resources to help these
individuals, and they're getting
the
Sources in jail or prison by
your other slide,
and when they're having 4 4th
degree felonies or having up to
18 months of treatment.
And we know that the biggest, if
we want to help individuals,
they have to have both
treatments, you know, um, and
counseling and, and all the
things in place. And I don't
know if that's happening and we
don't, we're understaffed. Our
police force is understaffed,
all these things and the
proliferation of all these
things are happening. I don't
know what to tell my community
at this point, Madam Chair. I'm
sorry I'm kind of rambling here.
I understand that. That's the
frustration when we're given
these data points and
everything, but when we actually
go into the public.
And we're trying to give them.
Some solution ideas when and
they're they they're
experiencing crime on a day to
day basis, and it's only
increasing what you have some
information that's giving us a
points based on the data, but
what do we tell the public to
give them any kind of assurances
that we're going to be, we're
going to be doing some of these
things. So this is a data pre
it's a data presentation and I
apologize, Madam Chair, but this
is the fact in the world that
we're living in and where I have
to go.
Back today and, and confront
them and they're telling me, and
they told me at the last one, we
don't want your data. We don't
want this. We want some
solutions and I'm not saying you
have all the solutions, Madam
Chair, and it's just kind of
frustrating for me, man. I'm
sure you hear my frustration
because
I've been experiencing crime
right in my own yard and
everything and we get that, um,
and there are some members on
this committee who are
interested in understanding the
data.
Because one can formulate
solutions based on the
information you're receiving.
This is a two-part presentation
representative. One is to share
data that this organization has
developed by going through
records that are either national
or state oriented and in October
we will be talking about policy
recommendations. So, but
remember, it's our jobs to be
developing policy. I understand
that.
question experts, but it is our
responsibility to be working on
it and not expressing
frustration to people who are
out of state here helping us
develop an understanding of what
our crime situation looks like,
OK, Madam, maybe it's more for
us on our end to understand your
data and, and I, I, I thank them
for it, and this is very
helpful. But when we're out
there and we're being told that
we are not.
They don't want to hear it, and
I understand, Madam Chair, and I
am frustrated and I think we all
should be. And I'm putting that
out there because this is a
committee in a public hearing. I
want to know what is the biggest
correlation with us that we can
go back to the public and say
this is how, so we're gonna
we're using these data, lots of
data to help them, Madam Chair,
thank you.
Madam Chair, committee members,
um, and, and thank you for
sharing with us and we
appreciate the feedback and um
several colleagues of yours are
on the working group, um, and
so, you know, our, our part kind
of the next phase of this
process is to look at the data
and the working group to come up
with solutions to present to you
all at the next meeting and so
that, that will certainly be the
tenor and the tone of the next
meeting. Um, but certainly
understand your frustration. I
think one of the biggest things
um that we've noted just in
comparison of New Mexico's data,
um, with states across the
country.
Is the um juxtaposition between
the system driven by the lowest
felony class, like the 4th
degree offenses comprising a
kind of in every single data set
versus the violent crime
challenges the state is
experiencing as a whole and so
in other states, kind of the
proportion of categories that
they have, whether it's 5 or 3
or 2 is a little bit more
proportional in terms of who's
coming into the system. And so
that's just something in terms
of noticing of, of, you know, a
distinction
New Mexico and other states for
all immed to think and consider
and talk about is, um, you know,
that point.
Appreciate it. Thank you, Ma.
Representative Reeb and then
Senator Cindy Lopez. Thank you,
Madam Chair. I'm trying to kind
of understand the data a little
bit, um, going to the kind of
the end of the presentation, the
I'm kind of looking at the
community supervision key
takeaways that you guys are
doing. So the individuals that
are being
Revoked parole or probation is
the data in here include like
how many probation violations
they had or how many revocate
like how many parole violations
because I'm seeing it says that
the uh violations decreased, but
it seems like it's saying, but
more of them are in prison, but
the experience I see on a day to
day basis is we're not having
probation violations filed for
the 1st 5 or 6 and then we go to
court on a couple.
So is that incorporated in this
somehow, and if so, if you could
help me understand, so I.
understanding their information.
So, um, Madam Chair,
representative, there's a really
great questions. Um, so if you
revisit slide 31, uh, generally
what we see is that the
percentage of individuals on
probation and parole who do
violate has decreased, but if
you visit slide 32, what we see
is that among the individuals
who do violate the number of
violations that these
individuals have before
returning to any kind of prison
facility to, you know, serve the
remainder of their sentence, for
example, has
Increased. Uh, so I think we're
seeing things like an 80%
increase for um probation in the
number of average or the average
number of probation violations
and about a 23% increase in the
average number of parole
violation admissions, and this
is just the number of violations
that they have kind of before
their end of their parole or
their um probation term.
OK. So, Madam Chair, in
committee, it could be that
they're having 5 or 6 violations
before they're even filed and
you're not even probably, are
you getting that data or just
the data that when there's a
formal probation violation
filed.
OK. So in some sense they're
violent, so when you say
decreased violations, that
includes preliminary violations
and and unofficial.
Preliminary reports and things
like that.
OK, OK. Um, ma'am sure that,
that just seems and I'm not
questioning your dad, it just
seems just a little strange to
me just on what I see every day,
but.
On that same realm, the 4th
degree felony key takeaways, um,
and I agree with you, probably
possession of a controlled
substance, Madam Chair,
committee is probably the
biggest one that I see too. So
is that saying that those are
going to prison when you say
this is, are they immediately
going to prison because in my
experience, if you're are these
new admissions, so if you, your
first time possession of
cocaine. I, I don't ever see
them going to prison. I see that
treatment options, you know, and
all those different things so.
So help me if you could, Madam
Chair and understand what new
admissions and it does that make
sense? OK, thank you.
OK, so, um, Madam Chair,
representative, it's all really
great question. The data is very
confusing. I, I'll be completely
honest. Uh, so when we're
talking about those new
admissions, this is data that we
received from the New Mexico
Sentencing Commission from the
NMCD, um, and these are
basically just the individuals
who are admitted into prison,
unfortunately, given data
limitations, we had some trouble
merging things like the court
data with the prison data, so
it's hard for us to track these
individuals kind of across time.
Uh, but what we're able to do is
say, OK, well, we can look at
the case filings. We can look at
what's occurring among sentenced
cases, what individuals are
being sentenced to. So we do
take a deeper dive in some of
our driver's analysis and I'd be
happy to to talk you, to talk
with you about it, um, further
that discusses um what
individuals are being sentenced
to. So are they being sentenced
to probation and then maybe
getting a probation violation
and then going to prison. But
what we're seeing here with this
data set is individual.
were identified in the data set
as either a new admission, a
parole violation admission, or
other, and we specifically focus
on those new admissions, which
is essentially this is something
that an individual was convicted
for. They were sentenced to a
term of incarceration in and at
an MCD facility, and that has
that individual themselves. OK,
so Madam Chair and committee, so
it could be that this possession
of a controlled substance could
be there 6 felony offense.
Is that accurate, am I
understanding that accurate? So
they could maybe get time and go
to prison because they've got 6
prior felonies.
Uh, so Madam Chair
Representative, unfortunately,
given the limitations of the
dataset, we were unable to look
at an individual's criminal
history. All we're able to do is
really get at what that
individual is being admitted for
at that time. OK, and madam
chair, I think that's my
confusion. I think that it's a
little misleading of it I think
I understand you're collecting
data and it has to be
interpreted, but there there are
a lot of just different
situations where this obviously
could happen and when I first
look at this, I'm like, 4th
degree felony possession of
controlled substances, or going
to jail on their first offense,
but.
I, I think I understand your
data now, so thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you very much, uh,
Representative, we have Senator
Ceda Lopez and Senator Maestas.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for all this data.
It's a lot of work went into
this. So thank you for, for
presenting it. um, on slide 7,
well, actually most of these
slides. One of the things, um,
You know, I guess to uh to a
hammer, everything looks like a
nail, right? I used to run a
domestic violence agency, and I
don't see domestic violence. I
don't see sexual assault, and I
don't see human trafficking,
things that I dealt with all the
time in the data set. Is it
lumped in with all other
offenses or is it lumped in with
simple as, where is it in the
data?
OK
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, Senator
Serio Lopez, that's a great
question. Um, so this, these
slide 7 and slide 8, this is the
FBI's national categorization of
uh offenses. So this is a little
bit different than this is
publicly available data, so it's
a little bit different than the
later slides that my colleague
has gone over, uh, like the NMCD
and the court data. Um, so those
offenses do exist. These are the
top 5 arrest offenses. Um, so
these are the
Um, top 5 arrest offenses that
police officers in these in
these police departments that
they're actually making arrests
for most frequently.
So they do exist in this data
but lower down the the chain
the.
The line. Cause I see so many
domestic violence and sexual
assaults arrest and it's like,
so that goes, that takes me to
the second question, which is
where are they in?
Well, just I guess everything
like parole violations, I mean,
is, is it possible to separate
that out? And the reason I ask
that is.
I understand that the initial
domestic violence case.
Often gets dropped down to
simple, simple assault. But what
you see is an escalation over
time. And the other thing that I
believe that I've come to
believe is sexual if there's
violence in the home, you're
gonna see spill out of violence
into the community. And so I'm
very interested in domestic
violence, and I just couldn't
find it. And I got a little
frustrated looking for it here,
so.
It's just not what you've
focused on, uh, Madam Chair, um,
Senator, we have more
information on more uh more
granular details about the uh
top offenses that make it to
prison that show up in the court
data in much more detail that
we'd be happy to share
afterwards too that are more
aggravated assaults and simple
assault may include um some of
those domestic cases in the
arrest offenses, and we have a
lot more information about the
the uh offenses.
I really appreciate that because
what I see in that area, again,
it's just what I see is a lot of
arrests, but very few
prosecutions.
Um, and that is something I
think we need to look at and
consider the community impact of
that. And so while I really
appreciate this. I think we need
to know more about what's going
on in our communities because I,
I, I saw it over and over again,
the spill out of domestic
violence from the home into the
community and into other other
of community problems and I, I
just, I understand that wasn't
the point of this, but if you
have more data about that, I
would really appreciate it. We
can share that, ma'am. Madam
Chair, Senator, we'd be happy to
share that. Thank you. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
You're welcome, uh, Senator
Maestas and then Representative
Barrego. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you for the presentation
and for coming out. Just
briefly.
Oh, tell us about the crime and
Justice Institute.
Madam Chair, Senator, may I, is
there anything specific you'd
like to know about crime and
justice.
Where is it? What is it, who is
it affiliated with? Sure, yeah,
uh, so we are the crime and
Justice Institute is a technical
assistance provider, uh, one of
the two main technical
assistance providers of the
justice reinvestment initiative.
We are an organization, a
nonprofit organization that is
based out of Boston,
Massachusetts. Uh, we have, um,
staff that live all over the
United States.
Um, we are from all over the
place, um, um.
All over, if you want to know
where we're from? And then the
justice reinvestment initiative
is one of your programs?
Absolutely, yes.
um, so.
The main goals of the justice to
reinvestment initiative. We are,
it's a public project that's
funded by the Department of
Justice's Bureau of Justice
assistance. Uh, we work with
state leaders that are committed
to using their state, your
state's own uh criminal justice
data to develop proven,
innovative, and holistic
approaches to reduce crime, uh,
shift some resources, reinvest
those savings, uh, and above all
else, improve public safety.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for that. The uh on a slides
33 and 34 to me are the most
telling, um, with regards to.
Probation and parole violations,
folks who get out of prison who
we're talking about corrections,
they get out of prison, Madam
Chair.
And, uh, you know,
They should be on the right road
and get them out of the criminal
justice system when I say get
him out of the criminal justice
system, I don't mean don't hold
them accountable, but they, they
don't recidivate, they don't
commit new crimes they're on the
right road, um, why is reducing
Probation and parole recidivism,
how does that equate to
increasing public safety?
Madam Chair, committee members,
um, so, you know, recidivism is
a measure of, you know, on the
efficiency of the system if
someone who's going through um
the criminal justice system as
being rehabilitated and is
re-entering the community
successfully and and not, um,
you know, re-engaging in
criminal activity that's a
successful reentry and if
someone is re-entering or
re-engaging in criminal
behavior, um, that, you know, is
going back in in the system and
it's it's a question of
resources, it's a question of
community safety if someone is,
you know, we
had contact with in the criminal
justice system, but they've been
through it and it's still coming
out and it's, you know,
jeopardizing our community, you
know, your communities that um
is a public safety hazard.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and then
on the, on
On the top of the page, frame
33.
Talks about um recidivism uh in
the 1st 3-4 months.
Of uh of their parole, why is it
important? Can we statutorily
funnel scarce resources into
those 1st 6 months. Is that
possible? And why is it
important to
To concentrate on those 1st 6
months as opposed to their, you
know, they're on probation 3
years down the road without any
violations.
Ma'am uh senator, I'm sorry, um,
there's been a lot of research
that shows the effectiveness of
front loading resources on
community supervision, that is,
um, you know, studies have
looked at these populations
across the country and examined
kind of when people are most
likely to recidivate on
supervision and it usually is in
those first few months and so in
terms of cost efficiency of
investing, investing very um.
Heavily in those first few
months have shown to be more
effective at, you know, someone
staying on the course of um
successful re-entry pathway and
that that looks to, you know,
and re-entering the workforce in
a productive manner of education
and, and again being a
productive member of society and
um states have handled that
differently and so you know you
all as policymakers will die,
you know, what's what's the best
path here, but yes, it is
possible to do it statutorily,
do you know, through an
administrative regulation and
policy, um, some through, you
know, targeted brands and some
even do it, you know, even
You know, jail settings and and
grants associated with re-entry
programming and and entry steps
um in those first few months.
Thank you, Madam Chair, because
in New Mexico you can be put on
probation up to 5 years.
And if someone goes to the 1st
2.5, 3 years without any
violations, year 4 and 5. It's
just a drain of resources to
supervise these folks. Um, so
there's been a bill to
Uh, that if they go 3 years
without a violation that that
they're no longer on probation.
There's other bill that gives
them 30, 30 days good time, so
to speak, every 30 days, both
those proposals have been
vetoed, but the purpose of those
is to funnel front load the
resources in those 1st 6 months.
So it's, it's definitely in our
interest to um to work on these
issues to improve public safety.
So thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you for you could be in 50
different states today.
Thank you, Senator. Thank you.
uh, Representative Brega.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
thank you, ladies. Um, so data
is my thing, and I appreciate
what you all have done here
today. Um, I'm probably one of
the few legislators that has
worked with the DOJ directly
with the APD reform of the CSA
and our um consent decree and um
I worked on the other side,
which was APD reform. So this is
uh this is really a very
telling, somewhat sad report, I
have to say. I mean, I felt a
little bit of sadness in here
because I grew up and I was born
and raised and educated and
retired and here I am again, um,
in New Mexico, and it's a little
saddening to see, you know, our,
our populations fall into these
categories, especially when you
show.
Such big numbers, but when I'm
looking at data, I look for
pitfalls. I look for holes. I
look for links. I look for
relationships, um, Madam Chair,
and when I think about the data
that you presented today, um, I
think about where these
individuals live where they came
from, um, I think about their
education status, which I didn't
see in here and I know you'd
have to break it down a lot
more. Um, maybe
you have that information. I
don't know. I think about their
family structures. I think about
their race and ethnicities.
Um, Madam Chair, I think about
uh our discussions in these
meetings about generational, you
know, poverty and sort of
generational criminals, which
really concerns me quite a bit.
I think about the data that you
presented and some of it seems
to come from the largest city,
which is the metro in
Albuquerque, um, and so I, I
wonder about the breakdown when
I start breaking it
Down the state of New Mexico,
and I always think of the state
of New Mexico in 5 quadrants. I
think about the northeast,
northwest, southeast, southwest,
and then the metro area. So I
always think of it in 5
possibilities, and I just, Madam
Chair, wonder about the snapshot
snapshot that I would see if I
started breaking down all these
individuals by what I just
mentioned in terms of how uh,
Madam Chair, they got to this
picture.
And how they got to that place
and, and the reason that I
raised that, Madam Chair, is
because when we start thinking
about providing community
services to help in these
communities that were, that is
our, our role and our function,
um.
I really start wanting to have
more information, um, and I
don't know if that's something
you all can do, but if you can,
please contact me because I
really think that that helps us
in terms of uh where the
resources need to be provided to
these.
Communities that may be
economically disproportionately
affected that may be
educationally, um.
Dispro and I'm gonna use that
word again because that's a word
that planners like to use, um, I
mean, educationally
disproportionately affected, um,
or, you know, where jobs are not
being provided and people are
not staying busy and they're
ending up on drugs because
that's the way that they make a
living and then they come back
and they end up in the prison
system or in, you know, and I
think we know the cycle.
And, and part of our function
here is how we break those
cycles. And so, Madam Chair, I
just, um, if there's any way
that you guys have information
that you break it down even
more, like by census tract or
things like that, I would be
very much interested, Madam
Chair, because it helps us to
look at behavioral health issues
in certain communities and how
these people.
Some of them family, um.
End up in those, in those
situations. So thank you, Madam
Chair, for that. I, um, I, I
don't know if you put your
contact information here on
this, these slides, but it would
be useful perhaps Nancy can get
it out to all the members and
that would certainly be an
opportunity for people to drill
down and in terms of what other
data sets you have. Yes, madam
Chair, it's it's on the last
slide. Our contact information.
So please, if anyone has
additional information they'd
like to uh reach out about.
Feel free. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Very good.
Representative Herrera.
Um,
I'm just curious,
what is the trend regarding
probation in this country? I
mean, I, I, I just from personal
experience, about 7 years ago
I'd hired a young man. I went to
my staff and I said we had a a
janitorial position open, no big
deal, you know, and there's this
kid I know from elementary
school. His mother died of a
heroin overdose. She had a rough
life, but you know, and of
course he got in trouble and of
course he was, you know, he was
out of jail.
And he was on probation, and so
I went to my staff, I said, I
think we should give him a
chance, you know, uh, but it's
up to you. I'm not gonna make
this decision alone. Everybody
agreed. We brought him on board.
He was on probation. It was
ridiculous. It was ridiculous
what he had to go through the
office, he had to report once a
week. He'd report over here in
Espanola, um,
he sometimes it would take a
whole day before they did a
urine test. He was out of work a
whole day.
Um, and you know, they, they
wouldn't give him a time. They
wouldn't tell me. I, I, it was
just punitive, the whole process
was punitive. I, I, I went to
everybody in this county, you
know, I really took this kid up
to the judge and instead of see
if we could reduce this, uh,
reduce this probationary period,
and, and it was statutory, we
couldn't. He had worked for us
for a year. He worked for a
year, you know, we would always
let him go do this cause
That's what he had to do. I knew
that was a condition, but I, we
went, we went to the judge and
she said, well, it's in statute.
There's nothing I can do about
it. I said he's missed one day
of work and that was to go to
his daughter's award ceremony
where she got straight A's and
hadn't missed a day of school in
a year. So I'm, I just, I don't
get probation. You know, if
somebody does the time, they
serve it.
You know, I, I just don't, I
guess I don't understand it. I,
I find it punitive, so I'd, I'd
just like to hear your response
to that.
Madam Chair Representative, they
actually just released the 2024
national standards for community
supervision. We'd be happy to
send you a link to those.
They're pretty, it's a good
breed if you have some time to
read through hundreds of pages
for some people. Yeah, but they
are, there are national
standards in terms of what's,
you know, considered best
practice for uh across the
nation.
ours compare with best
practices.
You can see that, yeah, we'd be
happy to follow up after because
I think we're getting close to.
OK,
thank you, thank you.
Um,
yeah, thank you very much.
There's going to be a part two
to this where there's more
analysis done. This was an
initial conversation about what
actually is out there in terms
of data collection, we'll have
another session in October where
we there's a greater
conversation about possible
policy initiatives and law
changes and the like. So thank
you very much for coming and
we'll look forward to seeing you
in Las Cruces in October, a very
nice time of year to be there.
Thank you, Madam.
committee members, thank you.
Yeah, thank you.
Um,
So, uh,
Ga we're shifting a little bit.
We're going to be talking with
New Mexico counties, 2025
legislative priorities and I see
our good friend Joy in the and
Grace.
Sure.
OK.
This
I think they're called New
Mexico.
The floor is yours, Joe.
The
Um
You have, you push the button if
you see a red button, then it's
on.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, members, um, as the chair
mentioned, my name is Joya
Sarsson. I'm the executive
director for New Mexico
counties, and we are very
grateful for this time to come
visit with you about our
legislative priorities that were
selected by our board of
directors in August. We have a
pretty lengthy year-round
process that looks at what we're
rolling out each year. Um, we've
done a snapshot in the front.
Um, the first page is sort of a
summary of the things we're
looking at. We of course have
affiliate groups. These are our
professional.
um,
county groups, there's elected
affiliates as well as
professional staff that also
have other legislative
initiatives that have been
reviewed and endorsed or not
endorsed by the board and some
of those will be brought to you
as well. But we really wanted to
show you the ones that we think
are key this year coming up, and
give you a little bit of
background on them. We certainly
are available for offline
discussions if you'd like more
information and we can certainly
connect you to some of the
technical experts that we have
in the counties. Um, last year,
this
Uh, legislature was amazing, uh,
for us. You heard our plea, you
heard our concerns about public
safety. I know it's a hot topic
amongst this committee. Um, we
appreciate the appropriations
you set forth. We want to have a
little bit of a discussion about
those today, where they stand,
what we think is working, what
we think we might want to
consider going into next year.
And, um, also a couple other
things that have been on our
radar, such as IPRA and
equitable disclosure and also
some border issues we'd like to
talk to you.
about. I want to give you kind
of background about how these
have been formulated amongst our
members and things that we might
be able to find some joint
solutions that work for the
state as well as for local
governments and so with that I'm
going to turn it over, uh, to
Grace to introduce herself and
start us off.
Uh, thank you, Joy. Good
afternoon. I'm Grace Phillips.
I'm, um, now the risk management
director for the New Mexico
County Insurance Authority. So
still the same organization, but
I've got a different hat on,
which is giving me, um, quite a
different lens in terms of what
we're, what we're about as an
association, so really looking
forward to, um, interacting with
you in that new role.
I'm gonna talk a little bit
about um jails. I know that will
come as no shock to you guys.
And in particular, the detention
reimbursement fund. But first,
if you would look on pages 4 and
5, that's just some kind of
context information, um, like to
keep an eye on what is happening
with detention populations at
the top of page 4, you can see
where the jails are. We have
adult detention facilities in 25
counties. Um, we have 4 juvenile
Child detention facilities. And
what has happened, um, if you
look at, um, how many people are
in jail, you can see that it was
really, um, significantly
affected by COVID. So just
looking at bookings, we, we
every June we ask our jails how
many people did you book this
year, right? So it's a way to
get a sense of, of the flow, so
to speak. And so at the top of
page 5, what you'll see is, and
I'll tell you, in the old days,
we were always over 100,000.
So,
I think the booking numbers are
important because I know you
hear a lot from your state
prison system
in June, the state had over, uh,
let's see, I, I just wrote it
down and now I've lost it 5800
people in the prison system and
the, the prison system has a
pretty stable population like
that's, that number may go up
and down a little bit, but
that's about who they're dealing
with. So compare that to county
jails. Like I said in the old
days.
It was always over 100,000
bookings, um, and that number
went way down with COVID in 2020
and 2021, but you see it's been
creeping up, um, we're still
under 100, but for the fiscal
year that ended on June 30th,
um, there were, um, fewer than
85,000 bookings. Still a lot,
still dwarfing the number of
people that, that are served in
your prison system, but less
than has been historical. And
then at the bottom of page 5, I
just
wanted to get you a sense of how
big a swing it has felt since
the low, so May of 2020, that
was big time COVID. Everybody
was helping to try to reduce how
many people were in jail. The,
um, you know, the courts were
not enforcing their warrants,
the state wasn't sending us
their parole violators and
probation violated. They were,
they were helping and there were
fewer than 4000 people in county
jail on that day.
But
There's been a trend since then
and we're we're substantially
more than that, and, um, that
low population, frankly was the
way we survived because, as
you've heard us say before,
staffing has been a very
difficult issue, um, really
coinciding with COVID. It was,
it, it did a lot to, to hurt our
facilities and then on the
bottom of page 4, this is our
average daily population for the
year. It's kind of, it, it
doesn't have the ups and downs.
do if you just pick out
particular dates, but you can
see the general trend is the
same. It was going down pretty
steadily down more through COVID
and then inching, um, you know,
up and down but inching a little
bit more than the low of, um,
2022.
So with that context, um, I'm
going to go back to page 3 of
the handout, where we're talking
about the detention
reimbursement fund. So this is a
fund that was created years ago,
really immediately after the
Court of Appeals decided the
case that the our organization
brought on behalf of San Miguel
County against then Secretary
Joe Williams. And what the court
held in that case was the state
is the responsible for the cost
of housing.
inmates. Someone who's sentenced
to prison, they may be on
parole, but there's still a
state inmate. So if they get
picked up for, you know, a
violation of parole and they're
sitting in a county jail, the
state is required to pay for the
cost of that. And, um, so right
on the heels of that decision,
this legislature passed a law
that created the inmate
reimbursement fund. And every
year you put some money into
that and that is supposed to pay
the cost.
Of housing state inmates in, um,
a handful of categories. One, if
they're sentenced to prison, but
they're still sitting in jail.
2, if they are on parole, but
they're picked up and they're
sitting in jail. 3, if they're
on dual supervision, parole,
plus probation, and they're
sitting in jail. And the system
that was created was that the
New Mexico Sentencing
Commission, um, calculates what
that cost is every year. They,
they get a what's the population
on June 30th?
And they do a 3-year rolling
average based on that to say,
this is how many people are, you
know, state inmates are sitting
in county jails, and then they
do the math. What is that
costing? So the, the graph on
the bottom of page 3 shows you
the very big gap between the
cost to counties and what this
legislature has appropriated
over the last several years. So,
again, you can see there was a
big drop in 21. That's your,
that's your COVID drop, but the
Uh, you know, on average, the
cost of, um, housing state
inmates has exceeded $8 million
and, and, you know, actually
exceeded $10 million in 2023 and
the shorter, lighter blue line
shows what was, what was, um,
appropriated in those years.
We really need to get to the
point where the state is
appropriating enough money to
pay for this and, and, um, it's
not, you know, $5 million is
better than 2 million, but it's
still nowhere near what what the
cost is. And I can tell you
that, um, this year, I'm worried
that the divide is going to
increase even more because now
we have a situation where, um,
counties are providing
medication assisted treatment in
their jails. They're putting
people who have an opioid use
disorder.
on Suboxone or methadone, mostly
Suboxone and are smaller and
they are being presented to the
Department of Corrections
because their sentence there and
they are being sent back.
And the corrections department
is saying we don't, we don't
provide, um, Suboxone yet,
they're gonna do it. We don't do
it yet. And so either you, um,
detox them, which I, in my view
would be illegal to
involuntarily, um, remove
someone's medication or you keep
them.
And so what's happening now and
hopefully this will not last
forever. We have state
regulations, um, that,
To some degree enforce what is
existing federal law, which is
that you are required to
continue to treat someone
serious medical condition, um.
Which is what counties have been
recognizing for several years
now, but the regulations that
were just issued, um, a week or
two ago, put an obligation on
counties to provide mat and say
that the state needs to do it
beginning Dece by December of
25.
Now, the secretary has assured
she's going to be up and running
before then?
Like much sooner in according to
the settlement agreement with
the, um, I believe it was the
ACLU, um, the state has 90 days
from promulgation of the
regulations to be up and
running, so hopefully it'll be
before the end of the year, but
I think you really need to
understand the um the enhanced
burden that counties are facing
because frankly, we need to do
the right thing. We need to
continue to provide medication,
but these are folks who, who.
Oh, my understanding is they're
not getting good time.
So you, you can either continue
your care for a chronic disease.
And give up good time.
Or you can.
You know, so, um.
I have some concerns about that,
and I just wanted to point that
out as a way of emphasizing
we've got a gap in payment. It's
money that's due. It's
calculated by a third party
entity with no skin in the game,
and we would like to see the
legislature, you know,
appropriate sufficient funds to,
to pay for the cost.
OK.
That was, that was my jail
pitch. Now, um, we'll talk about
courthouse funding, so, um,
pursuant to statutes that have
been around since before
statehood, um, counties have
been responsible for providing
the local district court with
adequate quarters, right?
Adequate quarters. What that
means is sometimes the subject
of disagreement. Um, and what a
county can do is often directly,
you know, related to their um
their ability to tax and collect
money from their citizens and
so.
Um, so in recognition of this,
um, two sessions ago, um, this
legislature appropriated um 22
million as a matching fund. In
other words, the county would
have to match the dollars, but
they could access this money to
help pay for the cost in this
case, a lot of the money went to
Otaro County for a new, new
courthouse, but there are
constantly needs that the courts
have, and um there's the, the
graph on here show.
shows you um how many judges
have been added um over the
years since fiscal year 19,
there have been 8 new judges
added and the reason that's
important is because those
judges need a courtroom and they
need and and the and the
estimate is that it costs
between 2 and 3 million to add a
judge, um, that probably depends
to some degree on how nice of an
environment the judge wants to
have, but the reality is the
legislature, um, did something
that I think was really helpful,
that first year there were over
um.
Uh, the there were, it was 23
million appropriated 15 million
went to Otaro County. The
remaining 8 million, there were
22 million in requests. So lots
of, lots of requests that money
got spent, although Otaro County
I think is a longer term plan,
um, this last year you
appropriated 10,000
um, the, the court put a request
out amongst its judges. They
didn't go through us. We've just
alerted our managers to that,
and we think they're going to be
lots of requests for the the.
Remainder there and so we are
asking that you continue to fund
that. I think our courts um need
it and our counties aren't in a
position necessarily to provide
the, the beautiful courthouses
that some counties have
provided, but it really just
depends on their tax base.
And then, um, the last point
that I'm going to make has to do
with detention recruitment, uh,
last year you appropriated 25
million to DFA to support um
recruitment of um detention
officers as as I've mentioned, I
think many times here the
staffing has been um um.
Severely low in our facilities,
um, and this year, this, this,
um, appropriation, uh, DFA
received applications for 850
positions, um, which is a lot,
there was enough money to fund
189 of them, so, um, you can see
on the little chart who who got
the funding, um, corrections got
46. The rest went to um
different counties.
And, um, and I think that's
great. I'm, I'm really glad that
people are using that money and
hopefully it'll make a
difference in our staffing
crisis, um, but to give you a
sense of scope, Bernalio County
received funding for 23
officers, um, they, their
vacancy rate has been over 200
positions. So there's still an
incredible need, um, but we
really appreciate the, the, um,
the funding that was provided
and I wanted you to know that
it's going to good use and so
we'll be, we'll be asking you
to.
Continue your generosity in that
regard.
Um, and with that, I think I'll
turn it back to you, Joy. Sounds
great, um, on the.
Our fund last year or you all
did, um, at our request in a
joint request with the municipal
league for funding for fire and
emergency medical service or EMT
recruitment. Similar situation
where we have seen decreases in
numbers, we see less people
volunteering, which is, of
course, really critical to our
rural communities that rely so
heavily on fire volunteers.
Um, DFA was tasked with rolling
this out, and they did a great
job of, you know, jumping on
this so that the funding could
go out fairly close.
To the beginning of the fiscal
year. One of the issues we found
in the applications early on is,
uh, municipalities and counties
are very different. So when we
talked about the detention fund,
we were really advocating for
those frontline workers. But the
reality in counties when it
comes to fires, we have 2, maybe
3 paid positions. Everything
else is volunteer. So when we
talked in testimony about 65,000
is that base level. And that's
what was included in the
application from DFA.
Initially, that doesn't get you
what you need when you're
looking for that 2nd or 3rd
person in a county that really
needs to be a higher level like
a deputy fire marshal and or
fire chief, and they need to be
able to recruit and train
volunteers. So we pushed back
some after we heard from some of
the counties that 65,000 wasn't
anywhere near what they needed,
even for that one position over
the three-year, um, plan. And
DFA did hear that concern. What
they did is they amended the
application and they went back
out, which we were very.
for the extension, especially in
light of the fires we were
seeing around the state. Um,
they said right in a number in
this extra field and justify it.
And so we were very glad that
they gave us that flexibility,
but much like with detention,
the numbers that we saw on the
requests were roughly 330
positions and we got 190 so the
need is certainly still there.
The other thing that's important
to remember about these funds,
this was a one-time
appropriation that needed to be
expended this fiscal year, but
the idea
was that it was to stabilize and
set up new full-time positions
over a three-year period, and I
believe DFA will be coming back
asking the legislature to
consider the language that's
necessary to make that, you
know, implemented over the next
two years for those 3-year
commitments that needs to be
tweaked, but also we'd like the
legislature to consider an
additional funding appropriation
because there are certainly
positions that are needed and
entities that need them that
weren't captured in this first
round. Um, so that's something
that we would work with
legislation.
to work with, um, hopefully the
governor LFC and others to talk
about what that number might be
that would be reasonable within
your budget considerations.
The next one has to do with
emergency medical services. This
is something for us that for
years has been in the forefront
and what really brought it to
our attention was a situation
that happened in Mota County
probably 8 or 9 years ago, where
all of a sudden they had a
private contractor for ambulance
services that pulled out. They
pulled out because of some of
the changes at the federal level
made it too cumbersome for them
to really be a viable business.
Mota County, this would have
been around 0708 because the
economic downturn actually was
successful in implementing the
GRT.
Increment, but the reality is
with their population base, they
don't generate enough to really
have a program. So at that point
with that shortfall coming back
to the legislature every year
for about $80,000. Um, we said
we need a bigger plan. Now, the
Department of Health has the EMS
Bureau, which used to have a
$100 million federal grant. That
has dwindled down. It was about
2 million over recent years,
right around 2.5. And the
reality was we didn't have a
viable fund for the recurring
revenue to support EMS services.
The way it was set up, each of
those services was getting about
7 or 8000 in their districts.
The legislature heard our plea
last year. We worked closely
with the municipal League on
this. We were thrilled that you
identified this need and this
gap. The reality was the budget
was already at such a point that
what they did to address it was
a one-time $11 million
appropriation with the
anticipation in Senate Bill 151
and the amendments that were
made, that it would then be a
redirect of the health premium
tax to make sure that we are
really supporting the
Structure statewide for EMS
services. We don't know that
there's anything else that needs
to be done, but we do want to
make sure that this happens.
Often when we see legislation
that passes and we've worked
really hard collaboratively with
you to solve these problems. We
have changes in leadership and
changes that due to elections
and all of a sudden things get
tweaked the following year. So
the reason this is showing up on
our priority sheet is because
this was a hard fought 10 year
discussion we had with you. We
want to make sure that it gets
followed through. This is
Important for all of us
throughout the state. So that's
why it's on our radar and on
your radar. The 700 megahertz is
a similar situation where you
have heard our concerns. Um,
this was a local government
issue for sure that there was a
plan in place from the state
with support from the federal
government to set up
communication interoperability.
So when we respond to fires,
whether it's in your district or
not, you can talk to the locals
there. You can talk to the
state, you can talk to the feds.
The problem was the cost that
was the burden on local
governments for the monthly
maintenance fees and the
subscriber fees were
problematic. Valencia County,
for example, was spending over
$300,000 a year if they wanted
to be on this system. We brought
these concerns to you and for
the last two years the
legislature has appropriated
funding to the Department of
Information Technology. And I
think it's interesting because
this shows a theme of what we
have here. This is not money
necessarily that's going
directly to counties. This is
money that's going to your.
State departments and your state
agencies to support local
governments, and we're their
advocates here front and center.
So with this do it funding, it
does need to be increased. When
we first brought it to the
legislature, it was interesting.
The Cabinet secretary at the
time, Secretary Monto, said,
Well, we need the counties to
have skin in the game. We need
the municipalities to have skin
in the game. We're paying
roughly 8000 per radio to have
skin in the game. So we
definitely are partners in this.
This is a shared revenue that we
think is really critical and we
would hope that you would
consider an additional
Appropriation to more accurately
help us with those subscriber
fees.
The last couple ones are
particularly interesting because
these aren't public safety. Um,
these are sort of our one-offs,
but it doesn't diminish the need
for them. Equitable disclosure
is something that the assessor's
affiliate has brought before the
legislature, I think also for
the last decade.
And it has had mixed uh reviews
and how it's been received. It's
been successful, more successful
Nothing about this changes the
fact that we are a nondisclosure
state. But the reality is on
residential properties when a
property is purchased or sold,
that information does go to the
assessor. It gives them the
ability to understand what the
market is doing, what fair and
equitable market rates would be.
We do not have that same process
for commercial properties.
Commercial properties, it's
almost a guesstimate, and often
we have new assessors that come
into office and you may see 100%
increase.
In your property taxes, and it
is alarming and concerning for
not only local governments that
depend on that consistent
revenue stream, but also for
business owners, it's not fair
for them to get hit
unexpectedly. So even though
there may be concerns that we're
targeting them, we actually
think that this could be a
solution which makes it more
appropriate for them. We may
discuss a phased-in approach,
but we certainly have
properties, commercial
properties that are undervalued
and as the counties.
are being required to go in and
assess properly, they're gonna
get hit.
The reason this year this is
even more critical, and you all
are well aware there are 2
ballot initiatives for veterans.
We value veterans in New Mexico.
We are a veterans supported
state, and we expect those two
ballot initiatives to pass. One
has to do with an increase in
their deduction as a veteran on
their properties. The other one
has to do with the decision by
the legislature that it used to
be that if you were 100%
disabled, you got 100% exemption
from
Your property taxes.
The proposal on the ballot is
that anybody with 10% or above
can now get an exemption that's
proportional to that percentage.
I don't know a single military
person that doesn't have at
least 10% hearing loss due to
munitions.
Nobody can give us the numbers
for that. LFC couldn't do it.
The legislature couldn't do it.
We expect both of these to pass
and yield control cannot make up
this difference of the revenue
impact that we're going to see.
We think this is the perfect
time to have this discussion
about how do we make sure that
our revenues stay appropriate to
provide the services we need and
commercial property happens to
be one of those that should be
looked at by the legislature. We
also have almost 20 of our
counties that are at the caps on
the mill rates. That means they
can't go up if they wanted to.
And the idea with yield control
is that it's supposed to create
a balance. So we are advocating
for a discussion during the
session. We are having a
discussion during the
with stakeholders, we've had 6
meetings planned around the
state. I believe tomorrow is the
one in Chavez, um, that'll be
our 3rd 1. We're including and
inviting builders, realtors,
small business owners, this
impacts all of them, and we
think this is a dialogue. We
don't know exactly what the
solution should be. We certainly
think disclosure of something
that's more accurate as to fair
market value should be
considered. That doesn't mean
the assessors are set in the
mill rates. It means that we're
starting to look at other ways
that we could address
this and maybe it is a phased-in
approach. So we certainly want
to have that conversation with
you.
The next one a couple of years
ago was the first time we'd
really addressed the inspection
of public Records Act, and we
were successful with the help of
the legislature and identifying
3 or 4 really key things that
needed to be addressed. Things
like protecting an undercover
police officer, not showing a
dead body, not showing a child
who's committed suicide and
having it end up on YouTube. So
these were critical things that
we all agreed on things like,
um, cybersecurity and
infrastructure for Department of
Information Technology. But
throughout the
Testimony, it was interesting.
Every time we'd turn around
there'd be 6 or 7 cabinet
secretaries standing behind us
because the state is being hit
with this, the same way we are.
Um, at that point, we talked
about that being step one and
with a 60 day session, I think
it's time to talk about step 2.
We, um, have been working
closely with the municipal
league. We understand the state
agencies are also looking at
this. Um, the reality is IPRA
has become weaponized and we
know that it is intended to
provide transparency and
accountability. We're not here
to interfere with that. But we
also can't risk local government
services that are critical to
our communities like elections
and public
We have individuals that are
currently sitting in prisons and
detention centers who've made a
career out of submitting very
vague IPA requests which are
almost impossible to reach. And
the cost of the fines are eating
our lunch. Catron County had
$100,000 in fines on IPRA
recently. For a community like
Catrin that's devastating. So as
I mentioned, we are meeting with
Foundation of Open Government,
we want to be transparent in the
dialogue. We do not have
specifics yet at exactly what
we're proposing right now, we
are trying to find the stories,
the logical reasoning of what we
really should be targeting, and
we're going to be working with
all these stakeholders to really
identify that, so um we'll
answer questions, but I don't
have specifics at this point.
The next one's interesting,
border issues. It's not partisan
at all. I say that tongue in
cheek, um.
This started with our county
board as a discussion from a
member in Sequro who lost a
niece, um, to a fentanyl
overdose. And I think you all
are completely aware and on the
same page with the crime that
we're seeing, the drugs we're
seeing, human trafficking, and
it's not just a border issue and
we get that.
But the original plan that came
to our board was a resolution
that at face value was very
partisan.
And our board had the
wherewithal to say, OK, that's
not where we're going, but it
certainly opened up a
conversation and at that point
staff was tasked to meet with
the governor and say, what are
the solutions? Do you need our
help and advocating for border
patrol on the border or National
Guard on the border. What can we
do to be helped with the
solutions and we recognize that
a lot of the border issues are
not within our authority. They
are very clearly stated and
delegated to state and federal
government. But we don't think
that
That excludes us as a partner.
And the governor very recently
had, um, some great news
articles about some of the
collaborative work she's been
doing with Donana County and
other counties, and it impacts
us all.
And the reality is we are part
of the government system, we are
part of the solutions, we are in
the trenches providing
transportation to individuals
who are crossing over. We are in
the trenches on task force for
drugs and human trafficking. And
we do think it's appropriate
that there be an appropriation
that goes to support these
efforts for county governments,
and my goal and my hope is that
there's also helps bring us to
the table as a collaborative
partner. We are part of the
government system. And when this
stuff happen
We need to be part of the
solution and recognized as such.
So with that, we would certainly
stand for any questions. We're
delighted to be here and we'll
certainly evolve this, and I'm
afraid you'll probably hear it
once or twice more between now
and January.
Thank you very much, Joy, and
thank you, Grace. So I have on
my list uh Representative
Romero, Senator Maestas, uh,
Senator Nibert, Represented
Martinez,
El Conn, Senator Cedilia Lopez.
Anyone else?
We.
Oh, he had to leave? Oh, I'm
sorry. OK, so we'll scratch him.
Um, Representative Romero, we
have about 5 people, so I just
have one question on this front.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
just wanted to circle back to
the question about the
reimbursement funds and those
folks that are being turned
away, um, or however that's that
mechanism is working or not
working right now for those that
are in a substance use, um,
situation where they're coming
forth, so I'm just trying to get
this straight. They're coming
forth with Suboxone
or methadone prescription and
then being turned away from
corrections department, going
back into the jail facility. OK,
so we have Matt for those in
jails currently, um, but the
corrections department is not
currently meeting the demand for
those with those prescriptions.
And is that where the gap is in
funding, or is it more so, can
you just help me walk through
that and the, the gap in funding
is for any state inmate who's in
our
Detention facility, um, and the
shortfall, the millions in
shortfalls every year is what's
on the graph. The, the issue
with medication assisted
treatment is one that I wanted
to raise because it's recently
been brought to my attention.
Um, we, we have been, um.
Um, conducting a project echo
for our detention medical
providers to, um, try to support
them in best practices for
medication-assisted treatment
and medication appropriate use
disorder and for for detox
medication assisted detox, many,
many of the people who come into
jail are, um, are in need of
treatment and they're um, you
know, and detox is often part of
that, but the, um.
The regulations that were
recently issued uh require
counties um require all
correctional facilities
included, included in the
definition is county detention
facilities to continue
medication for people who have
been prescribed treatment before
they arrived for booking. Um,
and also have, they're pretty
explicit, um, and demanding
requirements for standing of
what I would call a full-fledged
map program with clinical
behavior.
Health services in addition to
medication, um, so counties, but
we, we've been working on this
for some time now, so the
principle that when someone
comes to your door and they're
getting treatment for their
condition that you are required
to continue that and that is the
Department of Justice feels that
way and says that's what the
Americans with Disabilities Act
provides, um, the, the state's
failure to do that is what
resulted in a lawsuit, um, a
class action a couple of years
ago that was resolved with the
understanding that the.
They would um continue treatment
for people within 3 months of
the the uh regulations being
issued because the regulations
require counties to be doing
this today, and they on their
face give the state until
December of 25 to accomplish
that, um, and although I respect
and understand it's the
secretary's intent to do that
much more quickly. What's
happening today is somebody who
is getting treatment and
account.
jail but sentenced to prison.
Is being turned away.
From, from the corrections
department, um, and returned for
either you, um, titrate them
down and return them to us when
they're no longer receiving
medication or you keep them and
um.
It's gonna increase the cost to
counties for housing these folks
because they're being, they're
remaining in our custody. My
view on that and the advice I've
given is speak to the patient.
Do they want to titrate down and
go to corrections and be able to
get good time and there's other
programming and such that you
can get in corrections at county
jails don't offer, or do they
want to stay in the detention
facility so they can continue
their medication that that would
be the first step for an
individual, um, but it's not.
Um.
It's, you know, it's, it's a
little bit of an absurd
situation and we could have
foreseen it. And, and, and
frankly, we did. There was a lot
of commentary on the proposed
regs about the um.
The making this, you know, a, a
more challenging situation.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and just
to um point directly to the fact
that these counties are
literally inheriting these
problems and we're, as we're
talking about crime and
everything else, centered on
this, that the vast majority of
the folks that are in this
situation are in a substance use
situation that are coming into
our jails, is that correct?
Um, Madam Chair, Representative,
I don't have the data to say
what percentage of people in
detention facilities have a
substance use disorder, but, um,
but I can tell you that it's a
very high percentage. Thank you,
Madam Chair. I would love to.
Figure this out as quickly as
possible, um, and I hope the
powers that be who are
listening. I hope they are, to
make sure that we have this
program set up ASAP in
understanding that this is the
front line of our public health
crisis and our crime problem in
my humble opinion as to how we
solve for these issues and get
these folks.
The treatment and the housing
and everything else that they
need, uh, since you are the
counties are inheriting all of
this. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. We
have next on the list of Senator
Nibert and then Representative
Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, joy
on page 4, if I understood the
testimony yesterday from the
sheriff of Rio Rubi County and
the uh chief of police of
Vespignola. They apparently
indicated there were no
detention facilities now and
real rear but they were
transporting them out of county
so you might just note that on
your map. The, the second issue
is the firefighter and ES
recruitment, um.
I've
I've advocated for many years
that there are a number of
incorporated communities around
the state whose professional
firefighting uh departments.
Actually respond to
Uh, fires and emergencies
outside their incorporated
limits.
And
One way that that I think we
need to, number one, get ISO
ratings up and second to uh.
Allow the
Municipal fire departments who
do respond in those areas.
To receive the benefit of the
premiums that those.
Homeowners pay uh on an annual
basis into that fund. Right now,
I live outside the city limits
of Roswell.
The money I pay in premiums goes
to I believe Breo Fire
Department volunteer fire
department, yeah.
Brenda volunteer fire department
will never respond to my house,
which is urban but not within
the city limits. And so it seems
to me that you need to work with
uh the municipal league and come
up with something that would
allow municipal fire departments
to go beyond their um
corporate limits.
Receive
The monies associated with
premiums that are paid and
really have the volunteer fire
departments look at the.
Very rural areas where they're
equipped to fight those fires.
They're they're not really
equipped to fight a lot of
structure fires and stuff.
And so uh I thank you and the
municipal league need to look at
at how that should look like and
maybe um have some legislation
drafted that would.
Permit those fire departments to
to exceed their corporate limits
and receive those monies and
then have the volunteer fire
departments really focus on what
I believe they do best, and that
is dealing with fires in the
very rural, not the urban areas,
if the, if the municipality and
the county would like to do
that. So that'd be my only
comment on the firefighter EMS
recruitment.
Madam Chair, if I can respond
really quickly.
Um, Senator Nibert, I think it's
an interesting discussion and
certainly we work well with the
municipal league, I'm glad to
say, um, but I think in the
context of the ISO ratings and
home property costs right now.
It's particularly interesting to
have some of those dialogues
because as you know, fires were
seeing, I know state forestry
and superintendent of insurance,
this is something that we are
going to have to collectively
tackle. We have people who, um,
I have heard mixed stories about
whether or not people have been
dropped, but the reality is
They're seeing 3 and 4 times
premium increases and they have
no other choice but to look for
other options, so I think
collectively we do have to look
for solutions, so I appreciate
that.
Alternative suggestion.
Thank you, Senator.
Representative Martinez and then
Representative Al Conn.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um,
talking about the two veteran
ballot initiatives, have you
reached out to the Department of
Veteran Services for those
numbers
and, uh,
we have and run into the same
problem where also they don't
have hard numbers. We know
exactly how many veterans there
are in the state. We know how
many are 100% disabled. We don't
have a clue what the final
decision will be and it's of
course a process DD 214s and
going through that to get your
disability recognized will be
very cumbersome, but
Just opens up a whole scenario
and nobody has good data on.
Well, that that number will
change.
All the time because there's
different applications being put
in, but you could get a ballpark
number of.
Those ratings.
Through DVS or the VA and in uh
Albuquerque. I used to get that
number, probably every 90 days
from the.
Uh, regional office in
Albuquerque.
Um, and if you need assistance
with that, I'd be happy to reach
out to the VA and try to get
those numbers for you.
But DVS, I used to have those.
On hand for legislative
inquiries all the time.
So, um,
I know there's been a lot of
changes over DVS over the years,
but I'd be more than happy to
reach out to the regional office
and try to get those numbers for
you.
Um, I am curious, Madam Chair,
um,
About a fair market value, what,
what feedback are you getting
from these town halls from
businesses cause I'm getting a
lot of inquiries from businesses
in Sandoval County that are
terrified about this because
some of them are having their.
Their rates go up.
Drastically, and they.
Or having a hard time.
Trying to budget for this.
Madam Chair and uh
Representative Martinez, um,
great points and we would love
any help we can get with data on
veterans, so I will take you up
on that offer. Um, Sandoval
County is one of those counties,
Sandoval and Santa Fe, in
particular, where, you know, the
reality is assessors are
supposed to come up with
properly assessed properties,
and they both saw over 30%
increases and that's exactly the
reaction that we're hearing as
well. The town hall in Sandoval
actually was a really good
dialogue about how
Could we do maybe a phased in
approach we are absolutely
looking for solutions that don't
blindside those business owners
and another solution that's
coming out of the individual
affiliate is one to look at
possibly looking at increasing
the household exemptions and
other exemptions to help adjust
some of this. Some of those
haven't been increased in years,
so that might give them some
additional relief, but the
reality is if the assessors are
doing their job with the data
that they have now, which is not
great.
Without sales comparisons,
they're gonna get blindsided, so
we want this to be more
equitable, more transparent,
more accountable, and if we have
to look at a phased in approach,
we're happy to do that, but
right now based on statute, they
don't have that ability. They're
supposed to raise the rates as
appropriately as they can
determine, and that's the
problem.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
director Sparzan
my fear is that.
Um,
You know, I've had a lot of mom
and pop shops.
Call and say, you know what,
this is the last straw.
I just we just cannot afford.
Um,
This much of an increase.
So they're looking at selling,
moving, um, and I hate to see
that happen, um, because that
kind of thing is avoidable.
If, if there's a way to phase
these in or communicate these in
advance instead of having the
poor business owner open their.
Their assessment and.
You know, now they're faced
with.
A choice to make. Do I stay open
for business? Do I pay my taxes?
What do I do?
Um, so I think a little bit more
communication on the front end
would be.
Um, a lot better.
Then the phone calls that I'm
getting at the tail end.
Um, and I'll, I'll, uh, work on
those numbers for you and I'll
I'll reach out uh as soon as I'm
able to get those.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative
Representative Al K and then
Senator Cedilia Lopez.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair,
just, uh, I'm gonna stay out a
little bit about the veterans
exemption, which of course is
something that I am very
familiar with.
The big thing about this is that
uh what we're doing this and
we're thinking about the
negatives. We gotta think of the
positives.
The positive thing about this
whole thing is that we are going
to, what we're doing is we are
trying to attract veterans to
the state of New Mexico.
If you have somebody that has
served in the military.
And they leave the military
instead of moving somewhere
else, and they can stay in New
Mexico. That means we have one
person that is able to either
start his own business or his or
her own business or go to or be
employed.
I mean, they're trained to do
something. So that's the big
thing. The other thing, of
course, is they're going to be
able to afford a home,
especially if you got a
Just say if you got a disabled
veteran, they can afford a home,
OK? How many people are we
attracted to the state of New
Mexico that can come in and just
buy a house instead of having to
wait 20 years after they've been
employed here other than a
veteran or a disabled veteran.
And uh so you gotta think of a
positive part about this because
sure I can understand that it's
probably going to be a hit at
the front.
But the makeup at the end is
hopefully where it's gonna come
in and we're going to attract
these people to the state of New
Mexico instead of having them
leave to California or somewhere
else and New Mexico is a
wonderful place to live and be
living. I've been here for every
year of my life except for the
19 months and one day that I was
in the military.
So I just want you to keep that
in mind when you're talking
about the negatives and how the
people are thinking of how their
taxes are going up or they got
to look at the other end because
they're going to save money in
the long run because we're gonna
have people that are paying
taxes on new homes or taking
over other houses. I just
thought that I have uh Madam
Chair, is that, uh, I have
friends that work in
corrections.
And uh
What is the page will come over.
One of the biggest, uh, uh, one
of the biggest uh illegal drug
that comes into corrections is a
boxing.
Uh, the rates provide their own
because the state and the
counties won provided, so the
provider or actually it's uh my
understanding it's probably a
big money maker in the, in the
corrections department on the
wrong side, but uh those are
what are being uh those are
taken away from the inmates at
other ranges subbo and so I
don't think we have to worry
about the counties having to pay
for it because.
It's already been uh.
Provided, uh, on the district
courts, Madam Chair, I just have
to say a long, long time ago I
had this job. This is Steven way
before some of my fellow
legislators on board
and uh one of the things we were
building a brand new courthouse,
and one of the things that I had
to tell and explain that to the
district judges just simply that
the county
County will provide or basically
uh.
The the the county is
responsible for housing the
district court. That's all it
says in the statute.
It is responsible for housing
the district court does not say
how, doesn't say anything. So if
you wanna put a district court
in that little back room here in
the Espanola, uh, you can do it
because there's no regulation as
to how or how why you have to
build such a beautiful building
like they did in Cibola County,
but uh responsibility of the
county is just to provide the
district court.
So I'll leave it at that bed and
chair. Thank you, Madam Chair,
if I could, sure, real quickly
on that. Um, Representative
Alcon, I want you to know and
this is going to be a personal
privilege. I absolutely agree
about the benefits for veterans.
I'm a veteran's widow and I am
so grateful for the things that
this legislature has done for
our veterans. So I just wanted
to share that that we do keep it
in perspective.
Um, uh, Senator Cedil Lopez.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
um, and thanks for this
presentation. I think a lot of
these ideas are, are really
good. I just had some questions
about this detention facility
issue. Um, and I think, uh,
Representative Niber had already
pointed out that Ri Riba uh said
that they, their facility is in
major disrepair and what they're
looking for is a regional
facility that would, um, that
the tribal, the tribal, uh, law
enforcement.
The county law enforcement and
the city law enforcement could
all share, um, and that would
really help all of them. And I
hope you talk to them and
include their ideas. I mean, it
may require a little bit more
planning than they have, but I,
I hope you can include their
ideas because it seems really a
waste of time to be transporting
people so far.
But going again to this
detention issue, does this, um,
The population in the, does that
include the private prisons that
it?
That the county's contract with?
So the, the numbers with you
well.
OK.
Oh.
your mic.
Excuse me, uh, thank you, Madam
Chair, Senator, county operated
detention facilities, uh,
Lincoln County has a private
company that operates for them.
They're included, but this
doesn't include um the prison in
Torrance correct that because
they don't have county operated
detention facilities.
OK. So if you included
Why did you exclude those
numbers?
Because we were just looking at
county jails.
OK, um.
So how do you account for the
money that is paid to those
facilities, um, Madam Chair,
Senator, in the, in a, in a
different chart, we actually
collect um detention costs from
all 33 counties including the
ones, it's, it's not in your,
um, it's not in your packet, uh,
where it literally just getting
that those figures for um 2024
last year, the county's
collectively spend over $360
million on detention.
and um spent over 73 million of
that on medical care and um, but
I have, we're, we're gonna slice
and dice that data and we have
it both ways. We have what's
spent by all 33 counties,
including those who pay to house
their their detainees in another
state or in another not another
state, another county or another
facility. Um, and then we also
look at just the 25 that operate
their own facilities and how how
much that is. Cause I would.
Be very interested in those
private prisons because I keep
hearing such negative
information about what's going
on in the in those private
facilities. I've even talked to
people who work there who are
really trying hard to get out of
there and get a state job, um,
or kind of, you know, with the
county facility or a state
facility because they're paid so
low and the benefits are so
inadequate, um, and the
conditions are bad, and so I
would be very interested. I, I
understand.
this didn't include it, um, and
so I take it that the
Fund would not help counties,
would not.
How counties pay for those um.
So-called services, Madam Chair,
Senator, and, um, uh Linda
Freeman, the executive director
of the Sentencing commission, is
here. She might be better
equipped to answer some of this
and I, but no, every county
receives a proportion of that
even counties that don't operate
their own detention facilities
will receive sun to offset the
costs that they pay for housing
and the other other thing I'll
mention the just to clarify, so
the money that you're requesting
would go to help those counties.
Hey for the private facilities,
even though it's not included in
what the services are provided,
so the money and, and Linda,
you, you might help me with
that. The, the money is to to
reimburse counties the cost of
housing state inmates, right?
These aren't just everybody
who's right,
I got it. So it would be the
private companies that would
build the state. If, if they
were, if they had an agreement
to hold state, um, in
with the state. I, I got it.
Thank you. That was an
important. It's it's, it's a
narrow slice of the population,
yeah, um, but, uh, but the other
thing I, I did want to say is
that the counties that closed
their facility like Sibala
County had a detention facility.
They closed their detention
facility, and now they purchase
beds from the private prison in
Grants, um, they are very happy
with that arrangement. It is
saving them millions.
millions of dollars and they the
manager is very satisfied with
the the operation she's she and
her commissioner say they go
through, they visit, and um
they, they have a different
perspective, but it certainly
has saved those counties a lot
of money. um, I'm more familiar
with the situation at Torrance,
um, and especially the
immigrants, and we've seen that
documented. Um, I don't know how
Sibula treats its immigrants,
um.
And that's where I learned so
much about what was going on in
these private prisons, and I
think it's a concern and I also
think it's a concern that
counties are able to contract
with these private prisons for
Uh, the federal government
because then because the county
contracts.
The federal government doesn't
do the same review that they
would do a private, uh, a
private, the historical review
that they would do a private
contracts that they have because
there's a two-step process. They
would be reviewed before they
got a federal contract. And
right now with county with
contracting the counties, they
only get a one step review. And
so that's, that's another
concern I have, um, as you know,
I brought a bill about this,
about um trying to uh
And I know, I know your
organization supported it, um,
disappointingly, but I, I think
it is a problem, and I
understand that's not what this
is about. I get that now. I was
like, what? Uh, but now I, I
understand that, but it is a
concern I have, um, I probably
will go over and visit Grants.
Um, and see what's going on,
but, um, you'll take me? OK. Um,
my colleague will take me, um,
but I, I do, I've learned a lot
about torrents, especially, it's
close to Albuquerque and I have
more, more connections there.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Anyone else
we're about.
OK, very good. Right on time. I
love that.
Thank you, thank you. I really
appreciate you and I'm sure
we'll be talking more about your
initiatives and so on. So thanks
great presentation. All right.
We have the municipal league
folks here.
And
Yeah.
Oh, OK, yeah. OK,
this afternoon. Oh, you're fast.
Well, you don't mess around.
Good for you.
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah. I mean,
they're not doing what they're
supposed to be doing, basically
that's.
I'm surprised.
It's usually a big complaint hit
me with that with the
whistleblower.
Hi AJ and Allison, um, if you
want to introduce yourselves in
full and then uh the floor is
yours.
Thank you
All right, now we're hot. Thank
you, Madam Chair. AJ 40 with the
Municipal League, I would like
to introduce our team members
with us today. We have Clinton
nicely, our services director,
Tim Johnson, our public safety
director, Rebecca Martinez, uh,
one of our policy, senior policy
analysts.
Good morning, Madam Chair.
Members of the committee, um,
Alison Nichols, uh, policy
director with the municipal
League. Nice to be here.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Well,
I'm going to touch briefly on
our legislative priorities, um,
and then I will turn it over to
Allison to get into what would
be in front of the Senate
Judiciary and House Judiciary.
Um, we want to start with, uh,
It's probably too soon for me to
say special session, but we do
appreciate what you all did for
special session. Rioso, Ridoso
Downs, those communities are
going to need help for years to
come. Um, so we will be asking
for support, right? We are, we
want to make sure Ridosa redos
are down, stay operational, have
the ability to keep staff on pay
debt service, right? An example
Ridoso Downs.
Collects about 18 million a year
in GRT. So we're trying to craft
a bill and put together the
concept where state general fund
would keep them whole, so they
would have the ability to pay
the bills, keep staff on, and,
and maintain that service. So
that's one piece that we're
putting together and as Joy
mentioned, uh, EMS. That's
another one where there's still
a little more work to be done.
EMS is healthcare in our rural
communities. What you all did
last year increasing that
distribution from 2.8 million.
To almost 15 million is a big
deal, right? Those communities
that were getting 12,000 a year
are now getting significantly
more,
but it's not done yet because
what we realized is even with
that increase, they don't have
enough to buy any ambulance,
right? An ambulance is 35,000 to
$400,000. Not enough. So what
we're gonna ask for is the
ability to bond, just as you all
gave us the ability to bond our
fire protection fund revenue. We
would like the ability to bond
that EMS revenue so it can
actually buy an ambulance.
Um, so that's, that's a big deal
for our small communities. Our
cities are trying to help each
other, right? The city of Joel
is giving all of their older
ambulances to Eagles Nest. So
we're trying to help each other,
but at the same time, we just
don't have enough to get these
new expensive machines, um.
Like I said, 350, 400,000 a
year.
Another big push that we're
going to try again for the 4th.
Time, um, is more road funding.
We all know the health of our
roads. We all know we need more
revenue into the road fund into
the transportation project fund.
We're going to try again for
motor vehicle excise revenue to
solely go into the state road
fund and the transportation
project fund. That's a big deal
for every community. We, we rely
heavily on that transportation
project fund that change you all
made that gives us the 95% match
that really does help those
smaller communities. There's
just not enough revenue going
into the buckets right.
Yeah. Right now, that's the, the
clearest bucket that we see is
the motor vehicle excise
revenue.
Um.
The, the long game that we're
trying to understand, everything
we are trying to do at the
municipal league is data
focused.
What we're trying to understand
is water and on this committee,
especially there are champions
for water that have worked on
this for years, uh.
We want the data to give you all
the landscape of what it looks
like in cities for water. We're
we're 10% of the systems, but we
serve 70% of our state's
population. We know it's gotten
way too expensive for these
systems,
right? What send bill one,
that's a big deal. We have to,
we have to get them to use it
though. Now that we have that
tool, we have to have them
consolidate, even if you all
give us the money to build new
facilities. We don't have
operators, so we have
To have that consolidation.
You know, Portalli is an example
we saw at Water Trust board last
year. They need $800 million for
storage, pipelines, and new
wells to actually have water for
their community. Their current
wealth field of 48 wells has had
a 60% drop off.
So if you doesn't come online,
they have a problem.
So what do we do? So we are
trying to get the data to
understand what does each
community need to have a
sustainable water supply and how
much is that going to cost,
right? Last year, Water Trust
board received $135 million
dollars right from that 9%
severance tax carve out.
That wasn't enough, right? We
got 380 million in notice of
intents. That's the need in
communities around the state.
What we're trying to do is, who
didn't apply?
Right, what is the true need if
we had everyone submit a
PERliminary engineering report.
If we knew the total need, we
would like to come to the
legislature to say, can you help
us build these out, knowing what
you all did last year, right, in
2026, we'll be able to do
wastewater out of water trust
board. That's going to further
complicate the funding issues
that we need for water and
wastewater in our state, right,
with the new particulate levels
coming from EPA, we're going to
have to take into account uh
PAs, right? So we're
have, have to have RO on the
facility, reverse osmosis.
That's very expensive. So we're
going to do a program evaluation
to get the total landscape of
what is the need, but not just
an infrastructure, the human
capital as well, so we can
actually operate these
facilities and make sure all of
our communities have the clean
water and also the wastewater
side cause that's surface water
in our state to make sure we're
discharging clean water. So
that's something we will be
working on and coming to the
legislature to ask for, we
appreciate what's done through
water trusts board. We just need
a
Little more help.
Uh, the next piece is chapter 3,
right? Chapter 3, right, the
local government code, we, we
have not seen an update, um,
really ever, right, the local
local Election Act touched a
small piece, but this was 1953,
right? We compiled in '78. We
get questions every day, right?
106 cities, towns and villages
on.
How do we count the quorum,
right? If we have two members of
the governing body, uh, gone,
what's a quorum?
These are the things that we're
going to ask the legislature to
help us clarify so that we don't
have a 106 different opinions
and then interpreted in a
different way. There's pieces in
there like the mayors, the chief
law enforcement officer. What
does that mean? They're not
commissioned.
They don't wear body cams. They
don't have law enforcement
power.
Probably shouldn't call him
chief law enforcement officers.
On the flip side of that, we
need what we've learned is the
ability to cross commission. So
with the redos of fire, right,
they needed more police officers
than they had. So we reached out
to the Chiefs Association to say
who can dedicate officers to
help Riodosa when they reopen.
What we realized is we don't
have the statutory authority to
cross commission.
So we had a dozen officers.
get volunteered to come help,
but we do not have the ability
to cross commission. So we like
it very narrow, right? The
governing bodies to give or have
the ability to cross commission
officers until the next
governing body meeting or for a
set period of time so that they
can, they can have those
protections while they're on
duty in those communities for
disasters or even events, right?
Roswell, I think is a good
example. They're going to have
the Roswell Air Show. That's
80,000 people for two weeks,
around the same time as.
State Fair.
Are there going to be enough
state police officers to give
additional support or can we get
more locals to help, but we only
want to do that if we can cross
commission and do it the right
way. So that's a, that's another
piece where we see that's an
update to chapter 3.
Um, you know, we, and there's
many examples within the code,
uh, that we just see are ripe
for updating, and that's where
we need help from the
legislature to make sure it's
updated correctly.
Less for interpretation, uh, and
make it more uniform, so you
know our individual cities
aren't spending a ton of money
on legal to get an opinion on
how they should do it.
And the next piece, Madam Chair,
I'll turn over to Alison for the
IRA.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. Um, before I,
I talk about IPRA, um, I just
wanted to mention on the law
enforcement side briefly and
initiative that we're excited
about, um, that we wanted to
just quickly share with you. We
recently signed a contract with
a company called Lexiol, um,
that we're going to roll out to
all our police departments or
well about 65 police departments
that are members of our self
insurers fund through Lexiol,
they'll have access to policies
that are updated regularly, um,
basically in real time that
Comply with state law, federal
law, Supreme Court rulings, um,
state court rulings, so we can
feel confident that our police
departments are getting policies
that are always in compliance
with the law. Um, in addition,
lexible.
Um, has, uh, training resources
to make sure that our police
departments are also able to
train to these new policies. So
we're excited about this. We
think it's going to be a great
tool for our departments, um,
especially the smaller ones that
may not have the kind of
capacity or knowledge to, to
always be updating their, their
policies in response to
statutory changes. Um, I believe
the counties are already working
with Lexiol. I know some of our
departments have worked with
them and have spoken highly of
them. So we're excited about
that, um, and happy to share
more about that if that's of
interest.
So now on to inspection of
Public Records Act. Um, the
municipal league for the past
few months has been doing some
in-depth research and analysis
on IPRA and specifically how
it's administered by our local
governments, as you all know,
IPRA ensures transparency to
public records for members of
the public, media, um, other
individuals.
We've been hearing from a lot of
our members that they are, in
many cases struggling with ERA,
struggling specifically to
administer it to interpret the
requirements to respond to the
increasing volume of requests
and especially for some of our
smaller members, but even for
the larger ones, they feel like
they're just getting overwhelmed
and they can't keep up and and
that's concerning because they
take their commitment to
transparency seriously, and they
want to be able to respond in a
timely manner to these requests.
Um, so we've kind of been hear
This, you know, anecdotally, and
we wanted to understand what's
actually happening, what are we
really seeing in terms of a
volume of requests, um, trends,
requester types, um, kind of
beyond, you know, the, the
stories or the anecdotes that we
hear. So over the past few
months, um, we conducted a
pretty comprehensive survey. We,
we also worked with the county,
so we had 54 local governments,
municipalities, and counties
that responded to a survey um
with some qualitative and
quantitative questions about how
They administer IPRA and the
resources they used to do that,
um, and many of them also
provided us their request data
that's comprehensive data, you
know, thousands of rows um in
Excel of every request that
they've gotten over the past few
years, um, of that group, we
were able to um identify 19
local governments that had
detailed comprehensive data so
we can kind of build out that
that data set and analyze it.
Some of our key findings from
that, um, were, and you can see,
uh, the first chart on, on the
handout we gave you. The average
number of monthly requests has
more than doubled between FY20
and FY 24. Um, and, and again,
this is for that sample group of
19 local governments, not every
local government, but, um, to
our knowledge, this is the most
comprehensive assessment of IPA
requests, um, that has been done
in the state. So, on average,
um, local governments,
This group were receiving 2000
requests per month in 2020,
FY20, and in FY 24, uh, they're
receiving over 5000. So that's,
that's a pretty significant
increase, um, you know, we think
there's a few reasons for this.
It's kind of hard to pull out of
the data in a lot of cases, but,
um, you know, one reason is
likely the requirement for body
worn cameras, um, beginning in
2020, that just created a
significant increase in the
number of records, um, also the.
The volume, um, or the size of
the records themselves. And we
think that in conjunction with
some other kind of cultural
trends, um, issues in the media
also sparked additional interest
among the public, um.
In in requesting, making it
requests, um, and in addition,
and, and I'll mention this a
little bit later, we also saw a
big increase in requests from,
from commercial requesters as
well.
So, um, what are the requests
for? We found that the majority
are for police records, you
know, perhaps unsurprisingly,
and that's a mix of the body cam
footage and then also incident
reports, um, often accident
reports or other, other crime
incident reports, um, and you
can see we, we picked out some
of the, the local governments
that responded, um.
Over half and and in some cases,
over 80% were for police records
and, and most of those we also
saw an increase in the share of
the requests that were related
to police records over the past
3 years.
And then, like I said, one of
the other biggest drivers of
this volume increase was um an
increase in frequent or bulk
requesters. So we were defining
those as an entity or
individual, um, in this case, it
was typically a company that
made over 25 requests per year.
Uh, so those, those bulk
requesters grew from just a
fraction of total requests in
2019 to um.
Over about 1/3 in 2024 and 20%
of all requests in our sample
came from commercial data
brokers, and that was primarily
the company LexisNexis. Um, I
don't know if you're familiar
with LexisNexis, they have a lot
of products you might have come
across them for legal research
or you know, other types of
academic research, but as part
of their product line, um, they
make IPA requests or at the
federal level FOIA requests or
other, um, in other states using
their open records laws.
So they make these requests.
They aggregate the data
warehouse it, package it,
repackage it, and resell it. Um,
and that's for use in all types
of functions, law enforcement
purchases it, um, like I said,
legal research, background
checks, um, general academic
research.
So
You know, this, this was a
finding that was a bit
concerning to us, um, the fact
that a for-profit company is
using our IR process, uh, using
taxpayer funded resources, you
know, in this case our city and
county clerk's time or local law
enforcement time, um, to, you
know, take our public
information and then resell it
and and make a profit. Um, and I
think that was also just
surprising, um, seeing how much
of the requests were, were from
those private companies and
again, specifically LexisNexis.
If you turn to the 2nd page of
the handout, um, we did a deep
dive on Rio Rancho because we
thought it was pretty
interesting. And you can see
that, you know, the first point
I think is interesting is that
in Rio Rancho, and this was
about 3 years of data that we
aggregated for them.
1% of requesters accounted for
nearly 50% of all requests. Um,
so it was really this tiny
fraction of requesters that were
taking up, you know, most of the
kind of, um, request volume,
staff time, etc.
And then within that,
LexisNexis accounted for about
1/3 of all requests, so they
were by far the biggest. No one
else even came close.
After Al LexisNexis, you had 33
requesters that submitted more
than 15 requests.
And then the remaining 3400 plus
requesters, each submitted fewer
than 15 requests. So, you know,
you really have LexisNexis plus
another kind of smaller group of
um mostly private companies that
that are accounting for almost
all the the request volume in
Rio Rancho, and we saw similar
trends elsewhere.
So along with that increase in
volume, we also saw an increase
in staff costs, um, the request
volume, like I said, more than
doubled. We also saw, um, costs
devoted to IPRA staff time more
than double. So it was, it was a
pretty, pretty well correlated
those two things, perhaps
unsurprisingly, um,
And I think, you know, this also
raised a few concerns for us,
um,
If if we're doubling resources
devoted to IPRA staff either
hiring new staff or diverting,
you know, existing staff time
towards IPRA related activities.
Are we also able to to double
staff or, you know, double staff
resources for areas in public
safety, um, for fire, EMS,
police, you know, or even for,
for services like parks and
libraries, you know, typically
not local governments have not
been able to devote those
resources to areas that I think
citizens are, are telling us are
important. I don't know, you
know, if most citizens.
would rank, um, you know, IPRA
processing staff as highly as
some of those public safety or
other, um,
City Service staff. So, so we
were a bit concerned about,
about that as well.
And, you know, I think why are
we devoting so much more staff
time? Obviously the volume
issue, um, I also touched on, on
the body cam footage, um, you
know, we heard from, from a lot
of clerks that that is really
time consuming and and complex.
Um, several clerks in
municipalities told us that it
takes them over 2 hours to
review every hour of footage.
Um, they have to watch it, they
have to, you know, make sure
there's no private information,
um, spoken verbally. There's
there's nothing shown, um, that
To be redacted, they need to do
those redactions.
And if you think about um a
crime scene or, you know, a
scene of an incident. There
could be 4 or 5 officers on
scene. They each have body cams.
If 5 officers are there for 3
hours, that's 15 hours of
footage, um, in addition, some
local governments may have
cameras in their, in their, um,
vehicles as well. So that's more
footage. Um, so 30 hours, you
know, at a minimum, at a minimum
that's 30 out, that's um 15
hours at a minimum that's 30
hours of staff time spent.
Reviewing and redacting the
footage. Um, that's quite time
consuming, especially again for
some of our smaller departments
that, you know, may only have a
few, a few full time staff, um,
Overall and may not even have a
full-time records custodian.
And then in addition to the body
cam footage being uh complex
issue to address. The other
complexity, um, one of the other
complexities.
Is the fact that a single
request can touch several
departments. It can touch, um,
records in different formats,
um, emails, you know, audio,
video, um.
You know, other types of formats
that take records custodians a
long time to sift through this
and try to tie all these pieces
together. I mean, right now, the
technology doesn't really exist
to automatically pull all these
things together, um, so humans
are largely driving this process
and managing this process. And I
think we see that because of
that human error is a factor,
and sometimes in a massive
request, um, requesting hundreds
of records, one record can get
missed.
That can lead to to litigation,
um, that can be really costly
for everyone involved.
So, um,
And one more factor um that we
found that was really impacting,
I think the complexity of how
our records custodians are
dealing with this is the issue
of, um, exemptions in our IPRA
law and, and specifically where
they are and how they're
structured. Um, so in, in New
Mexico's IR laws we have um a
fairly small number of stated
exemptions in the Act itself.
However, we also have, um, other
exemptions that are otherwise
provided by law.
As, as many of you know. Um, so
those can be found elsewhere in
state statute, and federal law,
um, court rulings.
And those can be really, really
numerous, uh, hard to identify,
hard to interpret. The AG has
office has a really helpful
guide, um, or the Department of
Justice, a really helpful guide
on that, but they list almost 6
pages of additional exemptions,
and those are just illustrative.
Those aren't even comprehensive.
So often it's falling to a
records custodians in any given
request to have to figure out is
there somewhere else in law or
or in a court ruling that would,
you know, limit how I release
this information and they have
to go find it.
Interpreted it, we heard from a
lot of records custodians,
again, especially in the
smaller, um, the smaller local
governments that that that's,
you know, can be really
difficult, especially those
with, with limited legal staff
capacity.
And then adding to the
confusion, some records would be
protected in one agency or
entity's files, but those same
records would be subject to
release if they were held by a
different entity. So, you know,
I think, hopefully, you know,
you can kind of see how given
these various layers of
complexity and the time
intensiveness it takes, human
error can lead to records that
aren't supposed to be released,
being released, or conversely,
records that are supposed to be
released, being withheld or
overlooked or not found in the
first place. I think we
See that, that happening a lot.
One other issue we identified
related to that is that our
state IPA statute doesn't
currently provide for any sort
of administrative review process
that could resolve those
situations, um, when there's
confusion, miscommunication,
human error that leads to missed
records. And we found that about
1/3 of states do provide for
some administrative review
process, either through an
ombudsman, an independent
commission, maybe through their
AG's office. They can help to
resolve disputes before
resorting to legal proceedings.
So some of the the potential
recommendations, um, that, that
we've, we're kind of exploring
and, and again these are
preliminary at this point, but
we would be interested in
seeing, um, consideration of a
fee structure specifically for
those commercial requesters, um,
And potentially structured as a
fee for bulk or frequent
requesters who are in almost all
cases, these commercial
requesters. We think it could be
appropriate to have some kind of
fee after a certain number of
requests, um, that way, you
know, your average citizen, uh,
who's making a few requests a
year, they would not be
impacted, but the LexisNexuses
of the world would be.
Um, you know, we think that use
of IPRA may not align with the
statutory intent of the law or
how a lot of people would kind
of think of the law being used
to promote transparency among
citizens and the media,
Um we also were working with our
members to, you know, figure out
ways that they could post more
records online, um, for example,
these, uh, crash reports to kind
of have another avenue for
people to access them. It
doesn't have to go through
their.
Process that would save everyone
time, um, and money. So, you
know, we do want to encourage
our members to do that. I know a
lot of them are already doing
it.
Although there are some privacy
concerns, um, I think in, in, in
some cities, bad actors have
gone online and kind of pulled
public information out of the
crash reports and then use them
to try to scam people by
pretending to be insurance
companies. So, you know, with
every solution, obviously
there's, there's additional
considerations we have to
consider.
We'd also like to see a notice
provision within IPRA, um, which
would allow the entity to to
cure an alleged violation. So
currently, if somebody requests
records and doesn't get the
records they want or they think
a request is missing. There's no
requirement that they notify the
entity, that the local
government or the other public
entity, um, we think that's a
little bit problematic.
As I said, in most cases, these
are human errors that are
leading to missed records. It's
not, um, you know, um,
intentional or or malicious, um,
in most cases, and we think
giving the entity a chance to
just address that to say, oh, we
missed this record, you know,
here, here it is, um, but avoid
a lot of, a lot of litigation
and kind of similar to that, um,
we'd also be interested in
exploring the idea of an
administrative process that that
allows the two entities to
Come together and and cure any
of those, those issues, um,
before going to a judicial
remedy. And again, about a third
of the states have a model, some
kind of administrative reviews.
There's plenty of models we
could look at.
Um,
another recommendation would be
providing a clear statute of
limitations within IPRA.
Currently there's not a statute
of limitations, um, so leaving
it open-ended, uh, the
Department of Justice has has
provided guidance that the
general statute of limitation of
3 years should apply, but that's
not, um, in IPRA, so.
It, it is open ended and and I
think it could, it could use
some clarification. And then
finally, um, one thing we want
to look at kind of longer term
going forward is figuring out
ways that we can
Make sure these exemptions that
are found other places in law
are brought into the act itself.
Just to clarify it for those
administering the law or for
those using the law to be very
clear about what is and isn't
exempt. And of course there's
always situations where it may
be up to to judicial
interpretation or or um.
Other dependencies, but we think
in many cases our records
custodians, um, and other, other
folks interacting with IPA could
benefit from having those
exemptions stated clearly in the
Act itself.
So that's um what we're working
on. We are continuing to work
through our data and do some
interviews with folks and hope
to, to have a final report in a
couple months to to share with
you all and um our members and
other interested stakeholders.
So thank you.
Thank you, Allison, and um,
thank you. Um, questions from,
oh, I have a list. What am I
doing here? Uh, representative
Romero and then Senator Worth.
Uh, thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, I would love to just
go back to that discussion about
Portales and some of the other
needs on water systems and, um,
infrastructure.
Um,
One of the questions that came
to mind was when you were
talking about the 60% drop off
or something like that. Um, are
you talking about just water in
inaccessible or like as in it's
dried up or is it the system
failing and therefore they can't
actually meet the demand of the
water. Madam Chair
Representative, specifically in
Portales, it's the aquifer.
They're right on the edge of
that Ago aquifer and so, right,
as we put more straws in the
ground, um.
Right, and that spans states. So
as we put more straws in the
ground, they're right on the
edge of it. And so from when
those well fields, those 48
wells were put in, they've had a
60% drop off in the recharge
rate.
Yeah, that aquifer goes down,
they're gonna hit a point where
those wells are going to be
ineffective in pulling water out
so we either need to drill in
deeper, but as we do that,
right, we have to chase the
aquifer, but then, so then we
have to point A to point B,
which is incredibly expensive,
and then we need more storage.
So it's that domino effect when.
The aquifers start dropping,
which they've they've dropped
quite a bit.
Thank you, Madam Chair. That's
deeply concerning, um, to say
the least. I know that the New
Mexico Environment Department
and Enerd, um, we've heard some
solution provide like some
solutions provided as far as how
this is going to work with
federal funding. Um, are you
currently sort of speaking to
their prioritized list of
projects and of course trying to
leverage the.
The federal dollars that are
here for, um, infrastructure
funding within that space.
Madam Chair Representative,
absolutely. We, we meet with
them on a regular basis, and we
chase federal funds every chance
we get, uh, Allison, uh, runs
one of our programs for a grant
writer to Chase federal funds.
So I believe it was Hamish
Springs that just received 2.8
million to help with their
wastewater system. So every
chance we can help our members
go after the federal funds, we
do it.
I'm a broken record on apply to
water trust because if you apply
then we at least know what the
need is. We don't have enough
coming in to pay for all of the
needs, but we can at least help
with those planning grants we
can get them in the process so
that we can make the pitch to
all of you. Here's what the need
is in our state for clean water.
Thank you, Madam Chair. And so
does the municipal league have
like a prioritized list of
projects that they are sort of.
So that we would know perhaps
that we would be advocating for
that were somewhat like what I
think the
Public schools have as far as
like this is most acute, this is
what the price is, this is how
ready it is, this is the status.
Do you have anything similar to
that or like that
that you, we rely heavily on
water trust board. They have a
very good system in place.
And, and, and staff at Water
Trust board and Mexico Finance
Authority, they're phenomenal
about doing this. They rank it,
they prioritize it, they score
it. So that is the best place
right now, uh, in our state to
get that data. So that's what
we've done, right? Allison and,
and her contract team has looked
at the Mexico Finance Authority
data, water trust board data,
capital outlay requests to say,
here are the needs. The LFC just
came out with a report, I
believe 2 weeks ago, right, that
showed 5 $6 billion need in our
state. Um, but right now we're
to consolidate all of that data
into one document, so we can do
just that and show you exactly
what the needs are in every
community. Thank you, Madam
Chair. That really helps just
knowing that where your
alignment and priorities goes
and would love to just be able
to follow up so that we know
that how that budget.
coalesces with your priorities
as well, um, pivoting to some of
the IPRA questions, um,
Madam Chair, uh, I think this
might be a good use of AI
actually, um, for being able to
solve some of these problems.
Um, I'm really interested in
also trying to figure out
manager um.
Whether or not there would be a
good model for in particular
data protection and of course
the sale of our data I've been
looking at models from
California and some other ways
in which
All of these sort of channels of
production we're not taxing,
like you said, it's a free for
all, and now, um, these folks
are making money off of this
data and also taxing our own
citizenry for that. Um, are
there anything that you're
looking for a solutions or
policy frameworks that we might
be looking at in conjunction
with how you're looking to solve
this problem.
Madam Chair, Representative, I
think, yeah, the point about AI
is interesting. Um, it's
certainly something that we,
that's come up and that we've
brought up with some of our
members, um, I know there are
some tools out there, um, and I
think some of our members are
already using them. One issue we
heard was that with specifically
with the body cam footage, I
think there are some tools that
can help, um, but members told
us that they still need to watch
that video themselves because if
the AI misses something then.
They're on the hook, they're
liable, and I think that's
happened, um, but obviously the
technology is evolving quickly
and, you know, 1 or 3 years from
now, it could look different,
um, so I, I think hopefully some
of the technology tools could
help with that, um, but right
now, it still is a fairly manual
process, um, especially in the
situations where these records
are, you know, scattered all
over and in different
departments, different,
different types of files, uh,
physical files in some cases.
Of, of the commercial
requesters, um, I think.
The, the fee structure for
commercial requesters seemed
like perhaps the most feasible
option, um, or feasible approach
to address this issue, um,
we, we looked at how other
states in general, how their
open records laws are structured
and specifically on this
question, um,
States have different
approaches. Some do restrict
commercial uses of, of, um,
public records completely some
limit requests to only citizens
of that state, which would
likely, you know, exclude some
of these commercial requesters,
um, so I think those, you know,
those are policy frameworks that
exist, but, um, a fee structure
for those bulk requesters seemed
perhaps a more feasible option
to implement, but certainly open
to to thinking more about other.
Other frameworks or models.
Thank you, Madam Chair. would
love to just hear more about
that at some point and also just
um encouraging working with the
foundation of open government,
um, in the process as well.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Exactly.
Um, Senator Wirth and then
Senator Lucidia Lopez.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
I see our mayor's back and while
he's here, I want to flag uh an
issue that I know he's been
dealing with and we've dealt in
Santa Fe and just give you a
heads up that we're gonna try
and fix this. Uh, it's the 2013
executive order on audits.
Uh, which was done under the
under Governor Martinez, uh,
Then I believe.
I don't know if Senator
Cervantes was involved. I think
he might have been. There was a
there was a AG request and
Attorney General King stated
that it was an unconstitutional
executive order. Well, here we
are 11 years later, and it's
still in place and it's being
used and the language in that
order is quite extraordinary. I
mean, it basically gives
absolute discretion to the
executive to.
Insert DFA into the capital
outlay process, which they've
done, uh, certainly in Santa Fe.
They've done an espanola and
last session there was a bill by
the auditor that would have
codified uh that executive order
that kind of slid through a
backdoor channel that did not
pass, and I'm glad it didn't
because it was codifying it word
for word. So I just want to give
you a heads up because I know
you've got members that are real
concerned about this. We're
gonna try and get, I've visited
with the auditor, I visited.
With Secretary Prost, and it's
just important to get folks in
the room and look at putting
something in place. I'm not
saying it's not a good idea to
have this check, but the way
it's drafted is problematic. And
so I think it needs to be looked
at. I just want to flag that and
I know City of Espanola has been
dealing with that, certainly the
city of Santa Fe, which is now
complete in its audits and is
still being told, uh, that under
the language in the executive
order,
uh, their DFAs.
saying they can't do their own
capital outlay. So I just want
to flag that. I don't know if
you've heard from other members
about that, but I just want to
bring that.
Up and maybe you got some
comments.
Man,
yeah, it's, it's a problem and
our hands are tight, so right,
we
We serve as vice chair of Water
Trust board, Allison sits as, as
the board, uh, board seat for
finance authority and yeah,
water trust board our hands are
tied, right? And, and what's
hard is you all give that rea
for water trust board. And so
when Santa Fe scores and and
they need that money and it's
funded, we can't give it to
them. So water trust border, our
hands are tied, same with
Espanola. Our hands are tied on
what we can give to the
communities that you all
authorized, but we can't do it
because of that executive order,
we're stuck.
Ma'am, I just want to flag it,
and it's something we're gonna
work on. Uh, second thing on, on
IRA. I just had to smile of then
Representative Nibert and I, I
think it was his bill in 2023,
uh, for the courts dealing with
security systems, trying to get
an exemption for security system
records seems pretty
straightforward. Well, I think
he rapidly, he introduced that
bill. I asked him, what, what
happened? Never saw it. And
someone showed up with a monster
amendment and this is the
problem with, with IPRA. It's
how do we
It just needs to happen. It's
being weaponized. And so, and I,
we certainly hear the stories
from all of our communities and
yet getting a piece of
legislation in front of us
that's something that we can
work through and try and get
across the finish line, just
having a hard time seeing that
from past actions. So I'm
curious, the work you're doing,
this report.
Is it gonna actually translate
into proposed legislation or are
you just saying here are all the
issues. Now you guys go deal
with this.
Well, Madam Chair, Senator, we
Yeah, we started off with, we,
we don't know what we don't
know. And that was the point. We
needed the data to understand
what is the real issue. We hear
the stories from around the
state, but what can we actually
prove right? we wanted the facts
and the data.
And we sat down with Fog and the
Press Association. I think they
were just as surprised as we
were, right? When you look at
the Rio Rancho data, they were
shocked that there was so much
of a corporate welfare component
of of IPRA in our state. They
want the media to get
information they want you and I
and your constituents to be able
to get information from their
government. They were totally
shocked on how it's been abused
in our state. So I think the
data is going to help us really
show what the problem is, and I
think that'll help, right, craft
a solution.
And Madam Chair, is the, are you
guys gonna work on legislation?
Are you gonna actually propose
fixes because it's one thing to
flag it, it's another thing to
try and put it into a bill that
can pass and which I think we
need to do. We can't go so big
that we don't get anything done.
We've got and maybe it's we take
it in pieces.
It
Madam Chair Senator, that's
exactly uh in talking with some
of you, what, what the proposal
has been. Let's do it in pieces.
Let's take the most common sense
stuff that that we all agree on,
ress Association fog, local
governments, the state, uh,
let's pick the easy stuff and
just phase it over time.
Great. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Senator
Cedil Lopez and then Senator
Niber.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Peter,
uh, I mean, uh, Senator Worth
Leworth, um, covered a lot of
what I was gonna say because
I've been hearing a lot of
IRA complaints, um, but I, it's
also attorneys who make a living
just doing nothing but IPRA,
which is I think is really
gross, um, because they're,
they're things that they don't
even care about. They're just
trying to get to.
Catch the, the city and doing
something wrong.
So I, I agree that it needed to,
it needs to be um changed. How
about a fee?
For not, not for like an
individual, but like maybe after
you've done so many of her
requests and within a period of
time, then you're gonna just
have to pay the actual cost or
something, you know, or I don't
know, I don't know, um,
solutions, but I agree it needs
to be solved.
Madam Chair, Senator, um, yeah,
I think there's a lot of
interesting models we could
explore, um, you know, as you,
as you may be aware, right now,
local governments or any public
entity can't charge fees for the
actual costs associated, only
some nominal fees associated
with copying. Um, we see in
other states, different kinds of
fee structures, some of which do
allow for charging, you know,
closer to what would be the
actual staff cost time. So I
think there's different models,
um, you know, obviously we
want to be thoughtful about not
restricting access to public
records, um, making sure that
public records are public and um
easily accessible.
You know, that's kind of where
some of the, the thoughts around
fees for these bulk requesters
come in and you could think
about it structured different
ways. It could be um a fee per
request over a certain number,
um, it could be, yeah, perhaps
associated with some actual
cost, costs over a certain
amount of requests, for example,
so I think there are some models
that we could explore for sure.
Yeah, the other thing about this
Zipra stuff is it's also being
used in litigation, um, which
seems like, you know, attorneys
are getting more out of IPRA
than they are out of Discovery.
And, and that seems somehow
wrong, but I, I was just
wondering if you had any
thoughts about that.
Like, you know, a lawsuit is
filed and then IPRA, IPRA, IPR,
like crazy. Madam Chair,
Senator,
we have certainly heard that
brought up as a concern from
various parties. I think in, in
what we were looking at the data
that we had didn't specifically,
we couldn't really draw that out
of the data, so it's a little
hard to to make any specific
conclusions, um, you know, a
requester doesn't have to
identify why they're requesting.
So we can't really tell like,
you know, when it's used for
discovery or or another purpose.
Um, you know, we do see
certainly there are some law
firms that are frequent across
stores, um, you know, after
LexisNexis, like I mentioned,
then kind of that like second
tier is is typically some the
larger law firms.
Um, because the problem with
that is discovery is protected
by these different privileges.
And when they do the IP IPRA,
sometimes things, my
understanding is things get
through the IRA that wouldn't
have gotten through the
discovery process and it's kind
of an
Aha kind of thing, um, I don't
know, it's, I don't know if
anything can be done about that,
but I don't think that that was
necessarily intended by, by
IPRA, you know, to displace
discovery and litigation. So,
uh, thank you, Madam Chair. I
appreciate that. Thank you,
Senator Senator Ebert and then
Representative Barrego.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Are most of the municipalities
are not charging fees that are
authorized by the statute.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator, um, so
they, they can charge some fees
associated with, with copying
and printing, um, as well as the
actual cost of, of downloading
the information, um, but that's
would be very nominal. For
example, if you like had to
download it onto a flash drive
and the flash drive costs $2 or
something. Um, they can charge
some, some reasonable fees,
reasonable fees, um, and I may
turn it over to Rebecca Martinez
to see if she knows.
Specifically how many
municipalities do have some kind
of fee schedule?
Good afternoon, committee
members, Madam Chair,
um, Senators, so there are very
few municipalities that have a
fee schedule, um, as my
colleague mentioned, you know,
the statute is very cumbersome
in terms of, you know, what can
be charged. So really what the
statute contemplates is kind of
your old school charging for
paper copies. Uh, now that we
largely see, you know, in this
digital age that we're in, um,
now we're really wanting to turn
the conversation towards how can
we start, you know, looking
at some of those fees, um, you
know, not necessarily to regain
the actual cost but just to help
with some of the processing
associated with that and maybe
technology in terms of being
able to digitize more of the
records so that they're readily
accessible.
Well, Madam Chair, um,
I think it's 14 to 10.
Let me just double check that
site, yeah, 14-2-10.
Says that if it's determined
that it's excess the request is
excessively burdensome or broad
an additional reasonable uh
reasonable period of time shall
be allowed to comply with the
request and
I thought it said something
about adding a fee, but.
So, so you can add a fee, you
just get more time and so the
fee schedules in 9, which just
provides basically some.
Fairly nominal costs. It doesn't
include the time for research
and going through the spending 2
hours for every hour of video or
whatever, so that needs to be
fixed and you know, for, for my
colleagues around the table, the
difficulty is
In dealing with this issue and
we and we saw it with what we're
trying to do a year or two ago.
is that you get in front of the
Media
And
They crucify.
The senators and representatives
for pushing back on.
Public records.
But we absolutely have got to do
something because number one,
it's being abused. 2, it doesn't
provide critical protection to
information that is.
Public information in that it's
the public's data.
But it could be used for very uh
dangerous purposes. It could
allow somebody this the the the
systematic scheme of security
for a courthouse or a detention
center or a prison and that I
don't think was ever the types
of information that the
government ought to be handing
over to anybody that asks, um,
so it, the difficulty is, is fog
going to be reasonable?
And I would suggest that they
better start being reasonable
because real security is at
stake.
Um, and number 2.
We can't have particularly small
communities going bankrupt over.
Requests that are being made and
they're incapable of handling
the request and so I think the
whole law needs to be rewritten
myself, uh, but if not, we
certainly need to to provide
broader uh exceptions, specific.
Specific uh exceptions in one
place, so you're not having to
look all over the statutes to
find them. And then number 2,
there has got to be some
reasonable fee for not.
Just providing the copy.
But it's got to include.
The tremendous amount of work
that's being requested of the
public entity to provide that
that information we're doing
their research for them.
Most of my legal career has been
searching public records. I, I
go to the county clerk's office
and search public records all
the time, but I'm doing it and
somebody's paying me to go do
it. I'm not relying on the
county clerk to provide me that
information. I suppose I could
submit it IPA request, but, but,
uh, that, that I think is not,
I don't think that's the intent
of the emperor's statute, so, so
I think it really needs to be
looked at.
And
I, I would hope that my
colleagues would, would have the
uh fortitude to put up with the
criticism that they'll face in
dealing with the issue. I was at
the conference table when we
were dealing with a lot of these
issues and we're getting pushed
back, uh, from fog members and
and the media on on some of this
stuff, but it absolutely has to
happen because we have to
protect the sanctity of
government and particularly some
things that absolutely should
not be open to uh.
But the public generally, uh,
and you know, the computer
systematic, uh, the, the
computer information that that
is used to protect the computer
information shouldn't be
released to the public, you
know.
As the Secretary of State for
all the codes to access the.
Election files.
You know, I, I don't think
anybody would disagree that that
shouldn't happen, but, um,
there's probably um uh limited
exceptions for some of them, but
anyway, I'll get off my soapbox,
but I would appreciate you all
continuing that fight and
picking that issue up. Thank
you. We'll see how you do on the
PRC with that. Yeah, well, and
also, you know,
we um you could come and
testify. We we'll, you know.
OK.
All right. Representative
Barrego. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, well, for 28 years I dealt
with it requests um as a public
employee, um, the city of
Albuquerque does charge for, and
I don't know if we're in
violation of of our IPRA act or
not, but we, after a certain
amount of paper that was
requested and
And you know, you can imagine
land use files are pretty thick
and they go back many, many
years. Um, we did have
microfish. This is way back,
back in the 90s, um, you know,
most of our records were on
micro we we converted to
microfish, um, and then now I,
I, I've been retired for 10
years, but over 10 years, but
you know, if somebody came in
and requested.
Over 100 pages, I think it, I
don't remember exactly the cut
off, but there was a cut off and
it was like after that you have
to pay 25 it was 25 cents per
page at that point, um, and
there was a custodian that, you
know, I mean, they had to sit
and actually one of the planners
had to sit with them to ensure
that none of our records because
there were instances, Madam
Chair, where our records went
missing. There were
Pieces of our records that went
missing and so, um, you know, I,
I mean, I, I think, and I, I
need to bring that up because
there were fees associated with
how much information was being
requested and I mean those they
were reasonable fees. They were
very low, 25 cents a page was
pretty low, but I think this
brings up a bigger question, and
I think um the the director of
the prisons.
And I had a conversation about
this one, when I first got
elected, um, is that we're still
keeping paper files in some of
our agencies and that, you know,
it brings up a bigger question
about conversion to a more sort
of um
Not lucrative, but a more, a
more efficient, uh,
technological status for all of
our agencies as to and I I
realized that that's a really,
that's a really costly venture
because some agencies are still
keeping their files on paper,
but I think that we need to
start really thinking in terms
of converting all of our
agencies to a situation where
our technology is up to speed.
In the 20, what are we now, the
20 21st century or whatever we
are, um, I mean.
It's something that we need to
be really think about thinking
about and it it makes me a
little crazy because I think,
you know, technology is here and
we have the ability to to start
making those conversions.
It's just the question of the
investment and how and and maybe
phasing that investment to
making that technology
available.
Um, so, Madam Chair, I really
think that we need to really
start talking about this issue
and, you know, I dealt with this
issue quite a bit. Um, so,
You know, I'm and I'm kind of
throwing that out to all of our
agencies because I have talked
with some agencies that are
still doing paper and like we
shouldn't be doing that anymore
because we have the technology
out there to make these
conversions.
And so I'm just raising that
issue because I think that it's
something that's weighing
heavily on the back of my mind.
I worked for the state, believe
it or not, and the 80s, the late
80s, as an intern and now that
I've come back in this capacity,
I still see some of the same
things I was talking to Ed Perea
about this earlier, we were kind
of joking about it, Madam Chair,
but it's not funny, you know,
these are real
Serious issues. So thank you
guys for bringing this forward.
I, I truly believe that we
should, if, if we're providing
the paper, then we should start
charging for it because that is
an FTE's time. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Cervantes.
First, Madam Chair, I, I'm
amused that Senator Worth would
immediately think that when
there was a challenge to the
governor's, uh, constitutional
authority is being excessive.
His thought immediately goes to
me, um.
I don't know how I've acquired
that reputation, but, but, but
so, so far I think it's 100%
on the challenges, so, um, um,
you know, you said repeated in
your presentation our hands are
tied, our hands are tied. I, I
never buy that. I'll be really
honest with you, and I don't
mean that to be disrespectful.
There are always remedies, um,
in our system of government. And
I think that, um, as, as I said
as a lawyer with a lot of pride.
Now, your hands are not tied,
hire a good lawyer.
And, and a good lawyer will go
to court and get an injunction
and and force an executive
branch, and we've done it. Uh,
and we've done it successfully.
When, when a, when a part of
government exceeds its
constitutional authority.
There's a methodology for
challenging that and we have
many procedures for doing that.
So I encourage you to find a
good lawyer and, and uh when you
say your hands are tied because
the executive branch won't turn
over money, the legislatures
appropriated. There's a damn
good uh way to challenge that.
And, and my bet is she probably
prevailed, so I hear that a lot.
Um, in, in this job, um, folks
saying, well, our hands are
tight our hands are tight. The
best example of latest
enforcement of our marijuana
laws. Well, we've got Grove
farms out there with thousands
of plants violating the laws,
slave labor, and AG says their
hands are tied and the agency
says their hands are tied and
local law enforcement are tight,
so they keep right on operating
illegally and they're out there
today and the whole thing as
well, we, our hands are tied. I
don't buy it. Um, so, um, to a
different subject, um, during
the, a lot of our focus of this.
Committee of the last several
months has been the special
session. Um, just out of
curiosity, I didn't hear
anything from the municipal
league. Did I, did I miss
something? Did you all take a
position on anything in the
special session on the proposed
agenda that we had. Did I miss
something?
Madam Chair, we do our best to
stay on that
that was, that was the clear
memo on that one. There was
There was our letter. And, and I
missed it. What was the, what
was the letter about?
Uh, Madam Chair, give me, give
me the one minute summary. What
was the executive, what was the,
what was the municipal league's
position on the agenda for the
special? We we recognize, right,
and again, focusing on the data.
We recognize our, our, our
problem isn't getting better. We
hear from law enforcement
statewide that it's not getting
better. We hear statewide that
our officers are still doing the
paperwork and whoever they just
arrested is already out on the
street. Um, so yeah, we want to
work with the executive. We want
to work with the legislature to
get this updated, uh, we, we
hear it every day from law
enforcement.
We hear every day from our
communities, whether it be here
in Espanola. Obviously we all
hear about Albuquerque
constantly, but what we want to
look at is what does I've got a
limited amount of time. What is
your letter, what did your
letter say? What position did
you guys take?
We didn't take a position on
anything that was
Drafted. OK. That's our first
question. That's what I
suspected. That's what I got and
there's nothing wrong with that.
I understand the need to kind of
stay out of the the fray and,
and maybe that was wiser to the
circumstances. I just wanted to
make sure I didn't miss
something and, and I'll
challenge all of you who are
doing this, that doesn't help us
very much, to be very honest
with you, uh, and, and that's
again, that's not to be critical
of you. I'm not. I'm just trying
to say we need your expertise
from the counties. We need your
expertise from the cities. This
legislation directly affected
cities. Uh, data sharing very
directly requirement.
Additional burdens on city
governments, uh, city police
departments, so, uh, median
panhandling, absolutely directly
affected city governments, uh,
competency legislation
absolutely directed city and
You all ride the fence, uh,
you're not helping us, to be
honest with you. And, and I'm
sorry to be so blunt about it,
but I don't know the way to do
it. Uh, uh, uh, we need your
help. I, I can't tell you how to
run a city. I can't tell you how
to run a county. But when your
cities and counties who are
doing this and they're supposed
to be doing this. Tell us, you
know, we're, we're not going to
take a position, you're missing
an opportunity to guide us in
the right direction because
otherwise we're gonna, we're
gonna do this the best we can
and we may get it very wrong.
So, just some advice for you on
the getting it wrong uh
category. I should have asked
this in the.
and you guys are all here
together, so it's good. Um, I
was one of the sponsors, the
primary sponsor with a former
Speaker on the Civil Rights Act.
Um, I know not one of your
favorites, I'm looking at you,
yes, I see you, Grace. Uh, and,
and Joy. uh, Civil Rights Act,
um, whistleblower Protection
Act, a lot of things that I've
passed and sponsored that have
been criticized, and I just want
you to know from me, I get it
wrong sometimes and I hope
you'll come to me and tell me
when I got it wrong. Uh, one of
the questions I have on the
civil rights.
Rights Act, one of the
criticisms was, we would not be
able to get insurance, um, that,
that would that would be
prohibited and so forth. Just
real quick, have there been any
large settlements or large
judgments in the Civil Rights
Act in the years since we
enacted it in the municipal
area, Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, I
think it's too early on
judgments. I don't think we've
seen a case that we insure
that's gone through the system,
but it's absolutely made
insurance more expensive. We
have, we have cities now that
used to have a $1000 limit.
Well, under the Civil Rights
Act, we know it.
Not the case. I think GSD just
published the new number $2.3
million. So now cities have to
buy up, so they buy more
insurance, which is now costing
them double to get that $2
million of coverage or 4 million
of coverage for the occurrence
issue. So it's absolutely
costing more, but no, we've not
seen a judgment come through yet
because not enough time. I hope
you'll let me know when you see
those, if you see those concern
because again,
I see you in the back county
saying yeah you've got some of
that. So we're not going to go
back to you, but I, I do want to
know about that because if, if,
if, if our limits were too high,
if our caps were too high, if
you can't.
insurance, it's good for us to
know and revisit that and know
that at the same time, the fact
that insurance may be costing
more, again, I, I got, I, I took
some notes from my former law
school professor Senator Cedilia
Lopez, who's thought it was
gross that lawyers used the
inspection of Public Records
Act. I'm one of those guys who
use, in fact, Brandon and I just
wrote an inspection of Public
Records Act about an hour ago.
uh,
uh, and that was to deal with
the shooting, uh, shootings in
Santa Fe this last week and,
and, um, so, you know, I'm one
of the guys who gets that
information.
Frankly, it, it helps me to do
my job, uh, you know, when, when
I, when I, when I want to do my
job, so, um, well, and I'm, I'm
hearing some of the comments,
but it's not for litigation. I
do use it for litigation. I
mean, I, I, I do use it as a
tool. So, um, so, but I don't
want to be abusive about it on
the water, I hope one thing I
was looking as you were talking
about the water issue. One thing
that would be very useful for me
to know, and I hope you all will
encourage your cities to do
this. I'd like to know what the
per capita consumption is by
municipalities. I looked real
quick on my phone. I couldn't
find it. I'm sure.
Somebody more adept at research
can find that for me, but I
couldn't find anything that
looks like current data on a per
per capita consumption
consumption use because I, I do
recall when I was able to find
this years ago, Santa Fe was
terrific. Santa Fe was very,
very good about that. Um, other
cities, not at all good about
that. Albuquerque was not good,
a good example, and I would
always compare that to say, El
Paso, which has a even much
hotter temperature climate and
so forth. And, um, that helps
guide us in policy, right? Helps
us see where we can maybe make
some improvement.
So I hope that on water you all
will look at that issue on IPRA,
I, I, I could spend lots of time
talking about that. I'll just
tell everybody here that you
missed it. The city of Las
Cruces just got a judgment
against it for almost $95,000 by
Judge Martin. I know Judge
Martin well. I appear for him
for he's not a softie. Uh, he's
not an easy judge and the fact
that he would award $95,000
against the city for violation
of the inspection of Public
Records Act, um, a lot of that
$73,000 in legal fees suggests
to me
That, that one thing that does
happen that hasn't been raised,
which is governments sometimes
hide stuff, um,
especially when they are
concerned about exposing the
maybe somebody didn't do the job
well, somebody didn't get
something done on time,
somebody, uh, was negligent, um,
and, and that's where in the
city of Las Cruces case records
redacted, the judge said it
didn't have an exception on the
Public Records Act to be
redacted. So let's not, let's
not be naive, uh.
People in government hide
information from guys like me,
lawyers, who sometimes are suing
governments or suing law
enforcement. I don't do any of
these things. I don't sue
governments. That's not what I
do, but, but some of the people
that I know do that and I
frankly have respect. I don't
consider that gross at all, uh,
when they do so, um, and that
they, they have access to that
information. I think that leads
to better government. I think it
leads to less negligence. I
think it leads to improvements
in society. So I'll just push
back on, on those who are
Who are finding this distasteful
that we do so and I may be very
much in the minority of that,
but um I want you to, to know
about that. The um.
I certainly support the idea of
if there's a commercial use, it
should be, why, why wouldn't we
just ask people who are
accessing this to check a box
whether it's for a commercial
purpose. And if they fail to
disclose it for a commercial
purpose, that there's a sanction
against them, either in terms of
denying their requests for a
period of time or or whatever or
charging them for it, it seems
like, um, I agree with everyone
here that we shouldn't have a
commercial use of that. Um, the
and the last thing on EA
realized that in that case of
Las Cruces where you have
$94,000 awarded uh
To a litigant against the city
for getting these records. The
thing that's missing from the
inspection public Records Act.
You're all going to hate this,
and I don't know the solution.
But the only person that you
have a bunch of people when I
shouldn't have a bunch. Somebody
in the city of Las Cruces, the
judge found did not comply with
the law. Um, and the judge
awarded legal fees to the person
who charged them for not
complying with the law and
realized the, the person who
didn't comply with law probably
faces no sanction or consequence
at all. Uh, the $95,000 is paid
by the city out of the, so
we're, those of us who see Las
Cruces.
The taxpayers, we're paying for
it, although I don't live in the
city of Las Cruces, but, but the
citizens of the city of Las
Cruces paid the sanction, they
paid the $95,000 not the person
who was withholding the
information. Um, and I know
there's probably not a good
solution to that. I don't think
we're going to start having city
employees pay the fines and
penalties. I don't think that's
a reasonable solution either,
but we should at least recognize
that there's not a disincentive
for people in city government
sometimes to, to not withhold
information because if they
wrongful
Withhold information. The only
persons who are going to be
penalized and sanction of the
taxpayers. Um, in, in many
cases. I've never heard of an
employee being demoted or
sanctioned or terminated because
of a violation of inspection
Records Act. So I'm not trying
to make all the employees of the
cities and counties jittery, uh,
by, by suggesting anything like
that. But we should recognize,
and I think it's important to
talk about when there's a
judgment like this against the
city, for us to talk about it
because otherwise the city's
attitude is, uh, you know, um,
I, I don't really have a
Reason not to withhold records
if I want to because in the end,
if I'm responsible or liable for
it, the taxpayers are going to
take care of the problem for me.
And, and I think we as taxpayers
need to occasionally say, you
know, that's not cool. Um, and
so I know I threw a lot at you,
uh, you, you've been great. You,
you, the municipal league, uh,
counties. You guys have been
great about hearing my rants
from time to time and my
curmudgeonly ways, um, but I, I
think it's important sometimes
to hear some some
Uh, other perspectives on
things. So thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Senator. So I,
something popped into my mind
when you were talking about the
water, you know, replacing
infrastructure for water systems
and the like, and you know, one
of my concerns to be frank, and
it's a little bit of a
curmudgeony
approach to this is yeah, I'm,
well, I sit next to you too
often, you know, it's just too
much.
Yeah, like we're both gonna feed
off of each other. um.
City often don't charge water
fees that are representative of
what they need to be doing to
replace their water systems. I
mean, and I would say that about
my own community if you want to
know the truth.
I watch there's always a fight
when there's a, a rape
increase on anything, anything,
and you know, I understand we
need to support our
municipalities and our, frankly,
I'm more concerned about the
smaller, you know, the domestic
water because they don't really
have a.
Water rate base to be able for
them to plan for big things,
which, so that's why I give
capital outlay to a lot of those
little communities with mutual
domestics, but some of the
cities aren't doing what they
need to be doing. They're not.
In putting in their rates, you
know, a sufficient amount so
that they're planning for
infrastructure replacement,
water tanks, etc. etc. And, you
know, I just want to throw that
out there and do you, uh, you
know, get your reaction to that
cause it's it looks like we're
not gonna charge our ratepayers
what they should be. We might,
we're not going to have tiered
grades because God forbid we
should just go except for Santa
Fe, well,
um.
Because that's not, you know,
that's not good, it's not fair,
and, um, but when the the system
starts to break down, we want
some support from the state to
take care of all that, so just
come on your reaction, AJ, you
know, tell me what you think
it depends on, on where and
it's, it's tough, so I've used
Portals as the example. They've,
they've done rate increases, no
matter how muchortalli they have
$12 million a year in GRT no
matter and that's their their
GRT budget.
Their water rate budget,
they could not increase it
enough to pay the debt service
to to pay for that 80 million
need in water, water storage,
water supply. There's just no
way to fix it in rates, even I
think when you look at a city
like Santa Fe, if you just look
at wastewater, I think that's 80
million today by the time they
build it, that's going to be 100
$120 million dollar project.
The rate base isn't enough, and
yeah, there's 0 interest loans,
there's the the revolving fund.
There are so many tools, but at
the end of the day, right, the
majority of our, our cities,
towns and villages are small,
right? When you back out Santa
Fe, Albuquerque, Crucis,
Farmington, the big ones, Hobbs,
Carlsbad, they're small, just no
different. Yes, they have a tax
base, but no different than
those really small communities
that just can't afford a $200
million facility. The tax base
isn't what's supposed to be
paying for the water systems.
It's the rate base that is
supposed to
To be paying for the water
system or the electric system or
the, you know, and I, I'm, I'm
very sympathetic, as I said to
the mutual the tiny places, even
the villages. I, I'll grant you
that. But, you know, there are
cities, I don't know what
Albuquerque and where they are,
but you plan for that in your
rate base, and you should be
projecting what infrastructure
needs and some of that at least
should be recouped. Maybe not
all of it. I'm willing to
concede that, but I don't think
some of the cities are doing
what they need to.
be doing because every time they
go up 3 cents on their water
rates, somebody starts squawking
and then you say, well, we need
to start planning for
replacement, and everybody's,
oh, that's the next generation's
problem, you know, and we're
seeing that in Los Alamos too,
and we, you know, we have the
wherewithal to pay a little
additional extra in, in our
water race every time electric
rates up, you know, gas rates
squawking wastewater, you know,
it's just, you know, but people
have to pay for what they're
receiving, but that doesn't mean
I'm going to oppose.
interest in in supporting some
of these things, but I think
counseling the municipalities on
their responsibilities as party,
I would like to think as part of
your job, and they need to be
thinking about that. Well, and
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, we so even through
water trusts board, right, it's,
it's not a 100% grant. It's a
90, 80, 70% match. And so what
they're doing to come up with
that match is doing rate
increases to to fill that gap.
So they are doing it on the gap
because that's what they can
afford.
IPA discussion, um, more to be
had, you know, I, I agree with a
lot of the comments that were
made by various members on the
committee. It seems like we've
created an albatross to some
degree, and we have to get our
arms around it so that it serves
the purpose for which it was
originally attended, which is
open government, access to
citizens and the press, of
course, is another way citizens
access information, so, you
know, certainly I'm open to
trying to work with you all, but
we need to.
try to get fog involved too, I
think so.
Um, any closing comments, you
know?
OK, yeah, really good to see you
guys seeing you again. Thank
you.
All right, next on our agenda is
um committee discussion.
Are we all talked out? Yes,
surely not, um.
Yeah, well, you know, I
appreciate everybody's
participation today. I thought
we had a good conversation and
like if there's no committee
discussion and I don't see it,
um, public comment, I think we
have one person signed up
electronically. What's everybody
doing tonight, Madam Sher? Oh, I
don't know. There's really not
much going on.
Yeah, I can't wait, um, so I
think we have is Nat Dean on the
line?
All right.
All right, take care.
I discussions.
Thank you now. Thank you, Nat.
Appreciate you.
OK. Take care.
Make public comment.
OK
Rachel, are you signing up?
OK. All right. Oh, anytime.
Your participation, I thought
was a good conversation about a
number of things we are in
recess until tomorrow morning.
When do we start? 9 o'clock, 9
o'clock, not 9:30.
Thank you.
