To other benefits that might be
available to them.
Helping them get an ID, for
instance, helping them resolve
child support issues. If that's
something that's going on for
them and really helping them
direct, um the next steps in
their goals and their stability
and their own wellness, Um, in
addition to CC Act services,
which are assertive community
treatment services, also
Medicaid reimbursable services,
kind of the model of taking the
hospital
Similar to an act team
Um, to getting a voucher for a
food box at
Guess again, Um, so we'll
Madame Chair representative.
Thank you for that question. Um,
I'm happy to speak to that. I
also have more information to
share in our next presentation.
So this will lead into that as
well. Um, but there are
approximately 22 evaluators in
the state of New Mexico that can
perform these evaluations. Um,
it is a specific, um
Training and licensure and, um,
our guest presenter Doctor
Villon will be able to speak a
little training. Looks like, um,
it is beyond. Um, just somebody
having, uh, not to minimize, but
it's beyond somebody having a
PHD, for instance, there is a
different level of glee because
they're not just looking at, for
instance, a mental health
diagnosis or treatment
recommendations. They're really
looking at these various prongs
of competency proceedings of the
case. So currently there's about
$22 for the entire state. The
state operators so, um, these
individuals are contracted
directly.
Department of Health. And so
there are some challenges
related to that contract model
in terms of, um, maintaining
those evaluators, their
availability. These are often
done remotely, which, as Judge
Hudson mentioned is actually
extremely helpful in some cases
that we do have that option. Um
so we're not limited to just in
person evaluations. Um, but
because of the level and the
expertise related to the
evaluators themselves and their
ability to testify in court, if
so needed. It does require an
additional, you know, for
instance, a PHD
Or a life their representative,
I'm happy to find that
information out for you. I don't
have it off the top of my head,
But I will follow up with that
answer. Thank you,
Going forward.
Statistics are statewide. Other
than I think that there has been
You know, my personal has
improved substantially, uh, have
have helped with in the
evaluators to try to have more.
Yes.
Madam Chair representative. Um I
can also speak to that briefly,
anecdotally you I think correct
on both fronts. Um, I think
there is an increase in
awareness of mental illness and
how that is intercepting with
the criminal justice system and
the civil commitment system. And
I think that we're also seeing
situations in our communities
around fentanyl and
methamphetamine as well. Where,
um, some of these substances are
really impacting brain chemistry
and brain development. And we're
often seeing, um, those
situations sort of inter lap in
a unique way.
Mental health symptoms, so we'll
speak about that a little bit
more in our next presentation.
Um, sometimes it's hard to
distinguish if we're looking at
substance use if we're looking
at mental health, both which
came first. Um and those are
extremely nuanced parts of the
conversation. So I do think
we're seeing an increase in the
acuity in our state around
mental illness, and I also think
that we are seeing a more
awareness of mental illness. And
so I think that we're seeing
competency raised a little bit
more frequently for those
reasons as well. Just finally,
Madam chair.
So focus
For
The process where either break
down or fail, or, uh
Madam Chair representative. I
think that those are great
questions, um, related to, you
know, policy development and and
what sort of needs to be tackled
first, and I appreciate that
This committee is really
focusing on on how to do that.
Um, I think that you know what
you mentioned and observed about
the evaluations are extremely
important. Um, so I think the
the timeline around evaluations
is extremely important. And I
also think that, um
There's opportunity to look to
other states and other national
models to see how things are
being done differently. Um, but
without straying further into,
you know, recommendations around
policy. I'll just sort of leave
that there and say that, um, I
think that there are other
options available to any state
that I have representative Lu
Han Reeve, Senator Cedillo
Lopez, Senator Maestas and
representative Colson. So, um,
representative
Go.
Representatives Sapanski.
Anyway, so I'm thinking, OK, um
That's we could try to keep our
questions. Parameter. Um and
we'll be right. So the next
person is representative Lujan.
Presenters for being here. Um, I
was one of the sponsors of the
competency bill.
This last session, and you
touched on a lot of the process
and information and one of the
things that I think we're
getting.
Um, getting to is the language.
Um
New to me or understand
definitions and in our our our
law taxes that we address.
Competency and
We use mental health.
And that is for specific reason.
And I think we're getting to the
we're getting to understand some
of the the terminology, the
terminology that you're giving
us. But I want that to be part
of the conversation of why we
don't use behavioral health and
instead just use and
I think that is an issue when
we're dealing with any of the
things that representative Uh
Romero just mentioned in
substance use disorders. Um, one
thing I just wanted to bring
forward as I was a a policy. Uh,
A fellow, um, for Samsa in 2000.
A fellow, um, for Samsa in 2023
and still continuing with some
of their policy is
Is looking at these coo
occurrences. Um, issues and one
being
Uh, traumatic brain injury and
how we're even dealing with
that. And it wasn't even
mentioned through this
conversation. Madam chair and I
just want to bring that up
because this is a huge issue
because statistics are showing
us that 69% of recidivism.
Um
Are occurring with certain
populations. Of course, I would
probably include this 4% that
you encounter. Um
And in the courtrooms and others
that are not being diagnosed
because no one there is no diet.
There. No one is diagnosing
them.
This is such a huge issue, and
when we're looking in and
reviewing the full picture of
everything that is going on, and
why this is
And man, I'm sure so I wanted to
open up that conversation
because I know we're going to be
screening and going through, Uh,
further discussions.
Um, but I'd like to to to bring
that up to, um to everyone today
and getting any kind of
neuropsychological evaluation on
top of
Any kind of
Uh, evaluation is is is very. We
don't have the workforce.
We don't have, uh, we're not
paying our workforce. So my
understanding madam chair that
our evaluators get $700 when the
the fair market value is
anywhere from 2000 to 2.
2000 to 300.5 th evaluations to
be done, So I think that is an
issue that we need to talk
about as well. Um, my one is
that we have a number of rap on
this courts. Um what? How many
do we have and where, When do
they intervene?
In our and if
Madam Chair, representative
Lujan. Thank you for that
question. Um, I'd have to get
back to you on the specific
current count of the existing,
um, specialty court or
treatment. Courts is sort of how
we define them, Um, including
wellness courts and drug courts
and things of that nature within
the state. Um, that number tends
to shift um, you know, month to
month, so I'll get you an
accurate number on that in terms
of how they intercept with a
competency. Um, population. It
really is sort of dependent on
at what point in time.
Competency is raised in their
case. So, for instance, you
could have an individual in a
Mental health court, you know,
participating in, um all of the
mental health components such as
treatment intensive outpatient
treatment medication meeting
with a probation officer
conducting drug testing all of
those sorts of things. Um and
then, if competency is raised in
that process, then all of that
is sort of put on pause until a
competency determination is
made, so they are kind of part
of the same continuum of care.
So to speak, as, um, Judge
Hudson mentioned earlier. You
know if we're looking at the
sequential intercept model we
tend to think
Treatment courts kind of further
along the line around, um,
intercept three and the
competency process can really
intercept at any point on that
on that intercept. Um so they do
interact. Um, but once
competency is raised, everything
is sort of put on pause in terms
of, um, treatment Court or
wellness court participation. I
believe that in some other
states, they do have competency
courts specifically, um, that
work a little bit more a little
bit more meaningfully with
individuals in in terms of
specialized, um, super
Vision and things of that
nature. Um, but in terms of if
somebody is, if there's a
question of somebody is
competent or not, then their
participation in any of those
programs would cease until that
determination is made. Thank
you, Madam Chair, so there is no
definition. There is no direct,
um, specific pathway as to where
an individual may be directed.
It's all on a gradient of timing
and
Um, what's available? Is that
accurate to say manager
Madam Chair, representative
Lujan. I believe that that is
accurate to say, um, it also,
you know, heavily relate relies
on the the parties and their
agreement of what they would
like to do with the case. Um, so
in some situations, an
individual, you know, maybe, um,
offered a specialty court plea,
for instance, and if, at some
point that competency is raised,
then you know, the the district
attorney may decide to dismiss
the case or nly the case. So,
um, it is absolutely based on
sort of availability. Waitlist,
um, the current person or the
person's current, um,
determination of competency.
And what the parties and the
judge agreed to do in that
matter. Thank you Chair and just
the last comment really is is to
just go back to it. Um
Um, our judge here today was
mentioning and how we are
looking. We are raising the
issue of competency or we're
raising the issue of mental
health. The court system that we
are not necessarily looking for.
The the complete wellness
treatment that we're looking
for. We're not
We're not making that connection
throughout our judicial. We're
looking for a restoration to
competency, but not really
looking for treatments. And and
that's why I'm trying to make
this parallel to we have these
wellness wrapping it. In all
actuality, that's not happening.
uh, during this process during,
so this is why why it's
important for this R forward
that holistic approach
And understanding what true
community restoration is and how
we get there with rapping on
systems and not just
Treating the the the mental
capacity. I think the behavioral
and in the full scale of needs
of individuals that are great or
having the the issue of
competence. Thank you.
Representative representative
Reed. Thank you, madam Chair.
And I. I think it's important if
we're gonna possibly be jumping
into a special sess talking
about what we're talking about
the maybe overlapping into
involuntary commitments. How
complicated Well, it is a nice,
you know, layout of the process.
Um
Judges is there can be loopholes
in this that out of jail, um,
because there are some loopholes
Dangerousness type code. Um,
have you seen that happen?
In your ear.
Ma, I'm sure uh, representative
Reed. I
I'm not sure I would I. I can go
along with with loopholes.
Well, OK, and I can there have
been I can I can tell you ID.
I've had difficult cases OK, and
I can explain more, Madam chair
and I guess just kind of
starting with the evaluation
part just the regular the
regular evaluation part I know.
Representative Romero asked How
many, Um, certified evaluators.
There were information from like
the public defender. They I it
and there's 12. So I I'll be
curious to, uh, because what
I've noticed
Handling in this code 28 years
Now I have to reread it every
single time I especially a
dangerous person, and I'm I'm
concerned that if we jump into
this in a special session and
pack what we can into this that
it's going to possibly cause
Dangerous people to get out. Uh
And what I mean is, um
There's there's a lot here, for
example, um
The evaluation process, and it
goes to an evaluator. Um it
seems to be over and over and
what I've noticed Judge and, um,
ma'am, is that there's we get
these evaluations back where
they've evaluated someone self
reported.
Um not a lot of information in,
um not very thorough. We have to
contest them because these are
dangerous crimes half the time
or not, Um, but
We go into the hearing, and
let's say they go to it is a 30
days and they're back and
they're confident. So there's
something going on here. Whether
it's that they're not evaluating
them.
Early. I'm and they all say self
reported. They don't look at
sometimes grade school records,
Someone will graduate from high
school and then it will show a
mental retardation. The
diagnosis and they're just all
over the place. And so then we
have to have the hearings.
And then we get to the issue of
dangerousness. Which I? I
interpret it. Your honor is that
there's a dangerous kind of a
different dangerousness for
getting treated to competency
and then a different
dangerousness for kind of a
commitment degree kind of with
that.
Madam Chair. Uh, Representative
Reed? Yes. And they're they're
two different standards. Uh, in
two different considerations.
And as part of the if you if
they are committed
Uh, for treatment to competency,
One of the issues that they will
also deal with is whether, uh,
they remain dangerous if they go
to one of the 1.5 humans that I
talked about, and they're
actually committed for their
sentence. There's a review every
every two years. And then, uh,
an MB a try, does an evaluation
and there's a specific
evaluation for for
dangerousness, which again is a
little bit distinct from the
dangerousness that, according
initially
Uh, uh, results but it is not
You know, in in instances where
I've
Someone's been found dangerous
as committed, uh they've been
treated to competency, Um and
and come back and the the
preceding proceeds.
Uh, if competency is
subsequently raised, uh, in
entire process in
And even lately, um Madam chair
there. There has been a another
recent case from the first
dangerousness. Think it's
Archuleta State, V Archuleta
were originally you had given
the definition of you know the
community and and then or
they've committed a criminal
sexual detect of a minor.
And now
Where it used to be. That
section of just being charged
with that crime could get you
into the treatment to
competency Now, actually, you
have to provide evidence on that
and possibly put a victim up on
the stand to to prove that to
actually get to that treatment
to competency, which, if we're
gonna fix this thing, it's I
think
Kind of
Horrible for the victim, and
then you have to go again when
you're if if they're found not
competent and you're gonna go
under the dangerous commitment,
um, but the the problem I've
also found with this code
Madam chair is that list these
crimes in 31 91.4, a
And it's up to the type of
crime.
And whether they're dangerous,
whether they can actually be
committed. So, for example, I
had a girl.
Uh, person was charged with
arson and they were burning down
everything and actually, the
evaluator.
At the local evaluator. Uh, the
psychologist did give me some
information that there's
somebody you need to release out
into the public because they're
going to go do this again if
they weren't charged with
Ours are aggravated arson. They
were charged with arson, so
there was an and so she told me
This person's dangerous. And
then I had. OK. What am I gonna
do? I can't commit them to
Vegas yet. She's telling me
they're dangerous. So then I
gotta jump over to the civil
commitment. They harm themselves
or others. They're gonna put her
in. The judge put her in Las
Vegas for 30 days and then she's
going to be released out onto
the street dealing with the same
issue. So we have that also.
When you back up over to the
civil commitment
Madam chair and and your honor
that
A lot of these people are just
released.
Right out of Vegas, and we're
dealing. So I was wondering what
your thoughts were of this code
is evaluated on the criminal
part about raising the type of
crimes that they could actually
be committed under.
First, just the you just really
a handful of them, Um, that you
can actually go for that
commitment. Um
And and actually, you know, get
them committed to Vegas.
And you. Have you seen any
issues with that little part?
Causing somebody to like I. I
personally feel I experienced it
with a girl who was going to
just get out and have problems.
And is that something that we're
going to look at this part of
the code?
Madam Chair, representative
Reed. Um
Excuse me for being evasive.
Um
But as a judge, I don't I don't
think it's my role to say.
What you ought to do, I think
With our respect
that yours and because I'm the
one that may have to rule and
and consider that so, I, I
I think under the code of
judicial conduct, I need to be
very careful. I appreciate that.
I just thought, Madam chair and
since you've had so much
experience with it, I I'm
looking for these loopholes that
I've seen, Um, also one thing
that wasn't addressed.
Um was 31 9-1 0.6 the mental
retardation statute.
Part of this code, which is I've
found to be a huge um and
The defense proceeds under the
fact that somebody has mental
retardation is in that, and
that's what
And my personal experiences.
I've had a child molester who
was molesting Children in an
alley.
And was found to be mentally
have mental retardation under
this code, and there was nothing
I could do with this person
except let this dangerous person
out on the street.
Um
Because of that, finding that's
another hole that I found in the
code that I I'm kind of hoping
that we can address. Um and
again, you may not want to
happen or if that's used a lot,
I, I guess just being brief and
tying up cuz I know we're we're
tight on time. My concern Madam
Chair is that
We're just right now dealing
with the criminal part of this
code and not the whole civil
aspect of this code because it
does correlate into whether two
different animals
Relates to the civil commitment.
I really worry that if we shove
this into a two day session, um
This is just my my thoughts,
because if you're not working
with this code on a continuous
basis and seeing
Violent offenders walk out.
It's something that, uh, blows
some of the gaps on the
confident despite what we do on
the Civil Co. Is on that.
So, um
I just wanted to as easy as it
looks, um, by any means it is. I
don't think it's I guess I
shouldn't say it's easy as it
looks, but
I personally have been available
to want to work on this and
working groups and haven't been
contacted by anybody. As far as
this goes, I
I I'm still willing to
Express my concerns and help on
this criminal part of it, but
This is the part I deal with.
And I've dealt with it for 28
years and I've watched to do
with them. And I'm not saying it
does need fixed because violent
vendor are walking out. But if
it is a public safety session
And I think we need to be
looking at this part of the code
because I don't and I don't see
the emergency of pushing this
out. Really, really quick when
we can really work this code
civilly and criminally and get a
good piece of legislation.
With treatment centers
incorporated. Um, so that's all
I wanted to say, Um, Senator and
I were snack at half his five
minutes. So thank you.
He didn't have five minutes.
Um, just a few points with
regard to your points. If you
would send me a Nancy, a
reference to the the the the
Code section that you were
mentioning so we can talk about
putting that issue on the agenda
as well. And, um, representative
Appreciate your insights, and
I'll call you. Um you may have
some suggestions for, uh, future
programs for in June and in the
June time frame and before the
session, So I'm happy to work
with you and see if there are
other things I've been thinking
about the civil part of this
As well. But I'm sure you'll
have some insights that you
could share. So I appreciate
your thoughts. Um Senator
Cedilla Lopez.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Got that sounds so bad, um
I really appreciated the
presentation because when we saw
the competency bill in, it was
really confusing to me. Um about
what? You what? Your honor what
you identified as the disconnect
between the criminal company
standing competent for trial,
which to me is about
Protecting the the trial
process, you know, ensuring that
that individual can help in
their defense, that kind of
thing and civil commitment,
which is about protecting the
public.
And and also protecting that
individual. And so I felt like
the bill kind of SM, smashed
those two together, but you
identified it as a disconnect.
Um, could you expand a little
bit more about why you think
it's a disconnect if they have
such different purposes?
Madam chair.
Madam Chair, Senator I the
dissonant act is that I if if
I think I said it doesn't they
don't interact seamlessly is
because they they are served two
different purposes. Uh, they
involve different kinds of
evaluations. Um, they have
different standards.
Um And so it's it's how do you
move from one to the other?
Um
And as I explained as a judge,
it's it's created. You know,
procedural problems of of how do
I do it? And it's more just, you
know, how do we get it done?
Um yeah.
But I think we I you know, I
think we've been successful at
that. But I, I think there just
needs to be a recognition that
they are very different things
as as you have pointed out.
Then. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, I also
Kind of, uh, I had heard this
before, So I googled a little
bit and just looked a little bit
at at some of these studies, um,
about gender bias within the
system, both of commitment.
Um because of presenting danger
to self and others and also
within the system of confidence
to to stand trial. And what the
studies. Um, just a real cursory
review showed that, um
There does seem to be gender
bias, um more of gender bias
than even ethnic bias. Um, and
racial bias, However, the ra
racial and ethnic bias forms
the, uh
The reason they took it out is
because of the high correlation
between socio and socio economic
status. And so really, there is
bias, but it's more tied to
socio-economic status than than
race. Um, and so this may be for
when you when you present later
or for a future presentation,
But I'm just wondering these
studies. One was in, um
Phoenix and another one was in
Los Angeles. Are you aware of
any evaluation of the data in
New Mexico about whether either
racial socio-economic or gender
bias is happening within this
context?
Madam Chair, Senator Cedillo
Lopez. Um, we have asked, um,
that our academic expert Dr
Simone Villon, who'll be joining
us for part two. Speak to that a
little bit. Um, so we'd be happy
to answer that question a little
bit more detail from her
expertise. Excellent. I. I
appreciate that. Thank you,
Madam Chair. I stayed within my
time.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. Thank you. Honor
This was kind of spoken about in
all in and everyone who's
talked, but, um
I just wanna make kind of
reiterate the point that
Um
The philosophy be behind, not
prosecuting an incompetent
person is that they don't
understand the proceedings
around them, and therefore don't
know why they're being
Punished. Um
Essentially, you know,
Competency is based on two
findings. They
To be competent. You have to
understand the nature of the
charges against you, and you
have to be able to assist your
counsel in presenting a defense.
Um and so it it has nothing to
do with
Someone's mental capacity at the
time of the criminal act. Um,
whether they're it's it's
different than the than the
Then, uh,
In of not guilty by reason of
insanity or anything like that.
It's just you understand the
proceedings around you some of
the early
Remnants of this philosophy was
in the like the 14th century,
and then it kind of got codified
in the 18th century, So it's
been around a while, Um, there
was, um, Madam chair. It was a
Leading up to this presentation.
I was
Trying to find some articles
about around it, and there's a
Article that came out in that
says
Um
You know, Incompetency a time to
review That article came out in
1968 a lot of review article
from Northwestern. And then
there was a
Another one that says, uh,
Competency should should we
change the competency evaluation
and that was in 2004. So this
has been like contemplated for
decades. So my point is, Madam
chair is that we're we're trying
to do something. Uh, that's been
centuries old and been talked
about for decades in like three
or four days.
So we have to just acknowledge
that, um
But it is a priority of the
chief executive. It's I. I feel
compelled to give it
To keep an open mind and and
work diligently toward that
endeavor, Cuz what we're trying
to do is, um
We're trying to deal with mental
illness.
We're trying to to solve
problems and get people the the
help.
They need and they deserve to
overcome any mental illness that
they have.
In changing our competency
statute. And so, um
So anyway, just to be clear,
Your Honor the Madam Chair. You
have a a chart dealing with
felony companies competency and
obviously, if someone commits a
felony or is accused of a
felony, rather and they're
deemed dangerous, we can
We can commit them. We can
Incarcerate them so to speak.
What happens for misdemeanors?
What happens if
A misdemeanor court be someone
incompetent. What happens to
that case?
Madam Chair, Senator, uh,
misdemeanors follow the same
process.
But they stop
Uh, at the determination of
incompetence if they're found
incompetency, and it's a
misdemeanor of petty misdemeanor
case of the case is dismissed
without prejudice.
Got you. Thank you for that, In
other words like
And so what we're trying to deal
with is, um, we're trying to
Deal with that window of folks
who are not competent.
But they're also not committal.
And so, uh,
So how do we
You know, for those of us that
think
There's a benefit to plea
bargaining or benefit to the
individual for for being found
guilty. We're trying to deal
with that aspect. And so the
proposal madam chair that I
That that I believe the Supreme
Court came up with that that
representative Leon came up with
was essentially to create a
A procedure in which the the
proceeding is stayed that there
it's postponed, so to speak.
Deadlines don't have to be met
and that the defendant is then
sent to treatment either
inpatient or outpatient
treatment.
And if they complete the
treatment successfully, then the
case is dismissed. Whereas today
If
It's kind of everybody in that
town or or past decisions have
deemed that person incompetent.
Everyone knows what they're
gonna be deemed incompetent.
Next week or next month, and
then the case goes away.
And then they, uh and so what's
what's happening.
Is police officers, Judges,
prosecutors. They're just
there's a group of individuals
who could be 100 could be 200
that that that are out of
You know?
Putting society at risk, so to
speak, that we can't deal with
We I remember Madam Chair like
1012. Years ago, There was a
Serious attempt by I believe it
was Senator Mary Kay, Pa. And I,
It might have been Rick Miera
that tried to deal with
Civil commitments. Can we create
a statutory scheme to
To
Commit somebody against their
will. You know what I mean? So
what My point is, it's it's a
big lift. I think, um, I think
we can create
A statutory framework that will
allow the judiciary to stay
proceedings. But it's gonna take
a a very open mind by
prosecutors and defense lawyers
that, um
That this plague bargain.
They're not pleading guilty, and
then you're sending them to
treatment. They're just
postponing the case and sending
them to treatment.
It's gonna just I just ask
everyone to
Every lawyer in the state to
keep an open mind with regards
to attempting that
Because it kind of cuts against
the grain.
Uh, if you can't convict my
client, why should my client do
anything? You
You tell him to do? Um
So I just wanted to throw that
out there and look forward to
working with representative
Lujan and and the and the and
the governor's office and the
Supremes to
To come up with this cause I
believe that it's timely. I
believe a modern world dictates
that we do this as long as we
remain consistent with fairness
and justice. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Senator,
Representative Alcon.
Have a Oh, thank you. I just
have one question.
Once the, uh the system has has
come up or the question of
competency has come up.
And this defendant to send back
to jail.
I'm looking at your calendar
here.
It takes, uh
The average time it takes for
the dependent to be seen by the
evaluator. It's about 1 to 3
months.
And then the evaluators report
can take an additional 30 days.
But there is no time there is
nothing there that says
That dependant has to be seen
within a certain period of time.
Is that correct?
They can, uh, evaluate. We can
If we can evaluate we can't get
there.
In six months. That's just the
way it goes. Oh, Madam chair.
Uh Rep Representative UN under
the rules.
Um and
The evaluation should take place
within 30 days.
But that time is has to be
extended as a matter of
practical limitations.
Uh, on that so there there are
time limits.
And that's the I think the
beauty of the current rules.
Uh, is that it it it holds the
court feet to the fire to make
sure that that these cases don't
don't simply languish and with
which is what I think happened a
lot. Uh, prior prior. Um uh so
Everyone is more mindful of of
of of the time and and, uh, how
to, uh, make sure we we make,
you know.
Make sure the valuation happens
as quickly as possible.
So, Madam Chair. Uh, Judge,
there is nothing in statute that
says a hearing or an evaluation
has to be done.
A certain period of time. And I,
Ah, Madam Chair representative
in the statute, you are correct.
in the rules of criminal
procedure. It establishes the
time frames and that's that's
what I have to go by.
OK?
Thank you. And then once the
evaluators report this sent to
you with the judge.
How long do you have to set up a
hearing?
Index. Um, so once I received
the the report, I review it
redact it if necessary, Send it
out. The attorneys have five
days to either stipulate to the
report or file written
objections. My view is if they
don't file the written
objections, they've waived. Uh,
the ability to do that.
I usually I already have a
competency hearing set.
Uh, because I said that when I
issue my my order or if there's
been an extension I've already
set. Uh uh, the hearing.
Um, now, sometimes if they're
gonna contest it, and we need an
evidentiary hearing, we may have
to change that date. Uh, but my
practice is, um there's there's
a hearing set.
Hey, Thank you, Judge, And
that's uh that's my thing is the
there is no nothing really
saying that something has to
happen within certain. I mean,
in the criminal case, uh,
somebody starts criminal.
The D A has to do something
within 10 days of the D to get
those people out of jail.
In this case.
There's nothing like that.
So that's what my
That's kind of one of the things
that we have to look at is, uh,
how long can we keep this
people or why should we keep
them that long? Incarcerated
Because I've seen it before.
I've seen somebody charge on a
misdemeanor sit in jail for 67
months before the district court
judge
Ah, you can see them and this is
just on a misdemeanor. So the
madam chair, not get that at 3.5
minutes.
Actually, 4.5 minutes.
All right. Well, um, we are now
to represent a bargo.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um
Thank you, Miss Boone. And, um,
our honorable judge for your
comments. Um, you know, I as I
was sitting up here thinking
about all of this. I was
thinking about the the jail
system, which I've had to deal
with as a city councilor and
also the mental health system
and watching Albuquerque's, uh,
population, especially on the
streets grow and grow, and not
just in Albuquerque. But all
over the state. Um
And
So those are two systems, but
I'm also madam chair thinking
about the human element as I
drive through our streets every
day and see more and more
issues. Um, I think about sort
of
The people who become victims in
the systems.
And we're dealing with two
systems that sometimes don't
seem to talk to each other. And
I think, Madam chair we're
dealing with New Mexico
families, not just those
individuals, but we're also
dealing with the New Mexico
families that are attached to
those individuals and
I say this because, um, all many
of our families and some of us
don't care to admit it, and some
of us are happy to bring it out
to the open and say, you know,
how do we keep people who are
incarcerated and not getting the
treatment that they deserve in
order to get better? Um, how do
we keep them from falling
through sort of the gap, Madam
chair and and committee members
and
Honestly, my family has dealt
with that issue.
Um, in the in the jail system
and the individual not getting
the treatment that they
deserved. Um
So you know, I. I think about
that more as a city planner as
a, um, a person whose families
have been affected by those
people falling through the the
gap.
Of it. And in one case and madam
chair, I'm gonna give you an
example In one case, Actually,
the family had to go find the
individual because they couldn't
find that person in the jail
system. They ended up finding
them in the hospital that the
jail had had transferred them to
the hospital. Um
And I personally was involved
with this individual, um,
helping them through. I had to
actually had to call some people
to find where this person was.
and this person was dual
diagnosed.
Duly diagnosed. And so that does
add, you know, I mean, I have a
lot of questions because how we
deal with dual diagnosis. We
have PTSD we We have, you know,
all sorts of, you know,
alcoholic or drug addict or, you
know, and and oftentimes they're
not just dealing with one
What's the word? Um, I guess
just one
Analysis there. We're dealing
with a a range of things,
especially when they're on drugs
or alcohol or both. Or they've
been in the military and have
come back and don't find the
services that they need. And so
you know, I see. I see this as a
big
Issue that
Has a lot of different types of
linkages to it, not just one
because when those people are
released, um
From, you know, um, they don't
often have the support system
because many times they families
have given up on them.
Because they've tried so hard to
get them the treatment or the
help And then they just say,
Hey, you know, I'm I'm tired of
dealing with that individual.
Um so I. I really do appreciate
that. We have brought this issue
to light and I guess one of my
questions and I know we don't
need to talk about it today, but
I think one of my questions
would be. How do we deal with?
uh, dual diagnosis? Um, when
people are released from
incarceration
Or after they have gone. Um, um,
you know, out in back into into
the system to keep from
happening, Uh, repeat offenders.
How do we follow them to make
sure that they're getting the
treatment that they deserve as
they move forward into their
lives? Um, because oftentimes
those individuals will take
their own lives because they're
not getting that treatment and
so, madam chair. My comments are
really more comments.
Cause I've seen this issue time
and time again when I was
working at at the level of City
Council and and even as a city
planner, um
And the other thing. I think
that, uh, representative uh,
Luhan brought up was with regard
to the workforce and I know it's
really as this issue grows, It's
very difficult to have that
workforce, uh, to keep funding
that, but there are a lot of
programs out there that
Somehow.
We have a responsibility, Madam
chair to connect those
You know those linkages. So
really, my comments were really
more comments than questions.
but, um, I, I really do
appreciate the the work that you
all do. Thank you. Madam Chair
may respond.
Very briefly.
Um, representative, I just
wanted to say thank you. And
also just, um, to highlight what
you mentioned that national data
does. Tell us that, um, those
with diagnosed mental health
issues are more likely to be the
victim of crime rather than the
perpetrator of crime. So just to
speak to that, um, victimization
within those systems I wanted to
say that thank you.
Thank you, Uh, representative
Sapanski.
Thank you very much, Madam Chair
and thank you both for being
here. I think, uh, after this
presentation, um
It feels pretty evident that
that the current statutory
framework is imperfect tool. Um,
but that a big piece of that is
really related to a lack of
capacity around evaluations. Um,
these lengthy timelines um
And you know, one of the things
that I just wanted to raise, and
I promise I will be brief, Madam
chair, but, um, is just you know
the the focus on this issue.
Um, potentially comes at the
expense of us taking a real hard
look at the other pieces of the
criminal justice system, Um, to
answer that larger 30,000 ft
question, which is really how do
we balance public safety as well
as individuals, mental health
and mental Well being, Um
I'm I'm pleased that we're gonna
be looking at the contract
process and the number of
evaluators that are available.
It seems that that's something
that should be relatively easy
to fix. Um
But I
I wonder are there scenarios
where people are held for
timelines longer than a
potential sentence that they
would face while they are
waiting for?
Access to evaluation access to
competency restoration, once
released from competency
restoration, then awaiting, um,
the trial process. Um, is that
something that occurs Could you
all reflect on that? Please? Um,
I'm sure. Uh, representative, um
I I'm from my experience. I have
not seen that happen. I
understand, And I think that's
remember that you have the
statute, but you have the have
the rules.
Um, and the rules of the
procedure are the ones that
really establish us all. All
these timelines, the intent
being, um that if if it's a
misdemeanor or a petty
misdemeanor, uh and and and
given the the presumption under
the Constitution that people
need to be, you know that
they'll be released from custody
on non financial conditions of
release in the provision within
the rules, that is the
obligation of the judge to
review conditions.
A release. Um, that should not
happen. And I'm uh, in my cases,
I'm I'm not aware of, uh of of
that. Uh uh, happening, II. I
hope I hope it hasn't
Um um, but the intent of the
timelines and the rules is also
to uh uh, I. I think to prevent
that from happening. So you
don't have people simply. Uh uh.
Uh, in in custody.
Uh,
And I know that the association
of of of Counties is monitoring
that and how long people are are
remaining in in in custody.
Don't
You know the the the issue, I
guess is if they're charged with
a felon, and they're in custody,
and they're being held on either
on
You know, there's there's
somebody spending more time in
custody than
Uh, a waiting. Thank you for
that, Uh, Judge Hudson and Madam
chair.
I think the
One of the concerns that I have
is that the length of time to
receive an evaluation can be
lengthy. The length of time to,
uh if you are found to be
incompetent to receive access to
a bed, Um
At BH can be lengthy, Um
All the while.
I'm not sure that we are doing
an evaluation to understand if
the person would be better
served by a lengthy mental
health treatment program,
whether that be in the
community, um or in an inpatient
setting, um and whether that
might serve public safety
better. That's an that's a
question outside of the legal
process and the issues it
centered City Lopez raised
around actually staying true to
the rights of the defendant as
well as that legal process. Um
I think you know I have been
doing some research on this
issue, and one of the
interesting things is that the
American Bar Association
Association, the
Psychiatry and Law Association,
as well as a national task force
on this issue.
Um
Really underscored the need for
diversion programs as a piece of
the answer to this policy
question, and so
Um
I wonder. You know, In this
process, we have dangerousness
questions being raised and that
are also interacting with these
questions of competency.
Um, all of the competency
restoration services currently
provided are inpatient Is that
that's correct. Um
I wonder if you all could just
reflect on and this will be my
last question. Um, how
Community based competency
restoration services might be
provided and whether there are
places and this might be outside
of what you're prepared to
address today. But are there
places where diversion
opportunities could be inserted
into this process that might
lead us to better public safety
outcomes and better outcomes for
the individuals that, uh, for
the defendants?
Madam Chair representative.
I'll answer that, um, without
diving into policy
considerations or
recommendations, as you
mentioned, there are national
task force that have looked at
the, um possibilities of
diversions and some best
practices for how to implement
those related to the competency
process. So there are other
estates that are doing that, um,
that may have meaningful
outcomes to to provide or to
share with this group.
Specifically, um
In in addition to the community
restoration piece that you
mentioned again, there are other
states and and some national
recommendations about how to do
that. And when that's
appropriate, um so I think that
there are definitely resources
that this group could look at to
inform. Um, those considerations
moving forward. Um I don't think
that the judge or I are prepared
to speak about, um, our
recommendations regarding those
two pieces, But, um, there are
resources that that specifically
look at that How those can be,
um, implemented and and sort of
the points along the process
that those Thank you, ma.
Sure.
Thank you, representative. Well,
that concludes, um, our
questions for this, Um, piece of
your presentation. Really
appreciate it. Thank you very
much. Judge. I'm very
informative in your obviously
very experienced and, um this
process and we appreciate your
insights as thank you, madam
Chair. It's my pleasure. Sure.
Ok, thank you.
All right. We're on to our, um
Next item, which is introduction
to competency terms and concept.
You again, Um Miss Boone.
And we have
Doctor. I'm gonna ask the doctor
to say her name for me because
Or is it afternoon? Um not quite
afternoon yet. Um, my name is
Doctor Simone F. And, um, could
you, um, describe kind of your
background and why you're on the
panel.
Absolutely, um so I am a
forensic evaluator here in the
state of you need to speak up.
I'm gonna Is it better like this
If it's OK, because I can hear
myself really loudly. So thank
you for that feedback. Um, I am
a forensic psychologist. I have
a PHD in clinical psychology
with a specialization in
forensic psychology, and I have
been practicing as a
psychologist specializing in
forensics for about 11 years.
Um, I am the current court
clinic core for the Albuquerque
Second Judicial Court Clinic.
Um, which is a it started?
The pilot project in 2019 for
the second all of the felony
Competency evaluations are run
through the court clinic. It's
no longer being called the pilot
project because we've been in
practice now for
Coming on five years, So we
stopped calling ourselves that a
couple of years ago and we are
now the court clinic. Um, I I'm
also a co-owner of a private
practice that specializes in
forensic psychology, and I am on
the Supreme Court Commission for
mental Health and Competency as
well. And so I am here to
primarily speak to my personal
and professional experience
doing competency evaluations.
You know what the population is
like What the process is like,
and what goes into an evaluation
and hopefully that will be
To you all.
Thank you And thank you for
coming. Uh, you'll be working
off of these slides. I'm a
I We have this right now. Are
there other slides that we
should, Madam Chair? There is
another slide deck that is
titled Introduction to
competency terms and concepts.
Oh, OK, is it
Is it? Does it look like that?
No.
It's another PowerPoint madam
chair similar to the one that we
just went through. Um, but it is
a distinct set of slides.
Well, um, give us a minute. Um
The slide deck that we have says
criminal competency in court
processes.
And and doctor Simone. You are
listed as a presenter. So is it
maybe combined, Madam chair does
not, um, I'm sorry. That's
that's quite all right, Your
Honor. Excuse me, Madam Chair.
Um, Doctor von was, um, going to
sit with us in the first
presentation, but, uh, was it
unexpectedly delayed, So that's
why you see her name on both.
But it is a separate deck, um,
titled Introduction to
Competency.
Yeah.
Zoom test 123.
Um, pass them out. How's that?
So if people will
Be seated.
We'll get started.
All right. We're relatively
quiet. The floor is yours. Madam
Chair Committee members. Thank
you for allowing us this time
with you again this morning. Um
as doctor Filion mentioned, Um
she's joining us today. She's
our academic expert in this
regard, and also a current
practicing forensic evaluator.
Um, so we'll kind of lean on her
expertise to share more and
hopefully address some of the
comments and questions that were
raised earlier in the first
presentation regarding
evaluation. Specifics, um,
evaluator, specifics and
training. Um and some other
elements related to
What we're talking about when we
talk about psychosis and mental
health issues related to
competence.
We've already done this piece
moving right along. Um, so our
objectives are really to kind of
build on the the conversation
and the, um, presentation that
we had earlier this morning. As
I mentioned we are going to look
a little bit more specifically
in this presentation about the
mental health, um, symptoms and
disorders that we're typically
talking about when we are
looking at competency, and we'll
also dive in a little bit deeper
to the prongs of the competency
evaluation, the considerations
being made by the evaluators and
that training and expertise that
the evaluators bring to this
process.
Judge Hudson in his presentation
with us this morning. I spoke
about this being a due process
issue, and I think we've covered
that piece, so we'll skip ahead.
Um and move on to the next.
Um, so these are just the
primary case law that we we're
competency has come from. I
believe Senator Mato was
referring to the dusky standards
when he was mentioning the two
prongs of competency. The dusky
standard is really where all
states, uh competency statutes
and legislative and rules have
come from, uh, our has
progressed from the dusky
standard into We have the state.
We rather him. And then that
even was, uh, further uh, you
know, a advanced by state be
Lenas, and that is
Ultimately what our three prongs
are based on, Um, which I'll
discuss here shortly.
So these are the three prongs as
an evaluator. These are the
three things that I am looking
at. When I'm doing my
evaluation, So the first prong
is sufficient present ability to
consult with their lawyer with a
reasonable degree of rational
understanding. The second prong
is a rational as well as factual
understanding of the proceedings
against them. And then the third
prong, which we colloquially
kind of talk about it as a 3rd
and 4th prong because that last
piece of the third prong is sort
of on its own, But it is under
the third prong. But when
Doing my evaluation. The last
piece of that third prong is
what I'm putting in like its own
category, basically, but
essentially, it's the capacity
to assist in one's own defense
and the comprehension for the
reasons of punishment, So
there's a short number of states
that include that, uh,
additional piece. Um, but
That's what I mentioned before.
I I It's sort of sort of like
3.5 prongs. Really, because
their ability to understand
reasons for punishment is sort
of separate to the ability to be
able to assist. But as I
mentioned before, it's lumped
into that third prong. So these
are the three things that I have
in my mind when I am evaluating
somebody. And those are the
three questions that I have to
answer for the court.
I wanted to just briefly mention
this research because it
underscores the the importance
of having quality and thorough
evaluations. As has already been
mentioned today. Um there is
some issues with quality.
Inconsistencies and that's
something that we have been
working as a team for the last
at least five years to try to
improve the quality of the
evaluations in the state of New
Mexico. Uh, BHSD specifically
has been championing a
Significant effort in in this
regard, but I mentioned this
research because what we have
found is that over 90% in some
cases, 99.6% of courts agree
with the evaluators opinion. Um
and so that really, I think
speaks to why we need to have
Individuals with the appropriate
training, expertise and
understanding of what this
evaluation is, and also why we
should have somebody that has,
um
As I mentioned before the
appropriate qualifications and
do a thorough and comprehensive
assessment specific to these
issues because otherwise things
can go quite awry.
Unfortunately,
And now we'll explore a little
bit more of the specifics of
mental illness and how we see
that showing up in the criminal
competency process.
So as Judge Hudson was
mentioning earlier and we've
spoken about within this time
here today, when we're talking
about competency, we're often
talking about psychosis or, um,
floridly psychotic is another
term that you've probably heard.
Um and so we just wanted to
share with you all a little bit
more about those specific
disorders and mental illnesses
that we're referring to, as sort
of under this catch all umbrella
of psychotic disorders. Um, so
these are disorders that are
typically related to delusions
of some sort, So we have
delusional dis
Brief psychotic disorder
Schizophrenia, schizophrenia
form disorder, schizoaffective
disorder. Bipolar disorder is
often, um, categorized under
this umbrella as well.
Depression with psychotic
features psychotic disorders due
to other medical conditions. Um,
and that the doctor can speak a
little bit more about that as
well. But that's when we're
talking about, Um, you know
things potentially like
Alzheimer's or other
neurological conditions that may
influence
Mental illness. Um, and then we
also, um can't speak about
psychotic disorders without also
considering how substance use,
um, plays a role in that and how
we can have substance or
medication induced psychosis is
Um so a term that many of you
may have heard at some point is
severe mental illness. Um, you
know, there are certain
categories of mental illness,
and so these are symptoms that
we would consider in my field as
severe psychiatric symptoms and
typically are the hallmarks of
conditions that we categorize as
severe mental illness. Um
I'm going to be covering almost
each of these in more depth, so
I don't wanna necessarily read
each of these two, but this is
just a sort of overview. We're
looking at things like
delusions, hallucinations,
disorganized thinking or
behavior. Um, we're thinking
about suicide thinking suicide
attempts. Suicidality in
general, we're looking at, uh,
dis regulated emotions or
emotion. Disregulation is
another way. We talk about it,
um, negative symptoms, which is
a component of schizophrenia.
Which again I will be speaking
more in more depth here in a
little bit, um, you know,
problems with depressed mood or
elevated mood and then also
attention and concentration
issues. But as I said, I'm gonna
be covering going into more
detail for each of these.
So
Delusions are basically when
somebody has a fixed belief that
is not reality based, and they
are not amenable to change. So
when you have an individual that
has a fixed, delusional belief
when you challenge them about
the reality of their beliefs,
they're not able to, uh, take in
that information that you're
trying to provide them. Uh,
because this is a psychotic
symptom. It's a component of
many psychotic disorders such as
schizophrenia. There's also
delusional disorder.
Um, bipolar can often have
delusional belief systems as
part of that condition as well.
so they can be, um, of a
different type. So we have, you
know, paranoid delusions.
Religious be D. Sorry.
Delusions, somatic. Uh,
grandiose, So these are the
different types often
Individuals present with AAA
mixture of these. It's not
always that someone just has one
type of delusional theme to
them, And there's frequently
multiple themes.
And sometimes there's so many
that we just say, you know,
unspecified or mixed because we
can't really, um, say which
kind It is. Specifically, I also
wanna just mention the
difference between a bizarre and
a non bizarre delusion. This can
make an evaluators job very
difficult, because if somebody
has a
Bizarre delusion. It is more,
it's much more obvious. It's
more obvious to the evaluator.
It's much more obvious to the
general public, right. So if
somebody is saying, you know,
I've been kidnapped by aliens.
They've transplanted my organs.
You know, things of that nature
are typically considered
bizarre, because it's really
unlikely that this could occur
and non bizarre delusion is
where
It is plausible or possible that
that could be true. But it is a
categorically not true. So let
me give an example Somebody, um,
that I recently evaluated had a
fixed, paranoid delusion that,
uh, their neighbor was, uh,
recording them tapping their
phones. Uh, you know, had T were
targeting them. This was not
true, but in theory, it is
possible for this to be true. So
that is an example of a non
bizarre delusion. Still not
reality based, but it's not, uh,
of
Bizarre nature. If that makes
sense, and so the reason that I
say that this can be more
complicated because in this day
and age, um there are certain
belief systems that are held by,
uh, thousands of people that
could be could sound delusional
or could sound bizarre, but
they're really just fixed
beliefs. Uh, many of the
individuals in this room might
be aware of Kon. For example,
sovereign citizen beliefs,
things of that nature, and so
our job is to figure out if
somebody is presenting with a
strongly held fixed belief.
Or if they are presenting with,
uh, delusional belief system And
so that is something that we
have to figure out when we're
doing our
evaluation. Hallucinations. Um,
these are basically, you know,
experiencing perceptions that
are not real. So hearing voices
or hearing sounds that are not
actually occurring in in the
environment, seeing things that
are not actually there, uh,
smelling or tasting or feeling
things on their skin that are
not actually there. So, uh,
basically
Hallucination is a perception
that the individual has that
they believe is real, but it is
not real, but it's based on
perceptual experience, so
actually hearing things seeing
things. This is not just a
belief it's a It's an actual
experience of these things
occurring.
Uh, disorganized thinking. This
is something that I see very
frequently, um, with individuals
with a psychotic spectrum
disorder. So what you see in
front of you typically is
somebody who is, um, speaking in
a disorganized manner there
tangential what That means, is
they will you will ask them a
question, And then they will
start to talk about something
completely irrelevant or
unrelated. To what you've asked,
Uh, they often jump topics very
frequently. They also talk about
one thing, and then suddenly
they're talking about something.
And then suddenly they're
talking about something else.
Um, another type of thought
process that would fit under
disorganized circumstantial
thinking. So what That is is
when someone talks about
something in a very convoluted,
long winded, circular way, um,
providing excessive details.
It's not linear in any way, but
ultimately they do return back
to the point of the
conversation. So all of these
things are, uh, related to what
we call disorganized thinking,
which again is a a core
component of most schizophrenic
or
Psychotic spectrum disorders. It
can make communication extremely
difficult with these individuals
And also we see things, um like
word salad, where it's not
tangential. It's not
circumstantial. It's just
complete nonsense. Basically,
the the words don't even make,
um, an actual sentence.
Um, we also see not only
disorganized thinking, but also
disorganized behavior, so
individuals will, um, you know,
actually act in bizarre ways
that make no sense or we have
involuntary movements. Body
movements, um or the opposite of
that would be catatonic body
movement. So completely, um,
still unable to move? Um so they
can. They can also present with
stereotype behaviors like tics
or repetitive.
I. I met an I just did an
evaluation on an individual
whose ears sort of just
Quick to like, tweaked up and
down. Uh and and he didn't even
he wasn't even aware that he was
doing it so things of that
nature, so there's actual
physical, um, disorganization in
their body movements as well.
Negative symptoms. This is
something that is often under
looked or um, not assessed
thoroughly, because the what we
call positive symptoms are the
delusions, hallucinations,
disorganization. Those are very
in your face. A very obvious uh,
almost anybody, even without
mental health training, would
would identify that. This is
something not right with an
individual basically, who was
expressing or experiencing those
negative symptoms, however, are
more of, um like withdrawal.
They're they're not wanting to
Act with individuals. They lack
motivation or at the clinical
term for that is evolution,
which is basically complete
clinical lack of motivation to
engage. So this is the type of
individual who doesn't want to
leave his cell to me with his
attorney, he doesn't wanna leave
his cell to do the evaluation.
He doesn't want to show up to
court because of the severe
negative symptoms that they're
experiencing. It can also, um
present as Alloa, which is, uh,
lack of speech. Essentially,
they have no speech production.
Their mute sometimes or they
answer in brief one word
answers. They're not providing a
whole lot of really helpful
information. Um
And then another component of
this is a flat affect what and
what I mean by that is there's
this very limited facial
expression, And so we as, um, a
species rely heavily on facial
expressions when we are
communicating, and so when an
individual has complete lack of
expression, facially, um to
indicate their emotional
experience that can be very off
putting, um and can have
multiple, uh, impacts for
individuals within the legal
system.
Substance abuse and severe
mental illness. This has been
raised already today. You know
the dual diagnosis issue. Um
This is something that is really
prominent in in in my work in
the in the area that I have to,
you know, the population that
I'm serving. This is a huge
condition. Huge concern. The
bidirectional of substance use
of mental illness. Uh, we know
obviously that individuals with
mental illness and severe mental
illness are significantly more
likely to abuse substances often
and and in most cases as a way
to cope with their mental
illness. Um
The word self medication is used
at times, right. Individuals
will self medicate with
substances.
In turn, substances can also
create mental health symptoms.
Um, for example, and most
problematic for us in New Mexico
Methamphetamine has a unique uh
consequence I should say of when
someone abuses methamphetamine
for a very long time, and they
have a genetic predisposition to
certain mental health
conditions. They trigger a
psychotic disorder. So the way I
usually explain it in court,
it's like a lock and key
mechanism.
Right. The the lock is the
genetic predisposition. The
keys, the methamphetamine abuse,
And so when someone has those
two things together when they
use methamphetamine, they will
unlock a psychotic disorder. Um,
it's important to understand
this because we have a
misunderstanding of substance
induced disorders. But when we
talk about that, clinically what
we mean is it It's in the moment
while the person is intoxicated
while they are with withdrawing,
right, So, um LSD, right?
When you take LSD that can cause
hallucinations. But when you are
not taking LSD or you no longer
intoxicated or high off of LSD,
you will no longer experience
those psychotic symptoms. This
is not necessarily the case for
individuals who abuse
methamphetamine that have that
genetic genetic predisposition
because abstinence from the
substance is not enough for the
psychotic symptoms to remit so
That person needs
Mental health treatment. They
need medications. They need
actual care. Not just
abstinence. Um, and this is I
bring this up because I in my
work, Obviously, I see people
who have both conditions and the
question is often is this just a
substance induced issue, And
when they clear up are they not
no longer gonna have these
symptoms or when they are
Through the withdrawal process.
Are they still going to be
presenting with these psychotic
symptoms? Because really, we
have more of a permanent or
persistent substance induced
psychotic psychotic disorder.
Um, and these can be very
difficult to differentiate as an
evaluator. Whether we're dealing
with someone who is just
withdrawing or potentially
acutely intoxicated, or this is
somebody who really has an
underlying mental health
condition, um, that that is
requiring of medications and
treatment.
Um, So this is really what I'm
what I'm talking about.
Differentiating is is very
difficult. Um, sometimes we can
You know, have enough
information to know that an
individual's symptoms presented
before the substance use did,
uh, In that case, we can be more
confident that this is, you
know, quote unquote and organic
mental health issue. Um, other
times. We know that the
psychotic symptoms presented
after the substance use and so
in in those in those cases, we
have more information to know
that this potentially is a
substance induced psychosis
again, however,
In a lot of ways. It doesn't
matter because these individuals
need treatment. And so my
concern more is what the
functional impairment is and how
that is impacting an
individual's competency related
conditions.
Um
I think I've already covered
most of this information so we
could probably skip to the next
slide.
Um
I wanted to break down the
prongs and the symptoms and how
they interact because it's very
important that
As an evaluator. I'm not just
taking a diagnosis and saying
OK, not competent, right? The
it's really important that the
symptoms actually be directly
impairing for competency, relat
abilities, and this is why not
just
Not just any, you know PHD
psychologist or not just any
mental health professional can
do these because typically what
happens when someone doesn't
have forensic experience does a
competency evaluation? What they
usually do is they provide a
diagnosis, And then they just
say not competent, They don't
actually perform what we call
the analysis, the the legal
analysis the psycho legal
analysis that is required for
these, um for these evaluations
because an individual can have a
mental health disorder and be
competent.
A diagnosis is not sufficient.
And so that is something that
occurs when someone who doesn't
have the training. Will Aaron
mostly do is they will provide a
diagnosis and then just leap to
the not competent conclusion, so
I think it's helpful to lay out
what I'm thinking about in each
of these prongs. So for, um
You know?
For attention and concentration,
the ability to follow court
proceedings. Right, So that's
something that I'm looking at.
Can this person track What's
happening? Are they gonna be
able to, um, understand
something is happening in court.
that is not correct to then be
able to convey that to their
defense attorney, right? Are
they gonna be able to pay
attention enough to be able to
retain the information that has
been, uh, presented to them in
court, So that's what I'm
looking at for attention and
concentration for, um
You know, are they able to
testify at their own trial
trial? Are they able to, uh,
maintain their own thought
process well enough to be able
to testify. Are they able to
provide relevant information to
either the court parties or to
their defendant, their defense
attorney? Those are the types of
things I'm thinking about for
that speech and communication.
This is a big one, especially
for ability to assist. How can
this person communicate to their
attorney? Are they able to
consult?
With their attorney in a
rational way. So I mentioned
before the disorganization in in
speech, right? So if somebody is
speaking to you in word solid,
they're obviously not going to
be able to provide
Helpful information to their
attorney. They're not going to
be able to receive helpful
information from their attorney.
Their communication is clearly,
um, broken down at that point
again.
Ability to testify. So this is a
every defendant's right to be
able to testify if they should
if they so choose, and they
should be able to do that, in a
way that is helpful in their
case, And so this is something
that I'm thinking about when I'm
looking at the symptoms that
someone's presenting with so
again, someone who is
delusional, especially
delusional about their charges.
They're not gonna be able to
testify Relevantly about their
case. They're gonna tell you
about how the aliens did it and
it's not their fault, right?
That's
Helpful in a court proceedings.
It's not reality based. They're
not going to be able to make
decisions about, um
Which way to go, whether they
should take a try go to trial or
whether they should take a plea.
For example, right, um
hallucinations. So I. I used to,
um before I really focus on
confidence, I. I used to do
trainings for police officers.
Uh, CIT training to help them
communicate with, um individuals
with mental illness and one of
the exercises that we did with
them was, we made them put
earphones on and had stimuli
presented to that and then we
made them interact with us and
just to show how
Just difficult that is to have,
you know, Imagine having airpods
and then having a conversation
with, you know, a podcast
playing and you're trying to
hear what is going on in a court
proceedings. It's very
difficult. It's very difficult
for individuals to really focus
when they have that constant,
ongoing stimuli. Now, of course,
hallucinations can occur on a
spectrum of severity. Right I
I've met people who, um,
experience hallucinations and
they are able to focus and
attend during the evaluation.
So again. This is one of the
things that I am evaluating. OK,
you say you're hearing voices,
but you're able to understand my
questions. You're able to track
you're able to put them aside
and then I have other people
that are responding to their
internal stimuli. They are not
able to focus They cannot hear
my questions and answer
appropriately. So there is AAA
severity spectrum for each of
these symptoms that should be
made clear, not just this one,
but all of them, and that's part
of my
Job is to evaluate how these
symptoms are impacting
individual. So of course,
hallucinations are gonna be you
know, resulting in inappropriate
affect, they're gonna be
laughing at inappropriate
moments because they're
responding to internal stimuli.
They are not going to be able to
pay attention to what is going
on around them. Um, they are not
gonna be able to organize their
thinking again because they're
hearing other things that's
gonna disrupt their thought
process. It's gonna disrupt
their attention. It's gonna
disrupt their ability to
communicate and I mean, really,
it's It's a
Very dis debilitating symptom.
Um, thought process. Uh, I think
I've already kind of alluded to
this already with the
disorganized thinking because
When you are not able to
organize your thoughts, and
really there's just a complete
jumble of information in your
brain. You're not going to be
able to communicate your needs
your, um, ideas you're not gonna
be able to engage in appropriate
decision making. In your case.
You're not gonna be able to
retain information You're not
gonna be able to receive and
provide information. You know,
All of these things are gonna be
impacted. You're gonna have
fragmentary thought process. Um,
it's just basically gonna really
impact.
All three prongs for for this
one as well.
Delusions. Uh, so this can be
impactful in a number of ways.
So if an individual has general
paranoid delusions, um you know,
they might believe that their
attorney is working against
them. They may not trust them. I
had a defendant that believed
the judge was part of, uh, you
know, a black magic cult. And so
he didn't believe that the judge
was being fair, um, so it can
impact their relationship with
their counsel. It can impact
their even their behavior.
During court proceedings because
of that belief system. Um it can
also impact their decision
making because if somebody
believes that they are, um Jesus
and the law does not apply to
them. They don't care really
what is happening in court
because they don't believe that
they will be found guilty
because they believe it is
impossible for them to be found
guilty because of their
delusional beliefs so it can
really impact decision making As
I mentioned, I think in several
times
Affect and mood. Um so
Very rarely will I find somebody
not competent because of
depression. It has to be a very
it would be an extreme level of
depression that is resulting in,
you know, active and occur,
reoccurring, suicidal thinking
and attempts. I have had a few
occasions that I can recall
where an individual was so
depressed that they actually
were saying things like I'm just
hoping for the death penalty.
I'm gonna try to tank this as
much as I can, even though New
Mexico doesn't have the death
penalty right? Their thought
process was so extreme they were
not motivated to participate.
Their trial. They were not gonna
talk to their counsel, they had
extreme abolition. So that is an
extreme case where you know,
depressed mood can really result
in a competent finding, But, you
know
More than half I would say even
80% of the people that I see are
experiencing depression,
especially when they're
incarcerated. Um, but again, it
has to be really that extreme
level for it to reach the the
level for a not competent now
the opposite of delusion mania
that can definitely be
problematic. Uh, manic symptoms
are basically rapid speech.
Often there's grandiose
delusions. They're not sleeping
flight of ideas, so those
individuals are gonna have a lot
more impairing.
Symptoms that certainly will
impact all three of these
prongs.
Inside and judgment. Um most, if
not all mental health disorders
have the, um
Problem of lack of insight. Um
you know, certain people
definitely do have really good
insight into their mental
illness. But the folks that I'm
typically evaluating, um how
very poor insight into their
mental health conditions. They
often do not think that they
have mental health issues. Um,
and that's why we have this, um
Pattern of medication, non
compliance or inconsistent
medication because they lack
insight into their condition.
Insight is also very pro, uh,
problematic when somebody has
delusional version of events,
um, when they believe
Their delusions related to their
charges that makes it
impossible for an individual to
pursue the defense strategy of
not guilty by reason of
insanity, for example, because
they need to be able to say
On the stand, I. I know that
what I believe, then, is not
true. I now understand that
those beliefs were my mental
illness, and that's not what is
real.
They need to be able to do that.
to be able to really move
forward, and, uh, participate in
that strategy. For example, I've
already mentioned that with
those belief systems can also
Impact their testimony, impacts
their decision making it impacts
their ability to understand
whether you know to take a plea
or not things of that nature.
So now we'll dive in a little
bit more to, um, the specific
components of the evaluation.
the doctor explained. Sort of
what elements she's looking for
When conducting the evaluation,
and now we'll provide a little
bit of additional information
and follow up regarding the, um
training and specification for
the evaluator and, um, sort of
the evaluation process and
speaking a little bit more to
those timelines.
So as we mentioned before, um
not all PhDs. Not all
psychologists can perform
forensic evaluations. It does
take, um, training and
specialization and allow the
doctor to speak more to that,
Um, in in terms of those
qualifications, But really, the
role is distinct, and it is
intended to provide information
and an opinion to the court. Um,
while those evaluations can
absolutely include a diagnosis
and treatment recommendations,
um, that is not the sole
purpose. The sole purpose is
really to provide a
recommendation or an opinion, I
suppose, is more accurate to
say, um on competency.
And we do just want to speak a
little bit more, um, to the
contractor model. As I knew that
That was a question earlier from
the representative Reed, Um,
about the evaluators and, um,
the the numbers sort of looking
a little bit different. Um, we
have that at 22 forensic
evaluators in the state and the
reason for that discrepancy, Um,
Representative Reed mentioned 12
and I'll let the doctor speak a
little bit to this as well. Um,
but it's related to the amount
of contracts and then the
evaluators under those
contracts. So do you wanna speak
a little bit more on that piece?
Yeah. So I just want to clarify
the
There are 12 current
contractors, but some of those
contractors have multiple
evaluators. So, for example, my
com my private practice gold
standard Forensics. We have four
evaluators in our practice. Um,
you know, I know that Max Anne
Schwartz, for example, has a
number of evaluators. Uh, Doctor
Susan Caves has a number of
evaluators. So those are that's
where the discrepancy in numbers
comes from. There are 12
contracts, but some of the
contractors have multiple
evaluators, and those are
varying degrees of training.
Education. So you know, all of
my evaluators have PhDs. Um,
Some of the other contractors
have both PHD S and master's
level clinicians. So there's a
varying degree of that, Um, the
the 22 in state basically
indicates the evaluators that
are located in New Mexico
because we also have a number of
evaluators that are outside of
New Mexico that perform these
evaluations remotely. Uh, so we
have, I think.
Roughly 4 to 6 and I actually
have the person who's in charge
of these things. So she can tell
me exactly how many out of state
contractors by giving me the
OK, but we have many out of
state. Do we have
I saw four, but it could be
wrong. She's in charge of the
contract. So that's why I'm
looking to her six is what OK
six is what I thought I was 4 to
6. So yeah, six out of state, um
But I also want who got really
loud there for a second. I also
wanna say that while the number
of evaluators is certainly a
concern, um it's
It's not the only problem,
right? So
The main problem is the
contractor model because while
we have potentially a sufficient
number of evaluators to meet the
needs of the referrals
How many those Each of those
evaluators take is up to that
person, right? Because they're
they're a contractor. We can't
tell them you have to do 12
evaluations a month. You we
We're not able to mandate that
right so each evaluator can
decide to do no evaluations for
three months if they want to.
Well, I think that's not true.
They do have to do it a minimum
number of evaluations but over
an average but they really have
flexibility on how many cases
they want to or are willing to
do. Um, whereas, you know
Forensic mental health system.
You know, we have employees that
are dedicated to me, and they do
have deliverables right. So many
states have a model where the
evaluators are state employees
They are required to do X number
of evaluations. It's somewhere
you know it arranges state by
state, but 10 to 14 evaluations
a month is typical. And, uh, a
manageable number of
evaluations. So that's one of
the issues. Uh, the other issue
that we've seen across the
nation.
Because we are not the only
state that has a competency
crisis as everyone is, I'm sure
aware the problem is when we
just create more evaluations. We
just give more evaluators.
They're sort of the If you build
it, they will come problem and
so we've seen this in. For
example, Washington State where
where they had true blood versus
Washington State, they rapidly
have been hiring evaluators over
the last. Uh, I believe 10 years
and they continue to see the
referrals, increase and increase
and increase so
Well, having a number of
evaluators to meet our needs is
certainly important, um, is also
important to address the more
systemic issues that are
resulting in individuals needing
a competency evaluation. So what
I mean by that is mental Health
services, wraparound services
potential diversion options.
There are other things that um
other states are finding and I
don't want to speak too much to
it that have been more helpful
in addressing this issue than
just
Getting more evaluators so
To be clear. We do need more
evaluators, but there are other
Solutions as well. Sure. So
whenever I talk about
competency, a common question
that I have is what does it look
like? What are you doing? You
know what is the components of
it? Because it kind of seems
like this black hole. Um you
know where I go in. I talk to
somebody, Uh, not for an hour.
My evaluations typically are
about four hours long, um, and
can include testing at times if
necessary, but
It's helpful, I think to know
what goes into an evaluation. So
when I meet with somebody, the
first thing that I'm gonna do is
do a psychosocial interview with
them. I wanna know their, uh you
know their mental health
history, their developmental
history, substance use, uh,
education, employment, medical
history, legal history, You
know, have they ever done a
competency evaluation before? Do
they know what the outcome was
things of that nature, So I'm
going to be getting a
comprehensive history of from
the individual. The next thing
that I'm
Do is I'm gonna do a B like a
mental status exam. And what
that means is I'm gonna be
checking their memory. I'm gonna
be checking their attention. Um,
through sort of bedside methods
to do that, like, count
backwards and sevens from 100
Spell World backwards. Here are
three words. I want you to
remember them. I'm gonna ask you
in a few minutes, right? So I'm
just doing a a brief check on an
individual's current functioning
on their mental status. I'm
gonna ask them about their sleep
their mood I'm gonna ask about
Energy appetite sort of just
kind of a global picture of how
the person is doing right now,
Um, In my opinion, the mental
status portion of the evaluation
is
Almost the most important it's
it's only second to the actual
competency interview because
competency is right now, How are
you functioning today? So
The mental status exam is the
most important aspect of that
because it's going to tell me
how that person is functioning
right now.
Once I'm done the mental status,
Um I usually will do a This is
me personally, Not all
evaluators do this, but I
usually do it like in a an
effort screen Or sometimes
people call it a malingering
measure. But typically I'm
looking to see if someone is
putting forth good effort into
my evaluation with them. Um,
there's two subsets to that one
is just general effort. The next
one is specific to legal
feigning right. So is the person
purposely presenting themselves.
Lacking legal knowledge, are
they trying to present
themselves as more impaired than
they usually are? So I'm
Always screening for that to
ensure that I'm getting, um you
know good participation in my
evaluation because that is very
important for me to be able to
come up with an accurate and
helpful opinion to the court.
The next thing that I'm gonna do
is my competency interview and
so I have a semi structured
interview that I've developed
based on, uh two separate
published competency evaluation
measures, uh, that I've also
added some questions of my own,
because neither of those
measures really
Effectively.
Cover the three prongs that New
Mexico has, um, so, for example,
you know, reasons for
punishment. Neither of the two
measures that I use adequately
address that because it's not a
common prong there. I think
there's only five states that
have that. So the reason that I
use the semi structured
interview that I have
Formulated because it adequately
addresses the three prongs that
we are trying to assess.
Once I've gone through my semi
structured interview, um
I will determine if the
additional testing is needed so
usually additional testing is
needed when an individual has
cognitive concerns, so that can
be the result of intellectual
disability or a
neurodevelopmental disability.
It can also be the result of a
traumatic brain injury. Uh,
dementia, Alzheimer's, uh, you
know any kind of injury to the
brain, So those are the
The next steps, basically, and I
determined that from my
interview usually my mental
status, Uh, brief mental status
exam will will indicate if
somebody is experiencing
cognitive symptoms. Um, we also
always get referral information
so that whoever raised
competency nine times out of 10.
It's the defendant, the defense
attorney, but they will. Usually
we require that they provide us
a statement of concerns. And so
if there are concerns related to
cognitive abilities,
intellectual understanding
things like that. You
I will sometimes do testing
because there has been a concern
raised by the referring party.
Other testing can sometimes
include, um other than cognitive
and intellectual testing. If I
think that somebody is not being
forthright or not engaged in the
evaluation, I might do more
feigning or malingering testing.
Um
Some of other news would also do
what we call like multi multi
symptom testing, which is like a
self report test of about 344
questions That'll give us more
information about mental health
symptoms.
The third component. Um, so
there's the interview component.
There's the testing component
and then the third component is
a collateral information, which
is essential to an evaluation.
Um, I need some kind of
collateral information to be
able to
Form helpful opinions, Uh, in
other words, not just relying on
self report information. Whether
that information comes from the
jail from a person that knows
this individual really well,
like a parent or guardian, or
maybe a caseworker, Uh, mental
health records from community
treatment providers. I try to
get any records that I can, uh I
also will review and I courts to
see if the person's ever had
competency evaluations done
before if I can get the prior
competency evaluation.
To review That is something that
I always do, because that can be
really helpful in my evaluation,
But for individuals that are in
custody, I always want the jail
records or at minimum. I wanna
talk to the jail psychiatrist
to inform you of that person's
functioning in the jail. This is
one of the areas that we have,
uh, struggle and a barrier
because individuals in New
Mexico this is different in
other states, but in New
Mexico's individuals have to
sign a release of information.
There's there's multiple issues
with that that I won't
necessarily go into right now,
But we can't get records unless
somebody signs a release of
information. Um, and that is a
huge barrier for evaluators to
be able to complete their
evaluations.
Um
When I write my report, all of
that information is gonna go
into the report, and sometimes I
will form a diagnostic. Uh,
opinion or formulation, And
sometimes I don't because it's
not required. We don't have to
have a diagnosis. What is
required is a description of the
persons.
Impairment and functioning
deficits that are specifically
related to their competency
abilities. So as I mentioned
before, just having a diagnosis
is not enough for somebody to be
incompetent. And so, therefore a
diagnosis isn't necessarily even
relevant. I would say that most
of the time I am providing a
diagnosis because that is
helpful communication for, uh,
restoration services, a lot of
the courts and attorneys know a
lot of these.
Go see? So when you provide a
diagnosis, it's just helpful
information already, But there
are times when I don't I. I
can't give a clear diagnosis
because the person's not really
fitting well in one category,
And so in those cases, I will
just describe the impairments
like, uh, disorganized thinking.
Hallucinations. Uh, you know,
attention issues. Uh, sometimes
I don't have enough information
to be specific or precise. For
example, uh, intellectual
disability diagnosis. We are
To have developmental. Uh, data
right information from the
person's developmental period.
Um, I. I think representative
Reed mentioned school records,
Uh, New Mexico only retains
school records for I think, four
years, so if you have an adult,
you're not going to get school
records for that person because
they've already been destroyed.
So we are limited sometimes in
the information that we are able
to receive, And so that means we
have to be non-specific in our
diagnosis. So sometimes I might
give
Unspecified neurodevelopmental
disorder because, I I don't have
the information available to be
able to provide an intellectual
disability diagnosis. But as I
mentioned before the specific
diagnosis is not what's
important. What's important is
the impairment present or not
present in an individual.
Um and I. I wanted to address
the the the gender.
And race bias question earlier.
we we have not done any any
analysis of that. We do We have
data. Of course. Um, but we have
not actually done any of the
research for for New Mexico.
Specific, um
You know what we do know which
is just
Expected is that there are a lot
more males that are being
referred for competency.
However, there are a lot more
males that are just as involved
so that you know is makes sense,
of course, that we would have
more males being referred, Um
But we don't have the specific
data here in New Mexico that
speaks to that. But we do have a
lot of data that we plan to
really start looking into any
patterns that we can see as far
as gender race. Um you know, age
socio economic status, things
like that. We do have some data
that we know about in New
Mexico, For example, our rate of
incompetency is higher than
other states or the national
average. Um, so our rate of
incompetency is 60%, where
I believe the national average
is more along the lines of 30 to
40%. There are a lot of reasons
for that. A lot of it has to do
with our specific population.
Um our lack of mental health
resources or lack of rest
Restoration. Um or the limited
restoration. Uh, the limited
individuals that receive
restoration. Uh so we have a lot
of individuals that are, um what
we call familiar faces or more
derogatory way of saying it is
the revolving door problem.
Um, we have individuals that are
Refractory psychosis, which
basically means very difficult
to treat. Uh we also have, um,
a lot of states have this
problem, but we have a you know
a significant, uh, substance use
issue that makes it even harder
to treat the psychosis that
individuals experience, so
there's a lot of factors that go
into you know why we have a
higher in competency rate. Um
That are also relevant to, uh
why We have a long wait list for
an evaluations as well.
And just to sort of pick up on
that piece. Um, there's no limit
to how many times a person can
receive an evaluation so someone
can have an evaluation and one
month later be ordered for
another evaluation, So I just
want to sort of put that in
context, you know, as the doctor
was speaking about her process
for gathering this information
requesting these records
reviewing all of these findings,
uh, preparing the report, Of
course, the interview itself. Um
so somebody you know, could very
easily come back in front of her
again or another evaluator in a
very short
Of time. Um and so I just wanted
to share that in terms of
looking at resources, but also
looking at the impact to the
individual participating in this
process numerous times in a
short period of time, um, can be
very disruptive, um, and have an
impact on th those family
members and those caregivers
associated with that individual.
Um, so this process is extremely
complicated, um, very nuanced
and very time consuming for
everyone involved, and so I just
wanted to share that in terms of
how it impacts the proceeding of
the case and why some of these
Or delayed or take longer,
especially if you have an
evaluation scheduled and the
person refuses to come to it.
Then you're kind of starting
over your rescheduling. Um,
you're trying to get that person
you know, back engaged. Um, if
they stop the evaluation halfway
through, you're also kind of
rescheduling and and trying to
pick back up with them. So those
are some other elements that
increase, um, the length of time
that it takes to complete these
and just because, as we shared
in the earlier slide that the
whole process of the evaluation
of the report can take up to 30
hours, um and I would imagine
that that's just pretty
standard.
It's not kind of considering
some unique circumstances, so,
um, as it currently stands, you
know, someone could go through
this process numerous times in a
very short window of time.
Yeah. And just to add to that,
um, I often get asked by judges,
or, uh, you know other
individuals. What's the What's
the
Expiration on this evaluation,
and that's a very, very
difficult question to answer
because competency is so
present. Focused. Um,
clinically, I cannot answer that
question. That's something that
I leave up to legislator or
courts to decide how they want
to handle that, because for me,
I could do an evaluation.
Theoretically today with
somebody and then see them
tomorrow, and they might be
wholly improved because the
medications have finally started
to kick in, right so
Then certain conditions. Um it
is, you know, more likely that
they're they're presentation is
going to be stable, like
traumatic brain injury like
developmental disability. But
even in those cases, there are
things that can be, um
triggering and can worsen the
individual's presentation. Right
Substance use stress. Uh, they
have another head injury right
so things can impact an
individuals, uh, functioning
almost on a day to day so I
don't have a clinical answer to
that. But
That's why unfortunately,
The individuals just have to
keep going through these
evaluations because I can't
necessarily say as an evaluator.
Well, I saw him a month ago. So
just use that evaluation. It's
it's
It's just as good. I have no
idea if it is because I have to
meet with the person so from a
clinical perspective, that's an
issue, but obviously, you know
Hasn't spoon mentioned the
individual having to go through.
I mean, I've had people that
I've seen.
From the record have had 1520
evaluations in their life,
right? So I mean, that is
extremely
Resource.
I don't even know what the word
is, but it's obviously very
stressful for the individual,
but it's it's it's consuming
resources in a lot of different
ways.
Yeah, I think I think I've
already um
Discuss the slide that just got
skipped. Um
So I just wanted to highlight a
few things. Um, the most common
condition when an individual is
referred for competency as a
psychotic spectrum disorder. Um,
we frequently see substance use
in individuals with both psycho
psychotic symptom disorders and
also cognitive disorders. So we
see substance use basically
across the board in in this
population, but additional, um
The the third most common
condition is obviously cognitive
issues like I mentioned before
traumatic brain injury. Um you,
you know, neurodevelopmental
disorders, things of that
nature. Um
These are not quick or easy.
They should not take one hour
interviews and one hour report
writing they are
There's a lot of there is a lot
at stake as a result of these
evaluations, as has already been
discussed today. Um and they
they need to be thorough and
well done. Uh and they need to
have all of the components of a
good evaluation that I mentioned
before a full interview testing
if needed collateral information
and a competency interview. Uh,
because I've also seen
evaluations that didn't even ask
about any competency related
questions so they are not
Quick. They are not easy. They
are very resource. Um
Heavy and
I also wanted to. Um, I know
this is actually coming out of
out of left wing. But I. I
wanted to also address the
weight that has been discussed
today that you know the
evaluation wait time. Um
We do actually have recent data
that, uh, I think on average in
the state we are
Getting to individuals that are
in custody within the statutory
30 days. So on average in New
Mexico, we are from the court
order date for people that are
in custody. There is a report
being filed within 30 days for
people that are in custody. Our
big issue is our out of custody
population.
These individuals are very
difficult to locate. They often
do not show for their
evaluations. Sometimes we don't
even have a phone number to be
able to contact them to do the
evaluation. So when you see
these average wait times, and
they include both in custody and
out of custody data, it's very
misleading because we we have
people on our out of custody
that have been waiting
technically a year to be, you
know, or longer to be evaluated.
We
Have no way of finding that
individual right? And so that is
where our issue is, Um, you
know, defense attorneys lose
contact with their clients. They
don't check in. They're not on
active supervision so they don't
have to check in with probation.
Uh, they move states. We've had
individuals that were deceased.
And we didn't know you know, so
there are a lot of issues for
the out of custody that make it
very, very challenging for us In
the second. We are we are trying
to come up with solutions.
This issue, particularly, uh,
we, you know, we try to. We're
double booking ourselves because
people don't show up for the
appointments. We're trying to
get through our out of custody
Waitlist, but it is just
challenging, uh, being able to
locate, uh, the evals. The
defendants are not showing up.
And as I said, before, we
sometimes don't have ways to
find them. So that's that's one
of the big issues, So I just
wanted to highlight that we are
since the since the rule has
been instituted. We are we are
much better at actually
achieving the 30 days.
For in custody, but we have a
lot of challenges for the out of
custody. And just to add to that
as well. You know, those reasons
are nuanced for why they're not
showing up. Um you know, it
could be as simple as they are
not aware that they even have an
appointment. Um or they're not
oriented to the date that it
currently is versus when that
appointment is or, um, you know,
like the doctor mentioned
earlier in the presentation, all
of these prongs of competency,
you know, the insight the
judgment. Um, the ability to
kind of block out some of that
external stimuli or that
internal stimuli rather um all
That leads to you know the
ability to find that person and
the ability for them to show up
for those evaluations. Um, In
addition, you know these this
population as you all are
probably very well aware are
lacking some basic needs, You
know, basic shelter. Basic food.
Um, and some of the you know,
transportation, and all of those
elements are part of this
conversation about, um, why? It
is so difficult to locate and to
engage, um, and to do
And I think the final I I sort
of take home point because this
is an issue that, um
Really came kind of we so the
video evaluations a lot of a lot
of individuals or a lot of, you
know.
Attorneys or judges, you know,
have had the impression that
video evaluations are not as
good as in person evaluations
that they're limited in some way
When COVID-19 hit, we had no
choice. We either did not do
evaluations or we did video
evaluations, and certainly we
couldn't just not do
evaluations. Um
You know we were. We were
willing to go into the jail, but
the jail would not let us in.
Um you know, we essentially
across the nation had to start
doing a video evaluations and as
a result, we actually
Gathered a lot of research to
show that it actually is
effective and is as as effective
as in person. Now. There are
certain circumstances where in a
video evaluation is not going to
be effective, and that's when we
need to do cognitive testing
because that does need to be due
in be done in person. And so in
the second, uh I can speak to
that, because, as I mentioned
I'm the court clinic director,
we do all of our evaluations
over video. Um, except when we
know that individuals might need
cognitive testing. Then we do
that in person, because we wanna
make sure that we do
The cognitive testing in person.
Uh, but generally, the research
has been showing that the video
evaluations, um, are effective
and that they are very helpful,
especially for rural states, Um
and and, well rural parts of the
states or states that have
limited evaluation evaluators
again. We have more evaluators
now because we can do video. We
have those out of state C out of
state evaluators, so I just
wanted to also highlight that
point as well.
And we also just wanna leave you
all with the with the idea that,
you know, having a mental health
issue or a behavioral health
disorder or diagnosis or even a
dual diagnosis does not
necessarily mean that that
person is incompetent. Um, as we
spoke about earlier in the first
presentation, you know the the
cases that we're looking at is
4% of the criminal cases are
involved in the competency
process, but that does not speak
to all of the mental illness and
the behavioral health issues
that are involved in the
criminal justice system. So, um,
we're definitely looking at a at
a big picture.
And this is sort of one sliver
of that picture. Um, is specific
to the competency process. So
thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members. We will now
sit for questions.
Uh, thank you very much. That
was very helpful information. I
have representative Luhan on my
list. Are there others OK?
Anyone else?
All right. So far,
Representative Luke,
Representative Lujan. Thank you,
madam Chair.
Yes, This was quite a bit of
information to remind me back of
my
Uh, psychology classes. You and,
um
Um, but I wanna I wanna kind of
break this down and really say
that this is a no blame game.
We're not here to
To to build out something where
we're pointing fingers. This is
this is a team effort and I'm
I'm
I'm happy to participate in this
with everybody. So I wanted to
just kind of bring up those two
things that you just mentioned
about the custody in custody
versus out of custody
evaluations and and really the
challenges that are there and
also the challenges.
Um, where I really picked up on
Where the record keeping and
I think one of the the biggest,
uh, challenges we have is that
is there's a communication and
not having a centralized type of
model where we're housing all
this information.
And
Keeping up to date with those
records for our evaluations, and
for not just for them, but for
the entire system for the
judiciary, and and, um
individuals themselves to know
what is going on and and where
they are in the process. And as
you mentioned, too, it's it's
constantly changing. Um, my my
issue is
Is if an individual will have
multiple cases.
And then multiple evaluations
set or ordered in each of those
cases and how that expends time
and is inefficient and creates a
type of dysfunction,
particularly to that individual
and really kind of infringing on
on their rights To a degree, I
would I would suspect
Um so I wanted to bring that up.
as as I'm kind of grabbing at
what is going on in in our
conversation and and
Getting a summary of things just
for myself as well as others. So
When we're looking at, um
I think it was brought up to if
there is
Are multiple.
Cases and orders if you will,
and an individual is out of
sorts and comes back usually
when we see them back in the
system if they're out of custody
because they've re offended, or
there's a warrant is that
correct? Then chair
The humanitarian representative
Lu Han. Yes, that is often what
what occurs when we have an out
of custody individual and that
we've lost contact with and then
they do.
Get another charge. That's
usually when we when we locate
them again is when they have a
new charge, and they are then in
custody. I will say that when
somebody has multiple cases, um
as an evaluator, we typically
will do one interview and
address all of the cases so we
don't necessarily do separate
evaluations for the separate
cases, But that's of course, if
we know about all the cases, um
so as an evaluator, I will go on
to NM courts and look the person
up to see.
Um or we have access to Odyssey
so we will look up and see if
there are any other active or
open cases. Uh And then, if
there are court orders for those
cases cause sometimes
individuals have cases and they
don't have a court order for
competency. And so I am unable
to address uh, a case that does
not have a court order. But if
there are multiple cases and
multiple court orders, even if
they're not consolidated, I will
do one interview and evaluation
and I will address all of the
open cases so
That the person doesn't have to
go through multiple evaluations
and that the state doesn't have
to pay for multiple evacuations.
Um, so that's typically what we
do.
Thank you, madam Chair.
And that's to your credit, but
that's not excuse me,
necessarily.
What happens or mandated in any
way. Thank you. Um, man, I'm
sure so that's that's one big
issue. I think that's being
revealed in and part of the
conversation today. The other
thing is
Um, looking at a model
Um, how we create a community
restoration type of model and
what that will allow us to, you
know, how would that allow? Um
indi individual individuals who
have been coming through the
system.
Um, who are if you will fre
frequently coming through the
system? How would that
Just even based on what you're
saying and what you're able to
provide. How will that type of
model? Help? Um
Time wise and and the
individual, more importantly
with services, etcetera.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
representative Lujan. Um so I
want to speak first to so that
what we know nationally about
outpatient restoration, So in
other states, the biggest
concerns have been, um their
their bottleneck is in
restoration beds.
So individuals are waiting in
custody for a
In constitutional
unconstitutional amount of time
for a bed. We don't have the
same problem. Um our our
bottleneck is for the
evaluations, not necessarily for
beds. So outpatient restoration
helps. Um that issue, however,
outpatient restoration is also
beneficial because we don't have
to restrict an individual's
liberty by having them
involuntarily committed into a
locked facility. Um, so out.
Restoration is the least
restrictive model, and that is
Recommended when appropriate,
and it can also obviously
Provide that continued support
and treatment. And, um
Supervision in a way for an
individual. I'm not in a way it
is supervision. Um, and in New
Mexico. I think that it is given
the constrictions and the
restraints of our legislative
and statute and rule. I think
that the outpatient restoration
is going to be a very helpful
model.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I really
appreciate that answer and
getting back to, um if
An individual man if they are
kept beyond, uh, a certain time
limit. Can they not be move? Can
the
Yeah. Be the case being moved to
dismissal.
I'm sure Thank you, Madam. Chair
Representative Luhan? Yes. Um,
the rule is a is a, uh
All safe essentially where if
there are evaluate evaluations,
not having occurred within that
time frame or defendants are
waiting. There is a legal
mechanism for the defense to,
um, file for the dismissal.
Thank you, madam Chair. Uh, And
in lieu of time, I'm gonna end
there. Thank you. Thank you,
Representative Um Senator Sila
Lopez.
Thank you. Um, I really
appreciated the answer. Madam
Chair about having the data.
What are the plans? Um, for
reviewing the data to look for
any kind of issues of
disparities in race, ethnicity,
socioeconomics gender.
Thank you, madam Chair and
Senator Cedillo Lopez. Um
I think that we have, um, a lot
of research plans with the data
We have AAA really rich data
set, um, based on the way that
the because we have the contract
model, um evaluators are
required to upload their reports
and upload certain demographic
information. And, um basic
information, such as the
opinions that was rendered the
diagnosis that was offered, um
ethnic and gender and racial,
uh, I think even
Sexual orientation data is
sometimes collected as well. So
I think there is a wealth of
data that is available. Um and I
believe that there are several
research questions that are, um
Being looked at, but I don't
have the specifics of that at
this time. Um, I, I think
Our first goal is to evaluate
how well uh uh many of our
programs are working so more
like a program evaluation. Uh,
assessment. So, for example, in
the second, you know, that is a
A
Relatively recent clinic, So I
think there's a lot of, um
Desire to evaluate the
effectiveness. Excuse me of that
model. Um, because there are
plans or ideas to potentially
expand that to other parts of
the state. And so I think the
first order of business is to
evaluate the effectiveness of
that, Uh, initial model, but it
certainly we have a wealth of
information that is going to be
many a PHD students. Uh,
delight.
Uh,
thank you, madam chair that
That's
Really good to know, um and and
especially because one of the
things when it's
Just bruising the studies. Small
studies about, um, really, how
badly trans individuals have
been treated in the system. So,
um, it it's really good to get
that data and the other small
question I have. I just wanna
confirm that everything you've
talked about was about
competence to stand trial, and
it would be a much different
evaluation. If you're looking to
see whether to commit someone.
Thank you, madam Chair and
Senator Sedillo Lopez. That is
correct. My presentation today
was solely on competency to
stand trial. Um and and, yes, a
civil commitment. Evaluation is
a very different evaluation.
There are some similar
components. Um, I used to work
for NBH. And when I worked for
an MBH I as a psychologist and
forensic evaluator, I worked on
both the civil and the forensic
side, so I used to do the
evaluations for civil
commitment, and I also used to
do the
I didn't see to stand trial
evaluations, so there are
similar components such as the
history taking this clinical
psychosocial mental status. Um,
but the the standard uh, and the
Legal components are are vastly
different.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Uh,
representative Bargo.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for that question. Uh,
Senator Cedillo Lopez.
Um, thank you, ladies for your
input and doctor for your
insight. Um and
First of all, I just wanna say
I'm really glad to hear that you
do vide video conferencing, and
I certainly understand that
you're not able to do the
cognitive portion of that, Um,
having said that, though, um,
Madam chair. I just want to go a
little bit deeper into the way
that you, um
Obtain data. Um and
One of the reasons for that is,
um and I know that your job is
not to do the modeling for the
trends in our state, but I think
it's important to note to kind
of follow those trends to see
what areas of the state are, you
know.
More significantly being
impacted by, uh, maybe our per
capita, Uh, percentages of
individuals that are having
these problems because that
helps us to establish you know
where the state maybe needs to
look at further to
Provide jobs or provide, um,
access for transportation. And
so people can get to their
respective appointments. Or or
you know for a cognitive test.
I'm going to guess that you know
those cognitive tests are
probably done in Albuquerque. Is
that probably safe to
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
representative Bargo, Uh,
It. It depends, um so evaluators
across the state will do
cognitive testing. And so if you
know, we have an evaluator
that's located in Las Cruces. So
when she does evaluations, she
will do cognitive testing in Las
Cruces. Um, I only service the
second and so when I do
evaluations in the second, then
Yes, certainly the cognitive
testing would be in the second,
but that should be a component
of
Um, any evaluators evaluation
across anywhere in the state?
Um, I would add.
That we do have out of state
evaluators that are remote,
Many, if not most of them are in
the second. Judicial. Um not
Not all of them, but many and
what we provide in the second
court clinic is access to a
psychos that does testing and so
when an individual is an
evaluator, who was out of state
is not able to do that testing
in person because they're
obviously not local. What we as
the court clinic provide is
access to a trained individual
that can perform that testing
for them so that they can
utilize it for their opinions.
Um, but in short to answer your
question, cognitive testing
should and is being done.
A across the state.
Um Madam Chair and that's that's
really good to hear that that
that is accessible because you
know often you I heard you loud
and clear, Madam chair that you
said a lot of times, people
don't come to their appointments
or they don't show or you don't
know where they where they live,
or you don't know how to reach
them. So it's important that
The service is accessible
throughout the state. And and I
and I know it's hard to do
because you only have so many
people to do that, Um, is there
a way madam chair that you could
send? Um, send us or at least
send me the data in terms of
like
Statewide. Where are these C,
where services are available,
and maybe, um, population, um,
of who's being serviced and the
breakdown of, um racial and
ethnic
Um do you have that information
that you could just
Like a summary.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair,
representative Bargo. I do not
have that data, but I believe
that
Somebody has it
so we can by way of
Somebody can get it to you. I
don't personally have it. But
II I believe that Doctor
Bannier. I would just be very
interested in that madam chair.
Could we have it sent to Nancy
and Nancy can send it to
everyone so that you know
they're
That would be very helpful.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you
so much.
Uh, thank you, Representative.
Anyone else? Um, well, I really
appreciate the work that all of
you put into this presentation.
It was very helpful. And I want
to thank you, Um Miss Jones and
others in AOC staff because
you've all been very responsive
and and helpful with suggestions
about things. Thanks much and,
um, don't be surprised if we
come back and ask you for more
help. No good deed goes
unpunished, but, um, thanks
again, and I appreciate your
Time and thank you.
All right. We are on, um, our
next item.
And I see that we have Holly,
Aga J and Chief General Counsel
Office of the governor, and, um
Bein Baker senior policy, um,
public safety policy advisor.
Appreciate your coming, um, the
items a little bit open ended.
Um, just, uh, I view this as a
way to start our communicating
with the committee about what we
might expect in terms of
governor proposals, how we can
assist in vetting those
proposals and so on. So the
floor is yours, Ms. Uh,
Purposely pick the bad ones. You
know that right? They do.
Um
It actually.
Yeah. Thank you. Thanks very
much. Thanks, John. I appreciate
it.
You really have to calibrate
yourself, and I apologize for
that. You shouldn't have to.
Thank you, Um
So I'm gonna be using the terms
a O and assisted outpatient
treatment.
Um, with the full knowledge that
we may need to actually change
that phrase, um, because it's
something that is currently
being used in certain locations.
I think some people have very
strong opinions about it, Um, on
both sides of it.
Um, I'm saying it simply as a
matter of convenience for all of
us at the moment, but it's not a
term that I'm wedded to. Um, let
me also say that, uh, by no
means am I, a subject matter
expert in this area. What I have
done is at the request of of my
boss is look at the different
systems throughout the country.
And sort of have had the luxury
of getting to pick from them
things that I think are
effective in particular
California and Alaska have done
um, certain kind of renovations
to their program that I've
relied on heavily in putting
together. Um, what it is that we
would like to do. Mr Dolan has
put together an initial draft of
our bill. There's a civil side
and then as we as we know,
there's also the criminal side
but again.
Uh, incompetence versus you
know, civil commitment are two
different.
Two different buckets. Um, as an
initial matter anybody on this
committee or or really anyone
else in the Legislature who
would like to come? See? Uh
representative Chandler? Madam
chair has already seen it. Um
Mr Vice chair may come up later
to see it as well. Uh, I have
basically a conference room that
is filled with those enormous
pads. Uh, sticky pads of paper.
Um, where I have just been kind
of writing out the proposed
system. I'm I'm happy to walk
any of you through, Um
What we have is a complete
Retooling.
Of our currently a OT as we know
it is available in a handful of
judicial districts in the state.
Under the bill that we are
proposing it will be mandatory
in every judicial district.
We have to get to the community
based treatment that we have
been discussing.
Additionally, it must be just as
easy for a police officer to
take someone for crisis
stabilization as it is to take
them to jail.
Because if the jail is 20
minutes away, and the nearest
place for crisis stabilization
is an hour away the vast
majority of the time. I think
that person so as part of that,
starting on the civil side
Um right now.
As the statute reads in order to
be
Eligible for these services. You
have to base essentially have,
um
An immediate
History of violence.
And excuse me and or repeated.
Intensive treatments within a
certain period of time.
The current the
The new model will have
Much broader swath of
eligibility essentially the
eligibility requirements would
be, uh, somebody is suffering
from severe mental illness.
And is unsafe.
In their community or making
others unsafe and then and that
the, uh a would be beneficial
for the scope of who can apply
for such an order is also it's
about 12. Different categories
of people. Uh, it could be
somebody who, uh, runs the
homeless shelter where somebody
is residing. It can be a
qualified health care provider.
Um, it can be a a first
responder. It can be a family
member.
Once a petition and again this
is on the civil side.
Goes to
The court.
You then have the opportunity.
Or and let me say at every
stage, um, the individual that
respondent in this case is going
to be entitled to counsel
throughout.
From beginning to end.
So once we go in front of the,
uh of the court.
There will be an opportunity for
the respondent with the
respondent's attorney.
Um and the county attorney.
To put together.
Excuse me. What is essentially,
um, you can either put together
what? I'm gonna call an
agreement.
Or there will be a plan so the
opportunity to put together an
agreement means everybody, uh,
works together on what services
the respondent needs.
And if there is complete
agreement, then there is a court
order. So it's still an order.
Um
For the respondent to receive
those services.
One thing that is also very
different is that and I'm not
wedded to this model at all the
way I initially had it was
county by county. Um, the
services have to be available.
We then started looking at maybe
in different judicial districts.
Then we sort of started making a
little bit of a broader chunk
and divided the state into five
regions. But all services have
to be available in some way.
Somewhat locally.
Uh, as part of that, because
compliance with this plan
Complaints with the court order.
What's going to have to be
included in there is are the
services that are
That this person is being told
to avail themselves of are they
even available to this person?
So when you're making a decision
about whether somebody is being
compliant or non compliant, it
makes complete sense that you
have to make a determination
about you know, are they being
non compliant? Or is the service
that they're supposed to be
availing themselves of not
available?
If there can't be an agreement
on
What the plan should look like
for the respondent. Um then the
respondent will go through an
evaluation and the evaluator
will recommend a treatment plan.
Then the judge can
Make her own decision about
whether to adopt that plan.
You know, F soup to nuts or
adapt a little bit.
At that point, you end up in,
uh, you have status hearings
every 60 days.
That feels
Rather rapid to me, But I also
think, um
But if you extend it longer than
that, to 90 days or something
else, that you're gonna start
losing people, they won't come
back as often. I think you have
to have sort of that.
Uh, continuing contact with
folks.
These these plans will be
available on the civil side for
for a year. A judge can extend
it for a year. If the judge
wants the person thinks the
judge thinks that the respondent
needs additional treatment at
every step of the way.
Um the idea is going to be that
the least restrictive means are
used for the for the individual.
Um, if the individual is non
compliant.
The judge may consider that in
whether or not the least
restrictive means that are
currently in place are enough.
Whether there's something more
restrictive needs to be imposed.
Also at every step, there's a
tribal notification piece as
well, Um
So, uh, there will be notice to,
uh, whatever tribe if somebody
self identifies as being a
member of a federally recognized
tribe, there will be tribal
notes so a judge can consider
non compliance.
As part of, um you know what
Next steps might look like.
The judge may not consider
failure to take medication. Uh,
as part of that, that's the only
piece that's carved out.
Where we end up here is
Again. What's different and new
is this is gonna have to be
everywhere.
It's gonna have to be throughout
the state.
Because people have to be able
to be in their communities to
get the treatment that they
need. If we're going to ask
people to do it
again, at least restrictive
outpatient
On their own setting it we have
to have those services
available.
Um
As currently designed. There are
three pilots.
The pilots will have
A year.
To put together their design
their budget to get the
providers.
On board.
And in town.
Everyone everywhere else will
have two years.
Again. This is not a time period
that I'm wedded to. I just think
it's gonna take time to rebuild
this. How do we get people to,
um, offer these services?
Uh, one suggestion that I've
that I've had, which I think is
a good one is to pay. Maybe
something like two times the
current Medicaid rates. There
has to be some sort of incentive
for the providers to be there.
And that will be statewide and
that is also one of the reasons
why we feel like doing this type
of massive overhaul, uh, in a
special session is important.
Because if we're gonna give
somebody a a one year runway to
get these programs launched, we
need to get it started sooner
rather than later. Um, also with
the 60 Day session coming up,
Um, books can get their budgets
in.
And you know any adjustments
that we need to make to whatever
it is that we accomplished
during a special session can
happen then as well.
That is of a very, very broad.
Um
Overview on the criminal side.
Uh, once again, the idea is
going to be to have services
available for folks that they
aren't being offered. Now, um
and again, those services just
have to be everywhere. Folks
won't use them.
Um one other thing that is
currently built in is the idea
that I was just referring to of
crisis stabilization where
police officer would have the
option not to even arrest
somebody for a misdemeanor.
And instead of the person agrees
can be taken for crisis
stabilization, So this keeps
them out of the criminal system
and gives them and and there are
again in the way I have it.
Three separate, um, kind of
Stabilization buckets. One is a
essentially like an urgent care
model where it's somebody can
stay there for 23 hours and 59
minutes, Right so up to 24
hours. Um then there can be
another mechanism where it's up
to seven days in patient. Um,
those are pre arrests mechanisms
that, um, I think are gonna be
important again to keep people
out of the, um
Out of the criminal justice
system and to give folks at
least the opportunity. Um if if
folks keep coming back and keep
coming through the system on the
more cynical side, what you
would be able to show is that
this person has had services
offered to them.
Um, those services are available
and have been offered and the
person and and just hasn't done
what it needed to do, Uh, for
the respondent.
Uh, again, so that is a very
high level. Um, look at it
again. I'm I'm happy to walk
anybody through the specifics or
show you my big charts. Um, but
in terms of the kind of
Moonshot that we're taking here.
It's it's big. It's It's very
big. It's going to be, um
It has to be. It has to be
completely a complete overhaul.
Um it's gonna be really
difficult, but I think one of
the things that's important to
remember here is that a lot of
people are so frustrated. This
is so big and so hard.
That it's really easy to just
throw our hands up and say
there's nothing we can do about
it because it's too hard. Um and
I'm I'm sure you know that I
don't work for somebody who
accepts that as an answer.
So we're gonna try.
Um, so that is the
That's that's the piece that I'm
here today to discuss with you
all. Um, Madam chair. I don't
know if you want to ask
questions about that now or move
on to Mr Baker. I'd suggest that
we move on to Mr Baker and Good
afternoon, Madam Chair. Members
of the Committee. Um, thank you
for allowing me the opportunity
to be here in front of you
today. Thank you for your work.
In the interim. This is a
varsity level topic that that
I've listened in and appreciated
the judge and the doctor and
representative from modern
topic I'm here to talk about,
uh, three total ideas, two of
which are likely criminal. Uh,
Statutes. Um, one is likely
galvanizing something that this
leg to law enforcement data
collection and sharing so first
I'm gonna start with the, uh,
felon in possession of a firearm
penalty enhancement. I've spoken
with many members of the
committee, uh, individually
about this, And you saw, um,
some bills like this during the
30 Day session, Uh, one of
which, in fact passed a
committee in in the House floor.
Um, before expiring. Um, but I
wanted to talk to you about some
of the relevant data that I've
collected for the governor in
the last, uh, calendar year,
which is really telling and and
surprised me. Uh, many of you
know, I've spent 27 years
serving our state as law
enforcement officer all over the
place in large communities or
largest, including our smallest,
Um, and I saw some trends. Uh,
the Metropolitan Detention
Center. Is the data set that I'm
going to use not because I think
it is representative of the
state of New Mexico because, I I
know that that is not true.
But it is the one that is
comprehensively collecting data
that we can use for this.
Which will bring back around to
the larger point when we get to
the data collection and sharing,
which I think is very important.
Um, so for the first four months
Uh, which we just finished of
This year, There have been 100
and 18, mostly men, men and
women arrested for the crime of
a felon in possession of
firearm.
The reason why I bring that up
is because we're talking about a
period in time that is is
relatively short. It's uh,
almost one a day. Um and, uh,
our largest jurisdiction, our
largest jurisdiction jail. That
means that either probable cause
has been established to make any
custodial arrest or a warrant is
for already established probable
cause for the crime of being a
felon in possession of fire.
That's material because during
the same exact time period to
ratios that I will will
demonstrate to you
Almost the exact same number of
people arrested for the crime of
and I say that
Elicit some thought.
I believe that those two crimes
are as dissimilar to one
another as as just about any
crimes.
Uh, we have seen throughout
society and and New Mexico
history that you know, the crime
of DW has moved has flexed. This
legislature has made significant
adjustments on the prohibition
for a person previously
convicted of a felony is not
change. You are not allowed to
visit that conviction yet What
we're seeing is a frequency that
nearly matches the frequency
with which a crime that almost
anyone
Could be subjected to and and
many folks are so I'm gonna give
you some some data just so that
you can understand where we're
coming From the month of
January, 30 people were arrested
for being a felon in possession
of a firearm during that same
time period. 33 people were
arrested for the crime of DW
91% probability of being
arrested for a felon obsession
of a firearm February.
33 people arrested for being a
felon in possession of firearm
22 people.
29 and 45 for March and 26 and
30 for April, which we just
wrapped up when you combine
those four months 97.75%
probability of being
Convicted for common obsession
farm or being arrested. Pardon
me and what I what I know in
looking through all of this data
is that phone in possession?
Frequently ranks near the top of
the crimes being arrested for
month in month out
Beats out charges like robbery,
rape, child abuse.
Um
Some of the items that we would
be interested in contemplating
related to what can be done A
who continue to arm themselves
despite being prohibited by
Corber to do so, raising the
sentencing ceiling for felons
found in firearm to five years
from the current three years,
and I know that this body is
very well aware members of the
judiciary from both both
chambers are here. We have moved
this in historical years.
But I would respectfully submit
that that has not necessarily
appeared to move them into its
deterrent effect.
Speaking of deterrence effect is
a deterrent to criminal
behavior.
And and to that, Um, we we can
agree and and we can disagree at
times, but also know that
It seems untenable to have a
rate equal to DW. I folks
possessing firearms post
conviction.
And them not having to safety
component associated with their
incarceration might outweigh the
deterrence. Uh, portion of that
incarceration.
So
Additionally, what would you be
seeking in this is? Uh uh
Uptick in the penalty related to
second and subsequent conveyor.
So raising that from currently
would be a third degree felony
to a second degree felony, which
would expose that crime to nine
years of incarceration today.
And then contemplation as this
legislature has already done of
the difference between a serious
violent felon committing these
crimes and not also Equalling
the same as what? I just
described a second iteration
ceiling.
None of these are minimum. Uh,
requirements again. I mentioned
you saw a similar bill.
House Bill 316 last session
passed through, uh, committee in
the in the, uh
we talked a little bit. About
what the what the
The the goals would be trying to
mitigate and ameliorate what we
see as a disproportionate action
of folks within our community.
Heard, uh, my colleague. Talk
about
Diversion from jail for the
folks who need treatment or help
And during my assessment of
these of this data at our
metropolitan lots of folks who
fit that qualification
We run into staffing
requirements at all of our
correctional facilities, both
adult and juvenile and talk
about the latter part for this
committee to hear what they're
facing. If we incarcerate the
correct people who are violent
And have already demonstrated a
propensity to refuse to follow
the rules of the court.
And have exhausted their
appellate rights and are no
longer a determination of
whether or not they're innocent
or guilty.
I think we can alleviate some of
the staffing concerns that we
have of folks are able to get to
a place to get treatment. That
is not the detention center. The
folks are getting to be able to
get to a place where their
mental health
Uh, disorders and their
substance abuse disorders are
not
Uh, culminated in rest after the
police and the shop holders and
and other people are exasperated
with dealing with them, Um, we
will have the appropriate room
to deal with these serious
violence to ignore judicial, uh,
orders and and the laws of the
reason why I bring this up, and
I believe I believe is we don't
need to look any further than as
we know, uh, Public health order
23.
Since that time, 162 juveniles
have been arrested state where
the Children's code for
committing a delinquent act.
Uh, where a firearm is involved
is not the same as an adult
being convicted of felon in
possession or arrested because
of the Children's code.
We have a firearm 162 times.
That means that 67% of the days
were the public will have to
look past last Friday to see in
the southeastern corner of our
state. A 14 year old is alleged
to have shot and killed a person
with a firearm.
The
Frequency with which this is
occurring in our adult
population. That is why, um, my
boss believes that this is right
for discussion.
I'm gonna move, uh from the
topic of felons in possession of
firearms to the next topic. Men.
Sure if that's OK. Yeah. Can I
just ask for clarification?
You're talking about an
enhancement for juveniles? No,
ma'am, I thank you for the
clarification. I raised the
issue with juveniles because
what I believe is we're seeing,
um, reflective behavior, so we
have never experienced in New
Mexico. This frequency like that
is that is absolutely occurring
and what I'm bringing to this
community's attention.
You for the first time, I'm sure
is how frequently our adult
population is in. Well, you kind
of merge two topics and,
frankly, I found it confusing.
I'm so I'm very sorry. Is there
gonna be a juvenile proposal or
that was just thrown in there
for good measure. That is the
example of what I think we can
hope to alleviate with some of
the goals associated with
deterring folks.
Who are prohibited from possess,
OK.
Um, second item. If you could be
brief because we're gonna have
Your second item. Very good, Uh,
unsafe Public Roadway Spaces
Act. You guys heard this related
to, uh, the notion of New Mexico
designation of leading the
country in the place where it is
the most dangerous to be a
pedestrian. Uh, because of
fatality removal during
committee. Feedback of any, um,
mention or any component related
to panhandling or one's housed
or aggressive panhandling have
been removed from this is a
simply a bit where human beings
ought to and ought
Not to stand relative. Um
I think that is that is a brief
and and and probably sufficient
in the last point, ma'am chair
with your permission.
Uh, data sharing public safety
agencies. Uh, this legislature
during the, uh, last 30 Day
session in House Bill two,
Section five administered
language requiring local law
enforcement agencies to submit
monthly crime and incident
ballistic information to the
Department of Public Safety as
prescribed by the secretary.
That determination has been made
by the secretary and the
information that will be
collected is in the form of
neighbors data. Just really, uh
important and significant
because one of the things that I
think we have all seen
Many of you much longer than I
have, Uh, the absence of
articulable data of what we're
trying to inform policies about
is does not make for, um for a
very strong foundation with
which to begin so starting, Um
July 1 using NRS and then the A
TF, Uh, ballistic data reporting
will be required of our law
enforcement agencies to the
Department of Public Safety. The
governor wanted me to raise to
your awareness the interest in
galvanizing such a set of
This year's budgetary rule.
That is that is all, man. Sure.
Thank you for that. Thank you
both very much. OK. My list so
far is representative Martinez,
Senator Cedilla Lopez,
representative Lujan, Senator
Cervantes anybody else?
Oh, representative Laura Cadena,
OK?
All right. So, um Martinez
Madam chair. Thank you, Um
A lot of information.
Um
And it's obvious that, um
especially the the competent
competency issue needs to be
addressed.
Um
My fear is
You're asking 100 and 12 people.
To make a decision in two days.
Out of those 112 there, maybe
five that understand this.
The intricacies of this issue.
Why is this
Not being pushed.
To maybe the 60 Day session.
Having a vet.
Uh, the issue over the interim.
My fear is that we're gonna
Rush to pass something.
And
It's not gonna work.
And it's gonna
Maybe cause more issues
unintended consequences.
Um, we don't know how much this
is gonna cost.
We don't know where they're
gonna hire the professionals.
Um, we have a a hard time hiring
these mental health
professionals as it is.
Um
But we're expected to pass this
Basically sight unseen in two
days. I just personally do not
think it's a great idea.
I agree that
Uh, fell in possession,
something that
I think would be
Um I would hope fairly easy to
To get that, hoping that the
governor is reaching out to, uh
Leadership.
To shore up support for that,
Uh, we've not seen that support.
So I'm hoping that
That is being done.
Overall.
I'm not a big fan of special
sessions. I've seen them for
years and years and I've not
seen
An issue that was
Ram through on a special session
that didn't need additional
Attention.
For years.
I think special sessions should
be saved for budget issues.
You know if we're not gonna if
we can't pass a budget during
the session?
We absolutely need to come
dealing with these issues and a
special session. I just think is
gonna be a mistake.
Um, I would hope that
We would be able to maybe put
the especially the comps
Competency of
Until the 60 day allowing this
committee
To dig a little bit deeper more
than
A one day fast information.
Here's the bill, Pass it
Type of those are just my
editorial.
Thank you. Um, Representative
Senator. Thank you. I appreciate
I appreciate the heads up, Madam
chair, and this is this is, um,
helpful. Um, I just had a couple
of questions. Um, one of them
relating to the competency.
The competency issue, tribal
notification and kind of things
you were talking about, because,
um, the presentation we just had
about the process. Now, um
You talked about a full
retooling and
I
I'll just share it with you when
we saw the bill back last time,
the bill that we considered
It was super confusing about
whether we were talking about
competency, whether we're
talking about commitment. It
was, um
And so I'm just wondering the
bill you're talking about. Is it
just about criminal competency?
I know you said, Actually, No.
You said that, Uh
You said criminal competency is
a separate thing. Um, so you
only really talked about, um,
about commitment.
Right or is or am I confused
again? Um and and the the reason
I think that's important is
because the reason for the
detention or whatever it is that
you're doing with an individual.
It are completely different.
Um, competency, as you know, is
just about protecting the
system.
And
Detaining someone or or
committing someone is about
protecting society or the or
themselves, so there are two
different standards they're and
and I. I still see kind of a
blending of both when you talk
about community based treatment.
I totally agree that we need the
resources.
And I'm very worried that if we
pass AAA bill that has a new
process and we don't have the
resources. Um it's not going to
be very effective and then I
also am worried again because
they have such different
purposes. They also have
different due process
connection. Uh, protections and
the thing I heard about due
process was that you would, um
That this the plan and I would
like to see it. The plan, uh,
provides for an attorney at
every step of the process is
that a court appointed attorney?
I. I guess what I'm saying is,
it is the the whole retooling is
very exciting. It's super
exciting. I
I guess I'd like a little bit
more about how you're keeping
them separate how you're
ensuring that the due process
rights of the individual are
going to be protected because I
felt that that was lacking in
the last bill. Um and
Um, Yeah, I. I guess I'll stop
there because I have something
else, but it's not there. OK,
madam Chair, Senator.
All very good questions. Um
I think one of the things that
I'd like to do is is back up a
little bit and and saying that
as a broader matter,
We don't have services that
folks need
Everywhere.
So the goal here
Putting aside civil criminal.
The goal is to have services
available.
No matter no matter which door
you're using to access them.
Um, the bill.
Madam Chair Senator actually has
both civil a civil component. Um
And a criminal component.
So the criminal side of it and
I I said less about it because
we've we've spent quite a bit of
time talking about it in commit
competency. Yeah, exactly. And
competency really is a legal
matter, right? It's a legal
determination about whether
somebody is going to be able to
stand trial and competence
Restoration again is becomes a
legal issue. Um, that's entirely
different than than treatment
100%. So that's why it's it's
got both, Um the bill.
Um, has
The way I was thinking about it.
Senator was, um
To do it in one bill, because if
you
Right one with the assumption
that the other one is gonna be
there and then the other one
doesn't make it through. It
becomes a mess, right? Um
Now, in terms of timing again,
the way we get people here is
obviously we have to incentivize
them. We have to pay them. Um, I
know the governor has also
begun discussions with the MC OS
about
Telling them her expectations
that they have services
available.
Telling them her expectations
that there can't be any more,
uh, in network out of network
issues with this with these
types of that is what the runway
is for. That's what the one year
To two years, depending on
whether you're a pilot with a
pilot. Yeah, that That's what
that's for is to, um give folks
time to put together.
The processes and and the actual
foundation that they're gonna
need.
Um, one of the
Critiques that I heard of the
competency bill last session.
Was that services aren't
available.
Um, this gives us that year to
make those services available. 1
to 2. I think it really does
have to be
Both at the same time. We have
to have a
Updated
Uh, legal system for it, and you
have to update the services.
The bill from last session and
the and the one the bill
regarding Competency is is about
30 years old and I think one of
the reasons why it's confusing
is is because is because of
that, and
You know, we've talked about the
ideas, is it?
Would it have been easier to
just start rewrite the whole
statute or just kind of try to
fix certain pieces? A lot of the
criticism? I heard about the
bill during the last session was
actually about parts of the bill
that we weren't even changing.
Um so it it's gonna just require
a lot of work, but again in in,
that's why we want to get to it.
Um and get to it now, because
it's just it's gonna take time.
I. I am looking forward to
seeing it a smaller question
about tribal notification.
Playing the tribe that an adult
is present in the system or or
what is the for someone, Um,
that self iif, um
We just wanna make sure that
they have a tribal
representation if if they wish,
So it's it's we just don't want
to leave.
We just wanna make sure that
that's available to them.
OK, I, um also I really
delighted to hear about data.
Uh, being collected and being
used because so many times we
make decisions in the absence of
data. So, um
And, uh,
And I hope that the data
contains race, ethnicity, gender
socio economic status so they
can see disparate impacts of
what? Why they might be, um the
other thing about the crime
bills is, um
The
Um
At least the bills that we
worked on last time. The felon
in possession.
Well felon position. I'll just
share with you. My concern was
it last time it was just about
extending
Time limits or or time, you
know, like you said, giving the
the judge and and
An opportunity to to hold
someone longer and there's just
no data or no studies showing
that that's helpful, uh to refi
recidivism.
And so, I. I just
I'd like to learn more about why
holding someone in prison
longer.
Felon in possession. I mean, I
appreciated what you said of
comparing it to DWII. I would
say that DW I and Berlin County
is a mess right now, so I don't
know if that's a fair comparison
with what a normal FBI docket is
I I'll just leave it at that.
And and, you know, I just leave
it there. Um
And, um
The panhandling has already had
constitutional issues. And so
I'm in. I mean not. I called it
panhandling. You said you were
going to, uh, the public
roadway.
Where you can stand, Bill, um,
pedestrian safety? Yeah. What is
it called the road safety Bill.
Yes, ma'am, so pedestrian
Roadway safety? Yes, OK, because
there are already laws about not
being able to be on the on the
freeways would be on state
roads. We're talking about state
roads, right? And we're talking
about public spaces adjacent to
public roads as well. So we're
talking about medians, largely
and component of the definitions
of the proposed legislation.
I'll just throw out that I think
that getting over the challenge
of First Amendment is going to
be interesting.
And I'm looking forward to that
as well, Manager. Thank you,
madam. Which I thank you for
bringing up data. I did neglect
to mention that there is going
to be an annual data
requirement. Um
For from the that the health
care authority has to keep of
all of the services that are
available. How many people have
used them? Um, outcomes, et
cetera.
Excellent. Excellent. That's
that's that's really good. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator. So we have
representative Lujan, Senator
Cervantes, Um representative
Laura CAA. And then was it Ree,
or was it Oh, it was Ni 00. Ok,
All right. So we've got Senator
Nibert not she's helping you,
senator.
Not yet. You're not gonna jump
the line. Um so representative
luh. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you for the presentation.
Um and I really wanna thank you
for all the work that you've
done. Um
On the Bill. Haley Um Madam
chair as you work through the
the session with us on this
previous bill, I mean, we know
that
Competency. Uh,
Legislation is in its infancy,
so to speak, and that's from a
national
Um, purview.
And us taking this on I, As you
know, I. I fully support and I
know that it's it's time to do
this as you're in a behavioral
health crisis in our state in
nationally, so I'd like to. Oh,
did I
I understand.
Sorry. Oh, thank you. And so a
couple of things I wanted to
address as as you were
discussing discussing this and
really I wanna
Um, I wanna go upstairs and see
your board. First. I'll take you
up on that. So I. I really wanna
be in part of the process as
you're getting, uh, getting
through this and know I know how
you're putting this piece of
legislation together. Um, you
mentioned a OT. This is this is
an outpatient treatment.
Um in re I just wanna be clear.
It's not
It's not competency per SE, but
you are going to use
A version or a model of a model
in determining
Um
Civil commitment. Is that
correct? Madam Chair Madam Chair
representative. This is sort of
one of the reasons why I was
saying I was gonna say a OT as a
shortcut
because I know
California called it. The care
Project and I. I don't have like
a snappy acronym for it. Um,
it's going to be what it at the
end of the day. What it means is
that each judicial district has
to have a a whole set of
wraparound services available
for mental health. Madam Chair.
Are you going to leave this to a
rule making
District, or is this going to be
Uh, on in in legislated, it's
in. It's in the bill. It's in
the thank you for that. Answer.
Um
The other thing you touched on
was, um
Crisis stabilization, um,
programs.
To my knowledge, we already have
crisis stabilization programs.
In place. Can you elaborate?
what this bill would increase in
that way? Because
I know that I also sponsored an
appropriation bill to increase
those, um, those dollars through
programs that we have through
lead in another, Um
Other programs in the state. Can
you elaborate on that, please?
Yeah. Madam Chair,
Representative I. I can, um
First, there's the kind of the
three tiered model that I was
discussing about, you know, very
short term.
The other component of it, Madam
Chair representative again is it
has to be everywhere.
Um, because once again, um if
it's if it's 20 minutes for a
police officer to take someone
to jail for shoplifting.
And it's two hours for that same
police officer to
Use his discretion and not
arrest the person for miss for
the misdemeanor to get them
crisis stabilization.
It won't work because they'll
just take the person to jail. So
it has to be accessible enough
everywhere around the state.
Thank you, Madam Chair, So
that's going to be more dollars,
Which I? I fully commend you.
You taking that?
Part on as well. The the thing
manager regarding data. Um we
heard earlier. Um, in the
previous hearing that we
We're not lacking in a number of
beds.
But if we implement this
legislation
And we have the civil component
to it.
What data are you using? To show
where those numbers are gonna be
and how how That's
What the cost is to that
manager.
Ah, Madam Chair representative,
Um it's a great question.
The only cost models again that
that I am aware of cause this is
certainly not my my area. Um,
are the different cost models
that other states have used when
they've been kind of, um,
sussing it out themselves in
terms of, um
The number of beds.
I think with the broadening of
eligibility criteria.
When you broaden the eligibility
and you actually broaden the
surfaces that are available
statewide.
You will end up with more people
needing beds, and so we will
have to increase the number of
beds of representative Thank
you, Madam chair, so we don't
have any data on that, or
Or constructive information on
on what that's gonna look like.
Is that correct? Madam Chair
representative, Not yet One
other component again that I
neglected to mention, Um, when I
was doing my initial
presentation is as part of the
first year, the Healthcare
authority and the Department of
Health is going to put together
a working group with various
stakeholders. Um, to help, you
know, basically make a I'm I'm
gonna say like a road map, but
that's gonna be part of the
analysis that must be done.
Thank you, madam Chair. Um
again. I really wanna work with
you. I do have a a questions and
I'll go, Uh, go over them after
with you when you're looking at
the civil side again, and you're
saying that
Um
Anybody can petition the court.
Um, for the for these these
Whatever reasons you're gonna
define, I assume, um I really
want us to take a really close.
Look at what That means, because
Um, how far down does that go?
And who does it affect? You
know, it's it's that's a huge,
um endeavor there. Thank you,
madam Chair.
Thank you, Uh, Senator
Cervantes.
Thank you. And again, I
appreciate all of you being here
today. And some outreach, Um,
recently on on these bills and
Both the chair and I've had good
discussions about the fact that
we will continue to invite the
governor and her staff to
participate in this committee,
as we did last year to to try
and advance a common agenda last
year, Uh, 30 Day session. Of
course, the governor controls
the agenda and we invited you.
And I appreciate you coming
then, too, And this is that
opportunity.
Uh, the, uh, the felon in
possession when I When I toured
last year, one of the things I
did was I. I went back and
looked with the committee as a
group to what happened with
legislation that was introduced
in the session. And what
happened to it? Um, And so I
think that it's useful for us to
do a couple of things, the felon
in possession legislation this
last session, uh, came to Senate
Judiciary Committee and was not
heard.
Um And I own that.
Um as the chair and I take
responsibility for that, and and
I wanna give you reasons for
that, and the committee reasons
for that I went back and looked
at the 2018.
Session. This was the last year
of Governor Martinez's
administration.
Before Governor Lujan Grisham
was elected.
Um, and in that session
We did something, uh, at the
governor's urging, then Governor
Martinez, which as we separated,
violent versus nonviolent felon
possession, crimes, felon
possession crimes.
And we took what had been an 18
month maximum sentence and we
increased it in her last year at
her urging to a third degree
felony with three year penalty
That was in 2018.
For non violent We left that at,
uh, 1/4 degree felony and again,
this is gonna get complicated in
the weeds and and like you,
counsel. I appreciate the fact
this is not my area of law, but
I rely upon people who who do
this a lot, but we separated,
violent and nonviolent in that
year, 2018.
That will be important here in a
minute In 2019. We expanded
these penalties to misdemeanor
crimes from felony crimes in
2020. The next year, we
increased the penalty to a three
third degree for all felons. We
eliminated the distinction
between violent and nonviolent.
I was in now we're into the
Luhan Grisham administration the
second year of that, and we
increased the penalty to third
degree for all felons.
And then two years later, we
eliminated that distinction
between violent and non violent.
And we, um uh, increased, Uh,
crimes, uh, sentenced to six
years for violent crimes. Um,
and nonviolent crimes are made
at three years. So we continue
to to maintain that distinction
that we had eliminated
previously.
Um and I. I think it's important
for us to realize that 2018 2019
24,022 changes in the law all
relating to felons in
possession. And Mr Baker. I
hope, I. I didn't make my notes.
uh, incorrectly when you said
it, But you said these
increased, uh, efforts in the
past, haven't moved the needle.
Um and I see you nodding your
head affirmatively. And so, um,
when I told you I own the fact
that we didn't hear this in a 30
day session, I'm giving you my
reasons, which is we continue to
make these changes under a prior
administration and under this
administration repeatedly, and
we're not seeing, um, use your
word. It's not seen the needle
moving.
And so perhaps we ought to ask
ourselves a little harder
question about whether this is
really the solution to what I
agree with the governor strongly
about and support her, Uh, very
serious problem in New Mexico.
Very se, uh, very significant
crime.
This. I think the same argument
holds true when we talk about
competency, you you weren't here
earlier, but but we heard, uh, a
judge talk about competency,
said it's 4% of his cases were
competency is an issue.
To me when we have a serious
crime problem in New Mexico as
we do, and in Albuquerque, I if
competency is 4% of the cases.
Let's get real. Is that really
what we the best we can do in a
special session? Is that really
the best we can do with our
ample resources and with our
time of our colleagues coming
into a special session, the
taxpayers time and energy when,
when competency seemingly is not
a a significant number of the
crime cases, at least according
to the judges, statistics
Um are we really are we really
doing our best same thing with
again with increasing sentences?
This is really the best we can
do. II. I don't really think
the, um Mr Baker. I'll just I'll
challenge you a little bit. You
made comparisons between the
number of arrests for FON in
possession with DW. I SI gotta
tell you that's an entirely
fallacious argument with me.
And I hope you'll abandon it.
Uh, because very simply if we
put our emphasis on shoplifting
arrests, we'd see a huge spike
in shoplifting arrests. It
doesn't mean that shoplifting is
increasing.
We're simply putting our
attention into a certain crime.
So if we're looking for felons
in possessions, we're going to
have a lot of arrests for felons
in possession.
If that's what we tell law
enforcement to go find and go
arrest and go serve warrants for
We're gonna see an increase in
arrest. It doesn't mean there's
more of that crime and if we do
roadblocks and put people out on
sweeps for DWIS, we're gonna see
a huge increase in DWIS. It
doesn't mean that there's more
DWIS. It just means that's where
attention and effort is gonna be
so for when you compare. Well,
look at we we've got as many
felo in possession arrests. We
do DWIS. There's a a big problem
here. Completely fallacious
argument to me. I'm I'm just
suggesting to you that that
maybe it's not gonna resonate
all that well with me and
Uh, Senator Cil Lopez. You, uh
You said you wanted to leave the
DW I issue alone. It's on our
work plan. I hope we'll address
it. We all we had to. We had a
we had a We had just We had to
just acknowledge it that the
Legislature as long as I've been
here is criticized for being too
soft on laws that we don't.
We're not aggressive here. We're
not passing hard enough and
tough enough laws and DW. I has
been unpopular subject where
we're criticized for not having
strong enough DWRIS because we
have the worst statistics on DW
in the country, So let's
increase the loss. And what good
does that do If the cops are on
the take?
Um, I if you can buy the law
enforcement, um then we can
increase penalties here all day
long.
Um And what? Gonzaga
We have to talk about that This
committee ought to be asking
those kind of questions. Same
thing. I'm reading the newspaper
here in Santa Fe. The big debate
between the DD a candidates
about how many DWS are being
dismissed.
And how many and in Albuquerque
how many DWIS are dismissed. Um
and and everybody's got
completely different numbers.
The D a may say she's got a 60
or 70% conviction rate. And the
A OC man you've got say you've
got 20% conviction rate and
somebody else has got 13%
conviction rate and we can all
spin the numbers. We can all
play with them all day long, and
some of us are very good at
that.
Um, but but we ought to at least
acknowledge.
Uh what? Center city Lopez. You
said you didn't wanna address
and I appreciate you're gonna
come back to it later, but but
we ought to. We need to talk
about these things. Uh, And this
is the committee that that
should do. So, uh so we are. We
are, among other things, Mr
Baker. We ought to be converting
apples and apples and oranges
when we when we talk about some
of things and II, I know you
probably like to respond, but
I'm I'm simply, uh, maybe
expressing some reasons for why
the felony position Bill didn't
get hurt.
Uh and so that you will have an
appreciation for that and what
I'll challenge you to to do that
might get it heard in a in a
special session.
Um
If I'm still chairing the
committee, and that's always up
to the president and the leader
over here on on my right, uh and
and and subject to that, I. I
recognize that I'll just, uh
I'll. I'll echo something
represent, Martinez said. He's
left, unfortunately, but I
wanted I wanted to reemphasize
something, he said. Special
sessions. We're all talking
about special sessions are
fraught with peril. Um and and
there needs to be a lot of work
done before then. You missed my
comments earlier in the day,
This would all need to get done
and I'll just I'll end by saying
our last special session was to
pass laws legalizing marijuana
and establishing the framework
for doing so. And we can all
form our own opinions. You all
know mine about how successful
we were in that.
Session in the Mary law, the
laws that we passed at that
time.
And so a simple reminder.
That special sessions sometimes
can lead to unintended
consequences.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you very much. Senator,
Representative. A lot of Cadena.
Thank you, madam. Chair
presenters.
Thank you, Madam Chair for this
agenda.
Certainly for me, as many of
y'all know, I'm a working mom.
My little one has a week long
field trip, so I started my
morning dropping her off at med
school.
And I thought When I dropped her
off at 530, I would get right on
the road to be on time. And then
my emotions came out and I like
many parents, I sat in the
parking lot until that bus drove
into the into the sunrise. Um so
thank you. I represent South
Central New Mexico by half of
Las Cruces.
Um
But Madam chair especially
showed up today because of this
agenda item I, like many have
expressed have curiosities about
how we leverage resources to
show up in a special session and
how
We with purpose, Uh, work on
legislation to positively impact
And as many of you all have
heard me say
I live with mental illness, like
so many of our families and
probably and
Even today.
In the ways that my triggers
show up.
I can't sit in a hearing like
this.
Looking a list like that they
represent so many of my lived
experiences and expertise.
And Madam Chair vice chair.
When, um
I hear the casual almost
mentions.
Of a white board on the wall. I
want to respect your process but
also say
That it terrifies me.
That we're talking about a bill.
That includes
A civil component.
And a criminal component.
And that somehow in a special
session.
We're going to lift those
immense elements.
And get it right.
As
A health policy advocate and
researcher for many years before
I had the honor of running for
office and now being in this
seat
I had
Significant concerns about a OT.
As did many of the folks in this
room that I've
So when I hear today
Somewhat. What sounds like with
the legislator did when we said
there's no junior bill money,
But then we had junior Bill and
we called it something else. I
hear some of that in your
presentation, like we're not
calling it a OT and we'll we'll
come up with a new name.
Or, um, we're not gonna call it
panhandling. We're gonna come up
with a new name.
That brings up a lot of concerns
and questions for me about what
kind of politics we're playing.
And
Um, so many of my colleagues
have already covered some of the
significant questions that are
gonna come with competency on
the criminal side.
Um, we've started to talk some
about the a O piece and and the
1000 possession piece.
But for me again that a OT piece
when I When I hear it said that
we're gonna expand it.
Um
And we're gonna make sure that
if there's someone that's
considering harm to solve for
harm to others.
We can pull them in if
beneficial, so I turned to my
colleague here and I said, Well,
who's gonna figure out and
define what beneficial means?
And when I think about a longer
list of who will have room
To push someone like me into a
court system, albeit civil.
If someone like me and a lot of
new Mexicans I love and trust.
I mean, even on my behavior
today, some of you are probably
wondering like what's up.
You right?
Thanks. I have an incredible
therapist and a lot of
mechanisms to care for myself.
But
I'm really nervous about taking
on something like that in a
special session because of all
the ways that our systems
We're never built to care for
all kinds of new Mexican and
when I hear things said like
there must be services. That's
the plan.
I think we've always had a
commitment to making sure there
were services in our
communities.
When we talk specifically about
crisis triage. I represent about
half of Las Cruces That's the
second biggest city in New
Mexico and as our vice chair
knows, well, especially it's
always close to mind when we
talk about competency.
My community said For decades,
we're gonna build a crisis
Triage center.
And that we couldn't afford to
build the crisis Triage center.
Because someone on some DW I
arrests never had their mental
health evaluation and we left
them in jail for years and
years. We basically forgot about
them. And then in the end, it
was a settlement of over $50
million and we used the money we
were supposed to use to open the
triage center to pay the
settlement because we left
someone in jail and as of the
last couple of months, this
triage center that we built in
his beautiful
Now you'll Google it today.
Google tells us it's permanently
closed.
So if Las Cruces, New Mexico,
right now, today doesn't have
the capacity or the staffing or
the resources.
To operate a crisis Triage
center and I hear it said.
There must be services and there
will be services because we say
it's so and we're giving it a
two year on ramp.
I can't believe it in good
faith.
And I will end my comments
today, Madam Chair by saying
Um, I hope as we continue this
conversation
And I'm already trying to block
off my calendar so that I can be
here for the many days we're
going to have in advance of the
special session to keep flushing
these questions out.
That we also consider expertise
of folks.
That know what it's meant.
To find or look or search.
For care and services and
programs and resources and
support they desperately want
and need.
And not found anything.
Uh, because we've all talked
about like, what's on the
statutes and what's possible and
what's happening politically.
Um, but I also want to make sure
that we create space and hold
space in outer space for those
new Mexicans that know this best
and they're not in the thank
you, madam Chair.
Thank you, representative,
Senator Nibert and then
represent we're gonna wrap it up
with representative Borago.
Thank you, madam Chair.
When I
Look at the
Issues that were being proposed
for the special session.
I could
Recognize that New Mexico has
been in a crisis.
But
I'd even say maybe an emergency
does exist.
And so I hope I was hoping to
hear from the governor's office
that, uh we were going to
discuss
Meaningful legislation that
would words of others Move the
needle.
And get to some of the
Root problems and maybe some of
the root
Uh,
Solutions to
What I'd call the crisis that
we're in.
And so when I see the anti
And handling Bill. Maybe now a
anti
Hitchhiking bill proposed. I
don't see that being an
emergency.
Maybe the felon in possession.
Uh, enhancement does a little
But when I go back home
In particularly
After a
Short special session.
And people say, how am I safer?
How How are my Children safer?
How
How am I?
Going to expect my car to be in
the parking lot at the hotel in
Albuquerque, when I get up the
next morning.
How how am I going to respond?
Because I don't think what was
proposed.
Gets to those issues A and so
you know, I hope that in the
next
Number of weeks that we may see
some more.
Effort to
Move the needle.
Because I don't think that these
things do
And and so I would encourage the
governor to
Really look at doing some things
that will make our streets safer
that will make our people safer
in their neighborhoods.
That will
Get the attention of those that
do harm to their fellow man.
And make them think twice before
they do some of these things
because we do have a problem. I
recognize that. I think
everybody in New Mexico
recognizes it.
And if we're gonna have a
special session, let's do
something.
Let's do something.
Because so far, in fact, we had
the enhancement bill in this
last session.
You know, Couple years ago we
talked about shoplifting. We had
a water down shoplifting bill
that I got to come home and tell
people
Here's what we did on crime.
But it didn't move the needle.
It didn't do anything to make
our streets safer.
Didn't do anything to to make
the people feel safer and so
In my mind if we're gonna meet,
uh
We gotta do something.
I
Have my doubts whether we can do
this stuff in in a short amount
of time. I really am with some
of my colleagues. I think that
we ought to
Really look and study some of
this stuff and and really
But the legislative branch
engaged in that debate in in the
regular session and
Do our job.
Where things get vetted over a
course of of weeks, sometimes
more than a month.
Uh, but calling us back here to
to vote on something that's
probably been, um, cooked by by
a few.
Really doesn't give
Honor to the legislative
process.
Uh, thank you, Senator. Uh,
representative Bargo.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Representatives from the
governor's office. It's great to
be meet both of you. I tried to
meet a couple of you. And
throughout the last two years
and kind of hit and miss, but,
um
One of the things that I when I
ran for this office, Um, you
know, I thought
Well.
Maybe I could bring some
insight. Um, with regard to some
of the things that I dealt with
in the city of Albuquerque in
terms of being a city planner,
and reporting back to the
Planning Commission to City
Council and to the county
commission at times, um in terms
of data.
And when in coming here, Um you
know, I kind of expected a lot
more data for our bills.
And I was I listened to, Um,
Senator Cervantes a minute ago.
Talk about data and and actually
in my last two years, having
served, I've been sort of a
little flabbergasted by people
When I asked for data, it
doesn't seem to be there. And so
I'm thinking to myself. Well,
maybe this is just like, really
a little more political than I
what I expected or what? I You
know what I thought I was
walking into. But as
Sit here a little more and I, By
the way, I worked for the state
in the eighties, when I was in
college as an intern and coming
back into this process and and
sitting in this position and
looking at some of the
departments, I continue to find
that
And and I know as a city
planner, anything can be
compared to anything. Basically,
I understand that, but when
we're talking about people's
lives, and where money goes and
how it's been allocated and how
it's been, um, geographically
distributed around the state in
terms of, you know, areas that
are more prevalent than others
in terms of problems. I and I'm
glad that, um
Representative or senator, I
guess it is now. Nibert brought
up the issue of automobile
theft. I've had a bill for two
years, sitting just waiting to
get heard and coming from
Albuquerque and a former
representative elected official
on the Amasa board, finding
automobiles in our Arroyo's day
after day that the taxpayers are
having to pay for to pull out of
those arroyos and my
Still sitting there and I. I
look to, um to, uh
representative Al Cohen, who
told me it took him. I think
eight or nine years to get his
veterans bill through, I think
to myself
You know, are these urban
problems versus rural problems
that people are not
understanding that
These are issues that data could
definitely show our our areas
that need to be addressed.
And I and I'm really glad that
I'm saying this because our
leadership is here today, but
How many times do we have to
Bring bills back over and over
and over again before people
understand.
Yeah.
These are things that need to be
addressed and the data should be
a be there to support those
bills becoming priority. Um and
I'm I'm I'm I'm not trying to
preach or I'm not trying to. I'm
just trying to explain.
What I have seen in two years.
It's like, how do we bring these
issues to the forefront to let
people know that?
These are cries for help. Thank
you, madam Chair.
Thank you, Uh, representative,
So, I. I really appreciate both
of you Attending. I think
hearing all of the issues that,
um, were presented by the
members, I think is a very
important and I'm certain that,
um you will take them to heart
and we'll be working together to
try to address them. I, um Ha
have said to you, Holly and the
governor that I'm committed to
trying to get to a place where
we have viable. Um
Well crafted bills that address
real problems and, uh, that I
maintain that and I will
certainly do that. Um, but I
think, um, from the comments
that you've heard, uh
Right now, today, uh there are
some serious things that we're
going to have to address working
with you in a constructive way,
Not in a obstructive way, and we
will do that, But there's a lot
that's gonna have to be done to
get from here to
July 18th and but we'll keep
talking. Um appreciate your
willingness to come and hear.
Hear what? What Many of our
members have it. So thank you
for that, and, um we'll move now
to public comment, Um,
So I'm been asked so first, um
I'm yet again or we are yet
again in the position of
apologize in the Webcast and the
microphone. So I apologize again
for that, because I believe that
some of this probably wasn't um,
recorded and advised, so we will
probably use another different
room in our next series of
meetings because apparently,
this room is the bad room and
we're not gonna be in here for a
while, Um, so I'm not sure we're
gonna be able to do virtual. Are
we gonna
We are OK. So having said that,
I'm gonna ask. I'll make the
points that I was asked to make
Members of the public may may
make public comment in person or
virtually during the comment
period.
A person wishing to make a
virtual come confined
instructions for making the
virtual public comment and the
link to the Zoom Webinar on the
C CJ website location.
Um, if you wish to make virtual
public comment, please be in the
zoom Webinar before the public
comment period begins. Well, I
probably should have read this
at the front of the meeting. Um
while in the zoom webinar turn
off the webcast to avoid
technical interference during
the public comment period, a
person in the zoo webinar will
be called upon to provide
comment in their microphone will
be muted. Um
Will be unmuted at that time.
Sorry. So, um, may I suggest we
do? Um, the live public comment
first, and then we'll do the
zoom and then we have two people
who I believe are signed up. So
Diane mash
Diane
Oh, she's on zoom. I'm sorry I
misunderstood. So we're all on
is there are there Is there live
public? OK, come on up.
And if you'd keep your comments
to two minutes that would be
appreciated.
Two.
Two.
My apologies for the, um
Auditory processing disorder. I
thought it was going to be
three.
Um my name is Nat Dean. I am a
person with is the icon.
Yes, I can. I think so. People
can hear you. Yeah, people can
hear you. Thank you. I'm a
person with multiple
disabilities, and I'm also a
disability advocate. And I
wanted to, uh, say to represent
Ka.
We are in the room.
Um so I'm gonna go fast Crisis.
Uh, prevention.
Crisis management crisis
intervention crisis management
is an oxymoron. Um someone, uh,
I get many, many cases from
adult protective services from
HSD from DOH from Physicians
from providers from hospitals
because they
The individuals are not able to
connect to services because they
don't know the services are out
there. So, um,
Many times. People can be very
skilled at presenting that
everything is fine. Um, but a
lot of those behaviors develop
as survival mechanisms. There's
not malicious manipulation and
there's malicious manipulation
or actions, actions and
behaviors. Oftentimes I'm
finding that it's a lack of life
skills that leads to these
malicious behaviors because they
don't have the life skills to,
um
VA consumer of the programs and
services even when they are out
there. Um so it the malicious
may not equal and intent as much
as it is to achieve some kind of
outcome. That's better than what
they're experiencing. Now they
may not understand the process.
The
Programs may not be able to
convey the programs in a way
that the person can comprehend
them. So we oftentimes make an
assumption that someone
understands the process of being
the consumer for those services
such as someone who presented to
you and it made to adult
psychiatric services. You can
come here any time 24 7 and get
car They thought I can go there
anytime any time of day 24 hours
a day, seven days a week, and I
see the same therapist every
single time. Um they just had
not experienced how to
Consumer therapy. We only know
what we know. We speak from the
vocabulary of our experience.
Dual diagnosis concerns, um, are
very, very significant.
Um
Um, court procedure is also very
much about accessibility and
knowing what works and what
doesn't work versus what may be
utilized. Um, administrative
options. The courts was provided
a very specific inlay's terms.
VY testing results for a A
responder and someone who is a
respondent in the case. But AC
just said We can't do that. So
they accused the facilitator as
practicing practicing law
without a license so capacity.
Is not always the issue that, uh
That maybe it might be the
communication that's being, uh,
utilized in order to create that
bridge. Punitive measures don't
necessarily build collaborative
opportunities, but it we need to
help people who are behaving in
such a way that they didn't
experience a punitive measure
and the entities that are
perhaps producing those punitive
Those poor behaviors is to grow
empathy for both sides of that
coin. Um, thank you very much.
Uh, let's not forget 988.
It is rolling out. It is making
a difference and our crisis
stabilization units are response
Team C RT S are making a
difference. Thank you so much.
Madam Chair, Mr Co-chair,
Members of the Committee. Thank
you very much. Thanks for
participating. All right now
let's go to the zoom, Diane
Mash.
Hi. I lost hearing you.
I think I'm I think I'm live. Am
I?
Um
I can't hear anything so
Um
Hello.
Um
I'm not sure.
Uh, what happened?
Debbie Liz. The zoo.
Huh?
We can hear. Can we hear Diane
now?
Where you put orange
Oh,
Now I can't hear you again.
Diane, We can hear you.
I heard you very briefly for a
second.
Oh, we can. Oh, you can hear me.
OK, I see that in the chat. I'll
go ahead with my comment. Thank
you.
Um, So I wanted to say First of
all, thank you so much for
taking public comment.
Last year when public comment
was not taken during C CJ. I can
always thinking about how you
always say, Hey, this is the
people's house, but I definitely
felt locked out of the house
last year, so I appreciate being
let back in. Um I wanted to
comment on the filling in
possession of a firearm and what
was said about the enhancements
to the sentencing, um, and had
different things that have
happened over several years.
That haven't seemed to have
moved the needle. Well, perhaps
that is evidence that increasing
sentence
Is not effective to deterring
crime. That's what data shows
us. So I just wanted to mention
that and also
As we address all these crises
that we see all around us. We
need to keep in mind. We also
need to be proactive.
Um, if our healthy communities
if our communities were
healthier, all of our
communities, the people had the
Security of housing. Um,
employment if they are able
And childcare all of these
things that some of us have had
all our lives. Um, we wouldn't
have so much alcohol, drug
abuse. Um, mental health crises
and the suffering and
homelessness that we see. Um, we
need to address what issues we
have of in equity in our
society, um, so that we could
become healthier and the
incidences of all these crises
will decrease as um, People's
Increases. So thank you very
much. Thank you, Diane. Thank
you. That concludes our, um,
public comment. Um, so I wanna
thank everyone for your
participation in today's
meeting. I thought we had a very
good discussion and I'll look
forward to working with you in
in June on further flushing out
these issues. Thank you, and we
are now adjourned.
Oh,
