counsel of the Early Childhood
Education and Care department.
And with me, I also have Emily
Nitschke. She's my assistant
general counsel, uh, Secretary
Greginsky wanted to be here
Um, we are here today to, um,
Propose a bill um and ask for
your endorsement, um, which
clearances for childcare
providers and caregivers.
The criminal offender Employment
Act, uh, is intended to allow
individuals with certain
Also with the 2021 amendment to
the Act misdemeanors are no
longer permitted to be
considered.
Our concern is now that
misdemeanors such as enticement
is for background clearances for
those who are caring for these
important populations to not be
subject to those limitations.
legalized.
As a smaller piece of that bill,
it also removed misdemeanors
from the crimes that can be
considered for employment under
the Criminal Offender Employment
Acupuncture, etc. But what I
believe was an unintended
consequence of that was that
background clearances for
childcare providers and
misdemeanors include enticement
of a child, which is persuading
a child to go into a vehicle
room, secluded place with the
intent of committing a criminal
sexual offense against them.
a child, cruelty to animals,
negligent use of a deadly
weapon. There's a full list of
those crimes in the packets that
we provided to you so that you
can review um at your leisure.
check.
So for our background process,
we also do a nationwide check.
We consider convictions from any
state, and there are currently 4
neighbors, Colorado and
Delaware.
Some of the examples that we've
encountered is this past year
we've had multiple applicants
with abandonment of a child's
So relating to caregivers, the
criminal record screening for
Caregivers Act already provides
for the guidelines that for what
things can be considered for
background clearances for
caregivers for vulnerable
registered childcare facilities
and those covered under the
criminal record screening for
Caregivers Act.
We are not asking to exempt all
children and vulnerable adults
that would allow us to consider
the whole picture of an
applicant while protecting our
most vulnerable populations.
And with that, that's my
Others, um, repchai.
Um
Anyone else?
OK, for now, uh, we, we may have
questions prompted by other
about other areas, because I
think this is a great idea and
thank you for the presentation.
And it definitely was
inadvertent. I probably wouldn't
have supported, uh, if we could
have fixed this then, we should
agency, the health agencies that
deal with um victims of domestic
violence.
Um, and I think it, children,
youth and families is, is
exempt, isn't it?
the, um, actually, nope, they're
not.
Shouldn't they be
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, Senator
Sidia Lopez, um, we, uh,
we have um had discussions with
CYFD and I believe that uh they
intend to either join this later
unintended consequence.
Um, because you,
you want to consider,
I was
Misdemeanor aggravated battery
against a household member
it's a very important concern
and I'm really happy you brought
it up, but it's also a broader
concern, and I hope as you
consider, when you, as you move
will consider a broader cleanup.
Uh, thank you so much for
bringing forward and bringing it
to our attention. Thank you.
And I definitely support it.
Uh, thank you, Senator, uh,
I'm a little bit confused, but I
had a case, um, which, uh, where
I represented an adult who was a
guardian for a child, and
willing participant, but was
there and it ended up as a
Barely
I don't know, a low level
circumstances, she was not going
to be able to work.
Now
Does this
Is what you're trying to do.
Representative to see, um,
unfortunately, I don't know
enough of the details of that
case to be able to answer that,
but what I can say is that there
agencies doing background
clearances might be looking at,
um, for example, we look at um
substantiations of child abuse
under CYFD.
look at.
So, um, forget my case and then
just tell me what your overall
Uh, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Chasey, so our
goal is that we would be able to
look at these misdemeanors and
clearance. It wouldn't be, you
know, all misdemeanors. We're
not looking at shoplifting
charges. We're not looking at,
you know, those small offenses,
but we do want to look at
patterns, the whole picture.
might have nothing else on their
record except for a conviction
of enticement of a child or
cruelty to animals, and we also
want to be able to look at the
facts of those cases and see
case, um, I think I spoke with
somebody in, um, the licensing,
perhaps it was.
public education because she was
A situation if you do find
yourself here and in this case
it was never anything else in
could take classes or
prove himself or herself through
some other method.
Um, Madam Chair Representative
Tracy, we, um, do have a
and we do also have a rehab
petition, so they can submit
information. I've done these
anger management classes or I've
done these, um, addiction
gotten connected to a case, so
we definitely look at specific
circumstances and
rehabilitation, um, and wanna
make sure that
No questions, so it sounds like
people think this is probably a
good idea.
OK, um.
OK
Is there someone willing to make
a Madam Chair, excuse me.
earlier than we, uh, so I like
to have the bills well in
advance before we do an
endorsement, so, you know, I'm
disinclined to, to, and it
OK. All right.
Yes,
at this point I'm not a voting
member, so I don't get to vote.
So I just want we're short.
We do not have permanent members
or whatever you call it non, you
know.
So I that will not work. I
apologize, um, but obviously you
an endorsement.
Really, I mean, I, I know some
of my colleagues disagree, but
what usually happens is we
endorse a bill and then it goes
to its first committee and then
educate you because sometimes
you hear things you weren't
anticipating in the
conversation, but
Something's gonna happen in the
through the hearing process and
endorsements, but I doubt it.
knowing some of those members.
So, um, I, I, I apologize for
suggestions that there may be
some changes considered for this
bill and um I'd like to follow
up on that, so.
Thank you very much for um
offline if you, if, if you wish
so, OK, well thank you for the
presentation. I have Nancy's not
here because she's trying to
hunt up the next um presenters,
um.
tight for a few minutes, we'll,
we'll have them here.
Madam Chair, may I make that
And may have announced this
before, but
The Council of State governments
is sponsoring a listening tour
in New Mexico.
what we can do to improve the
juvenile justice system.
They're going to be in the
capital next Tuesday.
can apply to the, you can ask
the speaker to use one of your
days to get reimbursement to
attend the it's mainly going to
and you're all welcome to attend
and we would really like to um
encourage as many as you.
possible to join us.
three branches of government
executive, judicial and
legislative.
Uh, thank you,
Rep Chay appreciate it.
OK, so.
criminal justice, the future of
data governance in New Mexico.
And we have um
A number of people here, but I'm
going to ask you all to
introduce yourselves and kind of
your affiliation and so on, so,
Institute for Complex Additive
Systems Analysis. It's a
research center at New Mexico
Tech that I'll talk about.
Uh, a little later, um, I'm from
Miss uh Stephanie Myers. Who's
your grandfather? Come on.
Uh, Joseph Fidel. OK. All right.
Well,
That's so cool.
important issue and to see many
familiar faces. I have the
pleasure of working with New
Mexico Tech and the ICASA folks
on this very important project
today. Happy to be here with you
all.
Thank you, Madam Chair. This is
Charles Brock, um, have to be
packet today and I'd like to
briefly go over the agenda with
you, um, as Michael mentioned,
he's going to talk a little bit
more about the Institute for
Complex Additive Systems
Charles are going to really dig
in on their work on the criminal
justice side.
Um,
then I will be sharing a little
bit more with you about our
statewide data governance
as well as talk about the future
of the data governance project.
Um, and then we're really
excited to talk about how you
all can engage with iCOSA and
the data governance project
know that data-driven decisions
are and should be at the heart
of all policy making and
budgetary decisions. And so we
also help you all be able to and
help folks on the ground in the
field doing this work across
Policy areas be able to predict
going to turn it over to Michael
to talk about iCASA.
OK, Madam Chair, senators
representative IASA, this is a
Uh, it's, it's got its start in
2001, um, there's a, a line item
in the legislature that funds
up until today, uh, the funding
has increased steadily over
time. Uh, our mission at ICASA
over the years has been, uh,
critical infrastructure
the network that it's on, um,
some of the projects that we've
worked on since 2001, mostly
have been focused on Department
of Defense.
problem sets all had to do with
solving critical infrastructure
types of things, some stuff that
had to do with networks, uh,
complex systems, let's say it's
Uh, so, iCASA really has lots of
skills, working with complex
systems, working with the people
uh at these agencies that are
Ended, um, and it ended because
of a leak that came from Edward
Snowden out of that agency. Uh,
and so many contracts with that
in this case, we started looking
at what can we do for New
Mexico. Over the years, um,
we've been receiving state
funds, um, that's what we
leverage our state funds for, go
out and do business
Mexico that have to do with data
stovepipes, your critical
infrastructure. Let's, let's
help New Mexico get better. Um,
so that was one area that we got
DiSI Data Science in the public
interest projects that we've
worked on over the years since
2017, 2018, that Jerrih and
Charles will talk about a little
later. Um,
And
people, uh, there's about 10 or
12 students included in that
staff. We've grown significantly
since FY 21.
Um, because mostly the
So
Nice to, nice to meet everybody,
uh, and I hope, uh, what you
have to listen to is intriguing
the criminal justice programs at
iCASA.
OK, so, uh,
One of our main
Places that we've worked for for
on them, but the three main ones
I'll go over today are the
consolidated offender query, uh,
then the Dover disposition
Project and then finally the
single state identifier project.
Uh, consolidated offender query
project that started, um, back
in 2018, it was, um, there's a
amendment to the Constitution
Make that actually work well,
uh, the, uh, DPS provides a
report to many judges in New
Mexico, not all, some counties
criminal background of someone
and determine whether or not
they are, uh,
They should get bail or not.
lot faster and try to reduce the
turnover right now when they do
the reports, they have to, uh,
if they're doing it manually,
they have to do a lot of copying
all different and unique.
Um, so what we've done is we've
unified those queries so that
they have one interface, they're
Pretty much just generates the,
the report based off of what
they feel is important to
include it also goes through and
the FBI, uh, the New Mexico
Corrections department, uh, DPS,
and the administrative office of
the courts in order to produce
this report. So it's a very uh
getting all those groups to
cooperate at the same time and
some technical details with that
cooperation.
Um, the next project, uh, that
I'm going to talk about is
record, um, but they want to do
is make sure that for every
arrest they know how that arrest
turned out. What was the
process where they get
dispositions from the court
mailed to them.
And someone goes through and
takes those dispositions and
automate that system, so both go
forward and retroactively to,
uh, populate all of the
historical data, um, using, uh,
disposition data that's
we're working on that, um, but
they're also one of the
difficulties in that is
that there's not
Um, a great way to identify
going to talk about, uh, is the
single state identifier project.
And this is, you know, we're
talking about the lack of
identifier in the AOC works.
We're taking uh data that.
Uh, the DPS has said is OK to
send to the courts.
Um, we worked hard to make sure
certification, um, and we send
that to the courts so that the
courts can then use that to try
to add a unique identifier to
their disposition records.
match against, I should say.
Thank you, Charles. I, I'm gonna
just jump in real quick and say,
sorry, Madam Chair, Senators
representative, I'll jump in
that sat down with a bunch of
subject matter experts from
these different agencies. They
learned about the manual
processes that they did, and
then they figured out what
Thank you.
Madam Chair, thank you. Uh, and
continuing what Michael said,
who is here, um, and so I'll be
going through some of these
projects as well. Um, one of the
ones was the single state
identifier as previously
mentioned. Excuse me, uh, and so
that was a project that we are
data ingest, um, the NMSC is
required to do a lot of
reporting by the state and so
they do that by receiving
information from various
partners across the state, and
they don't necessarily receive
that all in the same way. And so
getting them to be able to
report data to the NMSC, uh, can
be a little bit difficult, uh.
then also giving them access to
other data sets that are on
there and so that's been pretty
helpful for them. And then
Uh, so with the internal
automation, uh, the NMSC does
these reportings uh from
different criminal justice
partners, uh, they receive their
data in a lot of different ways
like AOC, AODA, um NMCD doesn't
have to be manually curated and
so that's removing the overhead
on their partners to get their
reporting in on time. So
to try to get that done. Uh,
currently, we are just doing
some, uh, automated ingest when
their partners send the reports
and then as we move forward,
we'd be working on that
aren't having to spend as much
time kind of dealing with the
data in that way.
Uh, the next project is the NMCD
data lift to the NMDX, so the
detention centers to help get
their data uploaded to the data
exchange. Uh, and this is very
helpful for them because then
the NMSC has access to their
data, again, real time, it's
the different records that they
need for faster lookup for court
dates, etc. Um, and so we're
working to get all of the
different detention centers in
across the state to the data
Um, and so again, this is that
decreasing overhead, um, a lot
of these records positions have
really high turnover rate, and
so to create easier processes so
is the data dashboard for the um
CJCC, uh, and so we're doing a
lot of data analytics with data
that's available, um.
necessarily be the same. Um, and
so being able to give them some
insight into uh community
things, um, criminal justice
related things, uh, is kind of
our goal and so we're starting
Analytics, uh, and with the data
that we have that's available,
we're gonna implement as much as
that, uh, as much of that as we
can, and then we'll move on to
implementing some of uh the new
these research papers that are,
um, out there will be helpful
for us. Uh, we're currently in
progress and doing development
on that project, um, and.
All right, the last project uh I
want to talk to about Madam
Chair, is the case catcher. The
the
So a person had committed a high
profile crime, but they had been
arrested a few weeks before and
then, uh, released and the DA
police said that, uh, the DA had
everything they need to
prosecute them and they just
didn't do their job and the DA
said, uh, the Albuquerque police
didn't provide them with the
evidence they needed to make a
friction by being a
evidence reporting tool, uh,
from the police, local law
so that the DA can create a
convincing, uh, court case
against the person that was
arrested.
And so what this does is it
keeps track of that evidence so
that the EA doesn't lose it or
um has an easier time uh
creating the case against the
Madam Chair, uh, senators
representatives, um, uh, a
couple more words about the case
catcher. So it was a project,
uh, Albuquerque Chamber of
subcontractor, and we worked
closely with the 2nd District
attorney's office where case
catcher is deployed.
Um, we've also, we're also
first judicial district attorney
in his office. It's on uh uh
Microsoft Azure, uh, in the
cloud. Uh, so there's different
ways you can deploy it, and I
Stephanie.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, now I'd like to
talk more specifically about the
statewide data governance
it's $480,000 for ICASA to
basically conduct a landscape
assessment, really mapping out
assets and gaps within data
governance throughout the state
mean when we talk about data
governance. So when we're
talking about data governance,
we're really talking about the
framework that embodies the
tools and the systems and the
In the field programmatic work
and so forth. And so our goal
through this project and our
charge and mandate through the
um, that details what our
existing data governance
infrastructure looks like, um,
and so today what I'd like to
share with you all is how we're
approaching this project and
detailed landscape assessment
where we're reaching out to all
state agencies and other
stakeholders qua
quasi-governmental entities to
really understand what tools and
mention
that the statewide data
governance project is not
specific to criminal justice.
This embodies and encompasses
all issue areas and all facets
In addition to the landscape map
and the best practices research.
we are also um conducting
stakeholder interviews. We're
you all's feedback on your
experience in data and um your
work in data.
In addition to that, phase 2 of
strong data governance is for
the future of New Mexico and all
of the issue areas that we care
about.
I think um Jerrih and Charles
talked about the consolidated
offender query and some of the
challenges around the agencies
talking to each other and
hesitations around sharing data.
If we had data management
strengths are that we can double
down on and how we can improve
the infrastructure as a whole.
Um
What I'd like to do now, and as
few years, and so I'd like to
share with you though what our
preliminary findings are in our
initial stakeholder interviews.
Um, and you can see on this
with an issues. So when we're
talking about criminal justice
data, um, one challenge that
we're seeing and hearing from
agency folks is that, say, for
workforce data isn't necessarily
in a place where it's able to be
integrated and and talk to each
other. So, again, within the
context of
criminal justice. It's
is taking place, um, are siloed
in policy areas.
And the other pieces that this
side of the work, the data side
of the work and technology is
some, um, you know, IT people,
but they really don't have the
sort of subject matter expertise
that Juriah and Charles have.
And so that that's also a
the other pieces that, as I
mentioned before, there are not
specific data management
protocols in place. And so a
data sharing agreement can exist
between, say, CYFD and DPS, but
standardized universal approach
to data management protocols.
Um, the other
is that um I think it is
important though to lift up that
there is an appetite. Everybody
very much see the need around
data governance and the
management protocols in
particular to be driven by the
end user. So for example, the
clerk that's working with the
data for the single offender
agencies. Those end users being
a part of the conversation from
the policy, um, from the policy
standpoint.
Um
so we are in phase one of the
project. We are going to
continue gathering data
throughout the fall and the
winter, um, it's not required,
however, we do want to submit an
an interim report to the LFC and
make sure that you all have it
as well, um, in January of 2025.
We'd also like to to begin phase
two of the tech technical
Also, um, in the fall of 2025,
we are aiming to have the phase
to the technical application of
the project, um, wrapped up in
We often hear from members and
from other stakeholders, how can
we get involved? What
opportunities are there to
engage in this work. And I would
Um, I think that there are
opportunities to think about
policy and data governance
across issue areas and even
within the context of all of
about supporting phase two of
the um data governance project,
which is the technical
application piece and then the
narrative really.
exciting and sexy of a topic. It
is, however, very important, and
I think that it will also as
policy makers give you all
better tools to make the
For a stronger data governance
infrastructure here in New
Mexico.
And this concludes our uh
And this concludes our
presentation, I believe, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
Thank you very much presenters
um that that was actually pretty
interesting, um, so I have
Representative rego.
Senator Saia Lopez.
OK, great.
All right, uh, Representative
Madam Chair and and presenters,
so
New Mexico with DPS.
I'm chair, representative, um,
arrest.
Um
When that state tracking number
along with the fingerprint
information is sent to DPS. DPS
the state ID, and that is the
information that is being passed
to uh.
The courts to attach to their
despi disposition records.
fingerprints, they send it off
to the FBI, which kicks back.
A unique number.
That is used universally.
Within the US.
use an alias, I've got another
unique number.
And what I almost wonder is when
we kick it to the FBI. I, I
know, whatever number. Once we
get the verification back from
the FBI. Hey, Joe Blow is this
person.
And I'm trying to prepare the,
the, um.
Uh, report for the judge.
Madam Chair, Representative
Rehm, um, so currently, you're
correct, that number gets sent
to the FBI or that the biometric
information from their
fingerprint gets sent to the
strict requirements for what can
be done with that number. And
Uh, the courts have, uh, as I
understand it, um, not wanting
number is uh also biometrically
derived though, so it has a very
low, uh, collision rate. I'm not
gonna say it's 0, but it is uh
very low.
thing, but, you know, it'd be
great if we could get to one
number so that when we have that
number, whatever aliases he's
just end up with a database with
a bunch of numbers and we have
to individually verify. But
anyway, let me move on. The
other one I want to talk about
So we're gonna go ahead and take
the disposition and send it to
DPS who is then going to enter
Uh, incident that occurred, the
Department of Motor Vehicles
thought it would be a good idea.
We'll get some inmates to enter
enter it, and they would not
enter the data. Therefore, it
would be to the law enforcement,
a skip when they ran that
license plate.
comes to me, I'm the one
entering it and I go, oh my
gosh, this is my brother.
And I don't enter it.
Or I, you know, do something,
Um, Madam Chair Representative
Rehm, uh, I don't know, uh, how.
Any details about that program,
so I can't, I don't feel like I
can really speak to it.
Not in it or, uh, deceitfully
enter it, but I'm just pointing
out that's a, that's a link.
Anyway, thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam
developing the tools in the
systems, those process pieces
are um not really within the
purview of of our work. However,
I think that is such an
our customers. In this case it
is um DPS, so thank you for that
representative.
Representative Jay.
And so welcome back. It's good
to see you. Um, I appreciated
this. Uh, I, I guess we have
certain crimes when in fact it's
one individual, right? And we
want to try to target the
correct person, right, and that
target that identify the correct
person so that we're not, you
As policymakers and really law
enforcement too needs
unduplicated counts, right?
So, are you helping, will you
me to create unduplicated counts
of of people.
Madam Chair, Representative
Tracy, um, I we're currently
think it necessarily, uh, is to,
uh, change those count values.
It's more to provide to
disambiguate, uh, you know,
these two people were arrested
send the the.
The disposition to for the
records. If that information is
correct, then I think, uh, the
DPS will be able to provide
Um
We were told before the special
session that we needed a bill,
their data and um there was
considerable angst among the
legislators because there is a
law in place requiring that.
Conclusions you draw.
Representative Chasey, uh, so
there is, um, currently, as I
said, uh, earlier, when you get
arrested, when you get a
fingerprinted, there's a state
basically a 1 to 1, you get
arrested, you get an STN and you
get fingerprints taken, uh,
those three things, right.
that I know, uh, the DPS OC,
and, um.
You know, a bunch of other
things have been having uh
quarterly meetings recently to
think what Madam chair, um,
senators representative. The,
the reason I, I think we keep
hearing for why that information
isn't making it is, is maybe
staffing.
that human, I'm not gonna, I'm
not gonna do it again, you know,
let's, let's process this
person. Um, so, but yeah, those,
those are, those are just things
that we hear in the quarterly
Thank you very much. I, I really
appreciate that and I'm
wondering, um,
If the legislature asked
what the LSC needs in order to
inform us and, and what we need
to inform policy development,
um,
in on, um, this isn't a
challenge specific to New
Mexico. It is a challenge faced
by many states around how are we
able to incentivize or provide
mentioned, sometimes it is a
question of resources and
personnel and capacity of
systems and sometimes
it's just a question of, it's
just not happening. And so how
of in this data governance
project.
Mountain, I think maybe in the
future, that's where
I know you've talked about
working with the sentencing
we need reported.
To be intelligent in our
decisions, we have to figure
out, first of all, what are we
missing and then how do we get
meeting that we had.
We had put in a requirement in
House Bill 2 for those various
reporting entities.
Because I think it's tricky,
but, um,
For their funding purposes. In
other words, there was a um they
didn't get the money unless they
really mean it. We really need
the data.
These data and
Yeah
Well,
we probably need to be smarter
than
these juveniles, one of them,
they see a potential life
sentence now for murder with a
deadly weapon, um.
the vice chair said yesterday is
actually we need some
qualitative information on that.
So if there was no consequence.
Did the, um, district attorney
decide not to prosecute or what?
I mean, we actually probably
need
More of that kind of information
to make intelligent decisions.
um.
To help to get them the first
time and help them see the light
and not go down the wrong path.
And so how do we do that? And
am I taking too long? Sorry,
but, uh, we do need that kind of
information in order to be smart
enough about what we're doing.
And I appreciate the fact that
hoping to have we're gonna
rearrange things a little bit.
Simon was scheduled yesterday to
talk about the power of the veto
and how what how the.
You know, how it can be applied
very interesting, you know,
panel, so, um, I hope everyone
can stay for all of that now,
um, Representative Barreco.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um, hey
say that because, um, well,
I'll, I'll tell you a little bit
later, but before I get into
that, I just think it's
fascinating. I think that this
is the, you know, this is the
Madam Chair Representative
Brego, no, we are not connected
to the real-time crime center.
Have you thought about that
connection?
OK. Uh, I, uh, when we were
working with the 2nd District
attorney's office. We worked
probably meet with Chief Medina.
And uh the mayor.
Just to chat, I mean, since it
is Albuquerque is the largest
city in the state, and that's
And I was really um I thought it
was wonderful when uh uh
Representative Dixon proposed
this bill, and I wish I had been
we converted our um planning
department to a 11 stop shop,
um, and we implemented a new
computer system that, you know,
Parks and other departments to
that one stop shop. By the time
we went to implemented the
software became obsolete and the
city council had appropriated a
amount of money because that
first company went out of
business and um so.
Something to keep in mind,
especially as you're looking to
safety first and then moving on
to other departments, but by the
time you connect all, you know,
you implement the um.
Borigo, thank you for that
question. Um, I think so this
report.
And this appropriation really is
about understanding where we are
project, um, would be potential
conversions of systems, agency
by agency, that's not something
we would necessarily do or is in
be something that would help us
solve for some of these
challenges, and I think you're,
you're absolutely right, the
system's piece and then becoming
outdated and not able to work
Of each department in the state.
Madam Chair Representative, that
is a piece of the report. Yes.
House Bill 2, the language is
There's not a specific
requirement that we go agency by
agency, I think that is that is
very important and so that's a
part of our methodology
that's where that technical
piece comes into where we can
really establish a few pilot
projects and that actually
circles me back to your
And then, um.
In, in those backup.
Systems, let's just so you're
not at that point yet where
Madam Chair Representative, yes.
OK.
All right, um, and I guess the
Um, ICASA has experience using
machine learning tools to help
solve problems. Um, those
problems are usually automating
our report, um, based on ICASA's
experience solving problems
using AI and, and leveraging our
experience. Uh, Jeriah or
Charles, would you like to uh
provide any
Other information.
directly tie into AI and how,
how that's implemented is really
um, gonna be a concern,
especially when you guys are
would be looking at the policy,
the cost.
How all departments across the
board and so I'll be interested
is, um, this is really important
because I'm always complaining
that we don't have enough data,
um, to make some of these
decisions, so it's, it's really
important and I'm really glad
you're doing it. Um, and I think
terms of how discriminatory, it
can be, you know, with facial
recognition and all of that, so
I, I, I hope you all are up on
that. I think there's even um.
Sort of the dangers of, of
defaulting to
To AI in a minority, a majority
minority state.
protect it and, and how can we
ensure that it's not sold to
private entities who could use
this or resell it, um, and
information, but also that this
data isn't going to be sold or
misused or used in ways that are
unexpected.
with sensitive data, um, of
different types of the DOD type
for many years and
And usually there's uh
technology control plan that has
say, Department of Public Safety
or the data exchange is held on,
on their own systems, and it's
not, it's not on a server, on a
pretty decent experience, um,
protecting, protecting data, and
I would even say that.
We're pretty good at knowing
when we get data from different
not going to ask for it. Why,
why take on, why take on that
risk?
Um, and if, if that doesn't
answer the question, um, I'm
sure Jiah and Charles can
think is extremely disturbing. I
don't think we should allow it.
Um, and I just want to make sure
that.
Something is in place to make
sure that.
This data is not sold.
Data, um, man, I do not have
experiences with knowing other
agencies that
That are selling their data, but
I would, I would have to agree
that's uh seems strange to, to
with, um, any access that we
have to that data is logged, so,
uh, in particular relation to
make sure that, uh, we, we can't
do anything.
So, uh, their own, um.
Like internally access to that
research question for us for the
statewide data governance
project is understanding what
controls are in place at the
agency level to ensure that data
is not compromised. And so while
how agencies are addressing
that, that concern.
Thank you. I appreciate that.
Um, do you, I didn't recall that
you um get any data from MBD?
important question and um I hope
that you work really hard to
protect this data for, for all
the reasons I stated and many
more reasons. Um, thank you and
senator, I didn't see you.
Yeah, thank you, just quickly, I
also uh
Appreciate director Smith, um, I
was here with your grandfather
as well, I think, uh, Rep Chasey
well from back in the day. Uh,
just question, I want to
understand, so the relationship
between the, your entity and the
sentencing commission, just in
terms of the funding and how
does that work? Explain that to
Uh, Douglas sends money to us,
um, and gives us requirements
and tasking, and we follow up
you're basically providing the
data that he's using to put
together his information to us.
A man in the chair, senator,
yes. Great. Well, that's, that
is super helpful cause one of
us in terms of the analysis that
we use, plus we finally began
looking at the fiscal impact of
some of these.
Criminal bills that were being
proposed that we didn't use to
do that at all, and realizing
decisions, and I'll just as an
example, Paul G Guerin and Chris
Moore's work on pretrial
detention, the data component to
helps us make
decisions about how we move
forward, so super excited to
hear about your organization to
know this is happening.
Right. Um, Madam Chair, uh,
Senator Wirth, um, let me be
more specific, uh, first, um,
Iasa puts together the
technology pieces directed by
between, between you and, and
Douglas, um, but right now
funding comes from, from Douglas
to us. I know the current
funding that we have expires.
go into, to the likelihood of
those kinds of things. I
appreciate that and I think also
you're getting, we call it grow
money, junior money, which is a
whole ton of places where.
We, if we can get the data we're
we're making better decisions.
So again, just very much
appreciate the presentation.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
I, I'd really like to continue
helping the state getting
funding, um, having our, our
software developers, researchers
in the state, um, work on, work
problems. They don't always stay
at ICASA. They go other places.
They maybe go
work for the state, in which the
state needs more of the type of
people that we have at ICASA,
they may even have a clearance,
uh, so.
Thank you.
Thank you presenters, uh, as you
benefit the state so thank you
for your time. Thank you for
your presentation and um.
Look forward to seeing you
again. OK.
police chief of Santa Fe are
here and so instead of asking
them to wait, I think it's
appropriate for us to hear from
them and
it in um Las Cruces, and we
heard from the Donana sheriff
and the city of Las Cruces
sheriff and I thought that was
Of Santa Fe County and know they
hear Nancy is getting them, so
they'll be.
Please have a seat. Welcome,
Sheriff.
Good to see you, Chief, um,
Sheriff.
OK. So I had mentioned this, um.
our last two meetings and I
think the committee has found it
very informative and beneficial
to hear about local law
enforcement issues so welcome
maybe give a like a thumbnail
sketch of your.
Background and then we're happy
to hear from.
Good afternoon. Uh, my name is
Sheriff Avan Mendoza. I'm the
sheriff for, uh, Santa Fe
County.
Uh, I have about 26 years of law
enforcement. I'm on my 2nd term
there as a cadet and uh moved my
way up, retired in 2016 and, and
here I am, so it's been a
magnificent ride.
Uh, I can assure you, and uh,
PowerPoint. I will just be
speaking if that's OK.
And touching on a few things.
Um, good morning, good
afternoon, esteemed members of
the New Mexico Legislative
Courts Corrections and Justice
Police officer retention and
crime rates in Santa Fe County.
Let's first talk about repeat
offenders and the significant
impact.
often commit a large proportion
of the crimes.
This year
Uh, in, in Santa Fe County, 106
and astonishing 9 times in 11
months.
The challenges of repeat
offenders is a cycle of
recidivism linked to inadequate
This increase in law enforcement
contact and arrest can lead to
more violent encounters placing
the individual, the officer, and
rehabilitation and reentry
programs focusing on education,
vocational training, and mental
health support.
When it comes to dealing with
violent crime, whether it's gun
violence, domestic violence.
Criminal organizations, narcotic
narcotics tra trafficking or
others. We need to have a
to keep these individuals
incarcerated until trial.
Let me give you some examples.
I'm gonna use the first initial
and the last name of these
individuals.
13 law enforcement contacts 11
resulting in arrest.
The sheriff's office arrested
this individual in on October
About 29 days later.
Arrested this individual with
15,000 fentanyl pills. This had
included an aggravated assault
recently was sentenced to only
18 months for committing two
armed robberies, stealing 2
vehicles and then fled from law
enforcement by leading them on a
pursuit which we know is
Or Chavez.
Lengthy criminal history
involving property crimes,
possession of narcotics
aggravated fleeing, possession
was many times.
Uh, where he was arrested, uh,
intervention.
would have been possible where
this person would not have been
out on the street, not leading
And is known to traffic large
amount of narcotics in the Santa
Fe area.
Recently he was charged by the
Santa Sheriff's Office for
trafficking a large amount of
was released on probation in
February of 2024.
He's back out on the streets,
folks, although he's on
probation and being monitored,
he's back out.
arrested 38 times and I've never
received much jail time.
Just this morning.
Just this morning,
enforcement is facing.
Almost every day dealing with
the same individuals and a lot
of these, this small percentage
of individuals is committing the
the uh majority of the crimes.
Uh, pull synthetic opioid
contributing to a rise in
overdose deaths in New Mexico
and in, in, uh, impacting
families, impacting individuals,
our loved ones. I can guarantee
and it's horrible, um, I, I,
it's, it's, it's something that
is devastating for families.
And for the community.
I, I advocate for increased
and penalties for those that are
selling and distributing this
fatal drug to our communities.
There's people out there that
are selling this drug to our
youth.
To members of our community that
penalties for those that are
selling and distributing. Yes,
we understand that there's
people that are addicted.
Those, those people necessarily,
they need treatment. They're not
out there selling large amounts
We'll talk now a little bit
about police officer retention.
The challenges in retaining
experienced police officers due
to factors such as pay.
And what this is doing is it's,
it's uh it's creating a, a
bidding game between law
enforcement agencies for those
people that are certified or
that want to be in the
these big raises. They can't
afford the high, the high hourly
rate pays and, and, you know,
State police, uh, respectively
got a a nice increase this last
budget to keep these officers,
they're the ones suffering.
They're the ones out there that
are having to rely on other law
enforcement agencies like state
police, sheriff's office to come
stressful, stress on the family
relationships.
And we can talk a little bit
about cost of living, especially
here in Santa Fe, New Mexico.
The cost of living is so
living in my community, see the
police car there, their presence
make me feel safe. Well, that's
difficult to do when they can't
afford to live in Santa Fe.
They're, you know, a lot of them
are, are coming from uh the
incentives for housing, uh, for
affordable housing, not only for
law enforcement, but nurses,
doctors, mental health
professionals, we need more of
My suggestion is for
improvements in officer
compensation support services
and community policing
initiatives to build trust and
work program that was passed.
Uh, just recently we have 8,
retirees that we hired back to
the sheriff's office. We put
advocate, uh, for the program
and supported the return to work
and it's been very beneficial,
so thank you. We thank the the
legislature for that.
the state, and that money is,
is, is being utilized for
training and equipment and
things that we need.
enforcement, especially the
sheriff's office, and we're,
we're appreciative of that.
When we talk about crime rates
in Santa Fe County.
In Santa Fe County, we've seen a
2% increase in burglaries and
breaking and entry, um, and an
8% increase in motor vehicle
theft.
Um, and I think, you know,
We saw an increase in in child
abuse cases within Santa Fe
County and a lot of the other uh
crimes like larcenies and and
Um, one of the things that we
talked about and I, and I
believe that um DA Bragman
touched a lot in in reference
cases in both 2023 and 2024,
where people were charged with
crimes um where a suspect used a
fire, a firearm in the
commission of that crime.
accountability and consequences
for the criminals by the
criminal justice system.
We realize that criminals don't
see.
Uh
They don't have accountability,
Oh, you know, the action.
There's gotta be accountability
and consequences.
Um, I recommend investing in
community-based crime prevention
programs, enhanced social
A lack of resources and are a
partner.
We are partners, all of us are
partners.
And we are all part of a
criminal justice system.
I encourage the committee to
consider legislative and policy
changes that support systematic
reform.
Community safety and support for
law enforcement.
Thank you for your time and
consideration, and together we
can build a safer and more just
New Mexico for all residents.
Thank you.
All right, I can hear myself.
That's uncomfortable. OK, so my
name is uh Paul Joy. I'm the
chief of police for the Santa Fe
Police Department, uh, we're
um.
OK, so, um, I'll get on so I can
see what you're saying. And so I
have this conversation a lot
The first page, you'll see the
2024 crime data.
And this is going through uh
January 1st of this year to
before. Uh, and if you go
further down into the middle,
where you'll see year to year
changes. Again, the red
indicates increases from the
we saw a kind of lift in in
2021.
Uh, I would say 2022, things
were starting to normalize.
People were kind of getting back
to normal, and 2023 was the
first year that we really saw,
Uh, our total numbers, these are
the major crimes that you're
seeing on the main page and we
can talk and I'm happy to come
back at any time or speak more
with anyone uh individually, uh,
The 2024 crime data continued.
Uh, this is our total calls for
service. Uh, you'll see so far
at the end of October this year,
our highest year, uh, on record,
at least in, in this decade so
far, uh, so we've already
surpassed the trend for last
year.
But I also like to include the
crime and protect folks and do
traffic stops and and all the,
all the other traditional law
enforcement things.
Um, below that.
You know, kind of move back here
as well and
And again, this is what, when I
had these conversations in the
public, uh, when you look at
If you, and again, I would
encourage you if you haven't
already, and not to say that you
don't, but to speak to your
community members and your
constituents to see, uh, not
just what the data is, but how
with the data, um, it's hard to
argue against.
feelings, uh, with, with
objective data as, as much as I
would love to, um, but the, the,
State problem. This is a problem
and issue that we're having with
the courts.
Uh, where, uh, our biggest
driver of crime is repeat
offenders.
positions that goes all the way
from a sworn cadet up to myself.
I am considered a sworn officer.
Uh, our total vacancies right
now is 24.
resources for about another
year. So they'll get out of the
academy and uh June and then
they'll go through their FTO
process, which is another uh 16
this process and everybody makes
it through, numbers wise this
would be the best that we've
been, uh, in at least 10 years.
Um
workforce assessment in 209, no,
I'm sorry, in 2020 and then
2021, uh, we're using 2019
numbers and then 2021 numbers,
uh, based on that company's
ency to other departments of
similar size and how they serve
communities of similar size, uh,
based on that workforce
assessment, we are above average
in, in the work that we do.
the sworn positions.
Uh, so not just patrol, but our
support operations staffing.
Um,
we've done more, we're in the
middle of one now actually we're
in the middle of ball blitz that
should be ending soon.
But this is just for your
reference, this is, again, uh
Uh, for them, so next up, some
things that we're looking at,
uh, and at least one of them is,
is in partnership with the
sheriff's office, where, where
we're going to grant for
nationwide. It's been a, a
fairly successful program, uh,
and so we are looking at ways to
bring it here between us and the
county.
comparisons, uh, that we can do
in-house, uh, so again, broadly
speaking, um, the, the DNA needs
staffing, uh, and I know they're
doing great in the management
there is, is, is really.
Great to work with, uh, but, but
they have the similar issues
that we all do.
This will allow us to do uh
office has that we're looking to
acquire as well our license
plate readers.
Uh, we're building out our
policy first, generally
speaking, before we use any kind
of new technology or
Or um
police.
Uh, so moving on to the next
one.
Talking about, these are the,
the concerns that I hear when
I'm out, uh, having these
community meetings. The first
the next one.
Is homelessness.
Uh, now we, uh, I would say this
is an anecdotal, uh, assessment
Dealing with unhoused and and
homeless folks.
Next one that we get a lot, uh,
of is drugs.
And I, I should take this
Next page is my attempt at a
Venn diagram with the overlap,
and as you can see the, the big
driver for that affects crime
bigger issue than that is the
behavioral mental health system
and the struggles that we have
locally as well as at the state
level.
With that.
the folks and what I try to uh
garner community support from
your constituents and, and ours
is, uh, we really, really, I
can't say it strongly enough,
Uh, we have seen a lot of
progress, I think, at the state
with the law enforcement
retention fund and the, the
money and, and um
behavioral mental health field
that it does directly impact and
help uh the work that we do on
our end because um what we see,
the underlying factor is not,
uh, it is a behavioral mental
health issue could be uh also
drug related because they're
self, they're self uh treating
in, uh, who would probably be
otherwise better served in
treatment, uh, and, and, uh,
facilities um uh again I'm.
Uh, a fan of.
But also related to that, and
I'm not trying to give mixed
messages here, uh, I feel like
it comes across that way. It's
not an either or, it is a yes
And when we talk about uh the
sheriff mentioned some folks
that they've been dealing with.
I had my property crimes just
throw up some, some folks that
they're, they're top 5 that
He's been arrested 10 times just
since 2022.
Uh, Billy Ray Spencer has been
arrested 11 times since 2019.
Anthony Garcia has been arrested
actively all of these folks have
active warrants that they're,
they're trying to apprehend now
as we speak.
And these folks.
Uh, where and broadly speaking,
And so what I would encourage
you, basically one to say the
Arnold tool as it is now is not
working for us.
And it's not working for your
community and it's not working
for your constituents and, and
this is where again, my, my
response right now is this is no
longer a law enforcement issue.
Um
But then again, I would
encourage you to, not that you
don't already, but, but have
safe, because everyone should
feel safe in their homes.
Everyone should feel safe in
their beds when they go to bed
at night. Having your house
broken into and having your
property stolen while you're
folks for the rest of their
lives, uh, because they've had
their, their home, uh, and their
safety violated.
And again harm. Uh, if you were
of replenishing their goods and
merchandise and and the safety
or the, the security measures.
To try to tell them that they
have not been harmed.
Uh,
I don't feel like that
conversation's gonna go well.
Uh, our, our service to them.
And that is the end of it for
Senator Sadi Lopez.
Representative Martinez.
Clock
And myestus.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. So,
um, I introduced the bill last
year to go ahead and increase
the penalty for distribution of
fentanyl, of course, it was
killed in the first committee.
Generally have a firearm in
their possession. So they're a
felon in possession of a
firearm.
my experience, um, through
reading and being briefed on
cases that it is more likely
than not that's, um, you know,
most offenders have firearms um
in their possession, um,
Violent for law enforcement,
we're setting up law enforcement
for failure, um, because if this
is the 10th, 11th, as you've
seen some of the examples that
we've given, um.
um, uh, use of force, deadly
force sometimes. And so it's
setting up the suspect, not only
the suspect and the officer, but
data in front of me, but, um, if
you look at the second page of
the of the.
My presentation where I talked
about the overall crime data.
As you can see the assault
simple battery, the, the sheriff
pushes me, right, that's a
battery, um, to, uh, aggravated
battery, which is, uh, I've shot
someone with a gun, and I didn't
of assault offenses, but what
we, I can speak to from, from.
My team is that the incidents in
which
An assault defense does occur,
years. Uh, and of our homicides
this year on this sheet you're
only seeing 4, we had 1.
Uh, over the weekend, so we're
at 5 for the year. Uh, all 5
it short. I got 5 minutes and I
got a couple more questions,
but, uh, when you, is it been
your experience in communicating
sentences that, uh, they're not
worried about, about the penalty
for being a felon in possession
of a firearm.
I was undersheriff in Valencia
County.
In many moons ago, um, and I
seen
Um, you know, I've talked to
quite a few people who are on
the streets and, in, um,
Albuquerque and every story is
really need to get to, um, but I
wanted to kind of get your
perspective. It looks like we're
gonna be, um, consider at least
creating a new um law
the black market, money
laundering.
You know, some of the problems,
um, that they that they
regulate, um, and
something perhaps because of
resources or whatever that law
enforcement just didn't want to
deal with. And I wanted to get
your perspective on that and
whether you welcome a a new
you hit the nail on the head. I,
I, law enforcement, as you can
tell, um, is overwhelmed as it
is, uh, dealing with um a lot of
And so to expect law enforcement
to deal with the cannabis, um.
Money laundering
and I, and I support, um, some
law enforcement agency or
however the legislatures deem
spit for um compliance and
regulation and enforcement of
that industry.
New
Law enforcement agencies that
come in and focus on that for
us. It's not necessarily that we
don't want to, it's more that we
don't necessarily have the
area. So there's a lot of work
that's, that is certainly is
being done, focusing on, on
trafficking and, and
distribution of fentanyl and
other drugs, but yeah, to um
appropriately, yeah, it, it to
have another agency to do that
and take that load would be
great.
And Senator, if I can just add
one thing.
Um, please consider, um, the
Information in reference to
who's growing, who's licensed.
We Islam was enforcement should
know, uh, who's licensed in our
many for what in case our
officers run into that. I think
there's a lack of communication
and I like a little bit more
openness, um.
From that, um.
over that.
So yeah, no, that's a really
important point. The other
question I wanted to ask was um
about we talk, you talked a lot
about fentanyl, but one of the
do have a place to sleep at
night, but they, they have to be
out of the shelters by a certain
time, whether it's 8:30 in the
morning or 9 or whatever, and
then they're on the streets all
day.
And I thought.
else for lunch or, um, and so I
was just wondering what your
thoughts about, because I know,
I mean, maybe it's the same
issue that you talked about with
regard to fentanyl and, and.
Uh, so going back to my
PowerPoint, the first circle, I
said I wasn't an expert on was
homelessness. Um, and so
congregate shelter, uh, and I
think, I think with the
exception of, of cold weather,
uh, I think during the day they
do uh close their doors, I think
except for services and, and,
yeah, uh, and again, I'm not.
world where we have uh a
facility that can accommodate
folks and give them a safe
place, um, 24 hours, uh, that
Yeah, from talking to them, they
either become victims or
perpetrators or both.
You know, they're hungry, they
break in, they get water from a
fountain, they have to defecate.
I mean, it's really been
Question. I, I just, uh, your
perspective on
On how that's affecting you.
Alcohol misuse, I guess.
I don't, I because the data
we've been seeing is that DWIs
have been decreasing.
where we would like to see them
at 0,
but yeah, I think we've been
making some strides as a state
incidents I've been involved in,
uh, as an officer were
responding to crashes that were,
uh,
Um
EWI caused.
257 DWIs, um, in 2024, 154, so
we're seeing a decrease of 40%.
Um, that's DWI that's driving
while intoxicated as far as
crimes are concerned, I think
substances on board, um,
including alcohol, um, I think
that becomes very volatile and
uh and very concerning, but, uh,
as far as DWIs are concerned,
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Sheriff and Chief for being
here. I appreciate it. Um, I
Um, I don't think it's said
quite enough, uh, so I wanted to
publicly thank you.
Um, Sheriff, you, you keen on
something very important and
over the, over the last few
years, which has been super
helpful in recruiting.
And, uh, and retaining uh
officers or deputies, but, uh,
maybe that's something that
Um, and, uh, I'm, I'm for it.
We're all on the same team here.
And I just want to see more
individuals in law enforcement
in general. I, I don't, I really
don't, not concerned with what
agency they go work for. I just
throughout the years, uh, with
the inherent danger of the job,
the increased liability officers
sometimes don't feel supported,
um.
Uh, Representative, I don't have
a whole lot to add to the
sheriff's statement there. I, I
think it would be interesting to
see um if, if the, the pie of
folks from smaller agencies that
we're considering coming over to
us, but they got that, uh,
retention bonus, and so which,
which kept them on with their
agency, which was great, good,
basically they don't have as as
as highest call volume and, and
I don't have a nicer way to say
it. They're not as busy as we
are, uh, and also, uh, again
echo to Rio Rancho.
Where they have the benefit of
they can work closer to where
they live and where their
families are, uh, that, that's
been a big deal for us too.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Uh, Sheriff Cassau, Chief
Steele,
Well thank you for that. Thank
you again, uh, Sheriff in Chief.
I appreciate you being here.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. We
about fentanyl a little bit.
Talked about that one individual
he said they, they were arrested
with 3900 pills the next time
they're arrested with like
could do to help alleviate your
Sentinel crisis that's
statewide, of course, but
locally, how do you?
How do you think that the
legislature could help you?
Um, Representative Black, I, I
think, uh, going back to uh
Senator Wirth's statement, uh,
crisis, uh, aren't aren't aren't
the ones that we're going after.
They're not the ones that we
want to target, to be honest,
uh, and but also they're also
often committing crime to
facilitate their, their
trafficking and the penalties
around it more stringent and
again, broadly speaking,
whenever we have these bigger
cases, uh, and some of the ones
that the sheriff was was
get, uh, ATF or DEA or FBI to,
to come and
He adopt the case for us.
Um, and, and honestly when they
do, uh,
these uh entities.
Representative, I'll, I'll echo
some of the things that the
chief said, but I think um if
you think of it, think of it
globally, we need to
criminalize that, um, because if
we get them the treatment that
they need, um, then hopefully
the um demand, the demand goes
down.
And hopefully the supply.
Um, first off, and we need to be
tough on dealers and suppliers
and those that are dealing large
quantities, I think we need to
be really tough on them.
And I know it may not be
popular, but we need to, we need
to figure out, well, I, I think
we figured out where fentanyl
comes from the majority of that,
Mexico, we are a border state.
But we need to stop the supply.
We need to be tough on those
that are dealing and supplying
enforcement, as a state
compassionate when we can, with
people that are addicted but
tough when we need to be.
And those are the the dealers
and uh the suppliers.
Uh, so, Madam Chairman, uh, also
piggybacking off that, we're
talking about the border crisis
or I guess the crisis that's
just plaguing the state
regarding the human trafficking,
in Santa Fe, has it affected
your area as much as it has
communities such as uh Sunland
Park, places that are on the
border that have seen.
Right. Sure. All right. So I'm
gonna, uh, that's an interesting
topic and it's something that
I'm, I'm, I'm passionate about
more because uh I've been so
in Virginia.
And uh they showed this heat map
of where they tra human
trafficking was most prevalent
we're doing all right. Well
then, uh, about an hour later, I
went to another uh seminar and
it was hosted by Arizona, um,
they're, they're basically their
version of DPS.
and I was, I was really
impressed by the work that they
were doing because historically
we, we talk about interdiction
as it relates to narcotics, but
uh had never
Texas has been doing this and,
and we get a lot of the stuff uh
from Texas. We see a lot of
their uh of their offenders. And
uh I was like, well, that's
interesting, because there's
this whole state right in
how do you say, the introduction
to, this is a bigger problem
than we realized, and so, uh, I
know our Attorney General.
human trafficking in our state
are not as strong as they should
be and not as strong as other,
other states around us. Uh,
where again, uh, these folks are
Uh, the laws as they are, as my
understanding of it, uh, I feel
like we have a lot of work to do
to catch up to the states around
or do not see a lot of it in
Santa Fe doesn't really indicate
whether or not it's as big of a
problem as it is, uh, and, and
certainly I, I think it's, it's
Thank you, Representative. Oh,
Sheriff.
If you want to take a few
minutes, that's great. No, it's
fine. I echo everything that she
said. I, you know, I just think
for law enforcement. I wouldn't
say it's prevalent in Santa Fe
County. I I can't speak for the
city, um, I, I, I don't recall
any recent cases, but we are
in Sannoe County, but, um, we're
more educated about it and
that's a good thing.
Thank you. We have Senator
Master and then Representative
Lujan.
um, is there like, is there a
market for heroin or it's all
fentanyl?
Uh, you know, we've, we've seen
rise also. And, and I, I, this
is my personal opinion, but I, I
really feel it's due to, um, the
supply, right? What is the
cartel?
coming out of Mexico and until
we started seeing the synthetic
drugs like methamphetamine and
fentanyl, that could be uh
manufactured, um.
To be honest with you, heroin
was I thought a better, a less
lethal drug than fentanyl.
That's sad to say, but it is the
truth. And so, uh, I think those
just the
Expressing the frustration, um,
that we need to hear that as
policy makers of frustration of
uh what I'm sure every law
The unconstitutionality of, of
cash bail.
We need to be honest with what
the unintended consequences of
that reality is, one is
misdemeanants get out.
those that were heavily addicted
to narcotics, had time to detox,
you know what I mean? So we're
dealing with that. The um
gets out.
What's the, like the percentage
of success with uh, with the
local DA, the Santa Fe DA filing
motions to detain and those
Uh, Senator, I wouldn't be able
to give you exact numbers. I
know that uh the Carmac Ewes in
her office to file a good number
than that, but to, to what you
were saying before,
If you go back to the my uh
presentation here when we talk
about the operations, the
they made 55 arrests, uh, a good
number of those, uh, and I could
get you the exact number if you
wanted, but there probably about
that congregate shelter that we
referenced earlier.
And what we were seeing was, and
this is again some of the
pushback I get when I engage in
the community, because they
the guy gets out, uh, tomorrow,
if, if that long sometimes. And
well, what did they do? They
just go back, it's not, it's not
the deterrence that we like to
think that it used to be. It's
I, to, to your point, and, and a
lot of those arrests were
misdemeanor arrests, so it's
criminal trespass, uh, or, or
aggressive panhandling, some of
those things where, uh, it's, it
No, thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, gentlemen. The
um most people I speak to
associate fighting crime with an
arrest and jail.
So the person getting out of
conviction and post-conviction
punishment. Um,
It seems like with, with these
misdemeanor crimes, they're not
dramatically in, in, in my home
county, uh, when the courts went
from grand juries to preliminary
hearings. But anyway, that stuff
that we're struggling with. My
point is, is that it's the
Punishment powers. We just have
to uh stay in, in communication
to, to.
To work together to make it, to
make it functioning and frankly,
it, it's almost dysfunctional.
Trafficking in the state of New
Mexico is 9 years in prison.
A subsequent trafficking is 18
years mandatory. So I don't know
if there'll be an appetite to,
to do the minimum.
The minimum
being doled out. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you Senator um
Representative Lujan.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Sheriff. um.
included, you've been attending
town halls, you've been in, in
having um.
Very engaging in conversation
you and I were raised here in
Santa Fe with our mothers being
friends back in the day and so
forth, but your engagement and
your connection to the community
of, of us having and finding
innovation and innovational
ways. It's more to the fact of
having the correct funding.
And, and the workforce.
from? When our, our workforce
isn't a majority maybe if I'm
correct, does not even live here
in our community.
presentation.
Um, it's very difficult for law
enforcement officers and I, I
think
People in general to live in
Sanofi. I won't speak to other
would say 30 to 40% of our of
our law enforcement officers
live in Rio Rancho, where it's
more affordable. And, uh, like I
said, I think.
back home and, and, uh, it make,
it makes the community safer in
general, you know, I don't know
what the answer to that is, um,
I don't know if the housing.
enforcement but public safety in
general, firefighters, doctors,
nurses, mental health
professionals, we need to find a
way to keep these young people
that graduate with these
jobs, um, in other states. How
do we keep that talent.
And that expertise here.
And I know that's, that's,
that's the million dollar
question, right?
vested in the community, um, and
I'm not saying that they're,
they're not, but, uh, you know,
if you were born and raised here
in Santa Fe, uh you know a lot
of people you, you.
live here. I'm not saying they
don't care about the people here
in Santa Fe, but I think there's
more of a connection if you live
here.
Uh,
you know, representative, and
here and, and uh this community
and in this department of course
been wonderful to me. There was
an article that came out in
PoliceO.com, not too long ago,
arresting these folks and we
might see them, we might see
them at the store or we might
see them at the schools when
we're dropping off our kids.
together and and all these other
things and, and again I've and
was I a jerk? And, and just
wanna make sure cause I always
try not to be, uh, unless I
really, really had to be, and,
but, um, but yeah, by, by and
large, the interactions have
want that separation there, but
as it relates to the
affordability to even be here
for the folks who do want to
live here. Yeah, that's a
problem. And the city did try to
that was as we had a few that
applied for it and we're going
through the process to get
approval and then the interest
rates went really, really high,
and I don't know, and again,
That would have at least in our,
in our case, that would have
Benefited the city when they get
more, um, more folks to take
problems that we're facing. It's
not very, it's not simple, and I
want to commend this committee
and our and our chair and and
co-chair for, um, having all the
sessions we did during this
that they're going to be doing,
and I just would like you to
stay tuned, but I wanted you to,
to comment on that because
throughout our conversations,
that is one of the the elements
pocketbooks of those that are
working.
Um,
for you, for us, because that
that commute is 45 minute
commute or even longer, really,
Madam Chair, thank you for
indulging me with that. um, and
I just, I just really wanted to
focus in on that part because
that's going to be coming up and
we want to be as supportive to
our law enforcement and our
and.
Our public safety, um, and those
on the that are um experiencing
homelessness and having um
that, and I just wanted to say
to you, Madam Chair, to this
committee, thank you for all the
work. Um, this is our last, um,
Um, committee meeting, um, for
the year and I just wanted to
going to usher through, Madam
Chair. So thank you for letting
me come in and, and, and having
these words, but this is a topic
and an issue that I've really,
really
Um, been working at the
really good dialogue amongst us
and we really appreciate your
willingness to share your
perspectives and we take them to
heart and I'm certain they'll
mentioned and having this kind
of information is super
important to us, so thank you
very much.
Of course.
All right, so, um, we have
public comment, but before we do
for LFC. We, we had a lot of
meetings this year, you know,
and, um, they have been very
dedicated and committed to
making sure our meetings are
and Simon and Domenico, all of
whom have really been stalwart
supporters for us, so thank you
very much and let's give him a
hand.
OK, so now, um, if you wanna
come up and maybe take the mic
if that would work for you. Oh,
that would be OK. That would be
fine. It's easier, I think.
Legislators, members of the
public and staff.
Um, my name is Nat Dean. I'm a
person.
With multiple disabilities and
mentioned being 28 and having a
six-figure income on a business
because I did lose everything.
And I'm now.
Uh
This is
traumatic brain injury. And, um,
my journey to recovery took 25
years because I did not know how
to be a consumer of medical care
of insurance, of, of.
enforce when victims cannot go
back to the court system because
the offender will be in the
court and therefore they are
placed again at risk.
I have often worked with
care or treatment, which has
been able to help them mitigate
their behaviors and then
therefore mitigate or or have
their needs met and therefore
reduce their uh
believed. And I think that that
is extremely difficult when
you're uh individual who's
incarcerated, you already may be
feeling that you're not being
Assault. It depends on what they
Perceived as being controlled.
Um, I just also wanted to bring
have the perception that that
family member is their
protector, and so there can be a
situation where thevention has
occurred in the training has
roundhouse and the round
building during the session and
thank you very much. Thank you
and we appreciate your
participation. Madam Chair, just
before we wind up, I think it's
meetings. It's been critical to
what we're doing and, and we're
gonna continue to do so I just
want to publicly thank you for
that.
I second.
other branches of government,
but certainly for us. And I've
enjoyed working with all of you,
and I say that sincerely,
everybody's been great, so thank
