On the whole art.
Good morning everybody. We're on
day 2 of courts corrections and
Justice. Today we're meeting in
Las Cruces as we did yesterday.
The first item on our agenda is
update on healthcare
consolidation oversight Act, and
I just saw my vice chair signal
me, so I can just take a moment
before we get to the business
and, um, I was saddened to
learn, uh, this morning early of
the passing of Donna Irwin,
Representative Donna Irwin, was
um
Member of the House for many
years from the Deming area when
I was first brought into the
legislature, it was following
the death of my predecessor in
um in the House seat and
I was immediately assigned to
Dana's office, and those of you
in the house know when you share
an office you would develop a
pretty close bond to the person
that you're with the house
offices, unlike the Senate or
shared and and a little bit
tighter and I was really
fortunate to spend many years
with Donna as my sweet mate. We
got to become very dear close
friends. I know along with
Senator Stewart, Senator Worth,
who served with her, I think
many of you also serve with her
I think perhaps I think probably
ribs about going and others, um,
she was
Very much a fixture in Deming.
She worked all of the years that
I knew her at the bank there the
bank in Deming and if you walked
in the front door, she, her desk
was purposefully put right at
the front door for two reasons.
One is because the bank liked
everybody to know Donna as the
face of the bank. She was so
well liked and so well respected
in the community, the bank felt
a great advantage to that. And
of course for Don it was a good
way to get reelected year after
year, uh, because you couldn't
come in or out of the bank
without saying hello to her, so
she was a sweet dear lady I saw.
her a couple of weeks ago at a
special event for John Arthur
Smith.
They're both together and now
they're together again.
So thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, thank you, Senator.
So, I will let the senator and
representative take the floor
and you may proceed in.
way which you wish to.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Madam Chair and members.
The reason I, I'm not sure why
we're getting feedback on this.
OK.
So the reason that this
committee has devoted its time
and attention to this topic that
we're going to be discussing
today is because there's
something unique in the history
of healthcare that's taking
place right now. Private equity
and large corporations are
playing a rapidly growing role
in our healthcare system in ways
that have enormous consequences
for patients and for healthcare
professionals. Private equity,
provider acquisitions have
increased significantly in
recent years. physician practice
acquisitions increased more than
sixfold from 2012 to 2021. In
2012, 29% of physicians worked
for hospitals or health systems
and by, uh, 2022, it was 41%.
And New Mexico is directly
impacted by these changes. In
fact, here in New Mexico, 38% of
hospitals are now owned by
private equity firms, which is
the highest level in the nation.
And these massive changes
require new ways of thinking
about how to ensure that patient
care always comes first. We
can't turn back the clock and
eliminate these business models,
but with these growing trends,
we need better oversight tools
that focus on the impacts on
patients and on patient care.
I'll hand it over to Represent
that.
Thank you, Senator. Good
morning, Madam Chair. Um,
Transparency and competition and
healthcare remain essential
uh before Senate Bill 15 passed,
which was the one year
legislation that was passed last
session. New Mexico was one of
only 11 states that has no
market oversight.
Um, together with the office of
the Superintendent of Insurance,
uh, we really wanted the
committee to know how robust the
engagement has been in
communities around the state.
Um, uh, the superintendent along
with uh her team and the senator
and I have been uh with a
visiting communities around the
state to understand their
concerns about major
transactions that have impacted
their communities and the
frustration they have had when
They are not included in these
major decisions that directly
impact them in their daily
lives.
The need for a fair, transparent
process that centers community
and patient needs is essential,
uh, and that's why we wanted to
provide the context to this
committee about how Senate Bill
15 came together, and now how we
have brought together
stakeholders over the past
several months to really dive
into these issues and find a
workable long term solution.
And we have with us here today
the AC, our super.
And Jane Wishner, who has been
uh working as a consultant on
this, this bill throughout the
interim and last session.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair,
members and sponsors as well as
our, uh, policy, uh, consultant,
uh, for helping me, uh, and my
team, uh.
Take on this undertaking. Um,
uh, we've put together a
presentation that hopefully you
all have, uh, I'm gonna walk
through it, but if you have
questions along the way, of
course, please, it's, we want
all the input that we can get.
Uh, so the summary of our
presentation, we are going to
give you, which many of you
know, the background and context
for SB 15, the healthcare
consolidation Oversight Act. We
are going to talk about the, uh,
stakeholder process which was
invaluable and
I think at the legislature's
suggestion that we undertake
that, um, and we're going to
share with you the stakeholder
input which really had a number
of themes that we will talk
about today. And then the policy
issues to be addressed in the
2025 legislative session.
Uh, the background, uh, I'm sure
you recall about the last year,
the proposed Presbyterian
merger, uh, which is how I got
involved because they
Presbyterian onto uh health
insurance companies that we had
to approve and it became clear
rather quickly that there was no
Direct regulatory authority to
review major transactions that
could impact the quality
availability, accessibility, and
affordability of health care in
New Mexico.
Uh, a growing body of research
which has grown even more
exponentially this year, uh,
unfortunately, partly because of
the steward, uh, problems in
Massachusetts and Rhode Island,
uh, they show that, uh, private
equity when private equity gets
involved, there's often price
increases and there can often be
a lowering of quality of care.
New Mexico as as the sponsor
said, was one of only a handful
of states when we started
looking at this that had no
system.
To require reporting oversight
of health care transactions and
more and more it looks like
there's a need across the nation
for a regulatory process to
review these transactions
involving the merger
acquisition, or changing control
of major healthcare providers.
Senate Bill 15, uh, apologies
that OSI had a limited time to
put that together, uh, for the
2024 session. Uh, the original
bill was really worked on in
December and introduced the
first few days of the session,
uh, uh, in 2024 and was based
primarily on the Oregon statute
and built also on OSI's
expertise in reviewing these
complicated transactions in the
insurance industry, uh, under
the insurance holding company
law.
As introduced, the bill covered
a large number of entities
includingd significant
transparency provisions and the
opportunity for public input.
The compromise SB 15 terminates
July 1, 2025 and covers only
hospitals and provides complete
confidentiality with no
opportunity for community input.
Sponsors and the OSI agreed to
engage in the stakeholder
process and propose a more
comprehensive bill in the 2025
legislative session.
Uh, again, uh, Senate Bill 15
covers only hospitals, a single
review process for all
transactions. It's confidential,
no opportunity, no information
to the public and no opportunity
for public and community input.
There is no role for the
Attorney General, and there's no
specified enforcement or right
of appeal. It terminates at July
1, 2025, except for a three-year
oversight of transactions.
Again, thank, we thank the
legislature for urging us with
our sponsors to implement a
stakeholder and community
feedback process. Uh, as part of
this, OSI established a witch
page on a web, excuse me, web
page on its site and built a
list of nearly 600 individuals
that received notice of the
meetings. Uh, OSI and the
sponsors help community outreach
and targeted stakeholder
meetings. The community outreach
meetings were conducted in
Albuquerque, which was our first
one, Santa Fe
Gallup, Las Cruces, Alan Gordo,
Taos in Las Vegas. Multiple
targeted stakeholder meetings
also address key policy aspects
of the Oversight Act, with
hospitals providers, consumer
advocates, and insurers.
Significant engagement of the
providers, consumers, advocates,
and the hospital association,
there was significant engagement
of providers, consumer
advocates, and the hospital
association, and many more of
it, it's individual members. The
community outreach meetings were
in.
and they raised major issues
regarding local past hospital
transactions. And, and during
these meetings, they were very
focused discussions occurred
between the the hospital CEOs,
the communities and the members
and the providers.
there were over 250 participants
that that attended these
meetings. They were providers,
hospital executives, consumer
advocates, community members,
and insurers. The community
members, there are some themes
that evolved in our meetings
and appeared in
I would I'd say a number of
them. I can't say a majority of
everything came up, but most of
them, I'd say at least 3
meetings, these themes came up.
The OB, uh, there was a concern
about OBGYN and Women's Health
services that is no longer
available in many areas because
it's not profitable. Providers
are referring patients long
distances for OBGYN and other
health services and in many of
these rural communities,
transportation is, is a barrier.
It's beyond challenging. It's a
barrier to get help.
Uh, providers are concerned with
the lack of transparency and the
quality of healthcare. Uh, we
had a number of providers that
wish to be anonymous when
they're in these meetings and
telling us about some of the
concerns they had in there, in
their hospitals or in their
community. And then there are
real challenges for the
hospitals. They have challenges
with operating costs, staffing,
and the there are special needs
for the rural hospitals. We've
just.
Just discovered. Well, we knew,
but we're reinforced by these
meetings, uh, what we learned,
um, I would say, uh, our
sponsors were way smarter than I
was, uh, and understanding how
much it was important to have
the community input and
transparency. It it was, it was,
it was eye opening. Uh, we also,
what was reinforced was the need
to protect access to essential
medical services. The need to
Protect medical providers, um, I
think, uh, representative Zansky
intuitively knew this was an
issue and it certainly came out
in the meetings often hospital
transactions have had a
significant impact on medical
providers' employment, the the
doctor-patient relationship and
ratios and the quality and
accessibility for healthcare.
Independent practicers practice
providers are very concerned
about a bureaucratic burden and
cost being placed if
them if they are subject to the
Act and try to do any
transactions. And finally, which
really was something that came
out of this. There's really a
need for whistleblower
protection for hospital
employees.
Uh, the need for
post-transaction enforcement and
monitoring was really uh
On both ends of the spectrum,
uh, the hospitals want short and
the communities probably want
forever, so that was, and we
basically tried to tell them
this bill cannot fix everything,
but, uh, it was clear that
there's real concern and, and
disagreement. And then the
objection to criminal penalties
by hospitals and medical
providers.
So,
based on this, we've sort of
shifted, um, how are you going
to approach this? Uh, there's,
we're probably gonna, the draft
bill will have a three-tiered
approach.
We're talking about transactions
subject to reporting only.
Non-hospital entities or or
lower or entities or providers
with low lower gross revenues
will
only have to report transactions
after they've, uh, closed. This
will enable the public and
policymakers to understand
what's going on in the whole
health care system landscape
which became apparent we didn't
really have a a view into that.
Then we would move into
something that was in the, uh,
in the prior, uh, original bill.
No, uh, notice and preliminary
review of transactions. That
would be all hospitals, other
large healthcare entities with
higher gross revenue and, uh,
providing a pre-notice meeting
which is available on request,
and I can tell you under SB 15
we've had one group come in and
they have asked for a pre-notice
meeting, which is really
important and what we've seen
the insurance industry, it's
pretty typical. They come in and
tell us the transaction is
coming.
And then, uh,
if you, uh, in preliminary
review, we're asking that there
be a certification of accuracy
and completeness by the filing
entity, so we make sure we
understand everything that's in
there because based on this
review was an information. It's,
we're going to make a decision
of whether things go to
comprehensive review. And then a
public posting of notice and the
opportunity for written comments
from the public. And one of
their comments probably would
be, we're concerned about this,
would you consider
comprehensive review, so that's
what we're looking for.
And uh my thought, but I could
end up being wrong as usual, uh,
is that only a few large
transactions would go to
comprehensive review, uh, and
they would be selected, uh, by
what we found out what was
raised in the preliminary
review. That's why that
information is so important, um,
and the questions would be asked
our service is going to stay the
same or ratio is going to say
the same. Some of the things
you'll see later that we had in
the original, uh in the uh SB
15.
Um,
The, as I said, the expectation
is that most transactions will
not require comprehensive
review. There will be an
opportunity for public comment
and hearings and the ultimate
determination would be approval,
approval with conditions or
disapproval. Our thought is that
approval will only come after
we've looked at a comprehensive
review, uh, preliminary review
would be just go forward and
continue your transactions
because I, I'm, I'm, uh, not
comfortable giving approval when
we haven't really delve deeply
into the situation.
But we're letting transactions
go forward.
So, uh, reporting only again
would be the reports would be
filed after the transactions
completed. There'd be basic
information required to provide
insight for policymakers and to
identify trends and challenges
and we think this may require
because you get a view of the of
the landscape and annual
analysis and report of the
healthcare landscape to the
legislature.
Preliminary review again limited
information would be required.
Uh, there'd be a certification
by the filer of accuracy and
completeness. The notice of the
transaction information, the
information will be published
online and written public
comment will be invited on the
impact of the transaction and
whether to proceed to
comprehensive review.
The transactions selected for
comprehensive review after the
initial notice, OSI will send a
limited number of transactions
for comprehensive review based
on certain criteria. SB 15
requires OSI to consider whether
the transaction and to look
through this lens, uh, is, is
the transaction in the interest
of patients and consumer
healthcare services? Is it
urgently necessary to maintain
the solvency of the health care
entity and, and will the
transaction have negative
effects on
Against the lines we looked
through availability,
accessibility, affordability,
and the quality of health care
for patients and other consumers
of healthcare services. The
comprehensive review will
trigger a need to provide
additional material and
information, uh, a public
hearing on the impact from, you
know, a public hearing in the
impacted communities and again,
as we said, a determination
which could either be approval,
approval with conditions, which
is where we probably had some
monitoring going forward.
And disapproval which we
probably think will happen in
very again even more limited
circumstances.
What entity should be subject to
the notice and review view, uh,
hospitals will continue to be
covered all types, we're in
discussion with the Medical
Society in the Greater
Albuquerque Associations about
physician practices, their
concerns have led us to support
this tiered approach with
reporting only, uh, the new bill
will clarify that no change in
control occurs where practicing
clinician owners are added or
removed uh or a governing board,
uh, is changed and the
OSN and it's clear based on all
these meetings that OSI and our
sponsors are committed to
sustaining and supporting this
independent physician practices.
Other categories where changes
are occurring nationally. I will
sure it will be no surprise to
you. Healthcare insurance
companies are getting involved.
Pharmacy benefit managers,
long-term care facilities have
long been, uh, you know, targets
of, uh, consolidation, dental
and vision practice.
dialysis clinics, laboratories,
and imaging practices, home
health care and hospice care and
pharmacies.
SB at the size of the
excuse me, the size of
transactions subject to notice
and preliminary review. SB 15
has introduced applied to many
types of health care entities,
at least one party had a gross
revenue of at least $200 million
in the preceding three years or
for a newly created entity, it's
it's projections were to have at
least a $100 million in gross
revenue over the next 3 years of
operation. The final version, as
you know, was, was a compromise
and all
Hospital transactions involving
a merger, acquisition, or
changing control were subject to
notice and review, regardless of
gross revenue. The stakeholder
recommendations ranged in our
output from no dollars to a
threshold of 500 million to
trigger a notice requirement.
And the hospital association
proposal is $500 million in
gross revenues of at least one
party and $30 million for a new
entity with hospitals, if this,
if the sole provider of a
service in a community or
geographic area, even if lower
Revenue. The impact on the
community could be significant.
Therefore, our current thinking
is that the notice requirements
should apply to all hospital
transactions regardless of size.
The types of transactions that
should be covered. Mergers,
acquisitions, and changing
control are covered. Changing
control, the change in control
definition is modeled after the
insurance company holding lot
and really is, is focused on
trying to understand who's
really the decision maker
regardless of the percentage of
ownership.
Private equity this this
afternoon's hearing will provide
insights into whether specific
provisions addressing private
equity are needed, but the
legislation here, it's not
limited to private equity as, as
we saw what started this was a
merger of not, not for profits.
We are looking also trying to
capture all the uh the learnings
and developments that have
happened this year to other
state and federal legislation in
an attempt to capture the
creative structures used to
change ultimate ownership and
control.
Um, I'm sure you're aware of the
Stewart situation and Senator
Markey has introduced a bill, I
think it was July 25th, uh,
focused only on private equity,
but, but again, we're, we want
broader than that.
Actually I'm not sure everyone
is aware of the Stewart
situation in Boston, but at some
point, I know you're the expert,
uh, is well aware of it and
he's, he told me he testified
earlier this year about that. So
I think he, he's much more
qualified than I am to discuss
it.
Sorry to throw you under the
bus.
He's probably used to it, so
that's OK. And then OSI.
Has established an established
system on the insurance side for
forms for regulated entities to
request that information be kept
confidential.
But to redact certain
information. The potential basis
for confidentiality is, is
limited to trade secrets,
proprietary information or data
privacy and privacy security
concerns. The Oregon Health Care
Authority has a process for
redacting certain information,
uh, they tell us what happens to
the company redacts too much and
they.
Open the black lines so everyone
can read them. Uh, we have asked
stakeholders to review OH the
Oregon disclosures and and
express and explain any
disagreement with what's being
disclosed there. The hos
hospital association and
Presbyterian in in their uh
submission letters want to
maintain complete
confidentiality of disclosed
documents and information.
Uh
The new bill we're thinking at
this point will attempt to
create a middle ground to
protect commercial commercially
sensitive material from
disclosure, but we really are
looking for committee member
input on this issue.
Uh, the public review and
comment. The notices will be
posted on the OSI website. The
public will be invited to submit
their comments and request, uh,
you know, input and whether a
transaction should go to
comprehensive review and for
transactions subject to
comprehensive review, the public
hearing will be held in at least
one community impacted by the
transaction.
Now my, my, uh, luckily I have a
a consultant.
Who uh tells me I missed putting
a slide in here, uh, about
what's an SB 15 already about
the, uh, what we would be
looking at to approve the
proposed transaction. I get an
SB 15 on page 10. I will read it
to you and apologize for my, my
missing.
Uh, you get too close to these
things sometimes and you don't
realize.
Occasionally what what you
should put in the office, uh,
the office being OSI shall
approve the proposed transaction
after the comprehensive review,
uh, if the office determines the
parties to the proposed
transaction have demonstrated
that the transaction will
benefit the public by reducing
the growth in patient costs,
including premiums and out of
pocket costs, maintaining or
increasing access to services,
especially in medically
underserved areas. The
transaction will improve health
outcomes for New Mexico
residents.
And there is no substantial
likelihood of a significant
reduction in availability,
accessibility, affordability, or
quality of care for patients and
anti-competitive effects from
the post transaction outweigh
the benefits of the transaction.
But going back to a significant
reduction in availability and
accessibility. Uh, one of the
things that the questions that
will always be asked, are you
going to reduce essential
services? Is there going to be a
change to the patient, the
doctor patient, uh, uh, ratio.
Our, our patients going to have
access to physicians, you know.
Uh, in a timely manner, uh,
what's the geographic location
of where these essential
services will be something that,
that we also do on some level in
our, in our QHP process when we
look at the, uh, the networks,
the quality of the networks, so
we're, we're somewhat familiar
with doing this, but we're also
going to be working with the
healthcare authority, uh,
have input on these, these
really important issues.
And now let me go back to where
I am.
OK, uh, we, the role of the
Attorney General, uh, we have
been in discussions with the AGN
staff on their role. Uh, the
current, uh, dialogue includes
providing notice of and
submitting all materials to the
Attorney General. The Attorney
General will have enforcement
authority pretty much focused
on, you know, market
concentration, uh, market share
and consolidation, uh, but
there'll be no action required
by the Attorney General for the
OSI to approve it.
Transaction
Enforcement has been a
conversation that came up last
year. We're considering certain
administrative penalties for
violations, the administrative
penalties already in the
insurance code or uh are mostly,
uh, financial, um, a violation,
each violation up to 5K, willful
and intentional violations up to
10K and the right to a hearing
and appeal process where we
would conduct a hearing and they
can have an administrative
review.
By the courts.
Um,
Ongoing oversight of
transactions.
That received comprehensive
review. This was something I
would say the uh the the
communities were really looking
for. They're very concerned that
if not if things, if certain
things were uh agreed to if
there were guardrails put in
place or the or the trans the
the person taking over the
entity, uh, assured certain
things would happen, that
there'd be some oversight, so it
wouldn't just be there for a
while and then disappear. So
that's really where we have some
disagreement between the pro.
writers and the community, uh,
at this point we're considering,
uh, that there'd be more than 3
years of oversight, uh, but
there would be a time limit and
the oversight would require
annual reporting and review by
the filed entities, uh, and, and
obviously, uh, you know, we, we
make sure that, uh, that all
these guarantees would stay in
place.
And then we would now we know uh
change, there's changes in
circumstances, and then we will
provide a process to amend any
conditional approvals.
Uh
The next steps, uh, the next
step is really going to be in uh
Jane Wisner's hands as she
produces the next draft that,
uh will be uh for discussion,
but I, I think she probably has
a secret draft in a drawer that
she hasn't told me about.
But uh,
Those are my comments and we're
certainly uh.
We're, we're grateful for any
input that you have.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members. Thank you, Jane.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, I
have nothing to add right now,
but I'm certainly available for
questions.
Um, the way I structured this is
we are, we are hearing from you
kind of as an overview of the
act. I know you all have been
talking with the hospital
association and I'm sure other
stakeholders as you have
indicated, so I'm inviting the
hospital associations to talk
about what's been happening and
the proposal and so on, and then
we'll have a Q&A where everybody
has an opportunity to weigh in
on questions so um if we could
make some room for uh Jane.
I, I just wanted to, to
personally, um, since I am the
one focusing on a lot of the
details and I know the
superintendent shares this and
the sponsors thank the, um, can
you hear me?
No
Oh, sorry, sorry, Representative
Tracy, um, that, uh, to thank
the hospital association. They
have been incredibly attentive.
They have been partners in good
faith. They've been reasonable
and really trying to dig in to
some of these challenging issues
and we really deeply appreciate
that. We also requested that
they provide us with the what
they were going to provide and
they did in enough time for us
to think about it, to talk.
Talk about it and to be able to
address it today, so I, I really
do want to thank him.
And they attended most of the
community meetings as well, so
they, they've heard the concerns
in the community, so they were
more than active participants in
this.
Oh, that's great. Um, so if we
could maybe make some room for
Troy, or if you all want to sit
sit back and let him, yeah. OK,
very good. Yeah.
Yeah, it's great. I think we
have a spot that they're here
for you, Troy, and then Jane's
gonna move. Jane will move into
the audience, so.
Thank you.
So Troy, maybe you could
introduce yourself and um.
The floor will then be
Sounds good. Thank you, Madam
Chair and members of the
community. I think we're still
getting that feedback.
Uh, I am Troy Clark. I'm the
president and CEO of the
Hospital Association here in New
Mexico representing 47
hospitals.
Throughout the state, uh, both
acute care facilities,
post-acute facilities, which
include behavioral health,
long-term acute care, uh,
physical rehab facilities, it's
probably easier to just limit
down the only facilities that we
really don't represent would be
the federal government owned
facilities of the VA and the
Indian Health Services who have
a uh.
a different uh ownership
structure and uh operating
structure in the patients that
they serve.
I appreciate greatly the uh
chance to be here today and
from uh Ms. Wishner and
Uh, Superintendent Kane, uh, we
have been, uh, invited and
participated in this OSI
process, um.
In providing information to try
and provide a perspective.
One, because our hospitals don't
feel that there should be no
oversight.
But we need to be very measured
in our approach on the oversight
that is uh enacted, uh, as we
have, uh, probably the number
one issue in the state, at least
in regards to health care.
I think is undisputed that we
have a problem with access to
health care in our state. The
number of providers we have, the
number of services that we have,
we have to be very cautious as
we look at what level of
oversight, and I use that word
carefully earlier, very measured
to not detract from the efforts
that you all have made in this
past uh couple of sessions that
we are all making in the health
care sector to try and improve
access to care. That is our
number one goal.
As we have participated in the
oversight, uh, the
superintendent mentioned, uh, as
did Jane, that we, uh, have, uh,
provided a letter of
recommendation. I've got copies
of that for anyone who would
like a copy of that letter of
recommendation that we submitted
after all of the hearings that
we attended and worked with. I'm
seeing the chair nod her head
yes, so I will go ahead and just
pull the stack out and if
there's a staff member who wants
to.
Disseminate those I've got that.
Included in this uh letter of
recommendation, you will see as
the superintendent has just
spoken, the areas of emphasis
for the hospital as we attempt
to find this measured uh level
of oversight. Thank you.
First and foremost
confidentiality, uh, as we
discussed confidentiality, the
documents that need to be
remained confidential on the
documents that are required, uh,
to be provided to any oversight
body are very critical, uh, the
wording of what that is, whether
that is just the executable
transaction documents which we
believe are what are pertinent
to any transaction. Uh, there's
been discussion of all the way
down to all documents included
in any due diligence. There's a
lot of corporate uh sensitive
information. There's a lot of
Employee sensitive information
that are included in the due
diligence behind a transaction
and what we see across the
states is, uh, across the other
states is generally what is
submitted, uh, are the
executable transactions, so the
level of that confidentiality is
really tied to also the uh final
agreement in the drafting of
which documents are required to
uh proceed.
Uh, also the limiting of the
scope and it's nice to see, uh,
it's the first time I've seen
this, uh, although we've talked
about it, and so it's nice to
see some of our input, talk
about the uh scope.
Scope as I just talked about on
not only the documents required
but who it applies to.
Again,
We have to make certain that we
look that on the surface when we
want to protect essential
services, which we do, we want
to make sure that we also don't
inhibit.
The ability to continue services
that are there.
Uh, that's a perspective from
many of our rural hospitals, uh,
one of the recent articles in
Chartis talked about that this
is an important issue that we
need to discuss because it just
mentioned that over 60% of rural
hospitals are now affiliated
with a system of some sort. Now
it's an affiliation, not an
ownership.
For a need to survive. A lot of
that being driven by
requirements at the federal
level around electronic health
records around reporting
requirements that you have to
have a certain size to be
efficient to meet the
requirements, uh, of what we are
requiring of our hospitals and
our providers across this
country. A lot of that is what
is driving the consolidation of
our physicians, uh, into our
hospitals as we look in our
state. We also have a very large
percentage of our physicians
just over 50%.
They are now employed by
hospitals, having run hospitals
for 23 years, I can tell you it
was never my desire as an
executive to employ physicians,
but in our state with the lack
of access to care, we have to
employ them or we would not have
them in our state. They can't
survive, given the Medicaid
reimbursement and the other
operating effects and costs in
our state for them to practice
independently.
So with that limited scope, the
level of view, I don't need to
repeat,
repeat a number of these things
and I believe the superintendent
has already indicated their
intent to look at, but notice,
uh, only preliminary
comprehensive, but there was one
area that I believe uh Miss
Wishner and the superintendent
do intend to include that I
didn't see in the presentation
that I'd like to call out for
your benefit, uh, that Oregon
does have in their policy and
that is an emergency provision.
Absolutely necessary and
therefore if nobody else our
rural hospitals that when there
is an emergent situation of a
financial strain that we need to
make sure that there's an
approval process that can be
handled on an emergent basis to
prevent the closure which would
have a significant impact
on uh access to care and the
provision of services by total
elimination if they're close. So
we need to have that provision
in there and I don't believe
superintendent, that's a point
of dispute between us, I think
it just wasn't covered.
I want to make sure the
committee was familiar with
that.
The other uh items that are
important for us to others,
process and timeline and costs.
Having a predictable process to
go through. Uh, transactions
already take a lot of time to
get uh all the legal entity
work, uh, work through to
establish what the new entity
looks like, uh, having legal
review meeting federal
guidelines of oversight for
antitrust purposes, uh, as well
as operational issues, having
something that extends that
further will detract from the.
Those that are interested to uh
participate in the health care
provision in our state.
Uh, as well as the costliness of
it, we all know that, uh, the
more time we spend, the more we
have to bring in consultants
that increases the cost and I
don't think anyone in this panel
or in this room has ever told me
that health care doesn't cost
too much.
Uh, so we need to be very wary
of or aware of uh the costs that
we're adding on to transactions
and last uh areas of enforcement
and appeal. I believe in the
superintendent's presentation,
we do feel that uh criminal
penalties would be
inappropriate, uh, especially if
they are for accidental, uh, uh,
errors and mistakes that are
made in the submission, we don't
believe that people should be
making uh purposeful or
intentional mistakes to mislead
anyone in the process.
And that there should be
enforcement provisions around
that, but also an appeal
process.
I bring that back to as we talk
about those uh different areas
of focus that we have. The
current provision was, uh, I'm
sorry, the current statute SB
15, uh, has had two
transactions, uh, I guess
reviewed. One is in the process,
uh, go through it, and we think
as a starting point, it has
started to bring to light. We do
believe it needs to have some
confidentiality provisions
maintained in that, but we do
believe it does lack some
enforcement that would need to
be
and also some public comment
periods, uh, that would be added
to that. But aside from that,
many of the aspects of Senate
Bill 51 or Senate Bill 15,
although it was a quick measure,
I think what we've seen at least
in this year is not a uh
Innovation or a prohibition or
even a delay in a transactions
that have come forth. We see
something that might be working.
Whatever we do must be
meaningful, must be impactful
and must be implementable.
Again, I close with saying we
have to remember that our number
one issue in healthcare in this
state is access to care and
while we address other issues,
we certainly should not be doing
anything that undermines the
other efforts that we make to
improve on access to care
because in the last few years we
have not been successful. I will
tell you the act that we passed
last year, the Health Care
Delivery and Access Act, once
those funds start to flow
Next year they people may not
understand that we passed a bill
and now it's in the CMS approval
process I believe will help that
will help the access. That is a
great measure to be able to look
and make our hospitals, uh,
sustainable going into the
future. We have to find more of
those things to do to improve
access. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Well, thank you
Troy
Uh
Other panelists, any comments
before we, I go to Q and A.
Just briefly,
Man, you know, I, I think.
Our goal here, uh, and the
hospital association's goal of
access to care, we share that
that is a a shared value. I, I
think one of the, the main
points of this this legislation
is to preserve access and
availability and quality and
reasonable cost of care in New
Mexico, so I, I think that we're
all actually pulling in the same
direction on this, um, but
otherwise we could, I got
questions. OK, very good. So far
I have Representative Martinez,
Representative
Jones, anyone else,
representative block.
Um, Senator Worth,
Representative Al Kn.
Cervantes.
OK.
That's it for now and, um,
OK, OK. Representative Chasey.
OK, um, Representative Martinez,
and we have one.
Try to keep it 6 minutes or so
for now we have a fair amount of
time allocated to this subject,
so.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I will
be quick.
Um,
What, what are we trying to fix
here?
I, I, I've read through Senate
Bill 15.
I'm kind of confused as to
what's the problem.
That we're trying to fix.
Madam Chair, Representative,
there is an increasing trend
Of private equity and out of
state groups coming in and
acquiring health care in New
Mexico, and this isn't just in
New Mexico, this is nationwide,
um.
But they, they come in and they,
they acquire this healthcare.
And then, so one, that the
decisions that are being made
about health care in New Mexico
and what is provided, then isn't
being made on the basis of what
New Mexicans need. It's being
made on the basis of what is
profitable for those out of
state entities. And so actually
here in New Mexico, we have the
highest proportion of private
hospitals owned by private
equity in the nation. And when
that happens, you see costs go
up, you see quality go down, you
see
Essential services like labor
and delivery disappear. And so
that is the problem that we're
trying to address here. We were
one of only 11 states in the
country that had no system
whatsoever in place to provide
oversight of these kinds of
transactions. So I, I think,
thank you, thank you for that,
uh.
Answer, Madam Chair, I think
costs are going up.
Across the country and there's a
lot of issues.
That
Um,
are involved in that.
I'll move on to my next
question. I'm gonna ask the next
two questions because of time.
Um, and then you can, you can
give your answer.
Um,
I'm not sure what the plan is
for investments in the smaller
communities if we're.
If we're eliminating outside
money from coming in to make
these investments to buy MRIs to
buy X-ray machines to
Uh, attract practitioners to the
rural areas of the state, where
are we, is the state gonna come
up with that money or is it
another thing where you're gonna
come back to the state and say,
oh, we need $100 million for the
hospital in Espanola. I think.
Public-private partnerships are
the best way to to do that.
Um,
And I've, I've talked to a lot
of private practitioners, my
personal doctor for the past 30
years.
Um, has told me the reason
they're moving towards corporate
owned practices is because the
costs
That the state imposes on the
small.
Uh, private practitioner
malpractice insurance taxes,
mountains of paperwork to take
away from seeing uh.
Patient
Um,
Minimum wage.
Raising the minimum wage costs
for employing people, all those
things are.
Uh, pushing private
practitioners into
Corporate owned practices. My
second question.
Isn't the antitrust acts enough
to prevent either a monopoly.
Or bad actors. Why are we
introducing additional
legislation.
Um, I, I, I, I've heard this
comment from this.
Committee before and other
committees.
There are ways to fix things
without having to enact
additional legislation,
especially if we're creating a
problem.
To to in order to fix it with
the legislation. I just think
that there's already enough laws
on the books that are going to
do this.
We just kind of have to pay
attention to it.
Um, so those are my two
questions. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, panel for
For your input.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Martinez, uh,
I think you've hit on in your
first question exactly the
balance that we are trying to
strike this, the intention of
this legislation is not to
curtail private investment in
healthcare or limit access to
capital for providers.
And I agree with you that
public-private partnerships can
be really successful, but a big
piece of making public-private
partnerships.
Successful is ensuring that
those public dollars are being
well spent and ensuring that the
taxpayers or in this case the
patients are protected as those
private investments are coming
in. Um, we are talking about
A lot of this private equity
investment uh in these private
equity firms do not necessarily
have healthcare expertise and
the impact of that on access to
patient care on a day to day
basis as if we've seen in some
communities is
Massive shifts in employment for
the physicians, for the local
providers. Changes in who is
allowed to provide
hospital-based care, um, where
providers may have had admitting
privileges previously suddenly
those may be changing. And the
idea is not to limit those, but
to look at those and make sure
that access, affordability,
quality are all preserved for
the patients. So it's really
just a
Look under the hood of what's
going on to make sure that the
patients are coming first, and
particularly for hospitals that
are perhaps the only center of
coordinating care in a small
community. This is really
critical that we make sure those
patients are um maintaining that
access. So I just want to stress
that the idea here is not to
prevent.
The private capital that may be
incredibly helpful to some of
these healthcare organizations.
And you
Chair representative for as to
your second question, but why,
why aren't our, our antitrust
laws enough. Uh, so for a couple
of reasons. One, our RAG does
not think that our antitrust
laws, who is the one who, who
operates under those, uh, are
sufficient to to address this
issue right now, but, and, and,
but more importantly, this isn't
just an antitrust issue.
Antitrust is is is absolutely
part of it. But we're not just
looking at market dominance,
we're also looking at all
That she was that, that uh with
Zansky was just noting stuff
like access availability,
quality, cost of health care for
New Mexicans and making sure
that those are preserved while
we have this uh investment in
capital coming in.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for those answers. I just
think putting up additional
barriers to attract.
Um, practitioners to come to New
Mexico is not the way to solve
the problem. Um, and I, I have
some other questions, but I'll
I'll email them to you.
Um,
Probably to the office of the
superintendent of insurance. I'm
not sure.
Um,
But all, all send you some
additional questions.
Thank you, Representative.
Representative Jones and then
Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I, I
have questions for uh Troy
first, um.
And but first let me say as a
nurse, I, you know, I spent my
whole career as, as a registered
nurse and I have worked with
both privately owned hospitals
and and uh publicly run
hospitals and I just, I, I
really never saw um a noticeable
difference in wanting to really
care for patients. I think the,
the privately owned hospitals in
an effort to um
Do well financially are
interested in, they get paid the
same and they're interested in
providing good care because
that's how they succeed and
that's, I really never saw a
difference. That's just my
personal experience and
it
Over decades, but um
Also, as a, a representative of
uh.
Rural district with only one
hospital, one small hospital
that does have, um, a private
ownership outside the state. I
know that we wouldn't the
hospital wouldn't exist without
that private ownership and, and
I think they provide really good
care to the community, and they,
they tailor their care to what
our needs are and they're very
unique, um, to, to New Mexico
and to rural New Mexico, um, so
And they're doing well,
actually. I don't, I don't, I'm
not aware of the fact that we
need any state extra state
funding right now, um, they,
they're doing a good job of
maintaining healthcare and
access to care, which is so, so
important right now. So for
Troy, I, I'd like to know Troy,
um, do you know when the last
major health care related merger
and acquisition in New Mex was
in New Mexico and who did it
involve? Were there any consumer
complaints or negative impacts
to access that quality.
of care from that merger.
Thank you, Madam Chair and uh
Representative Jones, um.
I'm gonna go off the top of my
head here for uh the timeline of
history, uh, there are two
transactions that happened in a
similar time frame, so I'm gonna
answer you with both of them not
knowing exactly which one went
first, um, one in Alamogordo,
Gerald Champion uh was sold in a
private not for profit hospitals
sold to uh was acquired by
Christa Saint or not Christa
Saint Vincent, but Chris's
Healthcare, uh, out of Dallas,
Texas, also a not for profit uh
organization, uh, also the
transaction that took place that
I'm aware of was a uh
transaction in Las Vegas, New
Mexico, where we had a uh
for-profit private in privately
held company who sold that uh
facility Alta Vista Regional
Hospital to a not for profit,
uh, by the name of Dava uh
Healthcare.
Uh, so those two, were the two
most recent transactions I think
do we see an impact on the uh
employees and uh
Services or was that the second
part of the question?
Yes. So, um, actually I think in
both, uh they are recent enough
transactions that they are
looking at at the expansion of
services and talking with the
CEO at Alta Vista, uh, we have.
Uh, they have indicated to me
that they're working currently
on getting their ICU
reestablished. That was
something that was closed down
prior, had nothing to do, uh,
with the transaction, uh, in
fact, it was.
Uh, over a year before the
transaction may even been 2
years before the transaction due
to staffing issues that they
were not able to staff their
ICU. They're actively with their
new owner looking to be able to
bring back that ICU service. And
uh Alamo Gordo, um, may not be
thought of as a typical service,
but uh since the new ownership
has come in, they've worked very
closely with NMSU to reestablish
their nursing program in the
community, so we have an
opportunity to increase the
number of nurses, uh, which will
help.
All service lines in that
hospital, uh, as that is a
nursing program that had been
shut down, uh, 2-3 years ago.
Thank you, Troy. That's
excellent news. Love to, we need
more nurses, 8000 nurses short.
Um, so I, I don't know who would
answer this question, but I know
we passed, um, a temporary bill
last year. So why do we need to
do more than just remove a
sunset clause and create an
enforcement and create an
enforcement provision, and uh
Why are additional provisions
needed and what harm are we
trying to prevent?
So Madam Chair, representative,
so what passed last year was a
very bare bones, uh, compromise
band-aid.
To just, just to cover this next
year because we knew that there
were more transactions coming
while we went through this
stakeholder process to, to
develop a comprehensive
approach. What we passed last
year is not something that will
serve New Mexicans well, uh, if
simply made permanent. Um, it
is.
Very, very narrow.
Uh, we need, and, and it
doesn't, doesn't give, it
doesn't give the state the tools
that we need to really address
these transactions.
If I can also follow up a little
bit on on what you, you were
just asking Troy about the the
impacts of of these transactions
that Gerald Champion with uh
going into Christmas South and,
and with Alta Vista, because we,
we heard.
We heard very different things
in the communities when we were
having meetings there so I I'll
kick it to a superintendent or
or Miss Wishner to talk a little
bit about what we heard and the
impacts were in those
communities.
Madam Chair members
representative Jones, um, I
will, uh, outline, uh, what we
heard and also if uh Jane wishes
to add to it.
Uh, Alan Mordo was a very
difficult community meeting. Uh,
the people there were extremely
upset that this transaction had
happened. It had happened
overnight and they didn't know
what was gonna happen. I will
say the CEO came to that meeting
when we talk about interesting
exchanges between the CEO of the
community and the provider. This
was one of them. Uh, there
obviously was concern about
women's healthcare because it
was a Christmas, uh.
Taking over the, the hospital,
uh, there was discussion from
the CEO that they would
supplement it, but it hadn't
been there had been no clarity
yet about how that would be
supplemented. Um, I, I think,
uh.
The, the biggest, the most
pressing issue was the lack of
communication between uh the uh
the people that were taking over
the hospital and the community,
uh, I don't think there's still
clarity about what if, what if
any um
Uh, essential services will be
there. I will say this is a
little bit of a laugh. Uh, there
were, there was a big concern
about vasectomies
being provided, but uh uh an IVF
which was serious and as
Arzostectomies is a birth
control issue, but uh there
were, there was no clarity and
uh the community was pretty much
traumatized by the uh by the
sudden acquisition.
Yeah, uh.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
briefly we're getting to the.
OK, we have time limitations
just to note that all of those
public meetings were recorded
and I do know that in Las Vegas,
New Mexico, there was a censor's
improvement since it was sold to
a not for profit away from a
private equity, that there were
people who would a provider who
had left uh the hospital under
the private equity owned
hospital. There was concerns
that the new owner had just
eliminated uh a surgical
contract, uh, but all those
details, we, we
Didn't really prepare to go into
those. I think that uh Mr. Clark
knows probably more about the
details of each hospital, but we
could get you more information
if you'd like.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Could I
just say 11 quick, I, I'll be
fast, yeah, I'm, I'm just
curious and I appreciate what
you're saying and the importance
of being communicating to, you
know, uh, to the community. But
do you think that what we're
doing here would help that?
The
A yes or no question. I mean,
Madam,
do big yes, a big yes.
Representative block.
Thank you so much, Madam
Chairman. Thank you all for
being here today. I apologize
for not being here yesterday. I
was at New Mexico Finance
Authority Oversight Committee,
which is super interesting
yesterday in Santa Fe. So, uh,
Madam Chairman, I just have a
few questions just from what
I've heard and seen the
presentations, and thank you all
for the the very detailed
information, uh, so I guess
let's just start with the first
one. So Madam Chairman, and I
guess this maybe for Troy or
maybe for the panel, uh, like
our closures of services.
Or closures of hospitals and
services, um.
Actually connected to private
equity in New Mexico and can you
give me specific instances of
that other than
Talking about my hospital, which
you keep on saying takes away
reproductive health care even
though it does provide that,
Madam Chair, so I'll start with
Troy, thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative Block, uh, for
the question, um, if you
remember my opening remarks were
concerned about uh access to
care and that we don't, uh,
undermine the efforts there.
The community hearings were very
clear in Alan McGordo they were
worried about vasectomies, uh,
in Gallup, they were worried
about the closure of OB services
in Las Vegas. They were worried
about the closure of the ICU and
the OB services, but what I'll
tell you is those had nothing to
do with any transaction. In
fact, there isn't even a
transaction that's taken place
in Gallup, New Mexico. All of
those had to do with staffing
issues, staffing of providers,
staffing of nursing, uh, units
for departments and even in A.
Gordo
The CEO has reported to me, I
don't run the operation, but
he's reported to me that a
vasectomy is the biggest
complaint that he has for the
inability to get that service,
uh, redirected because of a lack
of a provider that existed
before the transaction and
exists even more now after the
transaction with the heightened
uh, interest in the community.
And so I, I think it's important
to go back to my opening remarks
about we need to make certain
that we are focused on the
impacts of access to care, and
these examples, they are big
issues in those communities and
we need to try.
And get those services provided
but they had nothing to do. They
are separate and distinct from
any transaction that took place.
Thank you, Madam Chairman and
thank you for that just
clarifying on that point, uh,
Madam Chair, we talked about the
services provided you said
vasectomy is big in Alamo Gordo,
so I guess drive the cruises if
you need one, but that's a joke,
but Madam Chair, uh, so I'm just
wondering staffing wise in Al
MoGordo, have you heard from the
hospital about needing those
providers and do we know how
many we would need just bare
bones to keep operations going
in the state.
Madam Chair, because I know we,
we always have babies that are
born every day. We need those
services, you know, OBGYN
visits, things like that. I'm
wondering, Madam Chair and Troy,
do we know what that that gap is
because I feel like we should be
focusing on the gap rather than
attacking private equity firms
and and nonprofits that simply
want to help provide healthcare,
Madam Chair, Troy.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Representative Blanc. I don't
know what the exact number is,
but what I can tell you, I think
from your question, uh, is we
are in a provider shortage. We
are in a nursing shortage. We
are in a health care clinician
shortage across this state. It
affects this level of services
that we're able to provide.
That's why we have an access
problem.
Uh, we have done a good job as a
state, I believe, on the
financial access, meaning having
an insurance product, getting
people on Medicaid, finding
other solutions, but that
doesn't provide care that
provides a means to means to get
care if it's available and so I
don't know the exact numbers for
every hospital in the state,
including Elmo Gordo, uh, but I
can tell you I don't have any
one hospital in the state that
does not have a shortage in
physicians in uh advanced
practitioners and nurses or in
every.
Clinical position whether that's
a phlebotomist or a respiratory
therapist. Uh, we don't talk
about it much. Radiation
technology, people who run the
radiation radiology departments
in our hospital on a percentage
basis is actually a greater
deficit than our nursing. Now we
talk about nursing because the
numbers that we know we are over
8000 nurses short in this state.
We don't need that many uh
radiation technologists, but as
a percentage we are have a much
higher percentage of our
radiation technologies that are
either vacant.
Or locums meaning they're from
they're travelers from out of
state and temporary employees.
Thank you Madam Chairman and
thank you for that, uh, Troy. I
just wanted to say thank you for
everything that's happening with
the uh I believe that
that one I'd like to reclaim
that time because I asked a
question to Troy,
Madam Chair I have a question
for the rest of the panel.
Can you whip you may speak.
Madam Chair, can I, can I
reclaim that time though? That
is my time that I,
you know, shut people down.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Go ahead
and talk.
Um, representative um Saansky,
you wanted to weigh and please
feel free. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Madam Chair and
representative, uh, I wanted to
add, um, and appreciate the
challenge between staffing,
management, um, access to
private capital and, and, and
the ownership issues that are
happening in New Mexico right
now. Um, what this bill, the
intent of this bill is to bring
some transparency and sunlight
to some of the assertions that
are being made.
So we hear a lot about staffing
issues. One of the things that
this panel heard when it was in
Gallup was that the uh after the
the acquisition of that hospital
that the uh radiology
technicians were replaced to the
local radiology techs were
replaced with a contract with an
out of state group. This was a
concern brought forward by
providers who rely on those
radiology readings, um, to
provide medical care and make
those medical.
Decisions, those technician is
the out of state technicians
that have now been contracted to
read those reports um are not
trusted by the local physicians
and so it's bringing a lot of
doubt, um, so I, I just wanted
to make the point that um
While there are staffing issues
and there's certainly a lot of
initiatives happening by this
legislature to address
healthcare workforce staffing
issues. Um, there are also
examples where maybe staffing is
not necessarily driving those
decisions and this bill is is
simply shining a light and
bringing forward those issues.
Thank you Madam Chairman thank
you for that, Madam Whit. So my,
my question, your question, my
last question, which is for the
panel including the secretary is
so in the legislation that
you're proposing this next
upcoming session.
What, what mechanisms will be in
that legislation if a provider,
let's just say we pass
legislation and the providers,
many of them decide to leave the
state. Will there be a mechanism
that the OSI has to ensure that
we can sure up that lack of
health care and those those
places that may have that lack
of a hospital is closed, Madam
Chairman.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
Block, I am unaware of evidence
showing that.
Any kind of oversight mechanism
like this leads to the departure
of um
Of providers because of the
existence of the oversight
system. So the assumption is one
that I am not aware of and that
that's how I would respond.
Thank you, Madam Chair. What
does Troy have any information
on that since we're looking at
both sides I was I'm wondering
if Troy has any information on
that, but we'll move on to our
next um questioner Senator,
Madam Chairman.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for the presentation.
I appreciate Troy, you being up
at the table, and I think, Madam
Chair, that's something that
really is important to have all
sides and it's clear to me that
what's happening right now is
exactly how this should be done.
We need you to figure out a
compromise and come up with with
language here that
That it's not gonna be what
everyone wants, but gets
something done because I really
do think this is a a really
important initiative and I'll
give you a, a parallel that I
was thinking about as I sat
here, you know, we have investor
owned utilities in this state
who are driven by a profit
margin to make as much money as
they possibly can for their
shareholders. We have a whole
regulatory oversight over that,
and we have an attorney general
who steps in to protect
consumers, and it's, it's
Find that balance because, you
know, Troy, I agree with you,
it's about access to care, but
it's access to quality care, and
it's balancing that against a
drive to make as much money as
you possibly can, which is what
the shareholders who are behind
these corporations. I can't
speak for all of them, but
clearly that's why they're here
is to try and maximize profit.
So finding that balance is the
key thing, and I think that's
why I just think the, the
purpose of this bill.
Makes sense to me. I do think
the questions that are being
asked, what are the, what are
the remedies? I, one of the
questions I had is if, if
there's a disagreement with the
decision of the superintendent,
where does it go? I saw it in
the, in the documentation, it's,
it's, it's a typical appeal
process to the district court,
and so the court will look at
substantial evidence, as I
understand it, in its review of
that. So there is a check on
that. Uh, but I did have some
specific questions about the
scope, and it's on page
9,
A number of these transactions
for quote unquote.
Non-hospital entities with lower
gross revenue are going to be
subject just to reporting. And I
want to understand what
non-hospital entities are we
talking about, number one, and
number 2 is that lower gross
revenue threshold going to be
established in this legislation.
Uh,
Madam Chair and Senator Worth,
the answer to the second
question is yes, it will be
spelled out and the first
question about which entities
would it apply to? We are, there
is another slide that lists
several categories that we're
considering final decisions have
not yet been made. The concept
is going to be, and we've
listened.
A lot to the um medical society
Gamma, Greater Albuquerque
Medical Association about the
potential impact. So we're
creating this reporting only
that would have a dollar
threshold to get a sense of what
is happening in our community,
and it may have a look back
provision. So if you have the,
the Pac-Man effect has the
superintendent talks about of a
series of sequential um
acquisitions of provider
practices, uh, there is.
Some sense ability to see it and
then to bring it to you all and
maybe there needs to be a
policy.
to address.
Well, ma'am Chair, and Ms.
Wishner, I appreciate that and
you know, I look at this as
The type of compromise that
needs to get something like this
pass. I, I will just say
personally, you know, a lot of
those transactions are things we
need to also be paying attention
to, but I think you get there by
the reporting, uh, so that we're
gonna see what's there and if
there are issues, we could come
back and, and tweak those, um,
so again, I just appreciate the
presentation, you know, private
equity is a challenging thing if
you look at our housing
challenges. Uh, we're dealing
with it there.
I met with the the new editor of
our newspaper in Santa Fe. Uh,
we have 60% fewer reporters in
the state than we did 20 years
ago and there's, it's all
private equity. You look at
Gannett and the big chains that
have come in and what happens is
to maximize the profits, you
kind of cut back on all the
services and so.
Again, we need to find the right
balance here, and I appreciate
the way you all are approaching
this because again, I don't want
this to turn into a
You know, an all-out fight if we
can avoid it, and that's the,
that's why it's important and
Troy, thank you for again
participating and
The feedback you're getting from
these communities is important,
and I appreciate Representative
Jones, what you're saying about
your specific hospital cause I
think, again, it's different in
different communities. I've
heard some things that are
pretty terrifying in other
communities. So again, I just
think, keep working at this. I
hope we can uh
Get something sooner so that we
all get a chance to kinda weigh
in as well before we have that's
for Jane. um, I just think and
also in fairness, so that, so
that all the parties get a
chance to really look at this
and, and we have time to, to
come up with a comprehensive
compromise. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Senator.
Representative Alconn and then
Representative Chasey.
Thank you Madam Chair, real
shortly, I just, I'm not gonna
tell you how long I've been
involved with hospitals as old
as I am. But anyway, but I'm
hearing in my community.
And uh and my, let's just say in
my district.
OK, hospitals in our area, I've
pretty much government owned
facilities. The buildings
themselves are owned by either
the county or the city or
something.
They're not uh privately owned
facilities, but they are owned
by the county or the city. I
mean, at Tbola general in
Grants, uh, that facility is a,
is a county facility. We pay
bonds to keep the facility built
and open and uh the beautiful
building that it is and it
works, believe it, believe it or
not, the hospital itself does
work, I know. But anyway,
Here is what I hear a lot.
We have this process of somehow
contracting with some uh
corporation.
And this corporation contracts
the hiring of everybody that's
on that staff in the hospital
works in that hospital.
They also collect the money.
And they send the money
somewhere else. None of that
money comes back to Cibola
County. The only thing is that
we have an open hospital. That's
a big good thing about it. We
have it in open hospital, but
anything that has to be built or
rebuilt or re-added, we have to
pay for it with bond money. And
somebody explained that to me.
Well, Madam Madam Chair and
Representative Alcon, I'm gonna
let, uh, Mr. Clark explain the
bond part to you, but I will say
that what you've described is
exactly part of the challenge
right now. I think you're going
to hear a report about a, uh,
what had been a public hospital
here in Las Cruces, and there is
now an entity running it, um,
that there have been some
problems and challenges here.
Uh, this is a these.
These contracted entities,
management services,
organizations that come in and
run the operations often of
public hospitals or publicly
owned hospitals is part of the
challenge. Those are included,
those transactions are included
in this bill and that's the
reason.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Al K, um, it is complex. Uh,
there are a number of different
ownership structures out there I
can tell you that the last 3 and
I know this discussion we're
trying to focus on mergers and
acquisitions, uh, but I'm gonna
bring in some data that I would
have shared later today around
private equity. The last three
private equity transactions of a
private equity owned company
purchasing a hospital in New
Mexico took place in 2000, 2002,
and 2005.
They are not racing on the
hospitals. I can't speak to the
other healthcare entities as far
as, uh, physicians and home
health, etc. uh, but you bring
up a good point when we talk
about these transactions and how
they apply. There are also a
number of counties who have an
all three of those examples are
counties who are in positions
that they didn't have the
expertise to run a hospital, yet
they wanted to own and maintain
the hospital as an ownership, so
they own the building and they
outsource the operations or some
other.
them actually still take
responsibility for the
operations but outsource the
management to get that expertise
to understand and so you've got
a broad mix, uh, across the
board, across our state, uh, we
have a wide variety. We have
more not for profit hospitals in
our state than any other
category, but we have not for
profit hospitals who have
academic hospitals. We have
publicly traded hospitals, uh,
ownership we have uh private
equity and we have mix where
there are public-private
partnerships like uh Loveless
UNM.
Has a rehab, uh, physical rehab
hospital that they jointly
owned. We have hospitals that
are managed by out of state
entities and, uh, I want to make
certain that we, as you make
that comment that we understand
oftentimes we look at the
dollars that are sent out and
say, oh, that's all profit going
out when that company is
providing the leadership, they
have to pay those salaries. And
so not all of those dollars are
profit. Those are the costs that
if they weren't being paid to
that entity to come manage the
facility, they would be paying
that by hiring their own CEO,
CNO, CMO, etc.
Um
And Madam Chair, and that that
is the thing that bothers me is
uh
I mean, there's, you can only
pay so much money for uh for
management, but uh there's a lot
more money coming in and we're
not getting it back to us.
Uh, one of the hospitals in my
area.
The county commission has got to
come up with something like 100
grand a month just to keep that
hospital open.
And uh I
I honestly wish I could find a
way to get into the books
because I know those things are
not right. That's all I can say.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Thank you, Representative. I
have Representative Chasey.
Sorry, Madam Chair, can I just
just correct one thing real
quickly, very briefly, please. I
don't think it's accurate to say
that the last private equity
transactions that happened in
New Mexico were in the 2000s. I
mean, even Alta Vista Hospital
in Las Vegas, which is now owned
by a nonprofit that is owned by
private equity. Um, so these,
these are transactions that are,
that are and world champion is
owned by Chris is Chris owned by
private equity as well? Do you
think so,
right, but, but I, I just don't
want this, this committee to be
left with the impression that we
are talking about transactions
that haven't happened in my for
about 20 years, OK, all right.
Um, we have.
Casey, then Senator Nibert, I'm
gonna go down the list so people
know we got a long list, but
that's OK. Um, Representative
Chasey, Senator Nibert,
Representative Brego, Senator
Stewart, and now uh
Representative Hall. So let's
try to keep our questions and
our answers brief and to the
point. Thank you. Oh, you are. I
always. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I just have one question of the
um the senator representative,
and that is to um explain
That
to us briefly that all rural
hospitals are not the same. Some
are owned.
Not private, not by the local
community. So I just want to
give you a chance to do that.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, um,
Madam Leader, um, it is true
there is a variety of financing
mechanisms and corporate
structures to these hospitals,
which includes nonprofit
ownership could be nonprofit
management contracts or
for-profit management contracts.
We do have a few hospitals that
are still entirely publicly
owned, so they are owned by a
combination of government
entities, um, but a number are
have been either sold wholesale
or are uh managed by either
for-profit or nonprofit
management companies. So while
there's public uh ownership of
the hospital, the management is
actually done by a separate
company.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
When I look at health care
issues.
I think
The only thing that I'm
concerned with is this bill that
I'm looking at going to
encourage more healthcare
professionals to come to New
Mexico or does it not?
So
Bottom line
Is this bill going to help bring
health care professionals to New
Mexico or is it going to provide
an additional deterrent?
The health care professionals
coming to our state.
Madam Chair, Senator, yes, I
think this will, this makes New
Mexico a better place to
practice medicine, uh, and the
feedback that we got from a lot
of the providers is that these
kinds of transactions are
negatively impacting them too. I
see this bill as, as not just
something that is looking to
protect patients in New Mexico,
but is is looking to protect our
independent providers in New
Mexico as well.
Well, I, I hear that, but I'm
concerned any time we
Put regulatory burdens on
anyone.
I've always viewed that as an
impediment.
And when I, when I see this, if
it's just noticed, that's not
much of an impediment.
But it looks like, and I haven't
read the bill, and frankly, I
won't be reading the bill, but,
but.
Yeah,
but, but when we create a
regulatory scheme, uh, number
one, it increased cost. It, it,
it, and ultimately those get
passed on to.
The consumers, uh, so I'm
concerned if we go too far with
the regulatory aspects.
We're going to discourage.
Investment we're going to
discourage some things that we
need, so I'd just be sensitive
to that, uh, as you guys.
Work on the bill and, and
hopefully, uh, make sure that it
doesn't get too far afield
because if it's, if it's noticed
and and try to uh deal with
some.
High level issues, you know,
what's the, what's the level of
service going to be, things like
that, disseminate that to the
public. That's one thing, but
when you're then going to create
a mechanism.
That goes beyond that. I, I'm
concerned about it. Also, uh,
how does this impact smaller
practices?
I, you know, I see in the, in
the handout that you gave that
it says, uh, you know, at some
level and, and one of the levels
is the.
I guess the success of that.
Operation if it if it brings in
a lot of money, then it may be
subject to your bill, even
though maybe just one or two
practitioners and so we have
some doctors in, in my town that
in Rosville that uh they started
a hospital Loveless bought it.
Now some of those same doctors
are opening up a, a surgery,
surgery center, uh, and it's
almost uh uh complete uh the
market.
In that regard seems to be
working, but if those doctors
are now going to be subject to
that, are they going to be able
to sell that practice as they
get older to, to a new group
without having to go through
this process and I'm sure they
would be concerned if they're
going to have to uh worry about
a regulatory regime to just
simply try to get their
investment out of the, the
center that they put their
capital in built and uh
have
Hopefully will operate it
successfully for a number of
years, but, uh, uh, one of
them's.
Close to my age, the other ones
uh younger, but, uh, not brand
new, so you know, their number
of years of of active practice
and probably less than 20 years,
and I suspect they'll want their
money out of that practice, you
know, in the next 2030 years,
uh, so, you know, I'm sure
they're gonna ask me about this
when I get home and
Their concerns on their capital
investment. So I would just be
very cautious about.
Making this bill, uh, one that
really regulates uh, you know,
it's one thing for private
industry to, to give notice and
stuff, but if you start
regulating it, this is a lot
different than a public monopoly
that uh you guarantee uh right
of return. We're not
guaranteeing these hospitals a
rate of return.
So
I'd just be sensitive to that.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Um, we have
Representative Barrego and then
Senator Stewart.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
thank you all for your
presentation. This is a very
interesting.
Subject, um, and I see kind of a
need for balance on both sides,
um, but, and I would just um
preface that by saying that I
have a 96 year old mother who
has heart issues that lives in a
rural area and getting her
health care sometimes is like,
you know, 4 months, um, her
appointments are like 4 months
in advance. meaning next March.
And that's a real concern when
you have
Someone who lives on a heart
monitor, um.
So, you know, from that
perspective, um, you know, I've
had to deal with the healthcare
um.
Agencies, um, on in a number of
times, and so I understand.
That side of being the the
Family, I guess that has had to
sort of negotiate with those
issues, um, but on the other
side of the coin,
When I was a city employee, I
was, I sat on the RFP committee
that actually hired the
healthcare provider for the
city, the county, and the water
utility authority. So I see it
from another perspective as
well. Um, and Madam Chair, I, I
bring those issues up because I
think that there has got to be
some sort of a balance here. And
you know, that's really when I
read your bill and I haven't
read your bill yet, but I
certainly am going
be looking for that balance
because I think on the one hand
we do need more um healthcare
providers in New Mexico, but on
the other hand, I think that
there does have to be some
regulation in terms of how, um,
you know, how it affects our
citizens. Um, one of the
questions that I have, Madam
Chair, is on page 8,
where you guys talk about the
need for whistleblower
protection for
employees.
And that just when you, when you
were giving your presentation
earlier that kind of jumped out
at me and I was like.
Isn't that federally protected,
um, and why is that in the bill?
I think Federal protection is
more on a public company. Oh,
excuse me, Madam Chair, members,
apologies, representative.
Uh, that's more on a, a.
Public company basis. What,
what, and this really came out
of uh our uh our, our outreach
meetings and the number of
doctors that came to us that saw
there were changes and concerns
about quality of care and access
and how they were being limited
and how they were practicing
medicine that made them
uncomfortable to the point of we
had a number of uh doctors
actually in tears or who had
just quit. Uh, so they wanted us
some
opportunity to be able to raise
the issues that they were seeing
in health care, um, going
forward,
and it was OK if you and Madam
Chair Representative Barrego and
and also um Senator Nibert, I, I
think this whole issue of the
impact on providers of what this
process could be. There are
different categories in the 50%
that are employed by large
systems are different than some
of those independent
practitioners.
Who may be looking to to to sell
their practices. And the biggest
concerns we heard were from
those employed physicians who
are losing control of how to
practice and the patient, uh,
physician relationship is at at
risk that some of them have told
us in some of these
transactions. So there that
balance is also to distinguish
those situations.
Against short of not reading the
bill yet, um, that I'm not,
it's, I'm still not clear on
that because Madam Chair, it
just seems to me like each
entity would have their own HR
system that uh provides for that
whistleblower protection. So I
guess I, I'm gonna be looking at
that because I think that's an
important point, um, and I, I
just had to question when I saw
that as part of this bill. So I
just wanted to bring
That up and maybe after I read
it, I'll understand it better,
but at this point in time, I'm
still not clear about that.
Thank you, Representative.
We now, uh, Senator Stewart.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, I
want to thank you all for the
work you've done. It's pretty
amazing. I had no idea you were
at this level of stakeholder
engagement and that all of you
were at the table, so it's very
impressive.
Uh, I, my, uh, I have one
question. I don't quite, I'm
very bothered by the
disagreement over transparency
versus confidentiality. The more
I learn about these hospitals,
the more I want to know, uh, so
if we have any hope of trying to
ensure that the hospitals are
running well and Mr. Clark, I
appreciate your agreement to the
oversight.
wanting to make sure access to
health care is right up there,
but I don't understand why.
You know, we're trying to hide
things that are going on in the
hospitals and, you know, what
part of, you can't be
transparent. I just don't get
that.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and uh
Senator Stewart, um, I, I will
first say that it's not a matter
of hiding things. There are
corporate sensitive information.
There are personnel HR sensitive
information. This should not be
disclosed to the entire public
somebody's HR file when you,
when we get in, as I described
earlier, the due diligence would
be taking the human resource
files of all the employees and
if somebody has had human
resource, uh, actions against
them. That's not the public's
information. That should be
protected for the employee.
Themselves, uh, as well as for
the entity, and then you get up
to the higher levels to the
financial information for the
hospital. Those are competitive,
uh, documents obviously that
their competitors would like to
see and see from one another,
but they don't want their
competitors to see their, so
they're understanding to say
there are certain documents that
need to be kept confidential.
They should be reviewed by the
agency who needs to do the
oversight to make sure the due
diligence is prepared, but I
want to blend that with also one
of my other comments was I think
as we look at the current
SB 15, 1 of the things that we
do think should be added to that
to, uh, what is currently in
place is some of this public
hearing. We do think there is
value in the public
understanding, uh, the
transactions are taking place
and I would share that if we
look at Gallup as a situation.
In that community meeting, I
believe what we heard from the
public was a previous
administration that did not
share what was happening in uh
transactions and the whys behind
it caused a lot of angst, uh,
and a lot of frustration in that
community and yet for the
current interim CEO who is there
who has been extremely
interactive with the community.
There was gratitude. We saw a uh
A representation in that
community meeting that we
appreciate that. So we're not
opposed to the public hearing to
the conversation and
communication of information. I
think that is a good thing. Uh,
but I think when it comes to
corporate sensitive information,
there's a number of different
reasons from legal, from
financial, from protection of
employees' information. There's
just certain information that
should not be out there and
disclosed to the entire public.
Well, I, I get your answer with
that, but, you know, so this is
health care. This is people in
crisis needing help, and you're
talking about competition
between hospitals that where you
don't want to share processes or
what you're doing. I mean, this
isn't a competition. This is
basic healthcare, so I, you
know, I'm, I'm, I'm bothered
even more now about this,
perhaps I can hear from.
No
I apologize for bothering you.
Lee Senator Doha you want to add
something and there is some time
on the clock, so thank you,
Madam Chair, Senator, so
We, again, with everything with
this bill, it is about striking
a balance, um.
Things that are trade secrets,
things that are proprietary
information, that's not the kind
of stuff that we're saying all
needs to be made public. Uh,
things like HR files would never
be an issue in something like
this. These are, these are
documents about a transaction.
Um, they are not in, you know,
write-ups of employees. Uh, so
that, that's not, we're not
talking about HR files. We're
not talking about employee
files. Uh, we might be talking
about things like, is, is part
of your plan to get rid of all
the physical.
and replace them with advanced
practice practitioners. That
might be something that it's
important for the public to
know, because in order to have
meaningful public hearings, the
public has to have enough
information to know, to know
We're certainly not trying to
say.
Every single single bit of your
competitive commercial
information needs to be laid
bare for, for everyone to see,
but we need to be able to give
the public enough information so
that they can make a real
assessment of the impact of
these transactions on them,
since they're the ones getting
that healthcare.
Oh, Madam Chair, thank you for
the answers. All I say is that
you, you need to continue to
work on this because uh uh if,
if there's a disagreement about
what can be made public, I think
we're in trouble with this. So
thank you, Madam Chair.
He senator of Representative
Hall, then Senator Cervantes.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
panelists, great job. I have to
concur with my colleagues here.
My question is very quick. Do we
have
Is there a number or this may be
part of your own ongoing where
a number were private equities
have actually come into a
community.
And tore
Down the hospital system and
then just punched out. Does that
information exist?
Does that make sense?
Manager and representative, I
think you're gonna hear that
presentation. You're gonna hear
that presentation a little bit
later.
I would note the superintendent
mentioned something about
Stewart, and that I think
occurred in Boston and our
expert who's coming up in a
little bit might know something
about that.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, Senator Cervantes.
Uh, good morning. I first of
all, I want to thank you, uh,
Senator and the superintendent
for taking me along for some of
these public meetings and
hearings and a nice dinner where
we talked about them in a lot
more detail, um.
Senator Neibert asked the
question, what we'll bring more
doctors here have personal uh
selfish motives, my daughter's a
OBGYN during her residency in
Houston. My new son-in-law is an
orthopedic surgeon during his
residency in Houston with her,
and I'd love to bring him back
to New Mexico too, so I have a
selfish reason, um.
You started your presentation
saying we need better oversight
tools. One question I have, and
I'm because the time is so
limited, I'm not gonna ask you
for answers to most of these,
but I will tell you my
questions. One is we do have a
tremendous amount of oversight
of hospitals in the licensing
process already. The
credentialing and licensing, the
levels of care that are
authorized and licensed by the
state involves a pretty rigorous
review, um, but there's a
commission that comes in and
does accreditations and so
forth. So I'm gonna be very
curious when we get further into
this to determine how this
process will overlap or perhaps
Conflict with that licensing
process how will those two
things work together because I,
I, you all probably know I spend
a fair amount of my law practice
in in cases against hospitals
and when, uh, Senator Stewart
and others are perplexed by the
transparency issues. I got to
tell you, when I depose doctors
in this community and ask them
who they work for, they don't
really know. Um, and when you,
and when you ask the doctors and
administrators who they work for
and what corporations they're
with, they don't know either.
Uh, people think Memorial
Hospital is a hospital here.
Memorial hospitals are nothing.
There is no such thing as
Memorial Hospital. It's a name
for a corporation that's called
PHC Las Cruces. They intend that
is a subsidiary of LifePoint
Health Inc. which is a
subsidiary of Apollo Management,
and nobody gets that. The, the
employees don't know it.
They're, their payroll records,
their forms, their handbooks are
all from different sources and a
lot of what I do in my practice
is to try and expose to people
what's really going on, who's
controlling the show, the, the
CEO and the CFO and the chief
medical officer all.
employed by a different
corporation than the hospital
itself is. They're employed by
HSC GP LLC. I mean, this, it's,
it's mind numbing and, and I
always ask myself, do they do
that on purpose? Uh, they
probably do it on purpose for a
lot of reasons, for tax reasons
and, and, uh, but also part of
it's limiting liability, right,
to make sure guys like me can't
figure out who's liable for the
for the ultimate harm here.
Uh, Senator Stewart asked, you
know, why, why we can't just
have full transparency, it's
beyond the time we have here,
Madam Chair, but Las Cruces is a
great study for all these
issues. We, for years and years
had a city county hospital,
memorial center I refer to it
when you can see right over my
shoulder and then um a few years
later, Mountain View announced
that it was going to be coming
into town as a as a competitive
uh hospital against the city
county hospital, and at that
point in time the city and
county realized they were going
to get out competed so they
contracted with the corporate,
um,
Private equity firm to come in
and they manage the hospital but
it's still owned by the city and
county. The, the plant itself
is, and to your question,
Senator Nibert, when Mountview
came in, they brought in
boatloads of new doctors and
services. It was a good thing
for this community, candidly, to
have that competition between
the two, but it's highly
competitive because one hospital
is trying to steal the doctor
from the other. One of them are
trying to give privileges to the
other and exclude them from the
other one who wants to do
certain services and have them
all go over there. Uh, memorial
was gonna be left with the
indigent care, the uncompensated
care.
You wanted to cherry pick all
the compensated and highly
insured care. This is a highly
competitive business. Memorials,
revenues. I'm just looking up
right now about $1.9 billion in
Las Cruces.
It's a lot of money in Las
Cruces, uh, for this community.
And so, uh, all of those things
are competitive. The, the
contracts with doctors, how much
one doctor is getting paid to
the exclusion of others, very
confidential, they protect that
they don't want to know when
anesthesiologist is getting paid
X and the other groups getting
paid Y and the competition. So
this is gonna this is gonna be
pretty tricky to, to get to that
sweet spot that Senator Worth
and others were talking about,
and if you want to know
transparency, just I just keep
repeating it if you're doing
$1.9 billion of revenue.
There in this town, you're a big
swinging.
Hospital, right? So, so, uh.
Yeah, um.
Uh, when, you know, I hope,
Madam Chair will spend some time
because I hear, I hear the
inferences about medical
malpractice and some suggestion
that that sometimes drives away
doctors. I know that's a common
refrain. We've all seen the
white coats coming around. Uh,
the Burrell College is right
over here, over my other left
shoulder, we should be talking
about MedMalin where it factors
into this because I'm
comfortable having that
discussion and where we're at in
terms of what we do for
physicians and a superintendent,
the one question I do have is
how much money have we put out
of taxpayer money in the
budgeting process into the
patient
Compensation fund that
effectively takes care of claims
against hospitals and doctors,
private at $1.9 billion hospital
revenue across the way here
makes some of that revenue
because we all of us pay to
satisfy and settle claims and
judgments against that hospital,
and we've done that this last
year, what, $30 million into the
patient compensation fund, and
we've done that the last 2 or 3
years, I think, that's 2 years,
right? Yeah, and it's still
insolvent, right?
Still not enough money there. So
we're essentially making sure
that the doctors and the
hospitals don't have to pay much
of those malpractice claims
we're paying for, uh, and I'd
love to have somebody paying my
malpractice insurance or or
paying claims against me for
malpractice. Uh, so while a
physician or a doctor may have
to ensure part of that, we're,
we're covering part of that as
well too in that in that fund.
So we'll talk about that. I'm
sure at some point in the next
coming session, Madam Chair, um,
so I appreciate the complexity.
The one thing that I'll, I'll
reaffirm with my
Question this last time was I
can't believe what the hospitals
ever agreed to this bill this
last time around. I was
perplexed, couldn't understand
it, but then also I don't
understand why the hospital
association decided to get
involved with a special session
and come out in favor of the
criminal law package, uh, the
governor was proposing for the
special agenda, so I don't,
there's a lot of things the
Hospital Association does that
don't make any sense to me at
all, but, um, but that's,
that's, I didn't understand them
supporting this bill. I'm a
private practitioner. I'm a
private capitalist guy, the bad.
Apple is, but I don't understand
why anybody who's trying to uh
make a living in business would
have agreed to that bill, but
they did. Um, and so now, let's
go and see where it where it
takes them. Um, I, I don't want
to, uh, find that we discourage
doctors and hospitals from
coming here and and decrease the
level of care because I'm going
to end on the fact that when
Mountain View came here, they
brought a lot of new good
character, a lot of good
doctors, and, and I've had care,
great care at Memorial Hospital
and I have a great care at
Mountain View and I'm sure
Everybody will quote that
against me and every time I sue
them. They'll say Joseph's says
he got great care there. I do
get great care here and I'm,
I'm, I'm proud to have those
facilities in our community.
Sometimes things go badly. So
thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, um, Senator, um.
So I just have a few comments
and maybe some questions.
I think everyone knows here that
we are not a unique in a unique
situation in terms of a doctor
shortage, and I'm not suggesting
that we shouldn't address it,
but I think a little context
helps us talk about that. So
it's my understanding there are
about 48 states that have doctor
shortages and um it's not
unusual. It's, it's uh it's an
issue that arises for a lot of
reasons and one that concerns me
is the cap on residencies, which
nobody has brought up um
At least not much, uh, and a
little light bulb went on
recently when someone pointed
out the fact to me that the AMA
has pushed for caps on
residencies and it was in the
90s that such caps were created.
OK, so why is that important?
Well, residency is the pipeline,
right? You have to complete a
residency before you can
practice medicine, um, the
length of the residency is
determined by the practice area
and so on and so forth. But
there's a cap. I think the
public needs to start talking
about that. And I, I'm raising
it.
I'm not saying that we shouldn't
be looking for solutions to
bring more doctors in the state,
but I think we need to start
having a broader conversation
and start looking to the
profession to start helping us
here. So what's that? That's the
AMA AMA is part of this, this
solution, and they have caps on
the number of residencies. And
so that's hurting every state in
the union. That's that's hurting
all of us, as patients who need
access to health care.
We need to start addressing
that. And I would point out.
Um, because of that, we have a
shortage and what have we been
doing? We have been pouring tons
of state money into the patient
compensation fund, the rural
blah blah fund this fun, the
that fund, you know, we're
increasing uh re uh Medicaid
payments which I think is a very
appropriate, but public moneys
in by the states and I bet we're
not the only state that's doing
this, right? Um, public monies
by the.
States are being used our
taxpayer dollars in part, not
100% because there is a shortage
that's being driven in part by
A cap on residencies because the
pipeline is constricted by the
profession and I just, you know,
let's start.
Having a broader conversation
about instead of these little,
you know, let's let's look at
the GRT rate. Well, yeah, sure,
really, you know, is that really
going to bring a lot of doctors
into the state really, if we
eliminate GRT on the little
piece of Medicare that is, is
still apparently is is still
apparently taxed. It really, you
know, we can talk about those
things, but this is a big issue
that we need to have a broader
conversation on. So,
Um
Thank you for hearing um my
little peeve about um the
medical profession and their
unwillingness to maybe open up
the pipeline a little bit.
Uh, yes, Jane, Madam Chair, it's
a really important point. I do
know that the deputy secretary
of the Healthcare Authority,
Alex Castillo Smith is here and
maybe during a break it's a
little beyond the Oversight Act,
but the um the the state really
did, um, make efforts to create
new residency programs
leveraging Medicaid funds. I
think Mr. Clark knows more
about, but, but residency caps,
those are, I believe, through
Medicare and there's little the
state can do.
But there's been a real effort
to leverage Medicaid funding,
and I know that she's here today
and maybe can speak with you
about that. I think that there
was a real creative effort to
try and do that here, but it
would be great if more could be
done.
OK, yeah, please, because I do
want to understand this issue
better, Troy.
Represent Chandler, I appreciate
you bringing that up and I'd
love to take you to DC with me
because as uh Jane, uh,
mentioned that it is a Medicare
issue. There's not really a cap.
You can go and have as many
residencies as you want. How
many of you get funded for or
reimbursed through by Medicare
is what's capped, and we have
had a tremendous amount of
effort to try and get that
raised at a national level, but
yet I have seen some of my peers
in other states start to try and
address this at the state level,
including some of the work that
uh our uh Medicaid program
is done. In fact, we have a
number of hospitals who have
residencies above their caps.
UNM has quite a number of
residency slots above their cap,
which means they fund it
themselves. yet another issue
where the state is funding it.
On the UNM one, but I, I will
say beyond that, the other
examples I know Presbyterian I
believe uh I don't know all of
them off the top of my head, so
I hate to exclude any because
they'll say, what about me,
Troy, but, uh, I, I'm sure I
know that Memorial and
Presbyterian and I believe
Lovington uh all have uh
residency slots that they.
added that they do not get
reimbursed for through what they
call GME graduate medical
education. So I, I think it is
an important point that we bring
up in terms of trying to get the
pipeline loosened on the federal
level, and we do have federal
representatives and senators
that we should be talking to
about this and if you need some
help with that, um, Troy, happy
to work with you because I think
that's part of the issue.
OK, um, thank you very much. I
think.
We finished. I appreciate all of
your participation and we'll be
on to our next, um.
I
So, um, we will be going into
executive session.
To hear about some issues in the
investigation that the Attorney
General has ongoing.
Into Memorial Hospital, so I'd
ask that members of the public
excuse themselves. We um are
gonna have lunch after that
presentation and at least
tentatively we're planning on
starting at about 12:30 where
it'll be open to the public
again, so people can plan
accordingly in terms of
returning.
Um, to the meeting if you so
choose to do so.
Yeah
