Not familiar.
Thirty thousand.
Yeah.
And when the place I met as
reference please note that.
The.
I would also like.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Are aware.
With you using the electronic
nicotine devices.
The american line association
and the centers forget these
control and prevention are just
a few national.
The.
An initiation of commercial
cigarettes that someone begins
with electronic devices first.
East the grip am contain armful
chemical and can cause
irreversible long damage.
We also know that the
thing and cigarette you can be
associated with metal health
symptoms such as depression in.
That is highlighted smoking card
tell the expenditures in the
united states currently amount
to more than two hundred and
forty one billion dollars per
year.
Now this is information for
broad tobacco use across all
ages and cost is generally split
between federal state and local
government I thought private
insurance parents but still
worth noting for alignment.
Best study does also breakdown
cops by medicaid spending and
possible product have been a
lot.
Highlighting that medicaid
spending and smoking because
this even problems is about
seventy two point seven billion
per year and productivity a lot
cut by smoking because element
of premium treatment can come in
at night nearly three hundred
and sixty five billion per year.
So how many years are using
devices and what are these
devices specifically.
The national use tobacco survey
or the n y g s is administered
by the us within drug
administration is a
prospectional will based off
administered questionnaire
cheaper at middle school and
high school students in the
united states and has been youth
since nineteen ninety nine.
The first flight here you'll be
shows the current overall
tobacco product you for twenty
twenty two and twenty twenty
three.
Here we see that among the us
high school students youth
declines during twenty twenty
two m twenty twenty three from
sixteen point five percent to
twelve point six percent.
The finding for this you know
that the decline was primarily
driven by east cigarette which
we will be highlighted on the
next plate.
Decline the news for all set
there during the same time
period or the guard and overall
combatable tobacco smoking
perhaps we'll do that
representing and all time low.
Conversely during the same time
period there was a reported
increase in overall tobacco
product use among middle school
students from four point five
percent to six point six
percent.
Result of this survey also know
that an increase in the multiple
tobacco product at one time
increased by one percent.
I will also know for middle
school earth better than for
better or worse than these
numbers did not indicate
significant change during the
twenty twenty two to twenty
twenty three year period for any
individual tobacco product
including esaver at.
This is also the time where the
average person while first new
the tobacco product age of
initiation right now averages at
about twelve to fourteen years
of age.
And the next five we'll see the
current youth and this is
talking about the decrease and
twenty twenty three and how this
translates to about five hundred
and eighty thousand your high
school you have to currently be
sticker at.
The students that use these
products about ten percent two
point eight million repark for
new of any tobacco product.
Three point four percent of
these report currently used to
have any combatable tobacco
products.
And three point four percent
report can't use a multiple as
in two or more tobacco products.
Yes they're great remain the
most popular product for the
temperature in a row with the
garsen cigarettes as the next
most common.
I will note that there is a six
percent difference and
popularity between each
cigarette and the second and
thirty of the guards and
cigarettes.
Among the current cigarette
users are disposable systems or
one time you set them.
About sixty point seven percent
of people who use this type of
debit.
This is followed by devices with
our credit were reasonable type
or courses with the you and
about sixteen point one percent.
With about a forty four percent
different.
According to a study by the trip
foundation the possible
cigarette holding the united
states have nearly trickled in
nicotine spring.
With couple of liquid capacity
and the rocked in price by
nearly seventy percent.
The.
Furthermore that study of each
they'll see that found that
nicotine stream capacity and
price it be additional areas of
continent.
They note that at twenty twenty
two eastern certain work
illustrated their introduction
of at least forty eight with
both the point you stick right
with six percent or greater
nicotine strength.
Eighteen products with twenty
million capacity which is to be
noted at twenty nine times the
size of a dual card and price
drop nearly triple possible
purchasing power.
This they also don't say that
the increasing side and spring a
disposable new credit.
May result in a generation of
products with nicotine levels
that are comparable to several
car in the cigarette.
With this market evolution it
does have some public health
experts questioning and need to
limit the cigarette by a dollars
minimum price of capital team
levels to prevent youth and
other people from initiating and
developing an addiction to the
between products.
Currently in in the united
states there is no indicating
concentration.
And the report is currently
smoking about two point one
three million reported three use
of the cigarette.
I believe more than one and four
use and eat the correct product
every day and one in thirty
report using eight cigarettes at
least twenty of the last thirty
days.
And while I will talk a little
bit more about labor cigarettes
later the study does mention
that almost nine out of ten
current easter grade users.
Who smoke do you labor tobacco
use me to flavor cigarettes.
Roof labors are the most popular
followed by candy divert or
other.
Then mine and member.
Interesting to note that over
half of the students who
currently give you the correct
report using flavors with eight
or eighth in the name for
example I water million.
The national institutions health
there were more than four
hundred and sixty different east
figure a brand on the market of
january twenty twenty.
But i've been through your way
and there have been a number of
federal regulations in the face
over the last few years and
although it took some time to
really operationalize this
change as of march twenty twenty
four the f b a has authorized
the marketing forty five
products with thirty four abuse
being tobacco and men's off
labored cigarettes.
The f b a received applications
for more than six point seven
million tobacco product the
majority of which were for
electronic nicketine delivery
september or ends product.
In september twenty twenty the f
b a has acted on more than
ninety nine percent of these
applications including denying
the marketing of more than one
million flavored and product.
On this way you will be able to
link to the f b a total data
base if you are interested in
finding the approved device.
Like the federal database an
emergency emerging policy area
for states have to do with
creating their own eat they
correct the by registration.
The machiner is from the public
health lock center and highlight
state action that various levels
from considering a day to be a
passing ability to anyone.
As you can see alabama require
that you live with manufacturers
and alternative nicketing
product manufacturers with bell
products in the state we just
submit the certification that
that manufacturer had submitted
a pre market tobacco product
application.
With the fba or has previous
static that the before.
Virginia required manufacturer
at the metaphor that each liquid
negative or negative favorite
product and has outlined
penalties for.
This policy area is something
that we will continue to keep an
eye on your
and are happy to provide
additional example to the
committee both following the
presentation and as the
legislative session six hundred
twenty twenty five.
Our number of reasons that you
made the big or started paying
from eastern marketing and
advertising to be availability
of a killing flavor social or
social media influences and the
effects of nicotine.
This means that I face the
public health leader look to
prevent intervene or support a
state channel even there are
married a policy option better
and it will likely need to
consider or could consider more
than one given the fact to reach
of this step up.
For the next few minutes I will
have legislative policy area
that have proven to be both a
priority in recent years and
continue to trend of the track
twenty twenty four and moving
forward.
But the because I have limited
time and this your ability to
comprehend all of it I would
just be touching on the movie.
First of all start with a
beeping tax policies.
Studies have shown that
increasing price is one of the
most effective ways to refuse
commercial tobacco and and if
you initiative give me an
increase clinically.
This is similar for each
cigarette or studies have
indicated that increasing the
price of an easily correct and
potentially leave toward the
reduction in the man or
consumption of these product.
By reading the price of tobacco
product experts also in the case
that maybe one of the greatest
impact on you you particularly
for those who may be priced and
sent out.
Expert you also know that my
increasing tax is it has the
potential to generate revenue
for commercial tobacco control
and public health work.
At this time there is no federal
tax station on each other at and
that means that they are more
recently trying to low
governments are adopting by
regularly super products.
As you can be here in the map by
january twenty twenty three at
least thirty eight and the
district of colombia have tax
beeping product.
I would like to know that the
have released updated
information on that and of
january twenty twenty four at
least thirty two states easy
order retail and members and
islands have packed legislation
requiring taxes on being the
product.
Fact of canberry widely and
they're structured gop and
amount for example some states
include the product upon him
well others tax only the eagle
liquid.
This can depend on if the
product is an open to be think
product.
Which is where the liquid it's
built by the user.
Or attacks includes meeting
products which is on product the
pre filled with a liquid for
immediate.
Where are some states have also
chose to let me attack on a
price of okay and we can see
that best percentage been rained
anywhere from seven percent in
some states that ninety five
percent another.
And finally we also know that
some states have added basing
products to their state's
current definition of tobacco
product or other tobacco product
making them eligible for the
same existing tobacco product.
To break that down in the
simpler sentence current minds
very widely but most states
either include a paper product
in their tax laws for commercial
tobacco or negative products.
It can choose to tax a
percentage of an overall
product.
Break the tax step by liquid
mount or device component or in
the case of at least seven
states still be outlined in the
map new mexico included you are
combination of percent of fight
and per unit tack.
That.
Pre amazon live our lives that
can prevent local communities
from passing local lives that
are more stringent order
different from.
The back of control policy.
I help people twenty thirty
objective calls to eliminate
policy.
Control policy.
From the public health leader
and.
Helping people twenty thirty
they argue that effective
tobacco control policies often
start at the local level and
local policies and help change
national attitudes around.
The main reason to know the
difference or pre emption lives
and no premiums and lives are
really that the potential effect
that we can be on issues related
to tax license monthly space and
use apps.
The next slides are going to
break out and regulatory action
into a few different areas first
we can start with these thing
around product packaging and as
you can see here there at least
thirty five faith as a june
twenty twenty four who have a
lot of pertaining to eat the
correct packaging.
Is what I may apply to children
packaging warning labels or
other sixty consideration.
In twenty fifteen minutes I was
one of the first eight path
legislation ensuring that all
like them is under this chapter
must ensure that any liquid
intended for human sumptions and
use an electronic delivery
device that sold a child
resistant package.
And in twenty nineteen south
carolina pass legislation
ensuring that all the liquid
computers intended for consumer
our children listen and labeled
with appropriate warnings as
determined by federal
regulation.
Retail like something on east
cigarette as another area have
been focusing on everything here
as the cdc report in march of
twenty twenty four at least
thirty four states have passed
legislation requiring or because
like them to fell at beat the
correct over the counter.
As you can be here in the north
carolina legislation a wholesale
dealer or retail dealer must
obtain a paper product like them
for each location for the
product it made.
Receive our stores a product and
each location where someone may
be a delivery seller or our boat
seller at that time most date to
have packed legislation require
one license her location of the
bit b.
Similar legislation and requires
a license to be renewed by
application process every year.
I router was also wednesday but
had that in the app I can see
every till life something and
have reported that the city of
lake with reduced retailer
violation rate by approximately
sixty eight percent one account
import morgan reported a
rekiller enforcement reduced
failed to mino.
This is another policy area
we're seeing both federal and
state action.
On march twenty seventh twenty
twenty one hundred and the
packed act to include new
regulations regarding the
delivery and sale of electronic
nickel team system which is a
good bait electronic cigarette
later with tobacco.
Individual older businesses that
sell transfer or ship for profit
any electronic nicotine delivery
system and interstate commerce
now must register with the etf
and they must also register with
any state that they will be
shipping and.
The industry update one out of
every ten high school reported
using tobacco products largely
in part to the either accept the
remail deliveries and online
sellers.
In responsibility the issue and
it's part of the enforcement
mission the at regularly
collaborate with the united
states possible for and the f
tobacco twenty one enforcement
team to provide sales and
shipments of basement integrated
come.
Licensing some things have
happened legislation pertaining
specifically the online sale and
delivery.
As you can be here mathitude
says half legislation but that a
person outside of the
commonwealth who ship the
transport I electronic making
delivery system as an into an
insight in seller my supply for
a license and then non president
distributor.
And a new time anyone who
violates this maybe penalized
with a civil penalty in the
amount not to expedite five
thousand dollars for each
violation may receive an
injection to explain a great
actual violation and be
responsible for contract
february by the eighth for the
cost of investigation expert
witnesses action and responsible
lawyer fee.
Other methods and place to
ensure that people under twenty
one can't legally buy maps or
electronic making the rights of
online are each fair if the key
verification system at the time
I purchase of a product and at
time upon delivery.
As well as there is monthly
reporting due to the at which
should highlight all devices
that were sold at a particular
location and who they report.
This will bring us to you failed
penalty as of march thirty first
all fifty states the district of
columbia one the northern
mariana island water and the US
burden island have passed on the
place and procompeting the sale
of the cigarette under each
person.
At this time american similar
and the martial island is not
have like the station requiring
a minimum age prohibiting the
fail of east cigarette anyone
under age.
In addition to federal actions
for failed violations to minor
at our state like new mexico
have treated penalties for
anyone selling tobacco you think
or beat committee.
As you can see here in north
dakota.
A person who thought offers the
fell or distributed any labor
you know like what are
electronic smoking device
containing labor liquids someone
under the eight of twenty one
and is not a manufacturer
subject to a fine a five hundred
dollars for each package a
flavor you like with the product
or electronic smoking debit card
painting a flavored liquid
product.
And then washington violation
and result in a class the felony
and.
Required the enforcement
officers are allowed to inspect
any place of business or vehicle
where products may be sold or
transported or.
Tobacco companies have used
flavors and cigarettes the guard
cigarette is that left tobacco.
Labor can improve the ease and
use them a product by masking
some of the harsher teeth and
effects of the back at all.
And i've noted earlier in the
presentation the national use
tobacco survey has reported that
almost nine out of ten currently
they great desert use a flavor
cigarette.
California and math that use
this are currently the states
with bands on all labored
tobacco products including
member.
And new jersey new york and
robertland have banned the sale
of flavored east figure at.
Other states like maryland and
appropriately all of labored.
Partridge faith and disposable
electric give me the cigarette.
And you talk about specified
that this is for non retail
tobacco specialty this method.
Twenty twenty two study was done
to a value week impact of sales
restrictions on flavor
ethergreph and four steep
including message you this and
comparing them to fourth it
don't have this policy the study
did include that all four states
with failed restrictions
including math and use
experience the decline in east
cigarette sales after their
policy was implemented and it
does not the best overall failed
decline with driven by the
client and failed labor.
I will also know though it's not
reference on this plate that
there are over three hundred
localities across the united
states that have passed their
online display ship or rules
that ban or restrict the use and
they'll have labor paper on.
Questions or reason with player
band is whether it will look a
trade or harm small business
that.
Several studies have been done
but one out of canada on the
nations band for flavors figure
out including member figure at.
Found that the band did not
three thirteen illegal sales of
member or non mental products.
And population surveys show that
large percentages of people who
smoke member cigarettes would
rather choose to put smoking all
together if mental products
could not be both legally.
And for small businesses there
are other studies that have
shown the banning of flavor
products that not go out small
businesses for home.
Evidence for it with flavor
restrictions like the math that
she says new york and road
island.
Have indicated that their flavor
band is not my business and and
it did not leave to a reduction
of tobacco or convenient stories
or reduction in employees and
our region.
They noted that retailers can
you ask that what they think
maybe a potential box or
profitability with other high
profit margin products such as
prepared food pocket during a
product.
Other things like a main have a
bill to interview a labor ban or
maybe researching their own
various of a bill like best for
the twenty twenty five
legislative session.
And our pen bank.
In a twenty twenty two study
fourth and classrooms were found
to be particularly great
settings for delivery easy
cigarette prevention program
because a large portion of
adelaide social lives take place
there and revolve around the
school setting with their peers.
Will be programs to allow for
analysis to learn along say
their period the build
collective effectively around
preventing or reducing easter
great you want final senior
three building south africa.
Has reported that school based
policies can support the
changing of community norm
thereby reason to think the
initiation prevalency and
attention a smoking amount
young.
I thought and you.
Common policy considerations at
this time.
Are around creating beat free
campuses creating our supporting
a healthy store environment.
Supporting full administrators
or faculty with information or
materials and resources for
students and educating students
on possible harm addiction and
effect of targeted advertising.
You think that i've put these
methods and active I logiviana
with prohibiting electronic
cigarettes and personal
baperiods on school property
virginia which require the
development and distribution of
educational material covering
the health and facing rest of
tobacco and paper product.
And similar to new mexico
colorado with part of a lot of
and ultimately a settlement from
july and colorado has been
determined through the
department of law and awarded
seventeen point four million to
schools and organizations to
help come back you speaking and.
The.
As of march twenty twenty four
the t c reports nineteen states
the district of columbia and
border rego have tasked
comprehensive smoke free indoor
airlines that include east
cigarette.
Prohibit smoking and they use
that east cigarette in indoor
area private works by
restaurants and barred.
Can I get past legislation
restricting the east cigarette
in particular public locations
and hours per institutions but
doesn't exception for public
housing high six back of our and
outdoor areas in establishment
serving alcohol.
And similarly never ask the
clean indoor air act prohibit
smoking and public think that
the places have employment with
limited exception.
And finally
campaign.
The general purpose of all of
these campaigns is to reduce
misconception of carm connect
youth with peers and and
support.
And it making quitting resources
available.
There are a number of variations
on these campaigns as you can
see here some are more near to
public education some are more
hands on and bringing digital
quitting program to adult the
new and some are about making
educational materials available
to educator.
In particular the real cost
campaign utilizes different
venues to reach people like tv
streaming that social media
social audio gaming focus
advertising and partnership with
you both you focused content
like marvel comic band over
time.
The latest outcome of valuation
data collected between august
and december twenty twenty three
showed approximately sixty seven
percent of youth were aware of
at least one of the real costs
the cigarette campaign
advertisement.
Survey result survey results
have also showed from multiple
years.
But there is strong be that
between a significant
association between exposer to
the real cost campaign and and
an increase in agreement with
campaign specific belief.
For example exposure was
associated with increases and
belief that he cigarette can
expose the other month to talk
to the metals and cause long
damage.
Ingredients that are at our
danger.
And cigarettes current increase
anxious feelings and increase
but likely to smoking
cigarettes.
Platform like the bit of
quitting also shown to reach an
apposite of way.
In the first random it's control
trial for us an adolescent the
journal of american medical
association demonstrated the
effectiveness of an interactive
dealer ex message program and
helping adolescent quickly thing
nicotine.
Particularly the two year study
compared to control group and
participants to receive the
interactive text message program
and found that there was a
thirty five percent more likely
than to report not using
nicotine at the seven month
thirty eight point.
Rip with read for thirty seven
point eight percent in the
intervention group and compared
to twenty eight percent in the
control group.
In the study researchers also
found that there are strong and
of evidence that the programs
effective me.
Among east of group as they were
to find by rate ethnicity dender
high level of nicotine dependent
smoking and other stuff
mental health challenges and
helpful.
Providing resources to educator
and adult in iraq with them more
commonly or with use more family
i've shown to be helpful
information in this hm and
supporting.
All right the potentially many
policy considerations that have
an action that it's retaking and
that we have seen them take them
on three thing here i'll just
take one minute here to point
out that there are number of
studies that have been done to
better understand some tobacco
petrol effort and what the
return on investment may be.
A lot of the study that the time
are for commercial tobacco and
not new cigarettes everything
but researchers believe that
there is to be considerable
correlation between these
efforts and date and do you
consider
it considered a go this route or
similar route for east moping
cigarettes and the big thing.
Just quickly you can figure out
the real cost campaign which we
just talked about was able to
prevent approximately a hundred
and seventy six thousand you
from becoming established
smokers from twenty fourteen to
twenty sixteen representing a
potential cost savings at at
least thirty one billion
dollars.
New york tobacco control program
that an assessment in twenty
twenty four and determined
accumulative savings and smoking
attributable health care bendit
true to about thirteen point two
billion.
And florida bureau tobacco
completed their assessment and
twenty twenty one and has
estimated it about twenty nine
thousand smoking death where a
verdict in florida from nineteen
ninety nine to twenty fifteen
resulting in approximately four
hundred and fifty thousand years
of white game by program plan
bank.
The final fight is really just
highlight a few sorts of they
have been referenced throughout
the presentation I will also
note that the electronic version
of this presentation does have a
number of resources on each
individual wide and length on
each individual.
I think with that I would look
like the think you all so much
for your attention and I will
turn it back to you mr ch.
Thank you tommy that was very
unlightening and a a good cross
section of what's going on in
america and I think presents a
number of ideas for us to
potentially pursue as baping is
a significant problem in new
mexico
i'll now as the committee if you
have any questions for ms hell
and her presentation or
additional to that.
Bear with this for one moment
please.
Wow of my colleagues are
looking.
Do you have any information on a
correlation between the percent
of attacks and a reduction in
youth vaping and other words if
the taxes fifty percent is is
there a much less uptake than if
the taxes only tender twenty
percent.
Thank you I appreciate the
question there are limited
studies right now on taxation
and but typically but many of
them do show that any percentage
increase
especially for you can be a
beneficial prevention mechanism
I am more than happy though to
follow up and be if any studies
have called out
more or less week but have a
percent on taxes and follow up
with.
Thank you.
Would be helpful
I had when other questions in
regards to preemption
as you noted it's it's tough to
get uh preemption laws as we
found here in many after many
years in new mexico
but do you are there some
particular minius apologies you
identified that there are a
number of where they've been
able to a passes laws and minus
palities have been able to
implement
distance from schools and so
forth due would you have any
examples that you could
potentially forward to us and
that regard.
Absolutely I have a number that
can be at the local level and
then a number of these that have
also done it more broadly even
with without pre emption months
well i'll go to the preemption
my space can get a little bit
tricky as well when you are
considering
silliness role which is going to
be about
and so I can provide some
information additionally about
what that might look like should
there be home role county is
and how and how to mean that the
policy have have
implemented regulation.
One other question is
that I understand anecdotally
that the vast majority of sales
in vaping ar sales of chinese
manufactured products that are
literally smuggled into the us
and somehow distributed is is
that an exaggeration on my part
or is there
in the evidence of the kind of
not
approved by the fda etc
manufacturers being able to get
in and do any states have any
panel these if there are sales
of non approved nine fda
approved manufacturers.
Thinking that their car
unfortunately can't speak to
which product
i'm coming in legally or
illegally although we do that
often with other substances
as i'm sure you're aware
particularly over the border or
it from china and so this is
something that could potentially
correlate I will note that the f
b a has
done a number of studies and
keeps an eye on maybe what would
be determined as I meant or hot
bottle of product and hasn't
warning letters to companies in
the past as well as if the
warning letters have not deemed
to
well that illegally resource
spelling that they
find though companies and can
penalize them from a better old
level there are other states of
well that did you create
penalties whether it is double
or criminal depending on the
back array of what's being
fallen and the
so I would be happy to put
together some information for
you about maybe where some of
those products are coming from
as well as I can link to some of
those studies that have been
done from the f b a about what
they have done both at the
federal level and then with them
they are doing both at that
thing about.
The apparent later this
afternoon hearing from
the
regulation the department
licenses and regulation
department which overseas the
serena and when i'm wondering if
just for my colleagues here is
it we might consider
some legislation that would
substance but would have a much
more substantial fine and
penalty and the smoke sharps
that are selling an approved
e cigarettes so.
Behind.
But there's also internet.
Yes and.
There is also internet and i'd
actually thank you for bringing
that up
you know that just hadn't
crossed my mind but what we're
going to do about the internet
so any examples of state
legislation that really are
effective in clamping down on
internet cells would be very
helpful as well.
And.
And now my colleagues have some
questions and i'll start with
representative thompson
thank you mr chair so I was
thrilled to see the road numbers
we need all the help we can get
to get some of these things done
so i'm just wondering I mean we
we've heard repeatedly including
today that nicotine is the
gateway drug i'm wondering if
any of the studies that you
cited do any kind of follow up
in terms of um whether they use
our progressing to other
substances or if there's any
data around that.
Thank you
at this time I haven't seen any
that have done the follow up
into additional absences but I
am more than happy to follow up
with you and see if that is the
case I think mostly the key
sense and that is that we have
been currently talk about the
movements from an electronic
nicotine device you more
combustible tobacco or
traditional.
I.
Two.
Thank you mister chair and thank
you so much for this great
information it's so
when we go to n c sl uhm
conferences it's always so good
to be able to see what our
sister states are doing and our
brother states I want to be
gender by us but
yet
it's it's good to know their
perfect examples that you
presented here for us to be able
to go and and
see what and how successful
they've been and there is no
reason why we can't also be a
new mexico
I
am
always
amazed how much faping does take
place in the schools and
how we can
force or may get sold it it's
more difficult not that we're
going to go wrest the students
but make it so there they're
stopped we've had some people
colleagues of ours that are
sympathetic to students to be
able to
to vapen the schools and
possibly have areas to go to the
vape which goes against
everything that we know is for
good policy so we need to
address maybe some other route
causes that students are having
to go to
a drugs for
whatever reason you know but be
able to have more counseling
behavioral health available in
the schools um and other things
that might cause them to reach
out for this kind of.
Yes you would say drugging in a
way
and
help alleviate that and I think
we're going to hear more about
how students in new mexico are
going from being because that's
going down just like tobacco use
went down when kids started
beeping but
zin is uh product that I think
we're we will hear more about.
As one of the products that is
increasing in use but for us to
be able to
as mister chair
mentioned about the regulation
with regulation and licensing
the enforcement at the
distributor or the
sales I think it's going to be
important
I very much appreciate having a
better picture overall
comprehensive picture of what's
going on in the nation that it's
it's not just does but we still
have to do what we can in new
mexico thank you mister.
Ms how I have them when glass
question and.
This may be a little bit
subjective but it's my
understanding from some of my
colleagues my medical colleagues
in the behavior or health arena
and that using nickel team
actually worsens depression
and as you noted that depression
is often a.
Generating reason for
individuals to use but the irony
it's kind of like alcohol
that the more you use the worst
you you go down and get into
negative areas that can lead to
depression can you
know of any literature that
validates that.
Yeah thank you there have been a
number of
your point
chicken early and which comes
but really do talk about about
that it works something at back
of using nicketing when you have
depression or beginning it
hasn't been present I would be
happy to send some of those
resources.
Thank you and what i'm wondering
in this again maybe there is
some evidence maybe not but
whether or not there is any
demonstrated evidence of the
refuse are notified of potential
for developing depression or
worsening depression using this
that knowledge to the individual
does it have any impact or is
this potentially kind of like
alcohol that some people
particularly who have craving
pathways
and in use there that are
becoming strong
that we see an alcoholism
and so it's just kind of a
random that those who have those
are are going to be I mean that
they're not going to listen
really to any kind of reason so
in other words does education in
does that kind of education have
an impact that it can worsen or
lead to depression.
Thank you
there are studies out that have
looked at the different week and
I will note that when they
have such a use particularly
high school and about looking at
many east dickorats over seventy
percent indicate that they would
like to stop and one of them
being concerned in both concerns
for help enter mental health no
I can also.
The.
Thank you miss hill if there are
no other questions
I actually will if there's
anyone in the audience we have a
department of health education
and regulation here if any of
you have any particular
questions that you would like to
ask of miss hill before we let
her go
nature to put down the spark but
it just don't looking at very
knowledgeable people who might
have more insight than maybe we
have that
line and we do have one
additional question from
the legislatures sir I represent
a friday thank you mister chair
I just wanted to add that
ncsl is a bipartisan
um organization and we have
found that
as a bipartisan issue to
eliminate flavors we've had
support from both sides of the
aisle in our state so we hope to
um
do something like that in the
sixty days section.
Thank you representative and you
have triggered one other
piece of information i'd like to
get a hold of
we we've looked at banning
flavors but we've heard it gets
very very complex and how you do
it yet I think you indicated
there are some states who have
prohibited flavors I guess maybe
you talk mentals well
but
wording in legislation and the
prohibition of flavors I think
is something that I heard on npr
when night going home that after
taxes
prohibiting flavors as a second
most powerful tool to reduce
youth uptake but if you have
language from some states who
have succeeded in banning
flavors that would be very
useful as well.
Yeah.
A with that
uh
no further questions and we
really appreciate it appreciate
and csl for all the work you do
and particularly the research
it's wonderful and we will
gather up that research and
not speaking from my colleagues
but to the extent we can try and
make very good use of it as in
our upcoming session to really
make some leaps forward after
some stumbles over the last
couple of years and getting
successful
anti vaping legislation but what
you provided I think a gives us
a lot more rational to persuade
the vast majority of our
colleagues to help us go forward
thank you again for you
presentation.
Many members for having me.
Okay then
almost feels like we should have
a bathroom break but we're just
right on schedule so if we have
someone would like to have a
bathroom baked breaker go ahead
and your own we won't escort you
right that's kind of like in you
know battle breaks and schools
and they go into the bathroom
debate
so so III i'll trust that you're
not going to go vapping okay
we will we will move on with the
final part of our presentations
today and
just kind of randomly will go in
the order of philip sanchez from
regulation and licensing
department
the department of health and
then the
public education department so
those of your with those
entities please fill please
can't feel free to come forward
and the floor is yours thank
you.
My bad yes the individually the
departments will come up and
then will go into a question and
answers for everyone so you'll
be running back and forth to the
microphones I politician
thank you.
Mr chair members of the
committee my name is
philipsanges I am the director
of the alcoholic beverage
control division for the
regulation and licensing
department
i'll refer to all called
beverage control as either abc
the division we just because
it's a lot shorter than that
whole title
we are abc have two primary
functions and it's the
administration of the liquor
control act and then the reason
i'm here today the
administration of the tobacco
products
the tobacco products act is
still relatively new compared to
when you consider liquor control
we have been licensing retailers
distributors of manufacturers
since january of twenty twenty
one.
Um
that it was a whole new industry
for us we were able to use some
of the tools that we use and
look at control in towards
tobacco products in the way that
tobacco products act as laid out
does track similar to liquor
control which was also helpful
um
as I mentioned we do license
manufacturers in new mexico
currently we have.
Three tobacco products
manufacturers license to new
mexico.
We licensed distributors we
currently have forty
distributors of tobacco products
license to new mexico and at the
retail level we do not license
uh
retail outlets i'm tribal land
so excluding those we do license
currently one thousand four
hundred forty three retail
outlets
now for a staff of fifteen
managing that and our alcohol
outlets we've devised some
mechanisms to
edd us in locating
unlicensed distributors or
retailers
to then get him licensed for
these past three years part of
the renewal process for
retailers is the providers a
list of distributors they
purchase tobacco products from
ideally once we're also
currently working on a new
online license in system where
this information will be entered
and once that data is collected
or it department hopefully will
be able to cross reference those
lists more effectively than we
can
buy flipping through pages and
hunting down files
we will use those retail list to
find unlicensed distributors get
them licensed and complain
we are also asking distributors
for lists of manufacturers in
new mexico that they purchase
from because we have no say over
those as far as getting them
licensed if it's someone
manufacturing and texas not we
can make i'm getting mexican
license but if they're buying a
product as a distributor from
someone saying I made this
product here they will provide a
set list as well as a list of
those retail outlets that they
sell to you and their again will
should.
Increase that fourteen hundred
significantly once we're able to
cross references lists any more
efficient manner
currently it is of paper which
does require a lot of memory
power and cross reference team
of paper in folders.
Now we did that because in
tobacco we do not necessarily
have the same three tier system
that we do and liquor control
but this was the mechanism we
found that we could at least
track who selling to who and how
we
and I will get into a couple
citation categories and explain
how one of them it sounds
contradictory actually fits that
was less requirements
now with our tobacco products
license fees
I did review some of the fees
that states need of surrounding
us collect rsr on par if not
higher especially the initial
license fee initial license fee
for manufacturer distributor or
retailer is seven hundred fifty
dollars for that first year
it's licensed from if you get
your license in april it's
licensed till the following
april and then after that every
renewal fee will be four hundred
dollars dollars thereafter
still relatively high given
their neighbors
I did look at
colorado who is four hundred
dollars a year that I could find
through cdc texas is one hundred
eighty every other year
you does twenty dollars every
two years
and arizona does not actually
have a license in the
requirement that I could find
it might be there but I did not
find it.
Now
again talking about those
citations abc does not currently
have any investigators or
inspectors we are working on
creating
a tobacco bureau so that way we
can have
more formal organization with an
abc dedicated purely to top echo
i'm currently myself and other
stuff except for one do split
between liquor and tobacco.
Yeah.
No with the citations we
rely heavily with being that we
don't have inspectors we rely
heavily on the department of
public safety their special
investigations unit is taste
primarily with book tobacco and
liquor control enforcement so we
do coordinate with dps as a you
and from time to time local law
enforcement when we are
contacted by them again we're
hoping to create more positions
within tobacco to have some
local long enforcement outrage
and relationship
faster in four since they're the
officers in those areas d PS is
spread out throughout the state.
No that doesn't mean that there
aren't citations issued
in
from july twenty two to twenty
three we had ninety seven
tobacco products citations
twenty three to june july twenty
three to june twenty four we had
nine nine sometimes filed with
us by dps and so far since july
of twenty twenty four we
currently have sixty one tobacco
products citations filed with us
now the categories of those
citations are broken up into
different
levels
we have ten of those sixty one
that we received this year for a
display of license violations if
their license they have to
display it so that way when I
say does inspect or is notified
it eliminates possibility of
unlicensed cells they know that
their licensed they know that
they've been
there aware of all regulations
and statutes.
Um
do have fourteen citations filed
with this currently of this year
for failure to verify h.
Now we do have one unlicensed
sale by a license and that again
sounds
contrary to itself however if a
retail outlet mixes
tobacco products they now need a
manufacturer license if they are
a retail outlet that's large and
significant and they sell too
smaller retail outlets they need
a distributor license
and that's how that violation
has been found to occur now out
of the sixty one citations we
received since july thirty six
were for tobacco's hells to
minors
most if not all of those
citations are rose through dps
operations they send in a minor
with specific instructions.
A similar to what they do with
alcohol if as for your id
provide your id you do not lie
about your age
in essentially here's twenty
dollars go ask for
x product.
After that retail outlet sells
to the minor minor returns back
provides the money back to the
change to the officer
the
provide the product to the
officer and then that agent goes
in and notifies the
establishment that you just sold
to a minor here's citation
you will be contacted by abc.
In order to resolve this those
citations are made out to the
businesses under the tobacco's
tobacco products act which is
slightly different than what we
have with your control where
they can be made out to the
business and the clerk.
Uh.
In tobacco the tobacco products
act it's all business oriented
when it's our licensees.
Now the penalties for those
violations can range
we
by statute have up to a ten
thousand dollar penalty and
revocation however through
regulation we establish
uniform steps to follow for
violations.
So that way all licenses can
know what to expect if they
aren't you found to have
violated um now before order
without going on way to the ten
thousand dollars penalty and the
revocation there are can also be
a suspension of a license.
There can also be
a situation where the director
requires that that licensee at
that location uhm utilize an
identification verification
software for a specific period
of time.
We have not done that but we do
have the ability if we see it's
not just one
isolated incident
at one location uhm.
For penalties for cells to
miners
there is another gradual
process for getting to their
ravocation and there's a three
year limit for that process
for the first violation for cell
two minor in that three year
period
one day suspension one thousand
dollars penalty
the second violation can be up
to seven days suspension of four
thousand dollars penalty.
Third violation
thirty days suspension seven
thousand dollar penalty and then
the fourth replication now
because a license is required at
every location tobacco products
as sold for
the standard store model.
If you look at a
speed way or subs
dollar general that's one entity
that has several licenses we
look at each license as it's
individual
personality and record for
administrative purposes.
And we do that's also in like a
control to where
yes a licensee with thirty
licenses may have
and I not sure of this but can
technically have five first
filations because each store is
independent of the others when
it comes to their behavior in
the operating that one license
it's not a we you're given one
license and it umbrellas all of
your facilities.
No
one think that is also
interesting about tobacco that
differs from our other industry
well both have a three hundred
for rule so to speak for a
location of where a license can
be located alcohol does allow
for a waiver process where local
governing bodies can waive that
three hundred roll requirement
tobacco does not
in the since twenty one when
we've been processing
applications.
I believe we have provided two
orders denied applications
because it was within three
hundred feet from a school
one was I think about two
hundred ninety eight feet and
the other was really in the same
party so it does very we do rely
on our applicants telling us how
far they are from with school
and then we do take necessary
steps if it looks close
addling most applicants will
towers they are
three or one or two eighty
whatever the actual number is
that they are
we
do also require if it is in that
three hundred to four hundred
feet from a school that they're
claiming that they provide us a
surveyor certificate indicating
that yes it is over that three
hundred.
And that is
our tobacco products in
forcement in the nutshell.
Um i'm gonna reverse myself
because there's a lot of
technicality here and by the
time we get through everyone we
may not be able to
it we will still do a joint
question at the end because
there'd be some relationship
that comes out but there's some
things that i'm going to lose to
to
presentations down the line and
I will start with the committee
if you have a question
representative thousand thank
you mister chair
so
do you have any note you
probably don't have the data on
this but you get the feeling
that the penalties that we have
in place are adequate to do what
it is that we need to do.
The.
Mr chair members of the
committee
I do believe in
some circumstances the penalties
are adequate
I do believe that
when you consider one thousand
four hundred forty three
licenses both virtual telephonic
in physically located in the
state
s a u may I can't speak forum
but they may or may not be able
to touch him all.
And then a little bit well
we see smoke shops pop up and go
away on a daily basis do you
know or do you get the sense
that they are licensed I mean
that there or are they out of
business before you can catch
up.
Mr chair members the committee
I would not be surprised if the
number of
pop up fly by night shops there
close before we are aware of
that they're operating if you
told me a number I would not be
surprised by that number
and then we were discussing a
little bit the cost of licenses
seven hundred fifty dollars
doesn't seem like a whole lot to
me i'm in you know if if indeed
as they tell us every time they
speak against their bills are
entire economy is built on
tobacco products you can't
possibly so if that's true than
seven or fifty dollars is
nothing if it's not true which I
think it's not
well i'll just leave that there
and then I was thinking it would
it would be good to have each
location be licensed separately
and in terms of um
just make insure everything but
then I think about like culture
like do separate and am just
making these up I have nothing
circucate or speed way it do you
look at patterns since each
individual building is a
different license do you look at
speed way and say you know the
you know we haven't reached up
to the five per lacet but we've
got fifty for their entire
organization that kind of tent
to make us believe that they are
that their culture is to not
follow these rules mr chair
members
that is a perfect example of
where
we have our standards of
suspension fine but if we do
notice say it's.
Speed way since you used them as
the example is having every
location has one violation and a
certain amount of period that's
where the verification software
requirements
I believe would be helpful
it's one of those things where
maybe but once they start using
that software they're culture
will change
I
hate to keep referring to local
control but again that's the
other half of my division
I often refer to i've never
purchased alcohol and a wall
greens without being carded and
haven't seen him swipe that's
that culture for that exchange
once they get you still it for
tobacco
may track similarly as well
and then what do we as
legislators need to do to make
sure that you have that
that verification so I mean is
it is do we need to pass a lot
we need to give you money do we
need to what how do we get that
going
mister chairman members the the
verification stuff where would
be a requirement we place on the
licensee so how they pay for it
would be out of their own pocket
there's we have the authority
currently in regulation to
require it we went through the
rule process when we created
these regulations and no
retailer
objective now we had very little
if any
push back at that time to where
it wouldn't be beneficial for
the purpose of regulating sell
to minors
so one last question mister
chair so when when will that be
in place
so it is in place.
Now that we can require it but
it's required in response to a
violation
we do not require point blank
it's not in order to get a
license you have to have this
it's if you violate and we deem
this necessary or
helpful
we can require it as part of our
settlement of that citation of
that violation missus jerry just
brought up what so
i'm thinking when we need to
make mandatory for everybody for
they break you know break the
rules
is that something that that
would be frowned upon by your
department if we pass the bill
that said if you're selling
tobacco you need to have this
software
so
mr chair members are committee
referring back to my other arm
in liquor control
there is statutory requirement
that for delivery of
alcoholic beverages to customers
home that they do need to have
the near idn verify that ID as
the person through sophomore so
it's been done before.
Thank you mr chair and thank you
too for all your great efforts
can you tell us more about the
tobacco bureau being created
when that's going to be do we
need to do that legislatively or
is the department going to be
able to do it on their own do we
need to get funding for it
mister chair members of the
committee we did get funding
this past session to do that
which is why we are currently
doing that
we need to create the positions
fill them and
hit the ground running once they
are filled
okay great i'm so glad to hear
that but also with the sieu
to work together they're short I
think of funding and agents and
it's hard to recruit for that
too exactly
I can't speak for s
however through conversations
yet difficult for that division
to cover the state with what
they have
so maybe we have to do like we
do for teachers and doctors and
ray salaries and
also you know recruitment
efforts by I think it's
important and the return on the
investment for that enforcement
to happen I think is
especially good for prevention
for you
thank you for all of your good
parts
thank you.
I think thank you mister chair
and I appreciate your
presentation thank you I
remember the discussion we had
on the build
but this would be the first time
for us to actually mandate great
value to have able to keep track
of who selling so
it sounds to me as though
the process is working
yes.
Mr chair members I I believe so
I hope so eighth believe our
numbers have increased every I
mean the first year was we saw
the largest increase but it has
continued to increase and we do
try to continue to monitor those
pop ups but yes
and mr chair what would be
interesting to see there was a
one point is maybe if there's
like a map that you could
produce where we can get a
visual to see exactly where
some of these businesses are
located and the reason why I
sent mr chairs just to kind of
get a visible to see where
around the state or pursuing a
particular like if we're talking
alva kirky is it located south
of the interstate north of the
interstate certain communities
i'm just curious if that would
be something mr chair that your
department could produce
your division sorry mr chair
members currently it would take
a lot of man power to produce
that because again all
applications are filed through
paper a hopefully with our
transition to
the nm plus platform we will be
able to have our it run a report
to at least.
Narrow it down I don't know if
we will be able to get
pin points on every location but
we can always check
and mrperiod terrorists about
money so what did you call what
is the name of this
it program new mexico
mr chair members
the new online license in
platform is new mexico plus
professional licensing users
system it's all of nah rld is
transitioning to utilising and
and plus for
our gallet beverage control
canada's control boards and
commissions and I believe
construction industries are
either on or
getting on that platform the
other divisions either to follow
shortly or some
I appreciate that I guess I was
the concern about money is there
sufficient funding to make sure
that
the transition is able to be
completed
mr chair members we did a launch
that system in
june of this year for abc
we are
transitioning our
data from paper to that system
we were able to do it mostly
through data migration however
we are asking for licensee
cooperation as well as staff in
putting those that
with any migration sometimes is
a one hundred percent
no and I appreciate that mr
characters sometimes this may be
done through a temp agency where
you hire somebody to come.
Or any of another guests into
order the detail but i'm just
hoping that there's sufficient
money funding to make sure that
this transition happens they're
not like two years from now
mister chair members of the
transition did happen now we're
just
plugging him blank spaces we do
require all licensees now to
renew or file online and it will
track that for us instead of us
maintaining
stacks of paper in the back no
and I appreciate that and that's
what I meant mister chair
I may have misspoken but it was
just making sure that we have
enough
staff who can do the entry
so that it helps to keep up
amazing you're not you are with
current applications yes people
having businesses having to do
online but to have a backlog up
that doesn't really help but you
give us a clearer picture I mean
as but for your division to
but that's all mister charge is
still a bit of.
We're here to help and we want
to make sure this is successful
thank you
thank you
thank you center
question the penalties in the
progression of penalties zat
rolled laid out by regulation by
the department or a sad and
statute.
Mr chair members
I do know it is in regulation I
m
struggling to remember exactly
how that statue is
written I do know it provides us
the maximum.
And I
don't recall off the top of my
head I apologize
no problem thank you the
where i'm going with this is you
you mentioned that it's kind of
a step wise over time and you
know a few slaps on the hand who
cares are making a hell a lot of
money
and I know that in in their
health insurance industry
where
in various roles in house health
insurance industry are we then
regulated by the office of the
superintendent and
when when they find something
they often come in with a very
substantial fine and they do
that to get the attention of the
other health plans and
so it's kind of by example it's
like if so we're starting here
and out right out of the gate
too bad you've broke the law and
you're going to get a
substantial fine and my sense is
that to catch the attention
since we don't have a lot of
enforcement capability that we
as a committee should look at
whether we need to do by
requesting regulation or by
statute.
Implementing significantly more
severe
fines penalties or what have you
for the first time
and nat say oh we understand
I don't think we really do and I
think they understood completely
and so
that may be something that we
approach you with to refine how
do we since again enforcement is
not staffed I mean I I hope it's
get staffed up to some degree
but that is something we might
do that with them people would
police themselves so that's why
I ask that question and you
don't have to comment on it
but I I think it's something
that we should look at are
because I know in health
insurance
it it does one of those big
penalties does catch the
attention of most everyone else
the second the verification
software I think I heard and I
just want to validate it could
we mandate that without law that
everyone do it cause that to me
would really mean what we're
really trying to prevent here is
used faping because of its
addiction potential and so forth
and the damage it can do to
brain development what have you
sold
maybe if everyone had to have
that verification automatic like
if you go to a house to bring
him the lecture which we put in
somehow I can't remember
maryland or whatever it was we
did and remember we did that
but i'm just wondering do we
need to do
legislation to require that of
anyone who sells a nicotine
product that they get age
verification before every sale.
Mr chair members I apologize
they turned it off
I would need to look into
whether or not
I have the authority to make it
a license in requirement since
the tobacco products act.
Does outline license in
requirements
pretty
pretty specifically for each
tobacco products license that we
would issue
thank you I could ask you to do
that and
send it to erika the information
and that so that we can
deliberate under our next
meeting whether it's something
we would request you to do or
that we would put into
legislation the up speaking of
panelis and so forth in your
talk about sometimes the clerics
sometimes the the retail agency
but
it sounds like a lot of folks
who are licensed particularly
they paying I mean they they are
big chain organizations the
seven eleven thousand of us
and
when I talk about sending a
message
it it might be something where
we would look at the ability
particularly of the or the the
larger organization to pay in
other words you know if wa
greens did this somewhere then
we would find walk greens five
million dollars
and then that would get
attention we wouldn't find fine
bill that five million dollars
to
a single owner which had that
put him out of business
obviously but again it's the
example that in order to
particularly for larger owners
of these particular the chance
you gotta have big fines or they
just kind of go well you know
optus that's a penalty it's task
doctorable whatever I would care
is
because they can withstand it so
it's something that probably
again i'm just giving you a
heads up something we'd like to
to
evolve and will do that off so
thank you the fact my final
question is.
I understand are you hiring a
call enforcement agents yourself
in the department or is it
paying the
public safety department to hire
the people to go to do this and
how many people would you need
to really really
basically either do that do the
the bating and so forth to talk
about when we're talking about
fourteen hundred retail
establishments what what kind of
personnel do you need and is the
funding there do we need to
appropriate
mister chairman members
currently the way the tobacco
product sector set up is that
well dps as a you is the primary
enforcement agency there is
enforcement power within abc and
local law enforcement to site
for violations
currently we we got fun in for
two four time employees
that's what we will be looking
to hire
s far as.
Funding.
Dps has certain skill said that
we do not they can do
minor operations because they
have constitute contingency
funds they can
if need be they can store
evidence in evidence lockers
we do not have either of those
capabilities currently.
Thank you very much I in the
interest of time i've i'd love
to go more detail but
if if my schedule allows it some
investor
doing some campaigning this year
and it's quite time consuming
but before the session
back and find the time I would
like to come sit down with you
and go into a lot more details
of that we can have legislation
that would really again i'm
trying to find a few levers that
really reduce the youth uptake
of this so thank you very much
for your testimony and if you
can stick around in case.
Test money from others reflects
and something that you may be
able to add to mister care
members thank you and I will
stay thank you.
Okay
next we have the department of
health
and we we have several
presenters
and that's a leisure or teasier
for the population and community
health rare jan is considered
directors senate for healthy and
safe communities and sarah are
me home
i'm sorry may have did
a range arrange.
A rather not thank you and areas
here as well so area
I I guess I turn it over to you
and you can manage the
presentations thank you do I
push the button can you
well I just want to say thank
you so much it's really good to
see you mister woops
we were really happy to be here
today thanks for the opportunity
it's good to see a mister chair
and
madam vice chair so we're here
today to talk a little bit about
the new pack program but also to
share some more recent data
around teen and youth and young
adult and some trends that were
seen and the data that we
actually just got recently um
we've been really pushing to get
a current data as possible and
so the data were sharing today
is is this current as we can get
it I would do want to introduce
some of her team we have quite a
few people here we thought it
was all we we all thought it was
very important to show up and
and are be really involved in
this conversation and wanted to
be able to answer all questions
so I am aria liam I actually
oversee policy and
communications I have my
marketing director here down at
the earned his name is chris
