All right. Um, well, good
morning, everyone.
Day two of courts corrections
and justice
committee, um, and we're here at
CNM.
Very happy to have justice Samoa
here who and her team who are
going to be updating us on the
Supreme Court Commission on
Mental Health and competency,
your work, and, um, your project
delivery. Now we did get a draft
bill yesterday which I've asked
Nancy to email out to all of
you, um, we'll have, I'm sure, a
conversation on that, but I
imagine that one of our, um,
future meetings we might go into
more depth about, uh, Bill
amongst ourselves and.
Maybe ask participation from the
justice and some of the team as
well. But very much appreciate
the work you're doing. If you
want all of you want to
introduce yourselves and I'm
happy to hear your presentation.
Thank you, Justice.
First question.
To
Um, you push the button with the
little person. And there should
be a light that goes, yeah, red
light.
And red light means it's on. Got
it. Thank you.
These are very fancy. Good
morning. My name's Brian Samoa.
I'm an associate justice of the
New Mexico Supreme Court. I'm
the, uh, non-voting liaison to
the Supreme Court's mental
health and Competency
Commission.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, I'm Alison Park.
I'm a staff attorney with the
Administrative Office of the
courts. Um, I primarily work
with,
Juvenile justice and Children's
Court child welfare matters.
And good morning, Madam Chair
and members of the committee,
uh, my name is Carl Swanson, and
I'm the deputy district attorney
for Berlio County around the
diversion team. Um, it's an
honor to speak with you this
morning about competency,
something I'm very passionate
about, um, but I'm also a little
nervous and uh I told Senator
Avioto that and he said, good,
you should be. Um, thank you.
We are expecting Jennifer
Borrella. I don't know if she
got stuck in traffic, I-25 can
be pretty tricky, but we'll be
expecting her, I hope so. Uh,
the floor is yours, Justice.
Thank you. Good morning, Madam
Chair, Senators,
representatives, um, just a
brief note that, um, Jennifer
Barela is with the Law Office of
the Public Defender. We wanted
representation from both sides,
um, so I hope she can make it
and I just wanted to make sure
you knew that. Um, just as a
reminder, the Supreme Court's
mental health and competency.
is a very collaborative group.
It's not just, uh, judges and
attorneys, but instead, it has
all three branches of
governments represented. It has
the private sector, it has the
public sector, and it has folks
from different professions,
behavioral health, forensic
psychologists, law enforcement,
um, etc.
Um, I want to thank the
legislature and the governor. I
know that, uh, criminal
competency and how we address
severe mental illness in our
criminal justice system is
complex, and I truly appreciate
your willingness to, um, take
this up.
So what we're gonna discuss
today is what the, uh, a work
group from the commission did,
um, which was create a draft of
the, um,
Statute, you have that. This is
a preliminary draft only, um,
the judiciary, this is not going
to be a judiciary bill, but we
thought perhaps the work product
might be a good starting point
for your discussions later on.
Uh, the focus of this bill is
only the court, criminal
competency, um, and our court
processes.
It's basically to give trial
court judges alternatives
besides, uh, incarceration,
pretrial services, and the
hospital hospitalization at New
Mexico Behavioral Health.
So if we go to slide one, which
is the stakeholders.
Hm.
Thank you. Um,
This is the these are the
individuals that were
represented, um, at the work
group for the statute. Um, it
was trial court judges, uh,
members of the legislature,
members of the executive branch,
both defense counsel on the
state, um, advocates from, uh,
disability rights groups, the
ACLU, local government like New
Mexico counties, um, New Mexico
Sentencing Commission, and then
we had forensic psychologists
and other behavioral health
representative.
Um,
I wasn't sure what would happen,
but it turned out to be a
really, uh, the diverse group
had definitely had difference of
opinions. But it turned out to
be a very informative and
productive dialogue. Um, I know
I personally learned a lot, uh,
from the various viewpoints. But
like mediation, I'm gonna say
this. We all went to the same
room, um, we agreed on some
things. We disagreed on others.
I think people left with, uh,
we're very happy with some
things. We're very disappointed.
With others. But in the end, um,
it was a compromised product
that, uh, came out of this
draft.
I want to say one more thing,
uh, the statute
alone will not be sufficient.
Um, this will lay the groundwork
to create programs, right? I
mean, I just don't want to have
a realistic point that a statute
passes and suddenly everything
is fixed, uh, in our criminal
justice system. These programs
take time because we have to
implement them, evaluate them,
and refine them.
And if we can go to the, um,
First
The next slide. Thank you.
So what we, uh, decided, and I
want to show this is, um, this
is a sequential intercept model.
This shows the different points
in which an individual is
involved in our justice system.
And obviously, it's not always
the courts. Uh, it intercepts 0.
At that point, they're involved
with community services, maybe
the county, the city, the crisis
line. They've not yet made any
made any interaction with law
enforcement or the courts. At
intercept one.
They now have a contact with law
enforcement and what law
enforcement does at that point
is their choice. They can get
them involved in the court
system or perhaps divert them
elsewhere.
Intercept 2 and 3 is where, uh,
the statute from the work group
is focused because that's
dealing with court processes.
That that occurs when the courts
have jurisdiction over an
individual.
Intercept 4 is when someone's
been released from the criminal
justice system, and they're now
re-entering the community and
intercept 5 is community
corrections, probation or
parole.
Um, I show you this because I
learned a lot from this group.
I, uh, walked into there with
tunnel vision, 10 years as a
trial court judge, day in and
day out of criminal cases. I did
a ton of these competency cases
and I thought, there's got to be
something more our trial courts
can do besides just having this
choice for the individualized
needs of these individuals.
And I left this group learning
that, um,
In fact, we, there's not just a
court program, we need a
community-based program. If it
were me, I would stick an arrow
across that chart.
And it would point in both
directions.
Because what I've learned from
this pretty amazing group was
that we have to create systems
and programs that go across all
of those intercepts, which means
now when we're implementing
programs like the community
competency diversion program.
Instead of saying, I'm only
gonna provide a program that's
gonna deal with you for 90 days
or 60 days or 6 months because
they're misdemeanors. Maybe
felonies a little longer. And
then you're out on your own. And
then
the program ends, we don't have
jurisdiction. Instead,
collaborating with law
enforcement, collaborating with
the community services,
collaborating with probation and
re-entry to create programs that
provide a continuum of care.
What do I mean? I mean, for
example, if we're going to have
a case manager or forensic
navigator that, um, is serving
our criminal defendants while
they're in the justice system.
Then why would they be court
employees? Why wouldn't they be
out of the, uh, behavioral
health center where law
enforcement can divert them
there, where probation can
divert them there, or the
emergency room can divert them
there. I would compare it to
medical care. I would not go to
the doctor's office and go in
with, um, major needs, and they
say, you know what, our
jurisdiction's up in 90 days
and, uh, you're on your own. So
here's a referral. I'm not sure
how long it will take.
Take, but, um, that's the
That's not how we deal with
medical needs. We go to a
hospital, we get everything
taken care of hopefully, and
then we don't say, well, you
know, we're, we're only going to
serve you for this period of
time. We don't have jurisdiction
anymore. So I no longer see our
court programs as a, as a, in a
vacuum.
I don't believe that it's, we
should be working in silos, and
I hope that we'll continue the
cross-collaboration with our
community partners, some who,
who are here today to build
programs that will allow
individuals a continuum of care.
If we can go to the next slide,
um, this is,
A competence to stand trial.
It's dealing with intercept 2
and intercept 3 because we're
here to deal with court
processes and court programs.
If you will see there are
numerous points in which the
person can be diverted to
behavioral health treatment. Um,
And this is the process that
guided the work group in
creating this preliminary draft.
Um, for example, if competency
to stand trials raised, the
person could choose to divert at
that point and not go through
the regular process.
Alternatively, they can, uh,
look at AOT in lieu of
treatment.
The competency to stand trial
once an evaluation is done, um,
They can say, you know what,
instead of competency
restoration, I actually want to
go get behavioral health
treatment.
Let's assume that they're
restored if you look towards the
middle there.
Um, if they're restored to
competency, we should still be
looking at programs that might
be suited for them, such as
mental health or behavioral
health courts.
Um, and then if they're not
restored to competency,
um, again, can we refer them to
diversion? So those are sort of
the different off-ramps we look
at, and that's what guided this
group's work, um, in the working
draft that we are providing. I
just want to say this is a high
need.
Group, not necessarily high risk
but high need. They, they need a
lot of, um, treatment. They need
a lot of care. Um, and I really
believe that if we continue to
collaborate with the
stakeholders instead of working
in silos, we can certainly build
a safer and better community.
And at this point, I'm going to
turn it over to Mr. Swanson and
Ms. Barela, um, and, uh, they're
gonna compare what currently
happens with what they believe
could happen, uh, with the work
draft.
the one we've provided.
Oh, yeah. Thank you, Justice
Amora. Um, and can we go to the
next slide? Thank you.
And Madam Chair and members of
the committee, um,
Before I worked with the
district attorney's office. I
worked for 9 years as a public
defender and, um, the
information that I'm going to
give you today, um, comes as a
result of the experience that
I've had both as a district
attorney and as a public
defender in dealing with
competency cases, um, and I
think it is important like
Justice Amora said to look at
what the competency statute
currently is, and what is the
competency system currently now,
um.
And who
are the target, um, audience, I
guess, for competency diversion.
Uh, the competency statute, I
heard someone say, and I think
it's very smart, that right now
we have 2 boxes to put people
into if they're not competent.
And one, we can dismiss their
case, or 2, we can prove a very
high bar that they are
dangerous. And if they are
dangerous, we can send them to
Las Vegas to be treated back to
competency.
And under the current statute,
that is all we can do.
Um, and I'll go a little bit
more into that, but, um, I'll
say every year, um, in Bernneo
County where I work, we have
about 8000 to 10,000 felony
cases coming in.
Uh, to our office and about 5%
of them end up being competency
cases. So you're talking about
500 to 600 cases. However, right
now it's in the news for
whatever reason, and I, I think
a lot of it is because people
see the frustration in that
system that we're kind of, um,
we have our hands tied behind
our back and we're not able to
do a whole lot with these cases.
We can either dismiss them or
prove that dangerousness and
send them up to Las Vegas and
have them, uh, returned back to
us, um, but that's all we can
do.
Um,
Competcing clients, they
are typically those that
struggle with severe mental
illness, uh, have traumatic
brain injuries or um.
Its substance abuse. Um,
sometimes they have co-occurring
disorders like substance abuse
or they're unhoused, um, or they
have lack of family support. Um,
so they're struggling.
On
Many different layers, um, and
Just simply treating someone
back to competency, um, all that
does is gives, gives them the
ability, a rational
understanding of the criminal
proceedings before them. It
doesn't address those underlying
needs like we need to. And Ms.
Borrelli, I don't know if you
have anything to say about this?
Morning, Madam Chair.
Representatives senators, um,
I'm Jennifer Barela I'm the
deputy chief for the Office of
Public Defenders. I oversee the
offices statewide, so we have
offices in, um, 1313 offices
statewide.
Um, I just want to briefly
explain right now just real
brief how the competency, uh,
statute works in, in the, in the
criminal justice system.
Competency is raised at some
point. It can be raised by any
party. A lot of times it's
raised by the defense attorney
because we have the most direct
contact, um, with our clients.
Um, and we raise it usually
when, uh, we believe our clients
aren't understanding the
process, um, or we,
Quite honestly, in my
experience, there's been times
when I can actually not even
communicate with some of my
clients. Um, and so once it's
raised, uh, the, the criminal
cases stayed, and then, uh,
evaluation is ordered. Um, the
evaluation is then ordered and
that takes a lot of time right
now. Um,
In some jurisdictions, there's
only a few, a handful of
evaluators, um, and so they're
just kind of a weight in the
proceedings.
Sometimes, um,
Our clients are in custody,
sometimes they're out of
custody. That's determined, um,
sometimes even before competency
is raised, uh.
After competency is raised, if,
if our clients are in conditions
of release, sometimes they end
up
Back in custody because they
struggle with maintaining
conditions of release. Um, so
it's hard for our clients to sit
in, in detention for a really
long time waiting for these
evaluations. Um, and then the
evaluations come back. Parties
either agree, um, to the
evaluations or we have a hearing
in front of a judge. If the, if
the client is found to be
incompetent, um, and the state
doesn't believe they can prove
the high bar of dangerousness
than the case is dismissed in
felony cases, and misdemeanor
cases, it's dismissed outright.
Um,
if they do, uh, seek a dangerous
in Syria is what we call it,
where we go in front of a judge.
The judge determines whether the
person is dangerous, and if they
determine they're dangerous,
then they go to, um,
The Behavioral Health Institute
in Las Vegas to be
Now they right now they call it
treated to comp competency. But
it's basically kind of similar
to the.
What we, with the term that's
used in this draft is, which is
restored to competency. Again,
the main focus is just to make
sure the clients understand, um,
the proceedings. They don't
treat the underlying issues. So
that's kind of just a real brief
overview of what happens now,
um, and, and, and what has been
implemented in in the in this
draft is what I think, uh,
Justice Samoa has, has used a
really good term kind of
off-ramps, um, where, you know,
there's
Clients can be diverted if it's
the, you know, if, if the
resources are in place and
they're able to, um, but I think
that's kind of the overview of
that. I don't know if I could
just insert for a second here.
You all should have a copy of
the draft bill in your email. I
believe Nancy, we got it
yesterday and I asked her to
send it out, so, um, if you want
to start skimming it, uh, and
my, my hope and plan would be
we'll, we'll get an overview of
what the bill does, and then at
our next meeting.
We can have some, we'll have a
chance to have our staff look at
it. We'll have a chance to look
at it and we can have an
in-depth discussion and maybe
suggestions and so on, working
amongst their self recognizing
it is not a draft of the Supreme
Court. It's it's a draft that
may be a framework for some of
us to adopt. OK. Sorry to
interrupt, but I just want, I
thought people might be
wondering where we're at with
that. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. And, um,
so,
I think attorneys have and
judges have an ethical duty to
raise the issue of competency if
they think that competency is an
issue. Competency could be
raised on any case, any criminal
case, misdemeanor or felony, uh,
my team handles felony cases,
um, most of the felony cases
that we see competency raised on
are nonviolent. Um, and I, I
think I was thinking of some
this morning. Uh, a lot of them
tend to be more nuisance type
charges, um.
And an individual that comes to
mind is, um, he's at university
in New Mexico, and he keeps
ripping up sprinkler systems out
of the ground because he thinks
the government is communicating
through sprinkler systems
underground and so he destroys
sprinkler systems around the
University of Mexico sometimes
causing thousands of dollars of
damage, uh, last week he caused
$120 worth of damage and the
officer didn't even bother to
file charges. Instead, he called
me about it. Um, but
You didn't file charges because
he knows that he's going to be
found incompetent and the case
will be dismissed and that's it.
There's nothing that the
criminal justice system can do
to address these issues right
now, um.
Most of the competency cases
that we have fall under, I think
this nuisance type of category
or criminal damage to property.
Uh, we do see some breaking and
enterings, uh, sometimes those
can be very dangerous situations
where there are people housed,
um, in that, um, you know, it.
Place where the defendant breaks
in, but often, um, these places
are empty, um, and it's a
defendant returning to a place
maybe where they grew up or a
place where they think the
government is operating out of
or something like that, um, they
can escalate into dangerous
situations. I don't think that,
uh, the competency diversion
program is, um,
You know, what we've come up
with, um,
We're not trying to divert those
dangerous cases. We're looking
for more for the new, the
nuisance type charges that we
see down on the lower level of
felony charges, and I, I think
that's the majority of them.
Um, and I also say that Ms.
Bella mentioned it briefly, but
the, um, the timing of these
cases. Once competency is raised
on a felony case in Bernandale
County, it is a very lengthy
process and it takes a long
time. Um, sometimes you're
talking 23 years, um, for the
entire process to unravel. Um,
and so imagine being a victim or
a small business owner or
someone like that and um also in
the case just goes away and you
don't.
Hear anything until we, the
district attorney's office calls
you 2-3 years down the road and
says, hey, we might have to
prove dangerousness. We might
need you to testify in this
case, um,
I think it's a very frustrating
system, um,
For victims, for community
members, and often for
defendants who have to be on
conditions of release for 2 to 3
years while they're evaluations
are pending, um.
And I think the, the competency,
having the ability to divert
competency cases would allow us
to streamline this process, uh,
dramatically.
Um.
So just looking at this slide
and what we have, um, drafted,
one of the important parts, and
we spent a long time discussing
it, is having some sort of
checks and balances within the
system, um, for the competency
diversion. And that's simply
that all parties have to agree,
um, in order for a case to be
diverted through this competency
diversion program. That means
the district attorney's office
can maintain the prosecutorial
discretion. They can choose to
go to the traditional competency
route.
If they want, um, the public
defenders or the defense counsel
do not have to agree to this, or
um if a judge is concerned
about, um, any particular
issues, the judge does not have
to agree to it. And so, um,
There is
The checks and balances built
within the system. And I think
that
That helps.
Get buy in every time you're
talking about diversion, um, you
need buy-in from all parties.
You need defense counsel to
actually believe in it. You need
the district attorney's office
to believe and, and you need the
courts to believe that this
system is actually going to
work.
Um,
Prior to the determination of
competency diversion, or, uh,
AOT.
Can be ordered, um, and that's
under the system that we've
built, um, and I think that you
can divert a case.
Um, through either AOT.
Or through, I'm just rambling
right now, um,
Ms. Brela.
I just, uh, uh, Madam Chair,
representatives and senators,
um, there, there are, I do agree
that there are a lot of checks
and balances, and I think that's
really good
because every, every individual
is different and every
individual has different has
different issues.
Um,
I just wanted to, and I, and I
think that's, that's a good way,
you know, for, for everybody to
have a say in things. And also,
if you can divert later, you
know, that would, sometimes
that's better for some
individuals than others. Um, I
just wanted to say diversion in
any form is always, uh, I mean,
as a public defender, it's
always a great thing. um, but
you know, you have to get all
parties on board and, um.
We had a lot of people.
Working on, uh, on this group
with very, you know, with, with
different visions, um, and
different, uh, ways of looking
at this. Uh, right now, I could
just say one of the,
Bigger issues is we we have to
build some of these programs,
right? We don't have outpatient
competency, restorative
competency in New Mexico. Um, I
think it's something we should
move towards. And I think we
have more availability in some
of the metropolitan areas and we
do, um, in some of the rural
areas. So, uh.
Those, those are just some of
the, some of the things that,
you know, that were that that
are debated and I think we have
to move towards in the
community. And I think using
community, um, organizations and
programs are very important, uh,
um, but we have to kind of build
those out a little bit. And I
also think, why is this
important? Um, and at the
district attorney's office will
receive calls from victims, um,
where they never intended that
felony charges be filed against
this defendant. Um, maybe it's a
parent.
And their 20 year old son or
daughter, um, we're having
suicidal ideation and so they
called the police and the police
were over there and while the
police were over there, uh, this
individual kicked a police
officer and now they're charged
with bat on a peace officer,
which is a 4th degree felony.
Um,
The victim, the police officer,
and the parents, all they want
is treatment for this
individual. Um, but if you put
them through a lengthy
competency process, you're
looking, like I said, 2 to 3
years for this process to
unravel and who knows the result
that you're going to have at the
end of it and you're not.
Addressing the underlying
issues, um,
which was the reason for the
police contact in the first
place.
Uh, do you want to go to the
next slide?
Thank you.
Hm
So, like I said earlier, um.
Competency is just a process of
proving or
or
Showing that um a person has a
rational understanding that
they're able to assist
themselves at trial, that
they're not having delusional
thoughts, um, that they can
testify in court, um, that they
can assist their attorney
throughout the process that they
understand punishment, why the
criminal justice system might
want to punish them for their
behavior. Um, and it's that
process. Competency restoration.
All it does is it, like I said
earlier, it treats them back to
the ability where they'll have
that rational understanding,
that legal understanding. And so
when somebody goes to Las Vegas
and they're restored back to
competency. Those underlying
issues are not being addressed.
Uh, really their mental health
issues, um, may remain
significant, um, they may still
struggle with substance abuse.
Uh, they may still be unhoused,
uh, they may still lack a
complete support system.
Um,
All Las Vegas is doing is
getting this person back to the
point where they can rationally
understand the legal process
that's against them. And so what
happens, and this happened when
I was a public defender, um, is
people will return back from Las
Vegas and they are barely at
that level of competence now.
Um, they may still have some
delusional thoughts, but it's
not interfering with their
ability to understand the
process.
And so they'll return to the
Metropolitan Detention Center
where they'll remain housed for
about a month and then in that
time they'll decompensate back
to the point where they're no
longer competent.
And so the attorney will have an
ethical duty to raise the issue
of competency again, and that's
part of the reason why you have
such a lengthy process, um, when
competency is raised because
then all of a sudden now you're
looking at sending the person
back to Las Vegas to restore him
back to competency and it kind
of creates this, um, cyclical.
Competency
Hell, I think, um, for lack of a
better term, um, and
So what we've designed is trying
to get something different. Um,
and so instead of sending
somebody up to Las Vegas, what
you can create is outpatient
treatment, um, where you address
those concerns, you address the
substance abuse issues, you
address the mental health
issues, um, or you provide this
person with a support system so
that when they are released from
custody, they actually have a
chance. Um, there's also
inpatient residential competency
restoration, or, um, any
combination.
of
services that you can provide an
individual, um.
Ms. Barrella, do you have
anything to add to this, Madam
Chair, representatives and
senators. No, I agree. I think
the outpatient competency
restoration, if we could develop
that in New Mexico, especially
in communities would help with
that lengthy kind of process
because, you know, right, it,
it, it does expand it though,
right? So right now you just
have the ones who are, who are,
uh, our clients who are
dangerous who would go to the
New Mexico, um, behavioral
health Institute. But, but
actually you would be.
Restoring more under the
statute, um, more individuals
and who don't necessarily need
to be in a locked facility, um,
and I think if you have the
outpatient company the
restoration programs
established, uh, it would be, it
would help in that kind of
circle because going back to a
detention center after coming
from a hospital is a completely
different, um, situation.
Sometimes people, uh, our
clients don't get the proper
medication and again they
decompensate and we're back on.
kind of the hamster will. So I,
you know, I think that's why
outpatient confidence
restoration is something we, um,
as a state should really, uh,
look into again, however, we
don't have any programs like
that yet, but, um,
It was actually a very new
concept to me when I first heard
about it and I thought, well,
wow, that would actually
alleviate.
a lot of hardships for a lot of
my clients.
If we can go back a few slides
to the vision for diversion and
that sequential intercept model,
um, because this is something I
think about often.
As well, um, and so you'll see
on the sequential intercept
model. Uh, you have 5 points to,
um,
Intercept uh someone and get
them some help and divert a
case, um, and it starts with 0
and ends with 5, and it's kind
of the timeline of a criminal
case. Um, and at 0, you have,
uh, somebody who is maybe
housed, maybe has a job, um,
maybe has family, um, and
they're somewhat stable.
However, this criminal behavior
is starting to occur, um, and
then at Intercept one, you have
point where they, um, have some
kind of
Um
Law enforcement, um,
involvement, um, intercept 2 and
3 is Justice Samoa pointed out,
those, that's what this looks
at, um, and that's when a charge
has already been filed and
you're involved with the
criminal justice system and
these cases are occurring in
court.
Um, and then 4 and 5,
you're looking at somebody who's
already been sentenced, who's
been sent to prison, um, or
who's on parole or probation.
Um,
I kind of see it. So here you
have 5 points and with the
sequential intercept model and a
timeline of, uh, criminal case.
I see it as actually like 50
points that you can actually
divert a case. And anytime you
have uh an attorney, a
defendant, and a judge in a
courtroom, you have an
opportunity for diversion. Um,
and so you have to be open to,
um,
Diverting a case at any point.
However, I think the system is
more efficient.
If you drive it down to 0.0, um,
because then you're not spending
the resources, the time, um, the
money. It costs a lot of money
to house somebody in MDC, um,
and it costs a lot of money to
have cases in the criminal court
system. Um, once somebody
becomes unhoused, it costs a lot
of money to get them back into a
house. Um, once they're off
their meds, it takes time to get
them back stabilized on meds.
Um, once they've lost family
support, maybe they will never
get that back. Um, and so,
I believe that the system, if
you can, uh, Justice Amora said,
imagine an arrow going both
ways. When I look at this, I
imagine an arrow driving that
way. And it's just 0.0 because I
want everything on the front end
for diversion, um, and I, I
think that we are going to have
a better system, um, ultimately
for the entire community, if
we're able to get diversion
headed in that direction.
Um
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, one of the
As we look at this model and we
have the different points, um,
we've talked about diversion,
we've talked about restoration
at the end of that last slide
that we looked at before this
was restoration, and that's at
this like end point, but there
are a lot of points at the
beginning for diversion and this
draft does provide these, these
off-ramps for diversion. Now
diversion isn't restoring
someone to competency. It's not
so someone can then stand trial.
Diversion, um, would include
different programs.
To help a person, uh, and we
actually have a couple pilot
programs, I believe that you've
heard about and Justice Samoa
can can tell you more about that
we're starting. These are for
misdemeanor cases only. And in a
few jurisdictions around the
state. And this is for
diversion. So they would never
hit the point of being restored
to competency because they would
be diverted at the beginning and
their case would eventually be
dismissed. Justice.
Correct, and I'll just, um, I
know you've heard this before.
Um, every time I come visit you
all, we're about to launch a new
program, so maybe that's the
trick. We're about to launch at
the end of this week in Las
Vegas, New Mexico, our second
competency diversion, um, pilot
project, and these are pilots
because we're starting with a
blank slate in New Mexico, so,
um, again, we have to, we'll
have to evaluate and refine
them. Um, but what we thought is
in misdemeanor cases, even
though we have very little
jurisdiction.
Oftentimes these cases are
dismissed within 90 days and
definitely usually within 6
months. Um, why don't we use
that time to connect these
individuals to services.
Something's better than nothing.
So, once they're arrested, they
will be screened by our pretrial
services officers, um, who will
determine whether they have a
severe mental illness and a
history of, uh, involvement with
the competency process in our
criminal justice system.
The first hearing in a criminal
case is an arraignment. At the
arraignment, um, they will be,
uh, we'll know by then whether
they're eligible and the parties
can agree that instead of going
through the traditional criminal
process, they will be connected
to a forensic navigator.
Um, although we have some
navigators employed by the
court.
We also will have some in the
community so that they can
continue to work with this
person once the case is
dismissed. The navigator will
come up with a plan, not only
for behavioral health treatment,
but many of these folks need
services like housing, medical
care, and food. So that we'll
look at the whole person, get an
assessment, and determine a plan
to treat them. Um, it's all
behavioral health treatment.
We're not going to try to, um,
restore them to competency. We
don't do that currently in
misdemeanor cases. And like I
said, once
They've, um,
gone through this process, the
case will be dismissed. It would
have been dismissed anyways. The
only difference is now we're at
least connecting them to
services.
Um, so I'm very excited. It's,
um,
Honestly, one of the, I feel
like the greatest
accomplishments in my career
because, uh, it was very
frustrating to have these
individuals. They were the ones
I knew by name. I started as a
Metro court judge, 5000 to 7000
cases and I knew their names and
their faces because they were in
front of me so often and we were
doing nothing.
So if we could flip to the last
one.
There we go, um, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, this
last slide shows just different
resources that the group looked
at when we were.
Organizing, getting, um, looking
at the ideas behind it. And so
this is part of the slides and
we don't have.
You're welcome to, to look up
the information if you like. We
didn't put them the copy of the
information for the slides, but
it, as uh, Justice Samara said,
it was a large group and a
collaboration of a lot of
different ideas, um, that, that
produced this draft and I want
to emphasize the word draft
bill. It's, um, as we're handing
it over this, this group, this,
um, our group is finished with
it and it's ready for the next
group to make decisions and
decide how to take it.
uh, to the next step, so we have
step one complete. It's a very
complicated draft, um,
And it can be quite confusing
the process in itself without,
as it is now, is quite
confusing. And so having a new
draft and a new process is going
to be an additional layer of
confusion, and I apologize for
that, but it's a complex issue.
But, um, we hope that that these
are some of the resources and,
and that you can look at.
And we know how our time is up,
so we'll stand for questions in
accordance with your policy?
Um, thank you very much. um,
Justice and panelists appreciate
your overview of, of where
you're going with a possible
draft bill and approach, really
appreciate it. Um, a member
questions.
Re.
Lujan, Iy Soto.
Um, Nybert.
Um, ream.
Anyone else?
00 yeah, the Pro Tem.
Um,
OK, let's, um, Representative
Reeb.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for the presentation.
I know it's probably did have a
lot of differing opinions on it.
I just had some questions making
sure I understand. I'm reading
over the draft,
um, Madam Chair, and I don't
know of Justicemora, who's the
best person to answer this, but
originally there was this issue
of
Um, competency being filed or
raised and not actually having
the competency hearing and then
the concerns about diverting
somebody when they're not
confident possibly to go into
some type of treatment or
diversion program. How did your
task force deal with that issue
and did you all come in
agreement? because I know that
was kind of a big concern, I
think with the PDs, um, of
sending possibly incompetent
clients who maybe don't want to
go to a diversion program, don't
know.
Understand what they're doing.
Could you answer that?
kind of discussion you had,
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, Representative
Reed, um, yes, that, that is a
concern. It's still going to be
a concern for our office and
probably some other, uh,
defense, defense attorneys. Um,
but I think that's why we, we
talked about putting the checks
and balances on there so
everybody has to agree. So, um,
if, if the defense counsel
doesn't think it's, it's
something their client can do,
then, you know, they're probably
not gonna
agree to this. And the DAs also
have to agree, um.
I can tell you there's a lot of
organizations who, who worked on
this project. Not everybody's in
agreement, um, with everything,
but I think that's why we put
that in there that all parties
have to agree. Um, the DAs also
can not agree to diversion. And
I think in some areas that's
probably likely going to happen,
especially on the, on the felony
cases.
OK, Madam Chair, the parties
that have to agree, um, so what
about victims? How, how did they
play into the agreement of this
if the crime is on a victim and
their constitutional right to be
a part of the process.
And Madam Chair and
Representative Reeb, I, I think,
um.
I can't speak for all offices,
but my office, um, certainly has
a policy of contacting the
victims, understanding their
position. Um, we don't always
agree with their position or
sometimes we may take other
positions. Um, however, I think
that contact and discussions
with them throughout the process
is important, um.
And uh just piggybacking off
what Ms. Borrella was saying. I
think that a lot of individuals
that enter the competency
system, um, might be treatment
resistant and so there are
individuals with their mental
health issues are so severe that
um they really are not able to
comply. Um, they're not going,
if they're released into the
streets, they're not going to
show up the next day to a
forensic navigator, um, and it's
very difficult to have that kind
of contact with them.
until they are stabilized. Um,
and so I, I think that
What I need as a prosecutor is I
need options in dealing with
criminal cases because every
criminal case is complex. Every
criminal case is very different
and unique. Um, right now I only
have those two boxes to put, um,
competency cases into and I need
a lot of options and I'm.
I will not say that there's this
is going like Justice Amoa said
that this is going to fix
everything, but this really
opens up the door to a lot of
options and getting a lot of
people some help.
And Madam Chair and committee, I
noticed you took out the
statutes in the dangerousness
part of it. Can you explain why
the statute numbers were just
for my own benefit, crossed out
on those different crimes. I'm
sorry, if you could, Madam
Chair, um, if you guys could
explain why I noticed in the
dangerousness part of the
statutes, um, the crimes statute
numbers were, what was the basis
for that reasoning?
Um, like it, Madam Chair
Representative Reed, yes, we, we
did that just because sometimes
statute number changes. That's
something that LFC when they're
drafting, they can fix. Um, that
wasn't.
Naming the crimes we thought
would be more consistent, um,
just for example, the Department
of Health changed its name to
Health Care Authority, and so
now everything has, everyone has
to go back and amend it. And so
that it was for that reason and
no other. Um, Representative
Reba, if I may go back to your
first question about the consent
and assent and, um, we try to
define a scent. We defined a
scent in these statute to the
best way possible, knowing that
a defendant can agree to maybe
Treatment but may not, maybe
have the capacity to agree to
treatment and say they're going
to go to a program, but they may
not have the capacity to, um,
To aid in their own trial. So we
were trying to differentiate
that and um and there's, we had
um, Doctor, um,
Billy
McCloud.
Doctor Cloud, who can speak more
about the ascent versus the
consent and really get tech, you
know, there's a lot of technical
information about that. Maybe
that would be another, um, a
good refresher for the group to
understand it better when, when
the legislature is taking this
up if they take this up and just
two more questions, Madam Chair.
Um, the dangerousness issue and
am I missing the, there used to
be a dangerousness part to get
to Las Vegas, very broader
than the dangerousness to get to
the clear and convincing
hearing. Did I, is that gone
now? I'm skimming. I'm skimming,
so I'm trying to, for the first
part, and I always kind of was
wondering, Madam Chair and
committee, why we didn't have a
more succinct definition, um,
because I do believe it is hard
that high level of dangerousness
to get some very dangerous
people to Vegas and possibly get
them to that clear and
convincing hearing, um, you
know, the diversion that.
It was great, but I'm, I'm kind
of focusing on those more
dangerous individuals. Madam
Chair, Representative Reed, um,
that's a good question. Um, most
states, I called it
dangerousness one hearing, which
is much broader.
And then dangerous is new to
hearing, which is much narrower.
Most states don't have a
dangerous one hearing. Most
states attempt to restore all
felony cases and some
misdemeanors. So that's where
New Mexico statutes currently a
little different, um, but the
focus of the group was really on
that first part which is now
dangerousness one to focus
instead on restoration to
competency. Um, so that is a
little broader. It does, um, try
to, um,
Perhaps, um, get a few more
people, um, either restored or
if they choose and the parties
agree, um, AOT in in lieu of
competency restoration, which
can be an extensively long
program. It's about a year.
Um, or some sort of diversion
program. And I hope that answers
your question, Madam Chair, and
Justice, is it like it's still
in there? OK, I, I probably just
missed it and then my final
question.
Um, and this may be 319-1-2 that
was used to be titled, um,
I, I not appropriately the
mental retardation part of the
statute. Is, is that that
section now or is that
completely gone?
So I always wanted that part to
be completely gone and I just
didn't know um what you planned
on doing with that, that little
part.
Oh, sorry, Madam Chair
Representative Reed, um, we did
not touch the that section. Um,
it's another complexity and
We just dealt with uh
We really just took the original
um.
Sections and rewrote them and
then the, and I say we as in the
group, not the group redid that
and then if you look at the, the
new draft section 5 onward is
the um just amendments to the
existing law.
OK. And um, Madam Chair, maybe
this is more for the deputy, um,
I don't know, I had a lot of
cases that slipped through the
crack under that, that issue and
would have liked to have been
able to at least send those, you
know, some of them, you know,
fitting those dangerousness
aspects to some type of
competency or not competency,
but some type of treatment or
just something first turning him
out on the streets and I would,
I guess, just request that when
you're looking at all this that
you.
Kind of look at that section
because it is a loophole where
we do let people out that yes
might be uh developmentally
disabled, um, where they, I
don't think it should be termed
mental retardation anymore, but
I mean I had a situation where a
defendant was sexually molesting
kids in an alley and there was
nothing I could do with him
because he fell below that 70,
you know, IQ, and so I would
just request that maybe uh you
could look at that as part of
When you're reevaluating this
entire code, but does that, that
Mr.
Swanson,
Madam Chair and Representative
Reed, I do not disagree with
what you're saying, and I, I
understand um and we can
certainly look at that.
Thank you and thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you very much,
Representative Representative
Lujan. Thank you, Madam Chair, 5
minutes.
Right. Um, thank you, um,
I think we've covered so much,
Madam Chair, and as a sponsor of
this piece, the previous piece
of legislation during the
regular session. Um, I want to
thank everybody in the whole
team, uh, and I see the
representation here of those
who've been working on this, um,
on this draft legislation, and I
want to say this is
increasingly, um, getting
better, um, and we're at a
crossroads, so I want to say
thank
to, uh, Representative Reed for
her questions and and kind of
looking at those other aspects,
but I think it's one step at a
time. I think we want, you know,
the, the principle we're being
more principled and trying to
get a very good piece of
legislation passed and creating
that foundation where we're
looking at forensic navigators
where we're looking at
alternatives to the current
process so that we are
addressing and helping those
that have underlying behavioral
health and mental health issues,
um, get them the services that
they need.
So my question, and it's, it's
more for, you know, for
education purposes.
Through the treatment courts
that we have available to us
now, and we know through the
through our hearings that
they're underutilized at this
time. They need to be updated.
There needs to be, you know,
some, some more information, um.
To uh to the rulemaking perhaps,
which lies in your jurisdiction.
Um, and those are some of the
things we've been discussing
through these last couple of
months, but more intently after
the LFC report that we received.
But through those treatment
courts that we have available to
us now.
And the structures we have
currently, where, if at all, do
individuals have the opportunity
to have the underlying issues
addressed.
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative.
I think I'm understanding the
question correctly. Um,
First of all, I want to say the
treatment courts have been
through a tremendous amount of
work of the judiciary, like I
said, they take a lot of time to
implement and and program, but
Those treatment courts are
likewise aimed, uh, addressing
people who are competent. Um, we
have treatment courts that deal
with substance abuse.
treatment courts that deal with
mental health but competent, um,
this is the one gap that we
don't have treatment courts. The
only point I could see this
group utilizing a treatment
court is if they're restored to
competency and then we we not
divert, we send them over to
mental health court. Um, that
could be a point in which we'd
utilize them. Um, but like any
program, and I, I repeat this
all the time, we can build
programs, but if we don't have
the stakeholders committed, they
will not work.
So our number one job in any
treatment court in any diversion
program is to convene the
stakeholders and get stakeholder
buy-in, which we've done with
the competency diversion
program.
Madam Chair and representative
uh Luhan Ai can speak for weeks
about treatment courts, um, and
I'm glad that you brought that
up. Uh treatment courts in
Albuquerque in Bernayo County
are, if not at maximum capacity
right now, um, getting close to
that point, and I think that
there's this um
Since the pandemic, the public
defender's office and the
district attorney's office have
really worked together in
increasing opportunities for
treatment courts. However, they
have limited capacity, young
adult court, drug court, and
mental health court are maxed
out right now and I cannot
immediately get someone in the
mental health court, um, or
young adult court, um, maybe 100
people in each of those programs
and that's over a two-year
period and so you're talking
about 50 people a year, um.
And
Honestly, I have 800 to 10,000
felony cases coming in my office
a year and so treatment courts
are a drop in the bucket in
terms of what we need and we
need to look outside and I
believe reserved treatment
courts to higher risk, higher
need individuals that can
comply.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for that. These are the
insights and these are the
components that we're putting
together, um, as we're looking
at this, uh, these reform
initiatives that we very much
need and with that said,
would we, as I sit on
appropriations and we're going
to be looking at our budget and
we're looking at the costs of
things.
What, and we're always looking,
we always forget what the, what
is the cost of us not doing
these things, right? So what
would you
Um
As we're building out this, this
system, a better system and
reform. Is there a cost
associated this is my last
question, Madam Chair, is there
a cost association associated or
has been an analysis of what
this will cost us to, to
accomplish Madam Chair.
Briefly.
We at the end. Madam Chair,
Representative.
None of no one from this group
has a cost. We'll leave that to
your capable hands. Thank you.
Senator Ivey Soto.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for the presentation.
Uh, today, um.
You know, a lot of
A lot of what we're getting at
here.
Because the fundamental question
of what's our goal.
Um, is our goal to heal?
Or is it to punish?
Because
And, and, and that's, and that's
an important question to ask,
and I think, and I think, and I
think whether you guys have have
have overtly asked that or not,
I think, I think that's, that's
underlying what you guys have
been doing.
Because, because at the end of
the day, frankly, if you send
someone to Vegas.
Right? The, the question they
have is.
OK, if they fail, they stay in
Vegas.
If they succeed, they go to
jail.
Ah, well, that's not a very good
choice, is it?
And, and so, and so we got to
look at what we're incentivizing
with people.
And, and, and what as a society,
what's our desired outcome?
And, frankly, as a society, I
think our most desired outcome
is to heal.
Uh, or at least attempt that
first.
And that and that.
And that failing that there
being a resistance.
Then, then moved to to more
punitive.
Measures, but you know, I mean
if we can just get people to
stop certain behaviors.
I think we're all better off.
Um, and, and part of the problem
is.
That that the criminal code
right now is written to punish.
It's not written to heal.
I mean, think about a treatment
of competency.
We're talking about treatment of
competency, what we're really
saying is, we know you weren't
competent when you committed the
crime.
But we're going to give you just
enough treatment so that you're
confident when we convict you of
the crime.
That's right what we're saying.
We're not,
we're not worried about the fact
that you weren't confident when
you committed the crime, as long
as we can punish you.
And, and so, and so I, I, I
really want to appreciate the
work that you guys are doing and
the direction that you're headed
and, and, and, and particularly
justice, what you're saying on
that, on that one slide where
where you're saying that there
ought to be a line going all the
way through.
Right? Because, because
precisely we box ourselves in.
In terms of, of well, OK, you
have this opportunity right now,
which, which, which do you want
to do, door number 1, door
number 2.
OK, fine, we're gonna go with
door number one. Now we're going
to go down here. Oh, we realize,
should have done door number 2.
Well, guess what? That that
opportunity, that passed, you
already made that decision, even
though you didn't know what was
coming. And, and, and precisely,
I think you're absolutely right.
We need, we need to make sure
that we have more flexibility.
Uh, in this process to be able
to pivot.
on folks both when they're being
compliant.
And they're being responsive as
well as when they're not.
In both scenarios, I think we
need the flexibility to pivot.
Um, and, and so, you know, I, I,
I, I do think
The questions that that
Representative Ree was asking
about the ascent.
Quite frankly, um,
I I see your definition, and I,
and, and, and there, there may
be a Venn diagram of cases where
Where you're not confident but
you can give a cent, but, but,
but frankly, I think, I think, I
think there's, there's a,
there's a Venn diagram cases
where you are not competent and
you cannot give a cent, and I
think you may want to build in.
A treatment guardianship.
Um, and frankly, that could be
someone from pretrial services.
Right, or, or somebody who's
who's just simply alerting us to
compliance with the treatment
plan.
But, but I do think I do think
you might need to build in some
kind of a treatment guardianship
without, without creating a
whole new bureaucracy on that,
um, but, but that, that might
need to be recognized in there.
Um, and, and, uh.
Uh, Madam Chair, I'll, I'll give
the panel an opportunity to
respond if they want to,
you spent your 5 minutes.
Madam Chair, Senator Ay Soto.
Thank you, um, for your
suggestion. We do have some
Build in with treatment
guardians where they can make
decisions on behalf of, of, um,
the person.
But there's, there's no direct
route in the statute for it.
but they can make those
decisions when, when they do
have a treatment guardian.
There's a, well, we said
guardian because there's the
different types of guardianships
and we don't want, we're trying
to cover it all.
if somebody just comes in on
their own and the criminal
justice system, the judge may
need to appoint someone to be a
treatment guardian for them.
In this process.
It is my point.
Thank you, Senator. Senator
Neibert.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I just have one concern, and
that is.
How do we accomplish this
without
Tweaking the Constitution.
Because.
We passed
The constitutional amendment a
few years ago that basically
unless the state proves by clear
and convincing evidence that the
person is
Going to be a uh
harm themselves or someone else.
That they
B, uh,
Be
set free.
And so it seems to me that that
we need to address that at that
level for a variety of reasons,
but this would be one that to to
to give us the authority to
detain.
We provide for the detainment of
this person, maybe not in a
detention setting, but in
another setting for
A period of time and so I'm
wondering, do we need to do
something.
At that level, uh, as well.
Uh, Madam Chairman and Senator
Neibert, um, the state has the
opportunity
to file pre uh preventative
detention motions at the
beginning of a criminal case, we
can actually file it at any
point during a criminal case.
Um, often what happens with
competency cases, it, um.
The defendant may be released
initially. However, they're
unable to comply with conditions
of release and they'll be,
they'll have the conditions of
release revoked and be held in
custody and that certainly
happens often. Um, so there are
ways, um,
that defendants may be held in
custody that are not necessarily
through preventative detention
motions.
But
Isn't that part of the problem
that we're releasing people that
go out and violate their
conditions of release. I mean,
it seems to me that we're
wanting to do something with
these people at the first
instance.
And, and seeking that that
treatment or what have you and
unless you know,
unless you're, you're doing that
at the very beginning, it seems
to me that you have a gap there.
Uh, and I realized
I don't know what the percentage
is, but it probably is closer to
100% than it is to 0% of people
who are released, uh, that have
these issues, uh, not complying
with their conditions of release
and probably most of its
substance abuse issues, but, but
anyway, it just seems to me that
we need to do something at that
level to.
Provide for this, uh, I'll call
it detainment but provide for
the authorization to uh allow us
to keep these people in custody
or
to send them to a program, uh,
they may not agree with it, but
we need them to go to the
program whether they agree with
it or not. That's what you're
doing in this proposed statute.
And if I can respond just
briefly, Madam Chair and Senator
Neibert, um, often in Bernna Leo
County and I cannot
Speak for every jurisdiction,
but in Burley County, we will
see cases pending for 3 or 4
years and the defendant will not
have a violation of conditions
of release, which I think is
remarkable, especially if
competency is raised and so that
person is struggling with severe
mental illness, but able to
comply, able to not pick up new
charges um for a period of up to
4 years, um, and that
Um,
Has enough where I'm constantly
surprised by it. Um, and I've
also seen the other case where
people pick up charges and do
violate conditions of release.
But at that point, most likely
have their conditions of release
revoked.
I just raised the issue. I think
we ought to look at it.
Thank you, Senator. We have
Representative Rehm, then we
have Pro Tim Stewart, and then
Speaker Mark lastly Speaker
Martinez. So Ream.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Judges more, I think it's 2016
that we passed a law to kind of
tighten up this, but what I'd
like is for the court to go
ahead and report back to the
committee if this is occurring.
Um, here is the, the question,
so when a person is adjudicated
or you've determined that
they're mentally ill.
Are you adjudicating them and
I'm using that word because when
you look at alcohol and tobacco
and farms form, it's a 4473
form.
Uh, there is a question on there
if they've been adjudicated
mentally ill. If they've been
adjudicated mentally ill, then
they cannot.
Possess a firearm.
And um I want to make sure that
we're getting them adjudicated
mentally ill and that we're
entering them into that next
system so they can't buy a
firearm.
Anyway, I don't know if you have
a comment, but if you could put
that back to the committee and
let us know that yes, 100% of
the time we're doing that.
And Madam Chair and
Representative Rehm, um, I
cannot speak for every
jurisdiction in Albuquerque. I
know that it is our practice and
our standard, um, I have those
two boxes, like I mentioned,
when somebody is not confident,
um, and one is to prove that
high bar of dangerousness and
send them up to Las Vegas and
the other is to dismiss their
case. Um, when the cases are
dismissed, uh, we do read them a
firearms notice and that goes
through the court process. Um,
so I, I think that that gets to
your point.
Representative Madam Chair,
Representative Vream, um,
My understanding is that when
there's an adjudication of
incompetency that it has entered
into the next system nightly.
So there is a process for that,
and, um, I'm Patricia Galindo
from the Administrative Office
of the courts works closely with
Nixon.
is available to answer if we
have more questions we can
contact her.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Representative. I'm
Senator Stewart.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thanks for the presentation
today. We're all struggling to
understand this and come up with
solutions, so I appreciate you
helping that work.
Um, so this outpatient
competency restoration. That
just is so weird to me. I
You know, I kind of agree with
Senator Ivey Soto about this.
Now, treatment, outpatient
treatment, yes, but what does an
outpatient competency
restoration look like? And are
they really doing this in other
states? I mean, we don't even
have enough evaluators. It takes
2 to 3 years sometimes in part
because of the evaluators, but
I mean, I can't, I, I can't even
imagine what that looks like.
Madam Chair, Senator Stewart,
um, you raise a good question.
Most states do have it in their
laws, uh, an option for
outpatient restoration or
residential competency
restoration. Um, and it's not
just done at the hospital.
Um,
I don't know what that will look
like in New Mexico. I would,
that would be something that's
created by the executive branch
and, and experts in behavioral
health and, and the treatment to
competency, but they will have
models from other states. Um, so
I think
You know, and that's why the
group discussed the off-ramps of
AOT in lieu of competency
restoration and diversion
instead of competency
restoration because one fact
will not change. restoration is
intended to educate someone to
understand the criminal process
enough. That, that can't change.
That's, that's what the law
requires if you go to
restoration route, but it's
certainly being done in other
states, um, and
I think New Mexico may choose to
do that as well.
Uh, so, Madam Chair, so we, we
don't have enough evaluators. We
don't have enough behavioral
health experts. We don't have a
good behavioral health system
already. We don't have enough
assisted outpatient treatment,
uh, so, so instead we're going
to focus on an outpatient
competency restoration.
Yeah, it, it, it sounds good,
but I can't imagine what it
looks like having all this work
going into deciding to trying to
train someone to educate them to
be more rational, uh, so it, it,
it just sort of screams
immediately to me of these are
people who need treatment. I
mean, they need treatment. They
need housing, they need to pull
themselves out of poverty, and
yet we're gonna focus on making
sure
They understand that they did a
crime and they have to help
their attorney to get them
either in or out of jail. It
just
Seems backwards and crazy making
to think that that's what we're
going to focus on, so, um, so I
appreciate your, your AOT off
ramp. um I really do, I mean,
we've heard from Las Cruces
about their pilot down there. It
sounds pretty solid to me. I
wish that's what we were
focusing on rather than this
sort of strange legal thing we
go through to make sure somebody
understands their
Well, it's just mind numbing to
me to think about that's what
we're going to focus on, so, but
I'm not an attorney. What do I?
Thank you,
Madam Chair, Senator, actually
the work group is in whole
complete agreement with what you
just said. And that's why
there's off-ramps to divert to
actual behavioral everything
that says diversion in here has
nothing to do with competency
restoration and everything to do
with behavioral health
treatment, housing.
Services, as well as your the
option of saying instead of
restoring, instead of utilizing
that time and those resources
that where there's an AOT
program we'll do that instead.
And that's not an off-ramp
that's created in our current
system. So thank you, thank you
for that, Madam Chair. I hope
that's what we continue to focus
on as we move forward. Can I ask
one more quick question for a
quick answer. What did you all
not agree on?
This great group of people. I
mean just one or two examples of
where you couldn't get to.
Um, Madam Chair, Senator Pro
Tem, uh, you know, for the
office of the public defenders,
one of our main issues is that
there is a lack of mental health
resources statewide. So one
thing that we, you know, we can
agree on some of the language,
which is why we really want the
parties have to agree in the, in
the statute because there are a
lot of jurisdictions that I
oversee and work closely with
the public defenders where
there's just no there's
No mental health treatment in
areas and even Alberto Berlio
County, there's a lack of just
straight mental health treatment
if you don't have a dual
diagnosis with substance abuse.
So I think that's one of the
biggest issues at the public
defenders have. And, and also,
as Senator Ire Soto said, it's
going to be a struggle for a lot
of our attorneys, um,
To agree that a client's going
to be able to complete some
diversion because it's, they're
different levels, right? I think
Mr. Swanson said that. There's
some clients that I had that I
could not even communicate with.
I would never recommend any kind
of program.
To that client because I, I
can't explain it to him, him or
her. So I think that's, that's
the those are the other issues,
but putting some of those
safeguards in, I think is
important for us where we have
to be able to have that
opportunity to really evaluate,
to evaluate it, and not just let
it, you know, a judge or the DA
decide, and I'm sure there's DAs
too who want who want to keep
that, um,
You know, that
You know, be able to say no, I'm
not diverting this case because
it's too violent. And, and I
think that it's going to work,
and I'm, you know, we're
interested to see some of the
open can of worms here,
so sorry about very good
questions. Speaker Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, I'll
be brief. Uh, I know you run a
tight ship here. Uh, thank you
all for all of your work, uh,
Justice Samoa, you've been very
involved in this and, and I
appreciate the work. Um,
this is my first opportunity I
get to
to address some of the
misconceptions and
misinformation that took place
post special session and I
appreciate you, Madam Chair, and
the vice chair. I, I watched the
webcast last night and I said,
gosh, I
I get in on this one too. Um, so
I want to start with the um the
Albuquerque Journal, um, by the
way, I canceled my subscription.
I had enough of the editorial
page. It's, it's just, it's,
it's just not factual
information. I mean, it's just
not and I'm gonna read excerpts
here from their editorial post
special session, um.
Lawmakers demonstrated last week
why they are the only unsalaried
legislature in the nation for
good reason, uh, is what they
say, um, how Democratic leaders
say that they engaged with the
governor in good faith, which I.
Continue to believe we did, um,
It goes on to say how hard is it
to require court-ordered
behavioral health treatment for
repeat offenders accused of a
serious violent offense.
Uh, clearly it is very
difficult. This is the kind of
process, Madam Chair, that quite
frankly should have uh been
invested in time-wise by the
executive and and it just was
not. This is the kind of process
that it takes to really get to a
point where you can.
Have a substantive proposal that
we can all debate and that we
can all amend and that we can
all work collaboratively on to
get across the finish line, but
this is how much work it takes,
and this is just one group.
There have been several
processes playing out throughout
the state through a number of
different agencies working their
way through whatever process
gets set forth.
Um, it goes on to say back to
the editorial, how hard is it to
pass a law prohibiting loitering
on a meeting no wider than 36
inches. Very hard. I was in
Silver City this weekend and I
saw a group of kids from Silver
High fundraising.
And I looked at the media and it
was a red light, and I, you
know, I didn't take a tape
measure, but also not blind, and
I looked and I'm like that's
probably about 18 inches.
That would have been made
illegal. And I'm wondering with
the local police departments
have been enforcing that.
I seriously doubt it.
Because as they always tell me,
they have bigger fish to fry.
Uh, it then goes on to say that
instead, we funded our daily per
diems of $231 apiece, and we
took the unusual step of
attaching $100 million of money
for the Ridoso wildfires in the
feed bill to ensure that the
governor did not veto our per
diem.
It does not take a rocket
scientist to understand that the
governor can line item veto.
This type of bill.
To, to, to insinuate.
That we pulled $100 million of
taxpayer dollars and sent them
to a community that has been so
terribly impacted by wildfire
and then flood after flood after
flood.
It's insulting.
This is our state's largest
newspapers, editorial board.
So
Um,
One of the things we said as we
engaged in this process in good
faith with the executive back
in.
April, I think it was, was that
we recognized how much of a
problem this is. The issue of
people who are unhoused many
times in crisis, most of the
time, and quite frankly, the
lack of supports for them.
And we vowed to stay the course
no matter what, even when the
cameras were turned off. The
hearing yesterday, the hearing
today, the hearing tomorrow of
CCJ and the work that you will
continue to do over the next
several months is a testament to
that. You all didn't take time
off.
Because you know this is a
crisis, you're here working.
And I appreciate you all for
doing that and I appreciate you
folks at the witness table and I
appreciate the advocates and the
experts and the DA's and the PDs
and law enforcement who have
continued to work on this.
I understand Vice Cervantes is
having a town hall in his
community. I think that's a
great idea.
I would hope not.
I like it.
Uh, we heard yesterday, 40+% of
funds appropriated by this
legislature to deal with these
complex public safety issues has
gone unspent.
We know that my hometown of
Albuquerque apparently didn't
apply.
For law enforcement retention
and recruitment funding. That is
shameful.
That is shameful.
It takes on average 2 to 3
months to get a building permit
in this town?
And that's if you pay the
expedited process.
How are we going to build
housing when it takes that long.
To issue a building permit, a
simple building permit.
We can all grandstand.
And point fingers and see how
horrible.
The city of Albuquerque is or
how horrible Sandoval County is
or how horrible the legislature
is or how horrible.
Take your pick, government
agency is. The fact of the
matter is these are issues and
these are problems that didn't.
You know, come up yesterday.
There have been years in the
making.
We had a governor in 2014 that
Dissolved what little behavioral
health system we had.
And yes, it's been 10 years, and
yes, it's been a struggle to
rebuild that system. A real
struggle.
If any one of you in this room
has a family member or a friend
or a neighbor.
Who calls you right now and
tells you.
I have been abusing drugs and I
am ready, help me.
Good luck finding the supports
for that person right now.
Good luck.
That's even if you're insured
and it's a, you know, good old
fashioned private health
insurance. Good luck.
The notion that we have the beds
to put all these people in the
notion that we have the services
to provide all these people is
simply not true.
And what's really frustrating
for me is, I mean, I guess we
could appropriate $1 billion for
this stuff in next year's
budget, which we could afford.
Is it going to be used? Is it
going to be spent? Is it going
to be executed, is it gonna be
implemented?
The track records is not very
good.
Uh, the last point I want to
make and I want to publicly
thank Chairman Cervantes for
this.
Um, I was wondering what
happened with that person who
Um,
You know, murdered the gentleman
in Santa Fe. I was like, how did
this happen?
Well, he was exposed to 41
years.
I mean, should we up the penalty
to 60 years, 70, 80 years like.
Does it matter when this is put
down to 10 years?
Now, I don't know why that was.
I'm not gonna make any
assumptions, but the fact of the
matter is the penalties were
there.
To sentence this person to 41
years.
And for whatever reason.
The judicial process took its,
you know, did its thing and we
ended up with 10 years and it
was half of that that this
person served.
That's sort of out of our hands
at that point.
And I think folks need to
understand that.
This legislature works hard.
These are volunteers and before
anyone rolls her eyes.
Some of these folks are
sacrificing to serve.
In positions that most people
don't want to run for. How many
of us are unopposed in our
primaries or in our general
elections.
I would argue way too many of us
are unopposed, myself included.
I mean, I do have Republican
opposition,
but.
These are very complicated
issues and not only are we
trying our best, we are doing a
damn good job of addressing
these issues.
But if everything in the system
is not working properly, then
things do fall through the
cracks.
And word of word of advice.
For folks who are not in the
legislature who are from the
outside looking in, especially
those folks in elected
positions to just assume that
you can go in there and put
people on blast and put entire
Branches of government on blast
without knowing the intricacies.
Of governance and how complex
some of these issues are.
Because had we rubber stamped
those proposals during the
special. First of all, I
guarantee you there have been
lawsuits left and right. So
these things wouldn't have
actually been implemented for a
while.
And even if they were
implemented.
The unintended consequences of
depriving somebody of their
constitutional liberties.
Simply because a member of
government drove past an
intersection and saw somebody
smoking fentanyl and their
sensibilities were so impacted.
That they cast such a wide net.
is, is, uh, would be a tragedy.
So thank you both for your work.
Thank you for leading this
committee. This is now your 7th
CCJ meeting and it's only
August.
Folks, this, this never happens.
This would have been like the
2nd CCJ meeting in normal times.
It is not for lack of effort, it
is not for lack of trying, it is
not for lack of work, and yes,
even when the reporters are out
of the room and the TV cameras
are off, these good people here
in the room are going to
continue to do the work so
publicly, uh, I want to thank
you for all of your work over
the last few months, and I look
forward to seeing these
proposals.
Even more cooked and even more
baked in the 60 day session.
At which point all of us
can debate, amend, substitute,
and take our votes on the
record.
On these issues. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, Speaker.
Um, the vice chair has promised
to be brief.
I, I did. There was a groan when
I said, could you just add me?
I, I did want to acknowledge the
speaker's comments, and he was
in Las Cruces last week. I want
to thank him for coming down
there and making this a
statewide effort and recognizing
that, um, and for recognizing,
I'm glad you watched the video.
I wanted to recognize that and I
hope everyone will do so. The,
the folks that are out there
listening today that didn't say
it yesterday were here today. I
hope you'll do it because I
think it was a very good
dialogue and I appreciate you
doing so. You, you asked the
question from the journal, how
hard is it to pass a median ban
and, and you suggest that it's
Let me differ with you, Mr.
Speaker. It's easy to pass a ban
if you don't care about anything
other than the press conference
at the end of the session where
we slap each other on the back
and we give high fives and we
credit the Chamber of Commerce
and the governor, and, and we
then we move on to something
else. It's easy.
If you don't worry about the
constitutionality of an
injunction that will strike it
down. It doesn't, it's easy if
you pass a ban like Albuquerque
has had for years and I drove
around yesterday and saw plenty
of people in all the medians of
the city where you have a ban
already in place. It's easy to
get the press. It's easy to
manipulate the public. It's easy
to make the solution seem like
it's nothing more than just
passing more bills. It's hard
when you want results. Um, and,
and we could have done it easy.
We could have gone in there and
we could have gotten the high
fives, we kind of got the
journals praise, the.
Chamber of Commerce would have
loved us, the public would have
thought we're doing something.
We could have passed that ban in
no time and gone back and run
for our re-elections and talk
about what a great job we're
doing.
And we would have known it's
bullshit, right? And you and I
would have known.
And so I, I appreciate your
candor. We we've got to call it
what it is. Back in your neck of
the woods in mine, we call it
holossos, right? You know, we,
we're, we're prepared for a
fight and let me just be clear
from yesterday. Today, the
district attorney of Santa Fe
said we need higher sentences,
right? Once again, the same
refrain, we need more sentences.
Well, the district attorney is
gonna have to answer for the
shooting at the Sonic in Santa
Fe. We talked yesterday about
the shooting here at the Best
Buy. That was Albuquerque's DA
decision. Santa Fe DA is the one
who pled down the shooter at the
Sonic, and we'll give you the
story at the end of the day. I
gave you the story yesterday on
the number of years that that
case was pled down. The district
attorney who's saying we need
more sentences and more years
today. By the end of the day,
it's gonna understand that she
walked away from a lot of years
on the guy who shot at the Sonic
in Santa Fe, right, and play
that deal down.
And, and like you, I'm not
second guessing her decision.
And I'm not second-guessing the
judge in those cases because I'm
not there. You and I know his
lawyers not to do that. But the
suggestion the solution is going
to be more years is is not the
solution. And Madam Chair, if I
can just one last comment. This
is not about defending our honor
as legislators. This is not
about defending ourselves. This
is about trying to find
solutions. And and if we come up
with, if we keep putting out
solutions that are not true,
honest solutions, then we're
never going to get anywhere.
Thank you.
Thank you, uh, Vice Chair.
Speaker Chasey.
Oh leader Chasey.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Mr. Speaker. Um, and,
um, Mr. Vice Chair, thank you,
everyone. There, there's one
thing in seeking solutions that,
um, as I leave, I encourage
Senator Maestas, Representative
Carena, to keep up the drumbeat
that whenever we're looking at
community safety and we're not
looking at corrections as one of
the important institutions to
Be addressed and overseen as a
um an avenue towards community
safety. We're really missing the
boat. So let's, let's get that
done in the future too.
Um, I want to thank you all for
participating in all your work,
uh, in this, um, very complex
but important issue, and I'm
sure we're going to have some
more conversations about as as
we move forward. So thank you
all very much for participating
here today.
Thank you.
OK, we are now on our next item
and it has to do with artificial
intelligence and data privacy
through state legislation and we
have 3 out of state legislators
online, um, who will, who have
been active in this project.
Yeah
Out of control
OK.
All right.
If you all give us a minute or
two, we're handing out some of
your materials and I apologize
for starting a little late. I'm
sure you've had hearings where,
um, we've had a vibrant
discussion on another topic, so.
Of course enjoy the.
Mm
I really
Oh.
OK.
OK.
All right.
Could we close that door outside
so we're not overhearing people
talking.
Thank you.
OK, um, I'll, I'll just start
with a brief introduction as,
uh, to this topic.
We have invited Senator James
Moroney from Connecticut, um,
Senator Sarah Love from Maryland
and Representative Steve Elkins
from Minnesota. These are 3,
legislators who've been active
and a working group that has
been looking at how state
legislatures can, um, I guess
regulate and monitor and
provides hopefully you know
solutions to
the AI issue and have an
appropriate role in ensuring
that our citizens across the
country or state. I've been, I
participated in a few of these
meetings. Oh, they meet monthly
by Zoom and um chief of staff
Lauer has been participating
very actively in those, and I've
sat in on a few and I've been
very impressed by the knowledge
base of many of the legislators
who've been participating these
three individuals. James
Moroney, Senator.
He's been kind of the
Spearheading it but organizing
folks and people and I've been
very impressed by the quality of
the discussion and the
legislation that's been
discussed, so I thought it might
be interesting for us to hear
what other states are doing and,
and perhaps see see some models
as a potential path forward. So
let's start with Senator James
Moroney
unmute yourself. Thank you so
much, Senator, for
participating.
Right, uh, Chair Chandler, thank
you so much for having me here.
Definitely no stranger to
hearings that run over and
facts, there is another one
going on in Connecticut now, so
I may get a text that I need to
leave and go vote on our uh
Laheap allocation, uh, the, the
other thing that I was excited
to learn was how quickly a room
clears out when you say you're
bringing in out of state
legislators, so it's something
that I think I'm gonna have to
hold in my back pocket uh for
later on.
But seriously, thank you so much
for having us here. Uh, it's my
honor to be able to address you,
uh, today, um, Chair Chandler
had asked me to speak about two
things. One, to talk about our
multi-state, uh, working group
which as she mentioned, uh chief
of staff, uh, Alisa Lauer has
been 11 of our most regular and
actively engaged attendees at at
our meetings over the past year,
um, and then just to talk about
some
The issues that, you know, I'm
looking at or that we're all
looking at that are, are key
that we address uh in the next
year. And so, as far as the the
working group, um, we started
last year, it actually started
just over a year ago that NCSL
um and a group of us who had
worked on state data privacy
laws, rep Elkins included, uh,
got together, uh, for, for
dinner last year to talk about
moving on to work together on AI
legislation.
Um, and part of it being through
our work on data privacy
understanding, one, misery loves
company, and if you haven't
worked through a data privacy
bill yet, you'll, uh, or if you
haven't got, haven't gotten it
across the finish line yet,
you'll understand uh that it's a
unique experience that you have
to share with others who, who
have gone through it and can
fully understand and appreciate,
um, and so a number of us had
been invited to be on a podcast
with uh David.
of Blackwell in Colorado, so
last year myself, uh, Senator
Rodriguez from Colorado,
Representative Careglion uh from
Texas, representatives Elkins
and Bonner from Minnesota and
Senator Gonzalez.
Uh, from New York, got together
for dinner to discuss uh working
together and holding some
meetings over the years so we
could try to align definitions.
Again, we frequently hear the
arguments of interoperability
and not having a a patchwork and
making it possible uh for people
to comply, uh, with, with the
bill, and so our goal was to try
to work together uh to do that,
to, you know, align definitions,
build kind of what we call the
Lego block model.
To have different modules that
people could pick, understanding
that each state's gonna want to
do something a little different,
but at least if we're pulling
from the same pieces, it would
be easier uh for the companies
to comply. Um, and so we met,
uh, you know, through the last
year regularly, um, and then
myself and Senator Rodriguez ran
ran bills which did not get
across the line in uh
Connecticut, unfortunately, but,
uh, Senator Rodriguez
was able
Uh, to
Pass a bill and get it signed
into law in Colorado, and so,
uh, there has been a working
group created in Colorado to
look at that to potentially make
changes, and we're looking at
running the bill again in
Connecticut, um, with the, you
know, the goal of hopefully
getting more states, uh, to run
a similar bill. uh, this coming
year, um, the steering
committee, uh, for, uh, the
multi-state working group in in
actually we just went through,
we're consolidating all of our
various lists and just today.
Count it up and realized we have
47 out of 50 states represented
in the working group, so we have
work to do to recruit those last
3 states to get us to the 50 of
50, um, the steering committee
is myself, Senator Rodriguez,
Representative Careglion,
Senator Gonzalez from New York,
Senator Hester, uh, from
Maryland, R Elkins and rep
Bonner from Minnesota, um,
Fiona McFarlane, Representative
McFarland from Florida, uh,
Senator Shelley Hughes from
Alaska, Senator Zolnikoff from
Montana and delegate Maldonado
from Virginia were supported by
Kier Lamont, Tatiana Rice, and
Fiona Richards of the future of
Privacy Forum. We'll be meeting
this Thursday discussing
workforce issues, uh, and for
the next several months, we're
gonna be going twice a month
actually. Last year was once a
month, but we're trying to get
in a number of different
meetings, um, and again, thank
you.
To a lisa for regularly
attending, uh, it's open to
legislators, other legislative
and executive branch staff. So
we actually have a few AG's
offices that regularly sit in on
it. North Carolina and Oregon,
uh, representative from their
AG's office, uh, and again, the
goal is to work together on
definitions shared lesson
sharing lessons learned, and
then hopefully to come up with a
few models uh for next year, and
that's one of the things that as
legislators will have to work on
ourselves.
You know, we're part of NCSL in,
in some ways the cybersecurity
task force, there are a lot of
people are members of both, um,
but then we're also in some ways
separate uh from there, uh, but
neither NCSL nor future privacy
form can officially release
model legislation, so our goal
uh as legislators will hold some
separate meetings to share out
uh the legislation and try to
workshop some of those things. I
know I'm working through the
Connecticut bill, and there are
a few others who are
Working on bills, uh, all that
kind of the background on the
multi-state working group. I
want to thank you for the work
that you're doing last year.
Alisa had sent me a link, and I
did sit in on one of your
hearings where you had a
professor, um, and I can't
remember which college in New
Mexico he was from, but just
going through the compass, uh,
recidivism algorithm. It, it was
a great presentation, I thought
that I, I learned a lot on that,
um, and that is, you know,
criminal justice is one of the
Areas of concern and government
services when we look at those
consequential decisions,
another, uh, you know, offer I'd
like to make is I haven't done
any work in that area, but um
the person I've become close
with postdoctoral fellow at Yale
who's actually leaving to remove
uh to return to the United Arab
Emirates this year. Mohammed Al
Masri is uh an expert in that
field of criminal justice and uh
algorithmic decision.
making in regards to criminal
justice, so I'm happy to make a
connection with him and he, he
would be willing, I'm sure, to
make lots of connections for
you. Um, over the next year, you
know, my goals, why I, I think
this is so important that we
work on this issue, uh, looking
at surveys, um, right now, over
50% of landlords and it depends
on the survey, it's between 50
to 70% of landlords are using AI
for screening tenants. Um, and
we're seeing lots of
Examples and, you know, rap
Elkins is gonna talk about his
bill and what he added in for
profiling, which will actually
help to correct some of the
issues we're seeing with
tenants. Uh, there's an example
of a man from California, I
think it's Christopher Peters
was his name, 75 year old man
who was denied uh being admitted
to a senior senior housing in
California because of a
littering, uh, a littering
charge. Uh, the only problem was
the littering charge
There's no proof that if you
litter, you're a bad tenant, but
2, it was committed by a man 33
years younger than him in Texas,
a state he had never been to.
And that's why um I'll let R R
Falcons go through what what
he's talked about the profiling
is similar case in Connecticut
of a man uh who was denied uh
disabled man who was denied
being getting an apartment in
his mother's apartment complex
because of unfortunately, it was
a retail theft allegation
charges
dropped from years before. So,
uh, unfortunately, the, the bad
data there, uh, over 80% of
companies are using AI for
screening for resumes. Uh, now
I've seen up to 88% in some
surveys, um, and we know that
there are different ways that
algorithms uh discriminate in
hiring. The most notable example
is probably uh 2018 article
about Amazon and their hiring
algorithm that because it had
used 10 years' worth of data.
Higher, and the majority of
people in technology jobs were
men. It determined that they
wanted to hire men. And so when
uh on a resume it showed that
you were on a woman's soccer
team or they can in some way
determine you're a woman, you
are not passed on, uh, in the
hiring process and so that's why
one of the things we, we wanna
look at is making sure that
we're sure that you're doing
algorithmic impact assessments
and bias audits before you're
employing these algorithms to
make a critical decisions, as
well as some
You know, looking at data
transparency, garbage in garbage
out, right, the whole, whole
saying that if you're not using
proper training data, you're
obviously not, it will not
obviously, but you're not likely
to get good results. Um, so I, I
think it's critical giving the
rapid adoption of these
technologies and the potential
to negatively impact our
constituents that we are getting
in requiring some form of impact
assessments in the next year.
Again, that pause, right,
between the stimulus and
response, just taking the time
to measure
to make sure it's safe. During
the pandemic, you know, we think
back and um you know, we were,
many of us were washing our
groceries off with Lysol wipes
before they brought them in our
house, yet, uh, we didn't just
put the, uh, you know,
put out, um, the, the vaccine,
right? We had to stop to test it
to make sure it was safe before
we did that and uh we need to
make sure that we're testing
these algorithms before they're
making important life.
Decisions. The other issue that
I see is critical that I think
unfortunately we probably have
really 2 years to address is in
skills, upskilling and workforce
development, uh, for a few
reasons. One, McKenzie last
December had a report that said
if we don't rule out genderative
AI thoughtfully. Uh, there's the
potential to increase the, uh,
the racial wealth gap by $43
billion a year. Uh.
However, the positive, the
upside of that is if we do roll
it out thoughtfully, there's the
opportunity to decrease the
racial wealth gap. And so the
other thing is recently uh
Microsoft and LinkedIn, uh, had
their annual hiring uh survey
report, 66% of companies that
were surveyed said they wouldn't
hire someone without generative
AI skills, 71% said that they
would take someone with less
experience in generative AI
skills over someone with more
Experience. And so it's critical
over these next two years that
we're really working to do
outreach uh to upskill, uh,
working across the digital
equity divide. So there is a
digital equity competitive grant
of federal grant that has an
October 3rd deadline. It's
something you may want to look
at. We are going to be applying
and uh Connecticut, and so in
Connecticut, where
We have an advantage that we're
a small state and that we're
just about 97% wired for
high-speed internet, but even
Despite that, when we did a
survey, a digital equity survey,
27% of families weren't
connected uh to high-speed
internet. 36% failed basic
digital literacy and so um we
know how critical these skills
are going to be to getting a job
in this economy, and we know
that even though this saying is
that um,
You may have heard this saying,
it's not AI that's going to take
your job. It's someone who knows
AI that's going to take your
job. However, my friend Delegate
Maldonado pointed out that
that's not completely true,
right? There are jobs that are
going to be lost to generative
AI, and many of those jobs are
jobs that are done by women and
and often women of color. And so
we need to be very thoughtful
and intentional, uh, in our
outreach in providing training
and upskilling opportunities.
Um,
And one of the things we're
looking to do here is to partner
with nonprofits. Again, if, if
any of you have read the book,
Recode America, one of the
things they talk about in there
is that for many people, it's
not creating a new relationship
with government. It's repairing
a deeply relate deeply broken
relationship with government.
There are lots of people we've
let down who don't trust us, and
so we need to partner with the
boots on the ground, uh, to do
the outreach to get people in
into training and find the best
way to deliver and give us the
Feedback. I think I, you know, I
know how to reach some people,
but not all, right? And this
needs to be kind of a widespread
approach to Cas a wide net to
make sure that the people who
need this the most are are
getting access to these this
training opportunities. Um,
You know, over the next year,
what I would recommend, I don't
believe you've passed your
comprehensive data privacy yet
and so, uh, you know, we're
lucky that we have uh Senator
Love and R Elkins coming next
because what I'll tell you is we
did pass our data privacy, but I
am updating it to match what
they did.
So copying is the sincerest form
of flattery, so I'm hoping to
flatter both of you, uh, and we
are planning on updating our
data privacy.
Laws and I'll have a draft later
on this year, uh, but, you know,
if you haven't done the data
privacy really that is the first
key step uh for the AI
protections, looking at what Rep
Elkins did and again, I don't
want to steal his thunder, so
I'll let him explain what he had
done on the on the profiling,
um, but there are a few other
things I think that you could
tweak with a comprehensive data
privacy bill that you really
have solid AI protections as
well as a comprehensive data
privacy bill.
So, um, rep Elkins will talk
about the, the profiling
changes. I think changing the
language, the right to opt out
of solely automated processing
right to opt out of a
substantially automated
processing again that solely
automated means that if they
have a human look at it at the
end, you don't no longer have
the right, um, but there's
something we'll be looking at
perhaps in that language, um,
the other is, uh, in addition to
the data protection impact
assessments. I do think it
It's important to require the
algorithmic uh impact
assessments, uh, looking at, you
know, if there are disparate
impacts or if they are engaging
in profiling that they have to
do those studies, um,
And then also looking at some
form of data transparency, uh,
in California, you know, they
still have until the end of
August to pass their bills, but
AB 2013, uh, assembly member
Jackie Irwin's bill is a great
start for the data transparency,
so taking some pieces of that to
amend on to a comprehensive, um,
Get a privacy bill would give
you kind of both of those, uh,
before going a little bit
further, um, but if you're
looking at, I'm happy to share.
I'll have another draft of what
we had called Sanopil 2 last
year um for what we're looking
to do next year. I'll have that
in September as well and happy
to share anything we'd love to
have as many people as possible,
uh, join us uh on the working
group again, understanding that
really it it's, you know, my son
is
to bring him to college in just
over a week. I am dreading it.
I'll be honest, uh, but one of
the things, you know, from his
um
College essay, one of the essays
I looked at is telling us
something you learned something
interesting you learned uh in
school, and he talked about
Blechney Park, right in the
importance of, you know,
breaking the German Enigma code.
It, it brought together, in
addition to traditional military
cryptographers, it was um
Chess players, uh, puzzlers,
gamers, Navajo Navajo speakers.
Uh, so,
It's, and what's that? It's the
importance of diverse
perspectives and diverse voices,
uh, to solve a problem. And so I
think the more voices we can
bring the more perspectives into
our multi-state group, uh, the
more likely we are, uh, to be
able to solve this problem. Um,
and, and again, that delegate
Maldonado from Virginia likes to
say, this isn't an eye problem,
this is a wee problem, and I
think it
You know, rap falcons and maybe
Senator Love have heard me say
this. I like to say alone you
can go fast, but together you
can go far, and we have a long
way to go to make sure we're
protecting our constituents and
um the IBM CEO has said we're in
the first inning of this game,
and so, uh, Arvind Krishna, and
so we have a long way to go, and
I, I would like to go together
with as many people as possible.
So, uh, with that, thank you so
much for, for having me. I'm
happy to answer any questions.
I'm also happy.
To share all of my uh contact
information. I apologize for not
having a, a PowerPoint for you
and making you have to look at
my face while I while I said
this, so.
Thank you, Senator. So is the
plan we'll do representative um
Elkins first and then, um,
Senator loves that sort of what
you all discussed.
So representative Elkins.
OK, thank you. Uh, great
introduction, James, and uh it
made to start out by saying, uh,
you know, Senator Moroney has
been the glue that holds us all
together. He's really been the
ringleader in in this cabal and
has just done incredible work to
pull us all together and and a
very productive way, so, um, I
did prepare a power.
You're frozen representative.
Ozen, that's not good. Can you
hear me now? OK,
let me, uh, let's see, I need to
share my screen.
Hold on a second.
Isn't it?
Hold on a second, I gotta.
Doing something wrong here. I
think I've got too many screens
open.
I definitely have too many
windows open. Hold on a second
here.
Apologize for this.
Let me try this again.
Yes
OK, that's better. Um, is that
showing up? Can you see the, uh,
See the slide show.
So we see your slideshow.
OK, great. OK. All right. Um,
you've got, um, there's more
slides if it was printed out
then I'm going to show here. I
hid most of them in the interest
of, of, of time. Um, but, um, a
preface this by saying that, uh,
uh, you know, the vast majority
of the bills that have passed in
the various states, uh, and this
is a, a, a current, current map
of what's passed here according
to the International Association
of Privacy Professionals.
Uh, all but California are based
on the same basic template that
was developed by state senator
in Washington named uh named
Ruben Carlisle, who basically
took the California law, which
was by all accounts, including
those of California legislators
hurriedly drafted and not
particularly well written. And
what um Ruben and his staff did
is they took the California law
basically rewrote it from
scratch that it so that it
actually flowed well, made more
sense.
Uh, and then the Washington tech
community shop the resulting
bill to the rest of us as a as a
template that they could
support, uh, and uh the uh um
the the first state to uh to, to
pass one of these Washington
Privacy Act bills was uh was
Virginia.
Uh, followed by uh Colorado, um,
followed by Senator Moroney's
bill in Connecticut.
And of the three that gave me
the, the uh the bill kept
getting better as it went along.
Senator Moroney put a tremendous
amount of effort into making
sure that his version of the
bill was properly vetted, and
after um Connecticut passed its
bill, um, the, the remaining
states pretty much, uh, the vast
majority of us have, have used
Senator Moroney's bill as a
starting bill for our our own.
Uh, and so now you see what's I
think last count about
19 states, and they all have
this, um, you know, basic
commonality of the the key
provisions regarding the uh uh
rights of uh of um data subjects
and the responsibilities of data
controllers and processors. So
if you, you know, pick up um
Senator Moroney's bill or the
Maryland bill or my bill as a as
a starting point, um, you're,
you're going to be most of the
way there because all of the
provisions
And these acts have been
thoroughly vetted and by and
large accepted by the uh the
business community. Uh, by the
time my bill passed in mid-May,
uh, this year, um, uh, it was,
uh, had, you know, so thoroughly
vetted it that uh uh no
committee hearing took more than
20 minutes. I had no business
opposition, any any testimony in
opposition, and there were no
hostile amendments to the bill.
I had 4 authors amendments to
the bill.
Uh, and as, as it went through
the committee process, but I had
developed such a productive
working relationship with the
key business stakeholders that
they um trusted me to, uh, you
know, represent the, um, their,
their key interest as well as as
long as I was flexible, uh, uh,
and, uh, so it basically sailed
through all of its committees in
both chambers on near unanimous
voice votes.
At the end, it got scooped up
into a huge omnibus bill that
passed on a party line vote,
which kind of obscured the fact
that that that the provisions
were, uh, you know, pretty much
accepted by the the business
community. Um, so the, the, if
either I'm gonna recommend a
couple of key resources for
anyone who's willing to take
this on, uh, both the Hush
Blackwell law firm in Denver
that Senator Moroney mentioned
earlier and the International
Association of Privacy.
Professionals, uh, both tracks
state privacy laws and produce
their own charts like this one,
maps like the one I showed on
the, on the previous slide that
will show you just how much
commonality, uh, there is among
the, uh the state bills that
have passed so far, uh, in terms
of the important uh uh important
provisions, and I would urge you
to, uh, you know, use those two
sources, uh, as well as the
future of privacy forum as as
resource
as you're putting the, uh,
putting the bill together. Uh,
one of the things that, uh, that
I did, uh, as I was, uh,
developing the, the final
version of my bill is that I had
received a lot of um feedback
from the the technet group which
represents uh uh mostly
technology companies, uh, and,
uh, they're complaining to me,
why, why wasn't I more like
Connecticut and in Colorado, so
I literally sat down one weekend
and uh you know, took the
scissors to.
My bill, Senator Moroney's bill,
Senator Rodriguez's bill from
Colorado, and literally cut and
pasted them side by side so I
could show that, no, I, I copied
Colorado on this one. I copied
uh Connecticut. I'm just the
same what it, what are you guys
complaining about, uh, and, uh,
I provided that cut and paste uh
and the chart that I put
together spreadsheets
summarizing it, uh, uh, to Ms
Lauer so that you, uh, and
whoever wants to take this on
would have that as a resource,
but it illustrates.
The degree of commonality that
we're all trying to achieve, um,
with these uh comprehensive data
privacy bills to make it as easy
as possible uh for national
businesses to comply with, with,
with these laws. So you will
find that uh maintaining as much
uh commonality with the uh uh
the basics is uh is extremely
important, so there are a few
things that uh are building upon
Senator Moroney's base that I um
Uh, but I, I did, uh, with my
bill, I mean, no, no two bills
of these bills are exactly
alike, and we all plagiarize
each other. Uh, I, for example,
took a a a provision uh from
Texas, uh, the definition of a
small business or small business
community really like the Texas
definition. It looked fine to
us, so we adopted that, um,
Adopted a position some word
language out of Oregon and
Delaware.
Uh,
About, um,
Uh, requiring companies to
disclose, um, who they might
have sold your data to, uh, in
terms of the, uh, um, uh,
exclusions from the bill, um, we
took, I took a provision from
Oregon, a different approach,
uh, uh, and there are a few
things that I as a, a, a data um
management professional for the
last 25 years of my career, uh,
believe we're very important
that I didn't feel uh were
adequately covered.
In the basic template. A few of
them are here. One of them is
the definition of a precise
geolocation. So a person's
location is considered under the
Bill template, uh uh um
sensitive data which um
companies cannot sell sensitive
data without your consent or use
it for targeting advertising.
The standard definition is uh a
plus or minus a third of a mile,
basically, um, but I spent a lot
of time transportation economist
by education spent a lot of time
doing transportation analytics
and realized that uh there's no
actual way to measure a third of
a mile without reference to the
latitude and longitude, uh, so
while the standard definition is
easy to understand, very clear.
It's also um unimplementable and
unenforceable.
So, uh, I basically in my bill
define precise location as
latitude and longitude accurate
enough to identify a street
address, which is about 4
decimal degrees of latitude and
longitude. This provision was
very heavily negotiated with
industry, but by the end of the
day people were telling me,
yeah, Elkins, you probably do
have a superior definition here.
Uh, one provision that I put in,
uh, that everybody has told me,
well, yeah, that goes without
saying except nobody else had
said it, so I put in a provision
that just explicitly prohibits
the re-identification of data
that is uh been de-identified on
purpose or collected as
pseudonymous by third parties.
I'll tell you there are
companies out there that are,
are taking um your address data
and using publicly available
sources, reverse engineering,
um, your
Your identity, uh, in order to
be able to target you with uh
other kinds of targeted
advertising. Um, there are a few
things that I put in, uh,
related to the concept of
privacy by design, uh, you know,
being proactive about protecting
your customer's data.
Uh, that I insisted being
included based upon my
experience, uh, as a data
manager in private industry, um,
and 3 of them, the three most
important are the in, in both a
practice and in the description
in the annual assessment, uh,
companies are required to
describe their policies related
to data minimization. In other
words, a company should not be
collecting data that they do not
need to uh provide you with with
goods and services. Um, you
should
not be collecting data just so
that you can sell it to somebody
else. Um,
Data retention, um, every
company should have a data
retention policy that says um
we're not going to keep this
data longer than we need, uh,
then we need to uh provide you
with, with the services. I made
that explicit. And one thing
that I think is unique among all
the bills is that I also put in
a requirement that companies
Maintain an inventory of the
data that they have about you
because they are elsewhere in
the, in the build template, you
will find that there are
restrictions that say, uh you
have to be able to, uh, the
company has to be able to
provide you with a company of
the copy of your data, make
corrections if there are errors,
um, delete the data if you want,
uh, if the company doesn't know
where your data is, uh, there's
no way that they can satisfy
that requirement. Um, so, you
know, every company should be
maintaining a data dictionary.
or a metadata reposit, I have
some way of finding your data if
you want a copy of it or want it
deleted. And then uh the, the
third really big change that I
made in mine, and it's actually
just one paragraph in the bill,
um, is it in the broader AI
context, there are a couple of
use cases, themes that we're
exploring, uh, the use of uh uh
generative AI to uh um produce
content is obviously an
important one.
The use of AI to improve
customer service as a second,
but one of the big ones that
we're all focused on is the
concept of automated decision
making, the use of, of
algorithms to, um, you know,
make important decisions about
you to score you in one way or a
manner, and the uh kind of the
archetypical example of
profiling is uh your, your
credit score and under the Fair
Credit Reporting Act, we all
have the uh the right to uh look
at the data.
That was used to um to to create
our credit score, correct any
errors, uh, have our credit
score rerun with the corrected
data, uh, and, uh, so as I was
looking at this concept in the
AI world of automated decision
making, I realized that the
definition of automated decision
making is essentially the same
as the definition of profiling
in the basic data privacy
template. Uh, it's, you know,
Any kind of automated processing
that, uh, you know, rates you or
scores you for the purposes of
uh um using that information in
making a consequential decision
about your life, whether it's
employment or the insurance rate
you're going to get or whether
or not you're going to get that
apartment. And so I just put a
paragraph in my bill that said
that that just says, um you have
this basically consumers have
the same rights uh for generally
that they currently
We have under the Fair Credit
Reporting Act so that if your
data is, uh, data is being
profiled, uh, in order to make a
consequential decision about
you, uh, then you have the right
to look at the data, correct the
data, have the fake run, and
probably as important as
anything else that I put in that
paragraph is that you have the
right to have the decision
explained to you in plain
English.
So if a company is uh uh say
using your credit score um to uh
determine what your auto
insurance rate is going to be,
you know, then the company ought
to be able to explain why your
credit score is relevant to what
you're going to pay for auto
insurance. Uh, so I feel like,
uh, in the way I've approached
this, I think that I've obviated
the need to have a separate, uh,
a separate bill related to
automated decision making
because the definition
Of, of artificial intelligence,
uh, in this context, and this
for this use case is extremely
nebulous. Uh, I see companies
all the time describing
statistical analysis techniques
like multiple digression that
have been around for over 50
years now being described as AI
simply because it's sexy. So
the, the use of what technology,
whether it's regression analysis
or neural networks doesn't
matter what matters is how the
the model is being used. So I
General rule on in any
technology legislation is don't
legislate the technology, you
legislate the uses of the
technology.
So, um, so I'm, I'm, I, this is
one area where I think uh by
just building it into the basic
privacy protection framework
where they're already
protections against
discriminatory use of of the
data, uh, and all of the
surrounding rights around the
the um the ability to have the
data reviewed and corrected, I
think are already there in our
standard data privacy tech uh
template, and I don't think that
we need separate laws related to
automated.
Decision making.
Um, a couple of, yeah, so if you
take this on, there are a couple
of areas that are always going
to be heavily negotiated and uh
you want to be prepared to
answer questions about these.
Uh, one of them that were early
on, uh, the definition of sale,
whether it was going to cash or
cash and other valuable
consideration. Um, some of them,
um, and, and this is important
because there are, are, are
cases uh where companies are
bartering for to get data.
So the, the infamous case was a
case where um a company, an app
called Flow, uh, which women use
to track their menstrual cycles,
was bartered to Google
Analytics. Basically Google says
if you let us keep a copy of
your data, we'll do the analysis
for you for free. So when you um
limit the definition of sale to
only cash, you're letting Google
get away from that. So don't,
don't cave on that.
Um, you'll spend a lot of time,
uh, and again, negotiating uh
exclusions uh to the, the whole
framework for companies,
especially in the financial
services industries, uh, or
nonprofits, uh, uh, the one
regret I know Senator Baroni has
is granted a grant a blanket bla
um exemption for any financial
services in a company that is a
governed in any way by Graham
Lee Flyley. In my case, I
followed the Oregon.
Lead and only exempted uh
companies uh that are subject
also to, uh, um, state
regulation like banks and
insurance companies, uh, and
only to the degree that their
data is uh intermingled, uh, um,
with data that is definitely is
covered by Graham Leach Bliley,
uh, or HIPA, the, the same, same
kind of considerations. So I
would, you know, um, I think
I've done a pretty good job. I
think I could clean up my
language a little bit there, but
in following Oregon's lead as I
did.
would be a good one. We talked
about my definition of specific
geolocation data and my
inclusion of privacy by design
requirements in the annual
assessments. I think Maryland
has some good language about
that as well.
The right to cure.
Companies will are gonna want to
ask you to say, well, as, as
long as I agree to fix it, uh,
you know, within 30 days, uh, or
45 days, uh I don't want to be
held liable, uh, in several
states, I think, uh, Colorado
and RI followed, followed the
followed, they said, yeah, for
like, you know, a, a temporary
period we're gonna allow people
to to cure the data. I think
Comect that had that as well,
but that's going to expire and
after a set date, uh, you gotta
have your ducks in a row.
Um, the organizational size
threshold, uh, you know, most
states are doing it, you know, a
number of customers based on the
side of their state. I really
like the the Texas approach to
that and adopted to that, and
then, um, private right of
action, none of the bills that
have passed so far, um, have
included a private right of
action they all have uh AG
Attorney general enforcement.
The AGs are all working together
on this.
Uh, and, um, uh, ironically, uh,
we all refer to this as the
Washington Privacy Right Act,
uh, Washington Privacy Act
framework, but the bill has
never passed in the state of
Washington because they got
completely hung up over the
private right of action, Vermont
passed a bill this year and it
was vetoed by the Governor
largely over the private right
of action. So at this point,
that's kind of a third rail. I
wouldn't go there yet. Uh, we
might want to go there in the
future, um, but
I would, I would stay away from
that one right now.
Um, so just keys to success if
you wanna get, you know, a, a
comprehensive data privacy act,
you know, Bill, you know,
through as easy as possible, is,
you know, try and minimize
deviations from the uh uh
Washington Privacy Act template,
um, you know, again, I said, I
said earlier, uh, most states
that pass bills certainly in 23
and 24 have used the Connecticut
version uh as a starting point,
uh, if you're getting pushback
You know, point to the
commonalities that you have with
uh previously passed bills and
you can do some uh selective
cherry picking of the best
provisions, uh, I use the
example like I, I took, you
know, or I took Oregon uh for
the uh Gramley Blily exemptions.
I use Texas for small business,
use Delaware for a requirement
that uh companies report who
they sold the data to. So as
long as you can point to other
states that have already passed
a better provision than than
maybe.
Prevailing, um, you do have some
ability to get away with that,
or is it uh communicate
proactively with, with
stakeholders. Um, I took this on
5 years ago and uh um in, in May
of uh of, of uh my freshman year
in, in the house, every tech
lobbyist in the world
immediately descended upon me,
and by the time the bill passed,
I had a stakeholder notification
email list that had over 125
different um stakeholder emails
in
And the bill, and I was
consistently told that because
every time I had a new draft of
the bill revisions. I sent it
out to the entire stakeholder
list, people would, um, um
communicate with me back. I
appreciated the openness, um,
that made a huge difference in
uh in my ability to, you know,
move the the bill smoothly
because everybody felt like they
they were heard, they have an
opportunity to provide feedback
and I've uh provided a copy of
uh
That stakeholder list to uh Ms
Lauer, um, with all the
Minnesota specific lobbyists
taken out and then the, the
other key for me is I, you know,
I found a number of, you know,
trusted stakeholders
representing a variety of
perspectives who could um advise
me, help vet the bills, and it's
included Cera Lamont from the
Future of Privacy Forum who
Senator Moroney has already
mentioned, uh, Dave Stau at the
Hush Blackwell law firm in
Denver was enormously helpful.
Now to make sure I was getting a
strong consumer, um, uh,
viewpoint as well. I included
Matt Schwartz from Consumer
Reports and Stacy Sukiyama from
the Electronic Foundation of
Frontier Foundation, uh, in my
stakeholder group as well. And
then
Towards the end, I found that uh
uh Andrew Kingman, who is a
lobbyist representing a large
business stakeholder group
called the State Privacy and
Security Coalition was serving
as a funnel for most of the
general feedback from the
business community, and I found
that I was able to evolve
productive working relationship
with Andrew, uh, is a new, I
would publish a new um um
version, amended version of the
bill. Andrew would take it,
circulated to
His his, uh, his members, uh,
come back to me with a red line
with proposed changes. I would
go through the his proposed red
line with my drafter, Nathan
Hopkins in a nonpartisan House
research, and we would go
through and we say, no, not
taking that, not taking that.
That's a clarification that's
good, we'll take that. And um I
could tell by the end of the,
uh, uh, you know, as we're
nearing the end that um he
clearly had understood where I
was coming from, the things that
were most important to me, I
could tell that he was
Pushing back on his members and
telling them no, Elkins is never
gonna go for that. He feels very
strongly about this and this is
why, ended up being a very
productive relationship, so, um,
so it did, again, as I said, in
the end, um, you know, the, the,
the finished product, um, you
literally sailed through all of
its committees, both chambers,
no more than 20 minutes, no, no,
uh, testimony against no hostile
amendments. So if you, if you
can build a bill.
You know, based on these, you
know, solid foundations of a
Senator Moroney's work, some of
the stuff that I've done, some
of the stuff you're going to
hear about from Senator Love.
You've got a really strong um
starting point and it should not
be anywhere near as painful as
it was for the rest of us. So,
thank you. Thank you very much,
Representative Senator Love.
Thank you. Good afternoon,
everyone. I am really happy to
be here. So let me uh take my
turn at sharing my screen. Give
me one second to do that.
OK.
Why is that not working?
Let's see if that works. There
we go.
OK. So, um thank you all. You've
been um amazing and very
patient, so I will try to be
quick because I know you've
heard a lot from us, um, but
it's an honor to be here and to
talk to you and thank you all so
much for your work as
legislators, um, and for your
patients and interest today. Um,
my data privacy Act has been
called a third way. So there's
the Connecticut model, there is
the, the um
Colorado or um Connecticut
model, which has also been
called the Delaware model, um,
and then, um Rep Elkins is, is
somewhere in between and then
mine has also been called a
third way and while my bill
passed on a bipartisan basis, it
was not nearly as smooth as Rep
Elkins was, um, in part I think
because um I pushed back on a
couple of different things than
rep Elkins did. Um, so as Ezra
Elkin said,
You know, we all did take the
same basic um model, so the
Delaware model, Connecticut
model call you whatever you
want to call it, model, um, and
then we changed it, um, for our
particular interests and
circumstances, and, and he is
absolutely right that the
buzzword that the tech community
pushes back on is
interoperability. It's got,
we've got to be able to operate
state by state by state, which
is absolutely true.
Um,
However, that doesn't mean that
I was going to accept everything
that they wanted. So, um, couple
of top lines for um for our
purposes today, my legislation,
oh, I wonder if I can do in um
Uh,
Sorry, put in um
There we go.
That'll work better. OK, there
we go. Um, it has a broad
application in terms of who it
applies to. It has strong data
minimization standards, which
I'll go in later. Um, it has the
standard uh consumer rights.
It's got the universal opt-out
mechanism and the
anti-discrimination protection.
So let's talk about what this
means. So the data minimization
is different, is different from
a lot of
The other states. So in
Most of the other bills, the
data minimization says that the
uh controller must limit the
connection to what is adequate,
relevant, and reasonably
necessary in relation to the
disclosed purposes which with
which with which the data is
processed. So what that says to
me is that the company just
needs to disclose it.
And just needs to say that it's
adequate to that disclosure.
It's adequately relevant to that
disclosure.
I wanted something stronger, so
in my legislation, they must
limit their data collection to
what's reasonably necessary for
providing or maintaining.
The product or service.
So it's not just to what they
disclose, but it's actually to
what they collect and and my
example on that is, let's say
I'm playing solitaire on an app
on my phone.
The company should not be able,
the the company that provides
that app should not be able to
collect my location because that
is not necessary to provide me
that service. Now, if under the
other definition, um, adequate
to the disclosure, they could
say, well, you know, knowing
what state you're in, it's, it's
adequately relevant because, you
know, we want to do more
business in Maryland. That's,
that's just not enough for me.
Um, and then we're sensitive
data is concerned, so data with
respect to what a controller
knew or should have known was a
child, um, your location data,
health data, biometrics, that
sort of stuff, um, the
collection process and sharing
must be strictly necessary to
providing that service, so it's
a much higher standard.
The consumer rights, these are
really standard along the lines
of what uh Rab Elkin said, um,
to say that, uh, you know, if
their data is being processed,
they can access it, they can
correct inaccuracies, they can
delete it, they can obtain a
copy, they can opt out of the
processing of their data for the
purposes of targeted
advertising, the sale of
personal data, or the profiling
that um Rep Elkins was talking
about in furtherance of solely
automated decisions that produce
Legal or similar effects, and
that is um defined in the bill.
And uh unfortunately, um, like
all of the other states, uh, we
are enforced by our attorney
General. I actually say
unfortunately because I do
believe that a private right of
action is a better route and the
reason I believe that is um
One, because Attorney generals
cannot take on the case of every
single individual who is harmed
by the violation of this law,
and second, if you look at um
the states that have specific
biometric data privacy bills or
laws, Illinois, um Texas,
Washington, Illinois has a
private right of action, and
yes, many people complain about
it, but it's actually in
Illinois.
Where the companies have changed
their behavior, and it's because
of what Illinois has done that
Texas and Washington have been
able to make changes to what the
companies have done. So I
believe a private right of
action is really important, um,
but that was one of those
legislative compromises that I
had to make.
Um, let's see, why won't this.
There we go. Um,
Couple of other important
things, um, we protect minors
data here and we prohibit the
targeted advertising and the
sale of personal data for
individuals under 18. In some
other bills, the um individual
under 18 can consent, and we
just said no, under 18, there's
no consent, you just, you may
not send targeted advertising to
them and you may not.
Sell their personal data. And
the other thing that we do is
that we fully ban the sale of
sensitive data. Um, again, in
other states, you can agree to
the sale of your sensitive data?
And we believe things like your
biometrics and information about
a child, information about your
reproductive health data, that
should not be sold, especially
because, you know, if it's
buried in a long list of things,
then people may not know exactly
what they're talking about.
Um, so we took the Delaware
coverage thresholds. So, um,
businesses that controlled or
processed the personal data of
over 35,000 consumers or
controlled and processed the
personal data of at least 10,000
consumers and derived over 20%
of revenue from selling personal
data. Quick note here.
Really, what was driving me, um,
in all of this legislation is
right now companies are
collecting and selling a huge
amount of personal data that
people have no idea. They just
don't know that it's going on,
and so I really believe that we
need to educate consumers and
give them the opportunity to
make the decisions. So that's
why, um, so let's
What was driving so much of um
this legislation, and so that's
why we have this threshold about
20% of revenue from selling
personal data.
Um, we have a limited right to
cure. Um, this was something
that, as R Belkin said, a lot of
companies really wanted, um, we
didn't really want it, because
how do you cure when someone
sells your location data.
Um,
You can't, but again, that was
one of those legislative
compromises that we made, um,
oh, sorry. Uh, we had, as most
of the other bills do a
universal opt-out mechanism.
Um, discrimination that uh reel
Elkins also talked about, it's
really important that you make
clear that covered entities may
not discriminate against a
consumer for exercising any of
their rights. You can't charge
me more for, you know, a tube of
toothpaste if I'm not going to
shine over my rights to let you
sell my data, um, and you can't
process the data in a manner
that unlawfully makes available
the equal enjoyment.
goods or service on the basis of
race, age, gender, or other
protected categories.
Couple of other things I wanted
to flag for you when you're
working on this type of
legislation, definitions really
matter.
So the tech companies really
pushed um in the definitions of
biometrics, to say um that it
is, you know, your, your
fingerprint or your eye scan or
your handprints, um, your face
scan that is used to identify an
individual. In our state law, we
say that can be used to identify
an individual and you all are
legislators, you know that those
are two.
Very different things, and it
was important to me that that
not only we we stick with our
state law, but that we use can
be used because it provides that
much more um privacy to
individuals, you know, that
fingerprint may not be used to
identify, but it still can be
used to identify someone.
Another really important thing
for us in uh most of the online
data privacy laws that are out
there, they use the term known
child, and that was what the
tech community really wanted.
Well, if you say known a child,
you give companies the ability
to say, oh, we didn't know they
were a child, even though
they're watching, you know, Dora
the Explorer. I don't know if
that's still out there, my kids
watch that, um.
But, uh, so we used new or
should have known was a child,
and that puts a lot more
obligation on the companies to
be a lot more careful with
children's information.
Going to the next uh box, the
exemption. So again, who does
this apply to, uh,
Representative Elkins mentioned
that Senator Moroney, um,
regrets. I also regret giving a
blanket, uh, exemption to
entities that are covered by the
Graham Leach Bliley Act, um,
that is a huge gaping hole in
the um in the legislation and if
you look at what
Blily covers. It's a lot of
different entities, but it
doesn't provide all the data
protection that a law like this
does. So I really wish that we
had gone with um the exemption
of data covered by Graham H
Bliley, not entities covered by
Gram Leach Bliley, and as a
matter of fact, the Attorney
general of Connecticut wrote a
report of 6 months after their
law was um enacted.
Saying, you know, these giant
exemptions make it really hard
to enforce the law.
Um, HIPA, lot of entities were
pushing to have entity level
exemptions for those um uh
entities that are covered by
HIPA, but please remember HIPA
is not a privacy bill. It is the
health insurance portability
Act, um, and here's an example
um that I think really drives
home the point why you do not
want an entity level, um,
exemption for HIPA. So,
When my brother-in-law was
dying.
His doctor said, OK, sign up for
an appointment via online
portal.
So he did.
The next day, my sister got an
ad on Facebook for that doctor's
practice, and we come to find
out that Facebook had had um
agreements with a number of
health entities for them to just
feed this information to
Facebook. That information is
not protected by HIPA.
So I really encourage you to do
a data level exemption for data
that is covered by HIPA.
Nonprofits and universities are
also things that will be um
negotiated. We did not exempt
them from our legislation to me,
um, you know, they should also
protect the data.
Um, I talked about data level
exemptions for GLBA and HIPA,
um, a lot of entities will say,
well, you should also exempt
those um that data that's used
for research, to me, that's
another gigantic hole, um, so we
did not include that data level
exemption.
So with that, um, I will, uh,
just end my presentation and
thank you so much. I really,
really appreciate everyone's uh.
Patients today. Thank you very,
thank you very much, Senator,
it's um kind of her hard to
absorb all the kind of
information that you.
And we're just some of us are
just trying to get our head
around it now, so your expertise
and knowledge is very much
appreciated. Um we have a few
questions, um, Senator Cedilia
Lopez. Anyone else?
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, this
is a very interesting, um,
approach and, and we are behind
in New Mexico, not, not, not
doing with it. I had a couple of
questions. One,
Uh
Opt out of certain kinds of
profiling on page summary of
basic rights by state. Um, what
does opt out of certain types of
profiling mean
how.
Practically you're talking
about. I, I think that's
represented Elkins' slide test
almost all of the Washington
Privacy Act template bills have
that provision that says you can
if if you don't want um
companies to use your data to uh
um you know, rate you for auto
insurance or, um, you know,
getting an apartment or
whatever, you can opt out of, of
uh uh of having your data used
in that.
Manner. Um, I didn't think that
was adequate myself because by
the time um you have reason to
complain about your data being
profiled, it's probably already
been done in, in, in bulk. Uh,
the insurance company is already
profiled you the uh the the
company that processes renters'
insurance has already a
renter's, um, that's renters for
uh um for um landlords has
already done it, which is why I
added the additional paragraph
in in my bill that
Immediately follows that one
that says if your data is
profiled anyway, you have these
additional rights.
Um, I think that's important and
that relates to the next
question, um, Mr. Elkins on or
uh.
Profiling protections unique to
Minnesota, I guess that's what
it's talking about, um, because,
and, and my question
specifically was what does legal
effects mean decisions that
produce legal effects. Would
that include employment
decisions, rental decisions. So
those are all.
And the basic Washington Privacy
Act set of definitions, those
are, are at this point kind of
settle terms of the art that you
will find in almost every
Washington Privacy Act bill.
Great, and then my final
question is, does this bill
apply to background checks, um,
that were done for employment
purposes.
Uh, it should, yes.
Because one of the things that
we're seeing here with
background checks, um, is there
seems to be one company that
does them all, and it seems like
you can't, like if you do uh if
you work for one school and then
you work for another school, and
then another school, you have to
do a background check for each
school and you have to pay this
company. I think it's $59 each
time and they, um, and their
reasoning for this is, um, well,
we can share that data.
And I asked them why and they
didn't really cite to anything,
so.
So I was a
A little confused by what that's
going on with the with I guess.
Yeah, so for that one you, you,
you might, you might have
interactions with your um
possibly existing state laws
regarding, you know, access to
uh uh you know, criminal
background information. So in
Minnesota, uh, we have long had
a state data uh data Practices
Act which governs the uses of uh
of data in state and local
government hands and um so you
may, if you have a similar law
there, you
uh running into uh interactions
between a date, your data
privacy law and your your state
data of practices Act if you
have one. So, so we should look
out for that because the thing
I'm concerned about is the
private company that does the
background check.
And
I'm wondering what the I think
it would be important to the
private company to be covered by
this act. If a company is, is
getting a legitimate getting
data from um from state
government and using it to
profile you. Um, I believe that
under under my bill, that
company would be required to
disclose the data to you, give
you the opportunity to correct
any errors in it and reevaluate
your background check based on
corrections that that that were
warranted. Correct.
Thank you. That's really
helpful. Thank you all for the
presentation. This is a, it's,
it's something we need to focus
on. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Exactly, um,
Representative Wuhan, thank you,
Madam chair.
Um,
so.
I've been to a couple of um uh
uh legislative conferences,
Madam Chair. I don't know I'm
getting I guess just because of
and I just answered my question.
Um, and talking about AI and one
of the factors that they, that
in the presentations from the
national conferences is um
making sure you might wanna step
a little bit away.
I think I know anyone.
One of the things
I can hear you this way.
Um
I just have a slide from one of
the presentations I had. Um, one
of the guidance, uh, usages with
AI, um, it's towards the idea of
keeping humans in the loop,
meaning that our AI framework
should be overseen by people.
Um, so that we have safety,
transparency, and traceability,
um, and we're looking at the non
discrimination and, and
environmental safety through
these pieces of legislation that
you've been able to pass and and
these other
How did you address those and if
I missed any of that, I think
the, the major component here is
that having the human in the
loop, uh, and making sure that
they stay in the loop.
Madam Chair.
Yeah, I, I, I, I'll, I'll take
that for the other two
legislators may want to chime on
this and as as well, um, but,
um, you know, in my, in, in my
bill that the business community
was asking for language that
said solely automated and uh I,
I didn't accept that. I just
said automated because, um, you
know, if there, there should be
a human interaction um there,
and I didn't want just a cursory
human.
Uh, uh, inter um oversight to,
um, you know, invalidate that
provision, but that's
essentially why in the paragraph
that I added related to
profiling, uh, I, I included the
sentence that requires a company
to be able to explain to you in
in plain English, why the the
model produced the result that
it did.
Uh, I think that is the, the key
sentence in that provision on my
bill that, that, that will will
end up mandating actual
meaningful human interaction.
And I agree with Representative
Elkins, um, we use the phrase
profiling means any form of
automated process processing so
that um anytime you use
automated processing, it's
covered, so we want to make sure
that individuals are in there
that that human beings have
oversight over it.
Thank you. So is it in
Um, where would you find those
guidelines, or are they actual
uh, uh, actually specific in
guidelines that you created in
the legislation.
So mine are in my definitions.
Yeah, I agree with Senator Love
is that uh you, you want to, as
you're diving into this, pay a
lot of attention to the
definitions. They're critical in
this bill, and there are like 3
or 4 pages of definitions in
there.
So, um, uh, so, yeah, most of
the, the the these questions
that you're probing right now,
you'll find the answers when you
read the definitions carefully.
Thank you so much. Uh, we've had
a couple of bills and I think
we're gonna talk about.
The other part is the
consistency. Did you have any
other bills that were AI related
that that you had to work with
so that you had um you had a
standardized or consistency in
those definitions, Madam Chair,
and that's my last question.
I'll, I'll address that a little
bit. So as I mentioned already,
um, we have a state data privacy
Act that uh date of practices
Act that governs the handling of
uh of data that's in the hands
of state and local government.
Um, I'm actually going to
planning to circle back and
And uh uh take some of the
things I learned um in the, in
the passage of this bill and see
which things might be um
warranted to to retrofit them
back into our data practices
Act. Um, the other thing that,
um, and, and Senator Love
touched on this as well about
HIPA, so I, I, I do consider
HIPA to be in large part a
significant part of a data
privacy bill for healthcare, but
it has lots of loopholes in it,
but HIPA is a baseline, HIPA.
Explicitly allows states to uh
uh to um enact a stricter
resolutions than than HIPA. Uh,
you can't be weaker than HIPA,
but states can and do have a
state laws that supplement
HIPAA. We have a, uh, Minnesota
Health Records Act, uh, here,
it's been on the books for
probably 20 years. Um, it's
badly in need of updating.
There's tons of references to
paper documents and an
electronic age. So I'm also
taking on a
Project to uh update the
Minnesota Health Records Act and
uh you know, fold some of the
stuff out of my consumer data
privacy bill into an update of
the Health Records Act as well.
So yes, you should be paying
attention to um other, other
parts of state law that may
interact, need to be integrated
with these bills.
Thank you.
So we, uh,
There's another senator, Senator
Katie Fre Hester, who's on the
working group. She is focused
more on the AI bills, um, she
and I worked very closely on the
definitions, um, because we both
agreed that we had to get this
bill passed and get it right in
order to build in AI protection
so that we can use AI, um,
responsibly and, and ethically
and well, um, so we worked very
closely on the definitions.
Um, and actually something that
Representative Elkins just said
from uh triggered me uh to
notice that I, I did the acronym
for HIPA wrong in my slide. So
my, my apologies, it's HIPAA,
not PPA. So, apologies for that,
everyone. Thank you. I, I worked
in healthcare, uh, IT for the
last 10 years of my career, so I
had to take HIPAA training every
year.
Thank, thank you. Anyone else,
um
Um, I wanna thank all three of
you and um honor you by saying
that I've been very impressed
with the work you've been doing
and it's a great kind of
overview for us, I think,
because we are going to be
seeing bills.
This probably this year and no
doubt in the future and it's
good for us to have a sense
about what's going on in other
states and what challenges there
were, and it's a good
educational foundation for
So I want to thank you for being
kind of trendsetters and um you
know, out there learning the
information for us and being
willing to be a resource for. So
thank you very much. Um, I
imagine we'll be participating
in your working groups as we go
forward. So, um, appreciate your
time. I know it's very valuable
to you, so thanks again,
appreciate it.
Thank you all.
and don't hesitate to uh reach
out if you've got additional
questions. Absolutely.
Take care.
All right, um.
We now are um we have our next
panel and then we have lunch and
I want everyone to know that we
are bringing lunch in for folks,
um, courtesy of Kim Lagant, and
that will be arriving relatively
soon, but I want to do our next
panel, which is assisted
outpatient treatment next steps
build out stakeholders and
review and what this um.
relates to is the work that we
did during the special session
and the um expansion of AOT
pilot programs, um, in certain
Judicial districts and
Very happy to have
Members of the judiciary and
staff from the judiciary here
and very much appreciate your
willingness to work with us on
this important issue, um, I'd
like to acknowledge Chief
Justice Thompson,
the floor is yours, Chief
Justice, and if each one of you
would introduce yourselves,
that'd be super helpful. Sure,
absolutely, um, let's start with
introductions if that's all
right. We'll give you sort of an
overview.
From my perspective and then
we'll kinda.
Go down the
Food chain, no offense to my
trial court judges to explain
for you sort of the levels how
we're gonna
um how we're going to approach
this issue. So, uh, let me start
with Judge Le. You want to
introduce yourself, Judge?
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, pleasure to be here.
My name is Jason Lydiard. I'm a
district court judge in the
First Judicial District.
Hi, good morning, uh, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
my name is Kathleen V. Hill and
I'm the court executive officer
for the first Judicial District.
Morning, Madam Chair, Karl
Reifteck, I'm the new director
of the administrative Office of
the courts, Mr. Pepin, longtime
director, wonderful director is
retiring, uh, his last day in
the office will be next Friday,
so you're, you're stuck with me
to.
Going forward, good afternoon,
uh, Madam Chair, members of
committee, I'm Dave Thompson.
I'm the Chief Justice of New
Mexico Supreme Court. Thank you
for having me. I'm reappearing
on AOT, um, the reason is, uh,
my two reasons. One is, um, I
very much appreciate the
conversation, um, that we had.
Um, in the last meeting and the
conversation we've had with the
Executive branch in an effort to
do our best to, uh, address what
is an emerging concern not just
in this state.
Um, in every state about what to
do.
Uh, in the matter of interaction
of a criminal.
Activity and competency in
essence, um, and so I thought it
was important to come today as a
follow up given.
Um, the fact that the, uh,
legislature is appropriate the
money and the, the executive,
uh, signed the bill.
So we'll stand for questions
that the structure is sort of
this, we have, uh, we'll have
Carl talk a little bit about
what the short term plan is for
the funding as far as, um, AOC,
um, administrative office of the
courts.
Uh, processes and then, um, as
you will learn, uh, much of this
work, all of this work is done
on the ground and the closest to
on the ground are our trial
courts. Uh, let me emphasize two
things.
One is
We could have.
Come with the 2nd judicial
program or the 3rd. I invited
the first because I thought
actually this was going to be in
the first judicial, so I thought
it was gonna be.
So that's really my fault. I was
like, well, we'll make it easy
on everybody. So we could have
provided other districts.
Um,
But here's what we can do if you
think of it as a construction
analogy, we can put up the walls
and the windows. If we do not
have the foundation, this is not
going up.
And we can't build a foundation.
We're not the funders, and more
importantly, when it comes to
the professionals.
Um, behavioral health
professionals that is not our
venue. That's you and the
executive.
So as encouraging as this
conversation may be.
We are putting it in places
where we have a chance to
succeed if we can succeed on
this. And that is, um, in the
locations we've described.
So with that, Carl wants to
spend a few minutes sort of um
on broad strokes on AOC's
program and then I'll turn it
over, uh, to Judge Lydiard, and
then we'll stand for questions
if that works, chair, OK?
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, good morning.
We're still in the morning, uh.
We're going to pick up a little
bit where the morning's
presentation left off and we're
going to talk a lot about
competency diversion programs
and also assisted outpatient
treatment programs and I want to
emphasize off the bat that those
are very separate concepts,
right, the, um, populations that
they address might might have
some overlap and so I, the
conversation kind of gets going
together, but the competencies
diversion programs really apply
in the criminal.
Case context
And assisted outpatient
treatment is really a civil, uh,
procedure and so they're just
legally very distinct and so I
don't wanna.
I know some of the
Concepts and words and
populations overlap, but I, I
want to keep those a little bit
separate.
Um,
As the chief said, we're
Really, um, interested to be
part of this solution, um, but
we only have the people, we in
the judiciary only have the
people who are coming to court,
right? We, that's, that's what
we do. We're the courts. And so
we're only a small piece of this
and we're excited to get to
partner with everybody else, um,
who's out there, um, and those
are our counties, those are our
providers in the community.
There are prosecutors and
defense attorneys, um, and the
community at large, and so that
takes time of course, to get
things up and up and running and
and.
Folks pulling in the same
direction.
Um,
We're looking at competency
diversion programs here in the
in the first judicial district,
Santa Fe, Rio Riba, Los Alamos
Counties.
Um, in the 3rd judicial
district, we've started a pilot
program that's Donana County,
and the 4th judicial district
that's um San Miguel Mora in
Guadalupe counties.
And in the 12th, Lincoln and
Otero Counties and so that's
that competency diversion
program you heard about with
the, the navigators to try to
match up folks with repeated
competency cases with behavioral
health type services.
We're also looking at assisted
outpatient treatment programs
again in the first district,
Santa Fe Rio Riba Los Alamos,
uh, and uh the 4th district
court against San Miguel,
um, Moupe and then there are
separate kind of existing
programs here in Bernna Leo
County in the 2nd district
court, and then also the
long-standing program in Donana
County, the 3rd District Court.
Um, but we, we're really
starting um pretty fresh,
especially with these programs
in the in the first I really
appreciate the partnership we're
we're having with the court and
also the three counties uh are
really expressing a lot of great
interest, but we've got a lot of
that community building kind of
work to do.
Um, so right now AOC is looking
to hire for um our two folks
statewide. We have these jobs
posted right now, um, to help
with our implementation really
um make sure we're following
best practices. I imagine that
we will borrow heavily from the
existing program in Donana
County.
Um,
But again, it takes that
community buy-in, so we can't
just um.
Stamp these programs out.
Um, and then we'll be looking to
add in short order some local
program managers on the ground
to really corral corral folks.
Um
In in those communities.
Um, and be able to pay for the
treatment, right? Um, Medicaid
doesn't pay for all of the
treatment, um, people might be
private pay but not be able to
afford the copay, so we have to
pick that up. Um, and then we
need to fund court-appointed
attorneys in these districts on
the uh assisted outpatient
treatment side, folks have the
right to counsel and if they
can't afford it, we have to
provide it. So that's another
area we're going to be looking
for, uh, attorneys down the
road.
Um, and then we have to fund,
um, these navigator positions as
well, and so that's, that's
another area we, we have to get
started and we're we're moving
forward across all those fronts,
but it's a lot of startup work.
You let me know
So that'll be implemented by
AOC, so the next step.
Um
Our stakeholders, which I often
used term I kind of like it. I'm
not sure. I go back and forth,
but, um, so what are we going to
do next? For example, in the
first judicial, we already had
emails prior to the session
saying, oh, you're starting AOT.
We want to know about it, hold
on. Um, now we have the funding
we'll bring in and this is where
the first will come in. We'll
bring in the main stakeholders,
the, the state prosecutor, the
defense.
Um, the county, um, that
provides a lot of these
services, uh,
We are also so to build some
confidence, you know, we've
addressed similar things, um.
For example, guardianship.
And in some cases, uh, what
we've learned is it's not just
the buildup, but it's the
monitoring, so at the same time
we're building the programs out
we have to make sure that we are
studying them and that we are
collecting the data to make
sure, uh, when we come back to
you, um, we can answer your
questions with regard to the,
um, whether or not it is
productive and.
As much as we can scientifically
valid. So Judge Ludiard, um, is
our judge up in TA. He is also
on the commission, um, his
former life was as a.
A prosecutor.
Who alleges and he will tell you
he has brought AOT petitions as
a state's attorney, so he has
some experience in doing that.
Um, and just work closely with
Kathleen and the chief judge of
the first judicial, uh, with
Santa Fe County and can give you
sort of an example of how we
would build this out at the
local level.
So I you.
Madam Chair, members of the
commission, thank you, Chief
Justice. Just to clarify, as a
prosecutor, I did petition for
civil commitment, not AOT AOT,
um, there's only a specific list
of individuals who qualified to
petition, and that does not
include the district attorney's
office and maybe that would be
something to look into, um, but
we are extremely excited in the
first judicial district to
implement and thank you so much
for the funding that you
provided for us to do so. It
will take us some time, but we
are interested in doing this
quickly, and we will work as
hard as we can to make sure that
it's implemented in a swift
fashion, but there is a great
deal of infrastructure and
framework training as well as
collaborative work that needs to
be done and um in my experience
working at the district
attorney's office doing civil
commitments. We do need to train
our law enforcement officers
that they need to when they
identify an individual who is
suffering from a mental illness,
not to take them to the
detention centers and to take
them to
Our hospitals and when they get
to the hospitals, our hospitals
need to be available for them to
be taking these individuals in
and not allowing them to sit in
the waiting rooms too long for
them to be seen.
And then once they go into the
hospital that those
professionals are trained to
know how to petition for
circumstances such as civil
commitment and AOT, and then
once that petition is filed that
we have the attorneys that
represent these individuals that
is required under state law to
be provided to indigent
individuals. Thereafter, we need
qualified professionals who are
willing, able to come to court
and testify as to the
circumstances that individual.
To establish the necessary
criteria for a district judge or
a special commissioner to order
a civil commitment or AOT, and
then once that person is in
those programs to have treatment
guardians to ensure that those
individuals are in compliance
with their treatment, and if
they are not to enforce the
orders of the court so that
those treatments can be
implemented for those
individuals. And then the
service providers to provide
that service. And I believe that
that's what we're going to be
doing with
The administrative office of the
court in the coming weeks and
months to ensure that we have an
AOT process implemented in the
first judicial district court.
The only thing I would add is we
will train our judges, um.
They need to be trained in in
this area certainly, and that'll
be part of uh CEI school. Um,
thank you, Judge Lydiard
Kathleen, um, maybe you can
explain a little bit about your
interaction with Santa Fe County
and, uh, how that has gone so
far.
Sure. Um, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, uh, Chief
Judge Beeside and I did meet
with um, a member of the Santa
Fe County and, um, discussed
some of the options that we
would have in, in the county.
She did. I, uh, notify us that
there are 25 to 30 people who
would be eligible currently for
this pilot program and, um, so
we've already started that kind
of groundwork, um, I did want to
thank you all for
Um, having us here today and we,
we're really looking forward to
implementing this program. Um,
we have worked with the AOC. We
started working with them on the
implementation and, um, what
steps we we're gonna need to go
through to get this program off
the off the ground, so, um,
thank you. Thank you all.
Cha's time for questions. Thank
you very much, Senator
Cervantes.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um.
I'm sure I, I simply really
wanted to, without questions,
uh, thank the Chief Justice.
He's been on the job for 4
months, 5 months now, I guess.
Well, well,
I mean it's the chief that's
what you meant it's felt like 2
years. 4 months, 4 months. I am
1 I have noticed you've been on
the bench for a little bit
longer.
Thank you. Yeah,
yeah, um, and for the, for the
non-lawyers on the group, I
think it's important to
recognize the court cycles
through chiefs every couple of
years we had
bacon here many years who was uh
before the committee quite a bit
and I, I don't, is this, this is
not the first time you're in
front of us, is it? No, as the,
as the chief,
2,
OK, hopefully last. All right,
yeah.
So I wanted to, yeah, I wanted
to welcome. Well, that special
session kind of threw us all for
a little bit, um, but, but
really that's why I wanted to be
recognized, Madam Chair. I
wanted to thank the Chief who
forgive us a great deal of his
time leading up to the special
session, and he met with Mr.
Ladaou who's in the front row
here.
To come ins around here a little
bit, met with me. That kind of
dialogue between us and the
judiciary at the highest levels
is really how we're going to get
someplace with all this, um,
don't mean to put you on the
spot. Have you had a chance to
meet at all with the governor
since you've been chief? Um, I
have not said or asked me that
last time I did follow up and I
reached out to general counsel,
um, to, to have that meeting
along with the chief of staff. I
did follow up on your request. I
appreciate that. And again, that
question is, I know the answer
before I
Basket, you know, a good lawyer,
right? You always know the
answer to the question before
you ask it. I, I know what the
answer is going to be, and I, I
asked the question as much as
anything to try and continue to
encourage the executive branch
to have a dialogue with us, to
have a dialogue with the
judiciary, with you as the Chief
Justice, I think the last Chief
Justice did not have an
opportunity to visit. We have an
open dialogue with the governor
either. And, and the committee
needs to know that the public
needs to know that, and we're
just never going to get
anywhere. we may not always like
each other, we may always get
along. There may be some
animosity. Somebody's got a
Call it out, you know,
somebody's got to say, hey,
we've got to be talking. So I,
I, you're right, last time I
asked you, have you had that
chance? I appreciated you making
the effort. I hope you won't
give up. Um, I, I don't give up
either Mr. Lightwood is smiling.
I'm frequently trying to get the
same opportunity to have a
dialogue with the executive
branch, so I appreciate that. I
also, um, I'm sure this is not
for the panel, sort of, but it
sort of is in the front row for
the members of the committee who
don't know Mr. Massas, who's in
the front row here in the sort
of white.
So, um, those of you who don't
know, I'm Senator former Senator
Macias used to be the chair of
the Senate Judiciary Committee
many years ago was in the
Senate. Uh, he's gonna soon be
our district attorney in Donana
County. Um, other than just
being the Senate Judiciary
chair, he was also the county
manager, which I think is
relevant because we keep talking
about AOT, this topic, and the
third judicial district as the
manager, he would have been very
intimately involved with the
management and administration of
the AOT program and the third,
which has been kind of held up.
Recently, as something something
of a guide or model, um, and,
and so as the county manager,
he's also been a, a judge,
district court judge. So, um,
I'm hoping he's going to prove
the point that I've been trying
to make for a long time, which
is we don't need more laws. We
need effective leaders, and I'm
counting on Mr. Mass with the
Senate Judiciary chair
background and a district court
Those kind of things, those
unique things to bring it
together. So I wanted to make
sure the committee knew who he
was in that experience and then
again to recognize that the
third is being held up as a
model. I'll, I'll tell you the
reason in my mind I've expressed
several times the third has been
a model on AO2 is to a large
degree, the county's
participation, and I see you
nodding your head on the panel
too. The county's been a huge,
um, component of that, and that
was again during Mr. Massas's
time as the manager and, and
also a lot of credit.
To Senator Mary Kay, who
sponsored, pushed through the
legislation and just, if you
know her, no, she sinks her
teeth in and just doesn't let
go. And that's what this takes
sometimes is that kind of
dedication. So thank you, Madam
Chair. Just some observation on
this idea of AOT uh I'll, I'll
note that, um, Madam Chair, you,
I, Senator Stewart, the protem,
and I met many, many hours with
the governor's staff.
Uh, with the governor's chief
counsel,
uh, with uh uh Diego, um, and
Holly in their conference room,
Madam Chair, you did too. There
were, I want the committee to
know there were boards filled of
writings and butcher paper and
notes and suggestions and
throwing things up at the wall.
We did all of that. So the any
suggestion post special session
because this is our first
meeting post special session
that the legislature did not put
in the work, did not make the
effort, didn't not make
themselves available, uh.
You all need to know that this
committee needs to know that the
public needs to know that.
That's all completely false.
Thank you, man.
You're welcome, Senator. Anyone
else, um, I just wanted to
underscore something also, and
that is we spent, I don't know,
almost the, the greater part of
our special, special session
meetings talking about AOT and
how that law could be improved
upon. And I think there is
opportunity to improve upon that
law, but I think this is an
example of proceeding with a
program under current
legislation that um just by
bringing the right parties
together.
And showing the will and desire
to move forward on something and
this is the result of
cooperation between the
legislative branch, the judicial
branch, and yes, the executive
in an effort to move forward
without the need for additional
legislation. We have seen that
AOT works reasonably well and
Donana County. We had a great
briefing on that and uh that is
a basis is, is sort of
foundational for us and the
judiciary
And others to move forward in
these other districts where we
think, you know, there is a good
opportunity and um availability
and moving forward in for a
successful program, so you just
want to underscore that, that
point again. No need for a
special session on ALT. We have
the foundational legislation
now. It could be improved upon
and we can, we can talk about
that, but while we have these
pilots moving forward, we're
going to learn a lot about what
works and what doesn't work, and
that will give
more data from which to improve
upon the bill if the law, if
necessary, but I want to thank
the courts for working with us
and I can see you're all very
committed to trying to make this
to be a successful program, and
if there's anything we can do as
a committee or as a legislature,
please come to us, any one of
us, and, and because we'll be
happy to try to work with you
and if legislation is needed or
additional monies we'll try to
assist with that as well, so any
um closing comments on Chief.
Justice
We stand on the record, chair,
uh, I know, I take it into rice
but not use all the time that's
given. I, I appreciate advocates
that don't do that. I won't use
any more time. I do know you had
a presentation on AI before
this.
If there's AI judge version. Uh,
please let us know, uh, before
you decide to implement, uh,
that, but other than that, we
appreciate your time. We're here
to, you know, as you, uh,
reciprocate in any questions or
help we can provide in this
regard, we're happy to do it.
Thank you keep us posted. We're,
we really appreciate you working
with us on this. Thank you.
Thank you.
All right, we can take our lunch
