Are, UM District Court and
several of our community
providers, and I'm going to try
to also answer some of the
questions from this morning. So
currently there are 20 IE in New
Mexico that are being ordered.
We started the the program. We
also received some federal grant
funding and that funding came to
the county in 2017 years. So we
started, um, developing the
program. We started with the
petitions in late 2017.
Obviously between 2017. And now
I When I talk about things I
reference pre covid Post covid.
So there were a couple of years
where things really slowed down.
But in total since we started in
late 2017, we've served about
200 people under a court order.
There is some information here
that I'm going to, um, have
already heard And I don't want
to be repetitious. But if you do
have any questions about any of
this, I'm happy to go back
again. Obviously, we all know
what a OT is, and I think it's
important.
Just a again to reiterate that
it is community based.
It's for people who have had a
difficult time engaging in
treatment, and it is for people
who are living with serious
mental illness of all of the
folks that have been served
under an a OT order in our
community. Most have had, um
bipolar and a few have been
diagnosed with or I guess the
most is bipolar. Second is
schizoaffective disorder
diagnosis. After that those are
the two top diagnoses. Most of
the folks do have co occurring
substance.
Use disorders. But substance use
is not the primary diagnosis and
that primary diagnosis and the
evidence that someone has a
serious mental illness is the
evidence for that is a clinical
assessment done by a qualified
professional.
Again. It is to, um support
people who have a history of not
engaging in, um, services, and
sometimes that is a result of,
uh, the individuals and, um,
accessing services. Sometimes
the services don't exist, but
oftentimes the services do
exist. It's just difficult when
you have a brain disease to call
and make an appointment. Get to
your appointment. Pick up your
medication, all of the things
that you need to do to access
services.
So we know that people, um with
serious mental illness are
caught in this revolving door
and we know that that causes
additional trauma and we know
that there's very little return
on that investment. We are
spending we taxpayers. We
family, we we, anyone is
spending a lot of money. Um, in
that revolving door and in those
systems, and we're not getting,
uh, a nice outcome for for our
investment, not improving and
overall proving so A OT is a way
to change that. That
Provides supportive engagement
strategy is to help address
great way of doing that is
through peer employees peer
support within the the
treatment. It is a form of civil
commitment, so it does have the
court behind it and has some
type of, um holding people
accountable. It is trauma
informed in the way our program
addresses and serves people and
everyone on the team, The judge,
the attorneys, everyone has
received training in trauma,
informed care and can
Nice when someone has
experienced trauma and
Try to not re traumatize people
through the process. Uh, again,
it is a way to leverage the
power of the courts, not only
for the individual in hopes to
change their behavior, but it
also influences the service
providers, um, and helps keep
the service providers on tasks
and task and make sure that
they're doing their due
diligence in serving folks who
were under the A OT order.
You heard a lot about the the
law this morning, So they're
right now, Um Joanna County
Government and our district
court. There is an MOU between
the the two governments that
allows us to O.
We do have a A petitioner. We,
um have an attorney that the
county pays for so the
administrative office cost like
they do for inpatient commitment
hearings. Um, the county covers
the cost of the attorney for the
You need a clinician to do the
evaluation most of the time
that's covered by Medicaid
services. But we do have special
contracts with, um, outpatient
behavioral health providers to
make sure that these evaluations
happen quickly. The type of
This is just an example that
will accompany that petition and
be presented to the court
Includes Act, which includes CCS
S intensive case management. Um,
these are just examples of what
is required that the types of
treatment that is required and
we do have this in Danna County
CC SS
Um and act are both reimbursed
by Medicaid so the individual
doesn't have to cover the cost.
Um Medicaid will cover for both
the act and the CCS S Act is
only available in very few
communities. But CCS S, which is
comprehensive community support
services is available in many
communities. Even smaller
communities in New Mexico. Um
and it is, uh, up to one year
and there's an option for the
second year. Most
Folks in our program are, um,
just in the program for a year,
But we often um, extend it even
if it's just an additional six
months. The eligibility criteria
you heard morning, so I'm going
to to skip that slide.
Um, the petitioner. This is the
the list of qualified
petitioners and again. The, um
In addition to the petitioner,
you need the clinician Who is
going to do that clinical
diagnosis? Submit that
affidavit. So in addition to
being a petitioner, the
qualified professional is also
required to submit an affidavit
treatment provider who is going
to be providing the service has
to submit a treatment plan. So
these, um any of these
petitioners can
Together right now, in our
program, it is usually the um,
treatment provider in the
community or the treatment
provider in a hospital. That is
the petitioner we have had, um,
some parents contact our office
and of their their child. But
for the most part, it's been, um
mental health providers or
hospital. Um, clinicians.
Versus Obviously we need the
judge. Uh, we need the court
system. We need the court
orders. We need that black robe
effect or that motivation that a
judge can provide. And right now
the county covers that cost so
the county pays for the the
court fees.
The respondents attorney, Um you
have to have someone there to
protect the civil rights of the
respondent and, um right now the
county also covers we contract
with the same swift for
inpatient commitment hearings
and for us when we started
learning how to do the
outpatient commitment hearing.
we just modeled it after the
inpatient commitment hearing, so
it was nice to have the same
judge.
And the same attorneys, um, in
the room for for that process,
But we do cover that cost out of
just County. Um, general funds.
Um, the petitioner needs an
attorney also and early on in
the program. Our district
attorney agreed to be and I
don't know if the legal term was
co petitioner, but they
petitioned on behalf of the
petitioner so there was no cost
to the county to file that
paperwork because at the time
our dis district attorney was,
um
Filing that paperwork for us and
again it was ideal because the
district attorney does the
inpatient commitments. So it was
the same folks. The docket would
stay the same so every Tuesday
afternoon it would be all of the
behavioral health, civil
commitment and you would go
through the inpatient and then
the outpatient commitment
hearings all at the same time on
the same docket with the same
attorneys, the same judge, and
it was also nice, because if
someone is going to
That time Pre covid. They were
coming up to Las Vegas. It was
really nice to also have an
outpatient, a OT order that
would become effective when the
person returned to our
community.
So
Having the same uh three folks
that were involved in the court
system involved in in a OT was
was really nice. Um, with
changes in the district
attorney's office in recent
years, we've had to move to a
private attorney. And so the
county has to pick up the cost
now of that private attorney,
and it's kind of separated the
inpatient and the outpatient.
um, process within the court.
The, UM qualifying professional
again, the medical provider that
has to submit the affidavit and
the treatment plan. Most of
that, um most of the time that
is paid by Medicaid to to do
that, the, um, provider that is
going to offer the ongoing
service for the entire inn. Um,
under an a O order. The, UM
provider of again either act or
other treatment medication,
whatever it is in our community
about 85% of the folks have
Medicaid or
Least within the first month.
They get re enrolled in
Medicaid, so Medicaid covers the
majority of the treatment costs.
The state. Um does have some
funding for P uses our county
health care assistance or
indigent program to cover the
cost. Um, if someone is
uninsured, so the treatment
costs are, um
Very manageable because
Medicaid the types of services
that people engage in are
covered under under Medicaid. We
also in our department, we have
a program coordinator. So, um,
either through grant funding or
county general funds, and that
person coordinates more than
just a OT. They coordinate all
version type programs. We've
also had the ability based
organization that provides
housing services, so having a
housing funds
Early on, Um, when we had the
federal grant, it was a
demonstration project, so there
was a lot of evaluation, a lot
of data collection and a lot of
additional costs that the grant
covered for program evaluation.
Um
When that grant ended the
program evaluation requirements
went away, but we still work
with New Mexico State University
and collect some basic data, so
we still provide, um, some
funding for program evaluation
because we wanna see if the
program is still effective. But
those are the the resources
needed and kind of who's
response. I think everyone heard
the court Pro process again. We
started with hospital discharge,
and that will
Court came to them and it was
usually it was, um short stays
in our local hospital, so it
wasn't necessarily civil. In
patient. It was just an
inpatient, um, visit
They didn't meet the criteria
for inpatient civil commitment.
but we knew that they had a
history of the the revolving
doors, So we would, um, take
referrals from our local
hospitals and covid changed a
lot of things that happened in
hospitals. So post covid. We've
really started, um, seeing more
community based referrals, so
oftentimes it is a treatment
provider in the community who
already knows that, um, their
hospitalized frequent
Incarcerated frequently so that
outpatient provider is the
petitioner and says, I think my
client needs a little extra
civil outpatient. Um
Uh, order would be very helpful.
So those are the community based
referrals that we we receive.
We've recently started working
with law enforcement. Uh, Las
Cruces police chief. That's
another area where and it can be
a pathway into a OT family.
Identify people in the community
who could be, um, well served
under an a O order.
Um, there's the initial hearing
where the patient is represented
by counsel. We do have the the
court orders that require the
patient to comply with the
treatment plan, but also
requires the behavioral health
system and all of the people
involved in that treatment to
adhere to the treatment plan,
and no one wants to come to the
judge and say, I'm sorry.
We just, You know, Jamie didn't
come to her appointment and we
didn't do anything about it. So
they always come very well
prepared to talk about all of
the ways they tried to engage.
Um, right now we have judicial
reviews. We have the initial
hearing that, um if someone is
except when someone is accepted
into the program, and then we do
a two month and a six month
check in and then we do an 11
month, and usually that's a
congratulations. You've
graduated in a very celebratory,
um, time or that's when we
decide to
Ask for an extension and those,
um those hearings are, I think
what makes a OT different and
what is one of the most
valuable? Um, opportunities for
people, you can be in treatment
and and that's kind of the same
for everyone. But if you sit in
front of a judge, and a judge
says, tell me about your goals
are you taking your medication?
Are you going to your
appointments and either puts
pressure on them to engage or
congratulate them for engaging?
It's amazing to see what
Evaluation post program and we
talked to the participants. They
said. Well, that judge cared
about me. I've never had anybody
ask how I'm doing Nobody in a
black robe sitting up in this,
uh, you know, seat of authority
that cared about
Where did you eat yesterday?
Where you live to see happen
firsthand during these, um,
status reviews or if the person
is not doing well, um and we do
have to have an emergency
hearing. It's just another
person and a person in the
position of the help persuade
the individual to get back on on
track. So again that personal
connection between the judge,
that's what makes these judicial
reviews. Um, really important,
so there may not be a lot of
Hearings, but it does take some
court time because we come back
to the same judge several times
during the the 12 months that
the individual is in the
program.
And then there's also team
meetings. So every other month
everyone involved in that
patient's care. The housing
navigator, the case manager, the
therapist, the peer support
worker, they all get together
and talk about progress, so it's
a way of sharing information
among all of the providers and
again, everybody focused on the
same treatment plan, and
everybody focused on helping
engage with
Um, the court orders for a O are
uniquely toothless, so people
often say, what's the point? If
I can't hold you in contempt,
there's no automatic return to
inpatient commitment. I can't
force medication on you.
Really What's what's the value
and again we just go back to
that court order and the black
robe effect. So, um, you heard
that, uh, these programs started
in New York, and there's a quite
a A lot of evaluation that goes
on there. Um, one of the
evaluation outcomes talked about
the increase in services
important, but it's the court
order itself. That appears to be
what is different. And what
helps people in this program do
better and have better outcomes.
And again, that's um
The kind of the the terminology
is the black robe effect. So the
judge in that seat of position a
symbol of authority really
embraces the role of the primary
motivator asks questions. One of
the evaluation tools is an OB
observation survey. So we have,
uh, one of the evaluate
courtroom and they observe and
they check Mark. How many of the
individual how many times did
the individual get to speak in
court? What was that
communication like?
Um
And then the the lack of
punishment doesn't mean there's
not a consequence.
And oftentimes punishment isn't
going to change behavior. But
the consequence I help you find
a place to live. The consequence
of I'm gonna keep coming and
visiting with you every day.
Just to check on you. Even if
you're living, um in a tent,
Those types of consequences can
be more motivational and lead to
more behavior change than the
consequence of punishment.
So again, um, back to the study
in New York has proven effective
that aces.
Hospitalisations reduces arrest.
There is a A lot of very valid
long term evaluation, especially
in in New York to show that it
is effective in all the areas
that, um, not just in New York.
They, um, has been studies
state. The last states. I think
we were number four. We We had
some, um other states to to look
to and evaluation and other. Um,
But here for
Finished up our federally funded
program, um, and published our
evaluation report in 2021, and
it is a a group at NSU. New
Mexico State University called
crimson Research that conducted
this and they, um through that
evaluation, we documented that
the average number of
hospitalizations reduced by 80
by 58%.
Number of days spent in a
psychiatric hospital reduced by
69% number of rest. Um, arrests
declined. 81%. There was a
reduction in homelessness. So
obviously the team did was try
to find housing for folks. The,
UM, attitude towards medication
change to take medication, um,
mental health symptoms, uh,
perceived to be less bothersome.
So a lot of these, um questions
came from pre and post surveys
with the individual.
Before they were in the program
or at the beginning of the
program and evaluators down and
asked them a set of questions
Six months later, And then, a
year later, I asked them the
same questions and that's when
people were talking about these
quality of life measures
improving.
We also, um, had to look at the
individual's rights and how they
felt going through the course we
don't want to infringe on their
rights. We didn't want to coerce
people into doing things that
weren't um, wasn't appropriate.
So a lot of the questions with
them and 92% of the folks said
that the judge treated them
respectfully and that they felt
more hopeful after the program.
There were about 100 questions
asked. So we have a lot of data.
Um, this is just an example. But
all of the data was was very
favorable for how the individual
felt about the process and also
the actual outcomes and their
quality of so that is, uh, a
quick overview of our program.
And I think we can spend most of
the time and our
Very good. Thank you.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Great information. You said that
since 2017 approximately 200. Do
you have a recidivism rate
Definitive. We tracked that for
the first year. I don't have it.
Um in my my brain right now it
it is very low. Most people come
through the program just just
once.
I brought the report with me. So
after this, I'll look it up.
Um, can you tell me currently
the annual for the court fees we
pay for the two attorneys and
then a portion of a program
coordinator in in our
department. Um
And it it fluctuates. But it is
probably between 100 and 100 and
50. That's
Grant money, Private insurance
Medicare.
So, um, Madam Chair,
representative. Let me let me
correct myself. So the 100 to
150 is what comes out of either
county or grant funds.
Everything else in the program
is covered by Medicaid or by, um
other
Other sources, so that's not the
total cost of the program
because we don't track the
health care cause that comes out
of a different
Fund. OK, so the 150,000 is
Is it private insurance? Um,
Madam Chair representative. No
about 85% of the folks have
Medicaid.
And
Most of those folks are already
But they're not getting a good
return on their investment. Um,
because they don't, um,
consistently follow through with
their treatment plans, so it's
costing Medicare or Medicaid.
I'm sorry, Medicaid a lot more
MI and is not healthier. The
person is often hospitalized.
So it
We haven't done a a fiscal
study, but the the there's
Not a lot of additional cost to
Medicaid. In fact, it's probably
less per member per month
because they're not paying for
repeat hospitalizations. They're
paying to keep people healthy
and the other, um
Folks that are uninsured about
20% 15 to 20%. They either
become insured because we help
them enroll in Medicaid or the
state has coverage. But the
majority of the cost is
Medicaid. So I would say that
the 100 or 150 is what you need.
in addition to what already
exists.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Um and
M, Michael. So
Um, Is it possible to get a copy
of the agreement that you? Yes.
Um it'd be interesting, Madam
chair. If I share that with you
clear, it's the MOU as well with
a court and actually the report.
Um, you're a self assessment
report, or I think on what you
want, but sorry, I think so.
Yeah. Just helping
We're all headed to the same
thing.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
there I may.
Uh, thank you very much, Um
Questions here. You mentioned
that you were and
And you were evaluating. Um yes,
because it was a federal grant,
And it was like a pilot project.
The intent from the F grant
funds were dedicated to
treatment there. It was more of
a so during that time we did.
People who were in having less
involvement with the criminal
number of arrests. We looked at
day four were they involve us
often now because we don't have
all of that federal money.
So we don't have the money and
we don't have the mandate. We
do. Um, we we just look at Are
they in jail Less? Are they
treatment plan? We don't do less
involvement in criminal justice
system, less involvement, and
most people successfully finish.
The are they really not even
come willingly.
Demonstrate contempt because
they really
So, um, The intent here is that
if someone
So if the court order the court
order says you will comply with
your treatment plan.
If someone does not comply with
the treatment plan, for example,
if they miss an appointment
That doesn't mean that the court
can hold so there's there's no
ability that court order doesn't
It's not like, um, treatment
course. If you don't do this,
then, um you're held in contempt
or your probation is is
violated. This these court
orders don't have any of that.
And II. I guess I think that
Cause I had a friend who's kid
with, um she died very young.
Um so I'm a little bit. Um,
Madam Chair representative th
This program is community based.
So the goal is to keep people
out of the hospital. But all
three hospital we have three
hospitals in in Las Cruces. We
have Mesilla Valley. Uh,
inpatient Unit. All three of
those providers can petition
And as somebody is leaving the
hospital they can move into, Um,
a OT so the treatment doesn't
happen at the hospital, but
oftentimes the hospitals are the
ones that initiate the petition.
Usually the hearing happens in
the hospital so before the the
individual is discharged from
the hospital and the treatment
plan, and everything is already
set up. The court order is in
place, so when they're
discharged from the hospital,
they
Move right into the care of the
outpatient, um, behavioral
health provider under that civil
court order.
And Madam chair. I really do
appreciate doing it sound. It
sounded to me and I'm not sure
and is the program for Dona Anna
County exclusively or do you
take people from outside of the
county? Cuz? You said you have a
mou between the city and county
and the district court. Do you
get people from Santa Fe for
Turkey from Matt's or from
I don't know. Northern New
Mexico, whatever the equivalent
is No, Ma, Madam Chair
representative, you have to live
in Danna County. Um, and so you
have to have an address. Um, in
Danic, Um, just side note, Madam
chair. I mean, I think it's a
It's really hard, um, my
replicated because what I heard
you say earlier was that this is
not just drug addiction,
treatment or other. Yes. Um yes.
That is correct. The primary
diagnosis has to be some type of
serious mental illness like the
ones you just listed,
Oftentimes. People also have a
substance use disorder. The the
reason that a OT
Is for a subs. Serious mental
illness.
As the primary versus substance
use is the primary is because
it's been studied and been
effective, proven to be
effective for people with
serious mental illness, not as
much for people who just have a
primary diagnosis of substance
use and the the treatment
modalities that are allowed like
a
That's a treatment for serious
mental illness. That's not a
treatment for sub so you can
treat both but the primary, um,
diagnosis for the folks in the
program with dual diagnosis.
Yes, Absolutely. Mhm, Um And
then my last question, madam, So
do you all receive any the the
opioid settlement funding?
And our county does. We haven't
used any for this probe. The
Dona County government receives
opioid settlement, um, dollars,
but to date we haven't used any
of
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for this presentation. Um,
you said that you need to have
an an address in Donna County to
qualify. So what about for
Unhoused folks?
Thank you for allowing me to
clarify that the the address can
be the homeless shelter, so it
there's proof of residency is
very, very loose. Um
And we have, um, people we've
had people in the program who
because people come to the
hospitals there from all over
the state, so we may connect
with them in the hospital. But
six months into the A O order,
we find out that they actually
have family and they live in
Roswell or somewhere, so our
court order will end if they
want to move back to their
community. So we go to the the
the judge and the the court
order.
Um, we stop it. We we end the
program, and then they go back
to their community. And and mam
Cha and I don't know.
I don't know if if there is an
answer to this, but
I was just looking up. What the
the incidence of of serious
medical
Um, illnesses in New Mexico. I
found something that said
From 2016, saying it was about
four point Do we know so of that
4.4% that has serious mental
illness.
Do we know how many of them have
uncontrolled serious mental
illness and how many of that
population is actually getting
to you?
Um, for the a OT. Like how? How
much of the population that
needs it is getting scooped up.
In do county. At least Madam
Chair, Senator. That's that's a
difficult question to answer and
I we have not done that type of
research. Initially, when Sam
said that the federal government
The, um organization that or, um
Office that funded our program
initially is Samsa, the
Substance Abuse Mental Health
Services Administration when
they looked at our population
they were estimating that 70
people in our community each
year might T order or might be
served by a OT and on average.
We serve about 40 people. Uh, a
year again. The covid years.
Don't don't count. Um, so we
probably aren't
Connecting could use use our
program, but it's really
difficult to to tell and to get
an answer for the question of
That I've been missing is
defined. Judge Madam Chair
representative. It has to be a
district court judge, and we've
had a variety of we've had. I
think three or four judges over
the years. It's important to
find a judge who really wants to
do this program and who has the
ability to connect and, um
communicate well, show empathy
show motivation.
Um, so the judge is is important
and they need to be well trained
and really buy into to the
program, but it has to be a
district court judge.
Thank you. And, uh, basically
how many There are, uh, I would
say between 35 and four Well
There.
Because everybody's in the the
program for about a year. I
would say there's about 40
initial hearings a year and each
of those individuals have three
At least one of the judge so it
it can
Big time consuming for for a
judge right now, the the judge
dedicates one afternoon a week
to a O so every Wednesday after
their docket is available for
either initial hearings or the
status
I. I appreciate that, Madam
chair just a quick question. Is
there any
Cost to the individual, You
know, no financial cost to the
individual. If they have, um S
SI connected with supportive
housing If they need housing so
Just just one question. So is it
a line item in the Donan? Can we
look at other possible?
Pilot programs just trying to
figure we are very lucky county
years ago D RT to the health
fund. So we have an indigent
fund and we have a health fund
in our county government and
that health fund created a
department within county
government. The Health and Human
Services Department three or
four other counties that have a
similar department within county
government. So those are the the
funds that we use for our
Department and to support this
program.
And so, ma J just structure in
the budget. Yes, thank you
trying to wrap my head around
whether or not or involuntary
Um
There are orders are issued. So
walk me through that. Do so a
person A petitions filed. I
guess that happens in your
program.
Um, we go through them. I have
heard that there are
participants who, um, are
agreeable to the treatment plan,
So they sign up and say, Yeah, I
agree. I wanna does a court
order then order it. Um, Madam
chair. It is set up on paper as
adversarial. There's two
attorneys and a judge and
The the judge gets to make the
determination so it is not
voluntary, the court order says.
You must do what this treatment
plan lays out In all of our
cases. The person um
We has been at least
Not, um they've been amenable to
it because we usually connect
with them when they're coming
out of the hospital, and they're
in a fairly healthy
Position. We have a peer support
worker that talks to them and
says, Hey, I want to tell you
about this program, so they they
usually are at least ambivalent.
uh, about the program, but they
have an attorney that represents
them. So if they say no, no, no,
Um it still goes to to the
judge. Um if they change their
mind in a few weeks, they they
can't change their mind. It's
involuntary court order that
says you will do what? This, um
Treatment. Um, you had a slide
that says no. Go to the comp. We
don't go to, um
Contempt.
So
How do we enforce the order? How
does the court or you know? How
does that so It's It's
definitely the carrot versus the
stick. Um and
Sometimes it takes a while, but
in in our experience with the
folk, a O order
When somebody says we wanna help
you.
When a peer support worker says,
Can I go with you to your
appointment? Can we help you
find a place to live? People say
yes.
Um people very rarely, um,
disagree. We do have a few, um,
situations where there's also a
treatment guardian. So if there
is a treatment guardian, and the
person is refusing to take
medication or or something more
serious, the treatment guardian
can step in, Um
We've also seen a a big,
different even from when we
started in 2016 to to now
medications that are the long
acting injectables have made
balls, um, willingness to and
get taking medication, so even
in that short of time, just the
type of health care that we're
able to to offer has improved.
So we we really have not. It's
involuntary. Um and we do have
times where I mean, we've had
some unsuccessful completion in
the community, and there's just
No way to to find them. Or, um,
you know the things happen, so
it's doesn't work 100% of the
time, but it works most of the
time and it really supports
people who are already
Kind of engaged in that
treatment program, the treatment
system in their community But
don't have that extra help to to
make it up to make it a habit
and that extra support to to
help them engage better.
Strikes me as unfortunate that
there's not so, um
Madam chair. They received the
same grant that we did. They
were about two years behind us.
Um, we did a work with them
initially, um, and had several
conversations and some site
visits with their team. So they
they started.
What? Um, At that time, there
was a kind of a disconnect
between the treatment provider
and the evaluators because the
federal money required a lot of
of evaluation, And that can be
an added burden for treatment
providers. Oftentimes, treatment
providers aren't
Keen on sharing medical
information, so I think there
was just a It didn't work out.
But, um, what I heard for you is
that they're gonna be back on
track with the with the program
and I know that we've someone
from an attorney from Berno
County has reached out to us and
asked for, you know our
petition. Our what? The
affidavit looks like what some
of our paperwork looks like, So
I think they might be ready to
re engage.
Else? Um, just one. Yeah, sure,
Representative, Madam chair that
program, and, um, the Gateway
program is a separate program
because it's a city program, but
I could definitely see this in
the Gateway program, um, working
with the outreach department
that they created. Um, I mean, I
think, And that's why I think
this model you know, I
I know you're I mean, I could
see this, maybe expanded to
The and pathways and Santa. Um
which we don't I don't think
they have much, but I could
definitely see
I. I would definitely like to
meet with you again and chat
with you. The mayor.
Thank you very much. Yes, I'm
I'm happy to try it. And I do
think that the what's important
is that this is scalable. So if
it's a small community, and you
only have five people in the
program that's fantastic because
it's five people who are into
your hospital. Your emergency
department your jail and it's
not gonna cost $100,000 to to
serve five people in the
program.
So sometimes I think there are
some barriers that collectively
as a state we can can overcome,
But I do see this program being
very scalable chair and thank
you up on something. I
Heard you say guardian or
medication Guardian.
Trout. How? How is someone
Appointed or made, Um,
representative that is a
separate civil process. Um, also
through District Court.
OK, thank you very much, but
it's a separate order and every
center worth just one final
question. I was curious again.
You are there things in the
statute that you think I was
very pleased that we added more
than just act because that would
have really constricted the
ability. So we were successful
in adding, Um CCS S, the
comprehensive community, Um, so
that was was helpful. I think
working on who can be a
petitioner, I think that's
fairly limited. Look at
A new pathway into a OT that
connects to the criminal side or
to the competency process. Then
some additional petitioners
still very cautious, but it
might be nice if the court or
the defense attorney or other
folks can be petitioners. We've
even put their role be in a OT
order.
It was also really helpful when
the D a was able to participate,
and they are responsible for the
civil inpatient commitment
hearings, so I would also like
for the legislation to say that
the D a May
Um, participate so it doesn't
have to be mandatory. But if we
are in a jurisdiction and the D
a is willing to, I think it
would be nice to clearly give
them permission to do so. But
save us money.
Uh, thank you. That's helpful.
Thank you. Um, I know there's
gonna be an, um
Thank you. I do have to, um,
back in 2016. I have to give
credit to Senator Mary Kay, Pa.
And she's the one who set me
down and said We will do this.
Well, maybe we need to bring
some Paton back and we can we
can throw it all out. And, yes,
Her black robe effect is just as
uh, Just as powerful. So we say
Yes. OK. Well, very good.
Yeah, Yeah. Yeah, well, I have
found that an effective way to
communicate.
You're welcome to come up in
store.
So
Oh, OK. Thank you.
Um
Are we ready? Are we ready?
Justice OK?
All right, folks.
Good morning. Welcome. Justice
invited, Um, Justice Zamora to
come and brief us on the We got
a G a glimpse. Don't know.
Yeah, I was probably nothing.
They were kind of playing, you
know, back so
Parcheesi and pinochle and
So, um, sorry. We're we, We we
just but we did hear a little
bit about it in the house. And,
um, I sigh. There has been a lot
of stuff, so thank you. Justice
for coming.
Thank you, Uh, good morning,
Chair representatives. Um, the
Supreme Court. I'm the liaison
for the Commission on Mental
Health. And And it was my idea,
So anything goes wrong. You can
blame me. Um, but we've been
extremely busy since then. I'm
gonna focus my presentation
briefly on what the goals are.
Then I'm gonna focus on the and
then last. I'm going to talk
about the I figured you might
wanna know about that.
So the mission of the commission
is, um extremely ambitious, but
we've done a lot. It's to
improve outcomes for by
inspiring collaborative,
ensuring access to services. So
in two last year we all met We
had a strategic planning retreat
and we decided to create
projects. Um one which I will
talk about is the competency
diversion Pilot. Second is
education, training and
outreach, and a big part of that
is one
I realized during the session,
complicated process, and last
year went out to We've already
gone to law school and we have
our juvenile and youth team,
which spoke Gabriel Hull System
team, and, as you know, the ad
hoc competency statute work
group. We were previously
working with the Council Council
of State Go Familiar Faces are
those
Something that was extremely
important was that we had
crossers sitting in a room.
Deciding what was best for the
state. We have law enforcement
advocates, school health care
providers, um folks with
expertise in housing, everyone
we could think of that was
willing to come to the table.
So what did we decide to do? We
decided we would come up with
recommend changes with respect
to criminal competency.
We decided we would come up with
a pilot project to try. We
wanted to come up with some
broad long term vision.
Um And then I talked about
So people always ask me. Why are
you so interested in criminal
competency?
And that comes from my 10 years
as a trial court judge doing
frustrated because the only
thing arrested
I may and then if I released
them onto Pretrials
So, basically what I saw.
Case dismissed rituals despite
my thousands of cases whose name
I knew
Um, I thought maybe it was just
me. But when we that a lot of
stakeholders are salmon jail,
um, And besides, just so
You also ask, why bother? It's a
small group of people. Number of
cases in Burnley, and I don't
think you can tell me that and
for 40 years we've been
following and
And the second and more most
important reason we want
equality.
Um and I. I showed these slides.
I'm sure you get to a quality.
Level, um, to get them hopefully
In less content.
Um, don't worry. US lawyers are
not doing this alone.
We have plenty of help, um from
national organizations.
Um and both implementing the
they've also connected us with
many other states who have done
uh, the council of state
governments. Um
Samsung gains. I know you've
been through this site, but I
just want to briefly touch on it
to compare what's happening now,
um, currently in a misdemeanor
case, the case process, you
know, Status conference set it
for trial. The person
The judge orders a competency
evaluation. The evaluation does
not assess from it just tells
the judge missed but
misdemeanors. It's all, um
What? We're not so you may have
seen this slide as well Model
Um, and our vision for
Ideally, diversion should happen
when they walk into an emergency
room or or perhaps they can walk
into a community center
themselves.
Or law enforcement. Could
divert. Um so I don't wanna by
any means suggest that we don't
think the next I'm gonna talk
about our pilot project put it
simple in theory, but it's taken
over. This was a lesson learned
for me that, um
These things take a lot longer
than I had suspected.
So what are objectives first? We
want to, uh have forensic
navigators. We, each pilot site
will have two navigators. Um,
these individuals hopefully will
actually be peers so they can
understand. The two navigators
will have very small and the
navigators will direct as they
need even out in the community.
This will only apply for
misdemeanor cases. At this
point, it will have
We have, uh, implemented a
universal validated screening
tools and at arrest to decide
whether or not they're severely
severely mentally ill.
And I put this in purple require
a clinical assessment from a
licensed professional. I know
this seems obvious, but there
are a lot of programs that don't
do this and I would just ask to
think about a hospital if we
walk into a hospital after a car
accident That's obvious.
We know that the doctor would
ask us other questions. We know
that we're not doing the same
for individual. Um, but one
requirement of this program is
if they need housing.
Everything about that particular
person that we need to
And, um, we, uh, the
administrative office. We're
looking at the data points now,
uh, recidivism.
The number of connections to
services and some other
So the first step is like I
said, they get arrested. They're
screened. The screen is usually
done at the jail anyways, um and
they go to their first court
setting.
We notify the attorneys but see
diversion program and they can
choose the parties. If they
choose not to. They'll get an
evaluation and
I want you to think about
something, uh, different than a
treatment. Court treatment
court. People are sanctioned and
can get kicked out.
Treatment courts. They see the
judge a lot. Ours is more like a
law enforcement high need
population. Uh, you will not see
us, uh, giving S.
Um, as I stated if the parties
agree a navigator of the, uh
they can. They won't go through
the traditional competency
process. Um, and there's my
clinical assessment that
And based on that clinical
assent, they'll come up with a
plan. Medical housing. They may
need benefits. Um, whatever
needs they have. The navigator
will do their best.
So the pilot sites, um are the
third judicial and I think you
probably heard they have, uh,
which is pretty amazing. Um, we
wanted to also pilot some very
Stan McGill counties. The 12th
Lincoln County. Um, we're hoping
the foresight is undetermined.
Um, but we're hoping possibly
out. Um, And as I stated, it
took about a year to just get
the first one.
Um
How do we get the money for
this? Um, they're able to get at
least six friends for the all of
the pilot sites.
Um we were able to create a
database and, um, pay the fees
for that database as well as
provide. Um, and the last thing
I want to talk about before I go
to questions is the statute
Um, of course there's the dis
but our chief justice has agreed
to allow the, um because at this
point we've got so many stake.
Um
The goal, I would say is two
fold.
Um, not surprising it.
So prior to determining
competency.
Um, having the option of
diverting them to treatment or
to assisted outpatient
treatment. If the, um why do
they also need to go through the
They're already in the program?
Um, so that would be one option.
They can either or they can, um
So they wouldn't have to do an
evaluation. But if they wanted
to, they could, and this would
happen shortly after the other
option would be after the
instead of restoring them to
come, we would divert them to
treatment.
Or to the to a OT.
Um, and competency restoration
currently in New Mexico happens
in one place and one place only,
which is the New Mexico
Behavioral Health Institute.
Competency restoration is not
Treatment. The, UM
Treating them to understand the
process.
So they're not getting connected
to services. But if the statute
was amended, this will allow
them to connect to services
instead of being
And finally, um
We also would like to do what
many many other states allow
for, which is why a competency
Um, I think the vast majority of
states have outpatient or
residential competency
restoration.
Where you do not have to, and we
think New Mexico. We also, um
Even looking at states like tax
competency. We have nine months.
I think Texas at most has
And then finally, I would like
to share the long term vision.
Um, sort of what we have
discussed. Um as we we think
working, and it goes back to
that every contact you have with
a defendant.
And is there availability for
services?
Um, and to give some examples of
states that have, um well, I
will, say Las Cruces.
Involvement with this county.
That has that, Um Minneapolis
has a great, um
Florida is building. Um, a
mental health center.
And then Pima. Arizona also has
similar facilities and this
center and I think, 1015 years
ahead because I know these
things are big, but what it
would provide multiples.
Individuals who don't have
housing in individuals who we
really do need to make it. And
La Clinica, for example, doesn't
just provide behavioral health
treatment.
So that's sort of a long
And I'm going to, um I assumed
you didn't want me to talk about
education. So I left those
Thank you, Madam Chair and
First quick question is
How do I get some? Uh, who makes
that decision?
Um, Madam Chair, representative,
The commission initially decided
on the four sites based on two
large too small but also we need
the stakeholders to agree, so we
sort of thought, well, there's
really good relationships. It
really was this simple.
Between the D A and the they're
likely to collaborate and make
it work because if you create a
program and the succeed
Um
But we are looking for that
fourth sight, so I will
definitely, um keep Sandoval
County in mind, Your Honor. I
appreciate that.
I think the 13th
Um, I'd like to be able to put
this in place before.
Um
Madam Chair, your honor.
Years ago, when I was with the
department, we were able to
contract with a local veterans
while we were waiting to get
them on.
Is that something that the
commission has looked at?
I agree. Sitting on the to BH is
Serving them in the local
community. I think maybe
contracting with so, uh, chair
Madam Chair representative. The
commission has looked at not
specifically for veterans.
Um, so the forensic navigators
are court employees. However,
the four pilot sites each have
mou with the services. Um, the
forensic navigator will start
before the pro all of the places
to refer.
I will tell you I thought is
housing.
But as far as the behavioral
health in the community, we have
those MOU S, um and the
Navigator's job is to get your
honor. I would like to do this.
Representative. Thank you.
Justice, Zora.
Uh uh.
On on the, uh
Amendments that you mentioned.
Shortening, competency
restoration and compared it to
Texas. Madam Chair
representative. Um I don't think
If other states are doing it in
shorter periods of, um then I
think New Mexico can. There's no
point in involuntarily commit
and I if there's
Pretty good research. You can do
it in less time. Why not do so
either? It's gonna I don't know
another state that but our
statute hasn't been amended in
about keep up with the times. I
don't see the need to
involuntary and that's the
reason for it now. Ideally, we
would use outpatient. But if we
are where we're at, then, uh uh,
Madam Chair justice more so
Uh, if someone is
Up against that threshold that
currently nine process to
Extend that or what? Uh, I mean,
what happens at that hard
deadline?
Madam Chair representative to be
Frank. I don't recall any
criminal trial court judge but
in Texas, But if the forensic
hospital had another 60 days and
that so, um, doing something it
would also slow down where I'm
hearing there's delays is in the
OK. OK, great. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you. Justice. Thank you for the
presentation. Um
I want to ask questions about
sort of in your, uh, pilot
project under step one that
initial screening that's done to
determine whether the person has
a likelihood of severe mental
illness and history of
competency. Who's doing that
screening?
Um, Madam Chair representative.
The screening is already done.
I'm talking about assessments.
Um, because the screening is
about
I think it's less than 15
questions. It's a brief mental
health screening, so it'll
either be done by the jail.
Uh or by our background in
business. The screening will
indicate whether in addition to
that our background competency
raised in the past, so those two
things together will give us an
indication that's not gonna tell
us what treatment they and if
they fail to do an assessment
that thank you and ma'am chair
just as I we heard some some
other presentations this
morning.
Distinguishing between folks who
had a primary diagnosis of
severe mental illness versus say
substance abuse. Uh, is that a
distinction that you all are
making?
In the the pilot program.
They need to have a severe
mental illness. Um
And I'm not a
Uh, forensic psychologist or
psychologist at all? Um, but
what we've learned and been
trained on is that's actually
not eligible as long as they
meet that
and man and justice that that's
kind of what I was saying. I was
thinking of what if someone has
maybe not even and I know that
the substance use can kick off
kind of long term.
Um, mental health issues, but
someone can have like a
temporary psychosis.
Maybe for because of fentanyl.
So if this was someone who
initially appeared
They initially appeared to have
that like then, when they got to
step three with the clinical
assessment
They were found not to have a
severe mental illness. What
happens then? Do they do they
stay in the the pilot project?
Are they do they then have to go
back to
It does their case get
Refile. Like what? What happens?
I hadn't actually thought of
that. But that's a good
question. I think the, uh,
person probably would no longer
Um, but if, if severe mental
illness we don't want this isn't
a substance that provide the
treatment. But it really is
competency proceedings. My guess
is just having been see
proceedings is that if they have
a history of being found, and
then and and mere justice, I
don't know if
If you would have the the answer
to this, But of that.
Of that small population of this
those with severe mental
illness. Do we know and I know
that and you're saying a lot of
them have many, many cases our
justice system. Do we know how
many
Are they? Mostly misdemeanors
Are there are there large rates
of felonies? Are there large
rates of violent crime? Probably
like
Do we know what What?
What kind of
Allegations. Madam Chair
representative Misdemeanors are
most
Individuals who are have a
smaller number of cases the
person with 100 and 59 cases.
Thank you. Thank you. Justice.
Thank you, Manager.
Representative Bargo.
Ability to understand people's
Journey they're on in this
world.
Um, one of the honorable judge
is the resources and United
State and I
I worry, and I and I've
mentioned this several times
already. And many of you know
that I grew up. You know, Mora
and
Trauma and places like that that
don't have the service of
program where
And it was on the west side of
Espanol.
That and one of the big about
Geographical geographic
locations for place, But whether
or not people can act for these
small communities where people
cannot access, But Beo County
has been and so you see these
Four tablets of F.
Literally.
In our S state.
And so I, I think very deeply
about where and how accessible
they are to the populations, Um
and and not just the the the,
uh, drug addicts but the people
because you know, you always ask
the question, which came first,
the chicken or the egg, Right?
Was it the mental health issue,
Or was it the drug addiction
issue? Cause in many cases, they
are they go hand in hand. Um
So, I. I just wanted to throw
that out. Madam Chair. I You
know, I
I've talked to Senator worth a
little bit about. I wish the
state of New Mexico had a
planning department that we
could do assessments and study
these locate the programs where
they need to be.
Um And I know places like Gallup
also have, like, you know, I
mean, there's there's a but we
need to be very cognizant
whether or not they are
accessible and I throw that out
because you're looking for that
fourth location. Um
You know, I. I think that it's
imperative A amongst us.
Yeah, five. That would be great
if we had five. I mean, I don't
know, I. I know it's it. These
cost a lot of money, but
I just want us to really think
deeply about these.
The lack of transportation that
we have the lack of housing All
these issues distribute
Um, services. Thank you, man,
Senator thinking that the bill
in the last members of the
commission and I'm just curious
is the How did I know It's gonna
be asked that question.
Um, the commission.
Before any special session or
anything else was, um,
discussed.
Decided to continue working on
it. Now we have all the
stakeholders there from
disability rights that if you're
asking, I don't think it would
On this together, and I'm glad
to hear that's what's happening.
And I think how challenging that
piece of legislation was, uh
over many years. Uh, again. It
was just, uh
I'm glad that
Effort that's happening now to
elevate these issues in the 60
Day session when the
stakeholders of jumped and there
may may understand.
How it is, and I'm sure you
thought, um we thought a lot
about that first. Um, just like,
additionally, the defendant can
still get and a judge could
always order conditions of, um,
your competency about the I'm
gonna release you to Pretrials
at the courthouse.
Or the judge could
Orders to be voluntary, so that
is one key difference. Um, but
all of it right at the
Absolutely absolutely No, the
both attorneys have to agree.
The D a the board. Otherwise,
it's not gonna happen, cause
I've heard this a little bit
already. And we're here to
represent the getting them
through the competency process.
In this case, they could
probably they know their
client's gonna get it. Forensic
review or not, And then
eventually they'll be a
dismissal. There's no there's no
and if there's a competency
issue, how do we know the
person's really consenting to
the participating in the
program? Because
We don't know. You know, that's
the kind of stuff I was hearing
during this 30 day. So help me
understand why that wasn't
brought up in this context, and
there's probably a good answer.
Well, it it
The first issue about the
incentive to participate, um,
has been brought up for a year
with by the attorney. So we
flushed this out. Um
So, um
That's why it's very much. Um,
First of all, it's voluntary.
Second, we will not be issuing
bench warrants. The worst case
scenario is they will go back to
the regulation. And so it's much
more hands off than a treatment
court, um, and with the fact
that they can program
The second question and the more
complex one is this capacity to
consent and I wanna I be happy
to give trained us from Samsung
Game. Um, so we looked at the
American Bar Association's
model, and, um, they talk about
US information versus their com
The trial process is much more
complex than deciding.
Have an X Ray.
Um, so there are two different
concepts and according to the
presentation that we were given
the defendant's ability to
ascent services, especially when
there's not a different than
their competence than their
ability to understand the
proceedings. They're two
different things. So in other
words, I may find, uh, a
defendant all of those things
that a defendant must
understand.
But a doctor who sees the
defendant and that says you know
what my arm's hurting, the
doctor says. Do you want says
yes. That person can consent to
that. Um, so I'm happy to
forward that information since
I'm not a psychologist, Um, you
may wanna hear from one
Um, and they can explain that,
but that's the processes we were
trained to do where it's gonna
become Tricky and I haven't, um,
wrapped my mind around this yet
as if they have a treatment
guardian, because then they, um,
but that's why this program is
so different. Um
Thank you very much justice. Um,
I have thank you, Madam Chair
and I have a quick any kind of
discussion.
Um, Madam Chair. You have
A represent
But I assume they have sent her.
We've seen the government. It's
now in the public domain.
Oh, let me go to
Thank you, Madam Chair and
I just wanted to follow up, Uh,
I just wanted to follow up on
the chair. Um
With the two. Essentially, I
guess, two different level. Um,
And so what? What is the result?
If that particular level doesn't
have the capacity, can they
voluntarily?
Enter in the public Defender do
that without R.
Um, no, not under our pilot
project. That's we're not gonna
be able to do that. So if they
have a treatment guard really is
those individuals who may not be
competent but could walk into a
doctor's office. Right? OK, and
I and I guess, um uh, thank you
for that justice and and
Madam chair. I appreciate your
indulgence, and I just have a
question. Uh, on the if someone
As I mean, there's some question
as to competency, they
voluntarily offender.
And then somehow are not happy
with the results. Something like
that challenge this
You know, process I mean, that
may come before members of the
commission. What
Um and and they're the and, and
the commission is the one saying
yes. You can do it this way they
miss
What sort of the the court me I.
I could have to. Um I didn't
know all the makeup. Oh, yeah.
I'm the only
The only justice on it. Yeah.
um, but to go to your point, and
I apologize, Madam Chair
Representative to go to your
point, Um
The person doesn't want to
process OK, and these are these
are misdemeanors, which is gonna
be a big and for this high need
group. I wish we had more. Um,
but they're just gonna simply go
back. Um, And so the
Sites that have agreed to
participate. Ha! We've already
got written policies and
procedures, and so that is one
in our policies and processes.
We're not going to force them.
To through the normal route,
which then we do have
jurisdiction, of course to do
what we can thank you justice
very much. And thank you
Last time I saw you you were
swearing in a bunch of new
lawyers in Albuquerque was a
nice event.
The center Worth was referring.
I just wanna make sure that
we're talking about the same
bill 233. But then there was
also a Senate bill.
On criminal when there was a
reference earlier to picking up
again from where we we're
talking about. Were you talking
about Senator Ortiz? Pinos and
we were looking back at it
Looks. Look, uh
We had a hearing on house Bill
233. We reached essentially the
same result in Senate judiciary.
just a little more efficiently.
Uh, we we check. We did have it.
Passed out a spec 70.
B.
Yeah, We just looked at it, so
we'll see. But anyway, it
doesn't make any difference at
this point in time. I just
wanted to know that it's the
same bill so that I kind of knew
where we were at so and is that
is that right? Justice? It's
It's the same bill. Madam Chair
representative. It is well, it
looks very different. But it is.
Yes, we started from where we
left from there. Um, The key
difference is, um
Well.
The key difference is now we
have, so I
Yeah. Uh, of course when we go
through these backwards or or if
we do go back, I just along the
way, but I always want to start
from books at the table. Let me
tell you
That's not in my experience, a
good thing. Uh um, but that's
just my experience. So, uh,
earlier in the day I the best
comments I've heard from the
day uh, where we were looking at
the A OT bill that we passed or
we worked really hard on that
bill. We were all around. It was
very complicated to try and
thread the the need in terms of
self determination, Termination.
And so that bill was Com
complicated but represents Al
Cohen was pointing out the fact
This morning that sometimes we
make things far too complicated.
and the OOT bill may have so
many subjective terms and so
much subjective language.
That's a that's a preamble to
what I wanted to ask you,
Really? Which is, um, when when
this process began problem, if
if, if there's any one specific
problem was that bill intending
to address in other words, what
What exists in the law? Now,
Madam Chair representative, Um
So that Bill
Um
With that said the bill was
aimed at doing two things first
and foremost, actually connect
these individuals to day out.
Being able to others so that
that's the first goal. The
second is outpatient competency
restoration.
Why does we could have an
alternative in the law that
allows for people either in an
outpatient setting?
Or at minimum, a residential
setting that's not locked and
secured.
So those would be the two major,
Um and that's always very
helpful for me. What I'm trying
to assess legislation. What are
what are we, and if I don't
understand the goal, it's always
either support or don't support
the goal number one and achieve
the goal.
Um, So the first goal you set of
the bill was to give trial
judges with based on your own
experience, You offer an
alternative to jails with
services. And and is there is
there a legal restriction right
now on being able to do that?
I'm I'm sure there is a I'm sure
there is an absence of available
certain. Well, I shouldn't jump
to that conclusion of of
resources available for the For
that alternative. But is there
something right now that keeps
the judge from being able to do
that?
Madam Chair representative, Um
not to divert. We don't believe
so now because we're gonna try
it right? We don't believe
prior. We can't divert. There's
two things that the law does not
allow for in Las Cruces, which
is
The only program really up and
running. Um, if a if a person's
in a OT and they pick up a
misdemeanor
There's no option to do the the
misdemeanor case is going to get
dismissed regardless so just
allowing patient treatment or
even lower level felonies. Um
that's a new trend in competency
law, but if it allows them to,
if they're gonna successfully
complete or I won't say
successful, I think she talked
about no contempt in that, but
if they complete a OT
Is there really a need for the
state prosecution of the
criminal case, So that's one
statute now.
Second. I'm sorry to interrupt.
You Forgive me, but we existing
a OT statute and they existing
criminal competency statute. We
want to divert them from the
criminal side.
If there are if they're gonna be
in a OT, we would rather not
have the criminal case. We'd
rather them have treatment
there not answering your
question. Very well. And what?
What is it in the law now that
prevents you from doing that
today?
Your treatment there and I'm
sorry if I'm belaboring this,
but what keeps the judgment and
that
There's nothing that permits it
and I would
They would be in they would be
in, I think intruding into the
permitted by statute. But the
bigger part of the answer is
After the defendants deemed in
Colorado, other states allowed
again. That's not something
permitted in the statute. So
those are the two areas of
diversity.
Yeah, I always I always operate
in a different realm, which
sometimes is popular or not,
Which is always the you know.
Don't ask for permission. Ask
for forgiveness, right? So, uh
uh, I'm I'm not hearing that.
There's anything that keeps a
judge from doing this right now.
But the judge and I understand
that, but but I guess what I'm
trying to say is if judges don't
wanna do this now, cause they're
afraid they're intruding on the
D's prerogative or something.
Judges do that judges upset DAS
all the time from my
perspective, particularly down
in the third these days. Um and
so it it, you know, it happens
and that's the dynamic. That's
the tension we have. So I mean,
I would just encourage that
thinking is that to represent
all coins plan earlier today we
don't have to legislate
everything. We don't have to,
Uh, give permission for
everything happening now, do we
really need to do the same? You
got that authority in the
judiciary? You can do that now,
and I think we're all supporting
what you want to do. Uh, I'm
just saying, why do we spend
months? Why do we think about
Coming into a special session
and and doing all this work in a
rush when we can do it now,
that's that's one of my
questions. Really. So, Madam
Chair representative, Um I think
for us to, um, dismiss a case we
Whatever else after they've been
found in con, I think having
that specific
Might give judge I understand
that encouragement and that and
that, uh, I think again we all
I'm still hearing. They can do
it because I've seen. I mean,
I'm in court yesterday. I mean,
Oh, no, I didn't say they could
do it. Well, I, I understand,
And I don't wanna be labored. I
just I, I I'm in court all the
time. As you well know, And I'm
I'm there this morning and
yesterday and judges will do all
kinds of things and dismissing a
case for deferring a prosecution
or staying a case pending some
other oxygen. So I I like what I
was trying to say is I
opportunity
Be creative and fashion things
instead of giving them a lot of
Here's the cookie cutter, Right?
Here's the cookbook. You gotta
do this, and then you gotta do
this. That was represents Alco's
point this morning as we we put
all these restrictions trying to
be clear.
And trying to help and sometimes
we make it worse by not just
saying Judge do the right thing
Here. Hold this T experience
right? And And you said the, um
The other. The the second goal
is the, uh, diversion from, uh
Madam Chair representative.
The second goal would be
thought. I said it. I thought
the second goal I said was I'm
We would, um, a residential
block. So it's just an
alternative to Mexico. Be health
for individuals to be. Would you
agree? Justice that that is, is
largely a factor of resources.
In other words,
Madam Chair, representative, Um
I can't Madam Chair
representative. I can't answer
that question that of the two
goals that you've identified
that
Madam Chair representative. Um,
I think
The statute that the criminal
code? Yes. Um And I think before
that so went from that to
In and the point I'm trying to
make justice for really for my
colleagues, not part of the
agenda for this meeting in the
next several meetings is to
really focus on topics and
Not have the competency bill. I
we have the A OT bill and triple
which Bill we have seen so we
don't have competency yet we
have a OT. I did take a look at,
Um
Representative Mike People
actually want to hear you
Really? Would You really wanna
hear me? Well, there is some
debate on the committee. But
there are people in the audience
who want to hear your you. I
guess I guess the question that
advantage should have been asked
is, uh what
Uh, isn't it happening today? I
mean, are judges already doing
this? Because I know they are. I
mean, when I started as a
problem, I said
You feel it over the District
Court District Court took over
and
They handled it.
Oh, so I know this is what we're
gonna do.
I don't know.
Thank you, Madam Chair, So
there's this, uh, this crime and
justice, the state asked to come
in and
And they did They gather all the
all this data so that we can
make kind of as we're we're
developing policy, and Mr Bauer
is still here. He's there's a
work group for it. Um Pro TEM
pointed me to and
I was looking at some of the
information we got from that
group and listening to this
because we're talking about
At least a OT here today.
In the context of a
Having a special session to
address crime.
Um and we hear that in do Anna
County. There is a great a
program functioning.
And then I look at the data for
donating Anna County for the
last decade or for in this Las
Cruces specifically in the last
decade, Las Cruces
Mr Vice Chair. You're gonna
shudder at this given how much
you like to slam Albuquerque,
But, um Las Cruces has had the
largest increase in violent
crime.
Ah, in the in the state over a
100 and 12% increase over the
last decade in violent crime, a
40% increase in property crime
over the last decade, Um
Well well, but but regardless of
why
I would That suggests to me Is
that in this a OT program
started out in 2017 or 2016,
they said, And when the numbers
start really going up and doing
Anna County was was and so what
that tells me is that having a
really great A OT program does
not solve crime.
It is not. It is a good thing to
have. It is something that we
should absolutely support and I
am all for but it is not the
answer to crime.
In New Mexico, uh, the other
data that they were giving us
was about. Um what things the
things that most spokes are.
Most cases are being filed for.
Most arrests are for
And so the most common violent
offenses are third or fourth
degree felonies.
Not misdemeanors, which I think
we heard from the justice.
A lot of the folks who have
severe mental illness who would
be targeted by this
They're not out there just
committing a ton of felonies.
They're committing a ton,
possibly of misdemeanors, but
not felonies. The the majority
of all case filings for the last
at least five years are fourth
degree felonies and most and out
of all those, it's most
commonly, uh, for drug
possession.
So
It just doesn't seem well, I am
all for it.
II. I think having a really good
A O program is a really good
thing for for all the
communities in our state.
Um, I don't see how it's going
to
Address crime in any meaningful
way. Represent a bri. Oh, sorry.
Oh, come come.
Why don't you go ahead and then
I'll go to representative
But about this thank you. I'm
sorry.
Everybody on listening in. It
was really brilliant. What I was
gonna say, but I but II I visit
with this individual because
he's telling me we need to have
statutory authority to enforce
And let me just tell you why. I
think that
Um, it gets back to the point
that I've been trying to make
and consider all code made it.
Judges have incredible power.
Incredible power and and, um
That what I was told is that in
the Stan here they filed for an
injunction.
You know if I wanted an
injunction tomorrow, I'm looking
at my lawyer Colleagues. I
wanted an injunction on
something tomorrow. I could get
a hearing tomorrow.
Um and and I think most of my
colleagues who practice law
though, do
you know? Uh, Senator, uh,
represent Henry. You know if if
if we wanted to if we wanted a
Hearing in front of a judge not
trying to exclude any of the
lawyers. But but again, a good a
good and a chair and the chair?
Yes, I'm I'm trying to make sure
I get this right. So I. I know I
know who the lawyers are. Trust
me. Trust me, But But, um, you
know if I if I wanted to get it
in front of a judge tomorrow, I
could get in front of a Y in
case that we've got somebody out
there with slave labor, not
paying wages. Uh, I got a 30,000
plant. Uh, grow farm.
That has primitive flaunting our
laws.
The the point that I'm trying to
get to in all this is a lot of
the authority that already
exists to do. Things exist.
In the law, and we can pass more
laws and we can have special
sessions and we can do things
but but represent all Cos right.
A judge can already do these
things, and we know that because
we're doing it and Dona County
Now, why are we doing that?
Well, the principal reason I
suspect is because Senator Papin
was the champion of that. Uh uh,
A very dear family close member
who her cause
And she pressed it locally in
Dona County. She pressed the
judges and the community to put
this into effect and work in it,
and it may not be showing any
results that are doing I may
agree with you may or may not be
good. It may not be reducing
crime at all. And I would agree
with you there, too. Probably is
not gonna have any effect on
crime.
Or minimally, so
But but the authority already
exists, which is the point I was
trying to make with Justice
Zamora
And I and I, I I'm gonna catch
hell for it. Next time I'm in
the Supreme Court because she'll
grill me as well as I grilled
her, but but I think that we saw
that authority exists over but
But a lot of this is just
happening because
Enforcing the marijuana laws.
Um and we don't have the will.
and so regulation licensing says
We need a law to give us that
enforcement authority. You're
saying they don't have it, Uh,
senator, and and I would tell
you this Wait, I gotta tell you
if if I was the and they have
attorneys for regulation if I
was a regulation licensing an
injunction to shut this and to
C, uh, product or whatever it
wants to be judged, So we're
just not trying hard enough. I
think I let the chief try and
tell you later. Why, uh, New
Mexico and Las Cruces. Crime has
spiked. There's no disagreement
for many years. You said I pick
on
Albuquerque, uh, for a man in
you, and you're right, but I've
lived. I've lived more years in
Albuquerque than I've lived in
Las Cruces. Um, for many years.
I used to point out that
Albuquerque had a much higher
crime rate in Las Cruces at a
very low crime rate. I did that
with a purpose because a lot of
people blame crime on proximity
of the border. That was the
argument and that's why I got
crime. And the reality is that
for many years until just
recently Sunlen Park I'm using
FBI statistics so
Presumably pretty good data. FBI
statistics usually showed
someone park in my district
data, and it's on the border.
It's the Juarez is across the
street.
Um, so the immigrant the
proximity of the border was the
reason I was statistics, but Las
Cruces has seen sadly and
increasing crime and I'm not
gonna get on a soapbox about why
that's happening today, but but
it's It's political. It's It's
just really that simple. We know
that Albuquerque does not arrest
for a lot of crime, and they
decide not to arrest for him.
agreement not to do anything
about it.
Like the marijuana example.
We're not
OK, um, represent first
represent a brago and then
represent Chase.
I'm gonna leave that one alone.
But I agree with you.
Um
So most of it, um OK, so and
thinking about all of this
discussion, really? For
And I think it's uh
representative Hambre and I who
are dare I say the youngest
legislators, um not literally,
the youngest, but the the newest
Um
So I had a question has has the
state of New Mexico done a
comprehensive statement? And if
so, I mean, has the that
Shows us, you know, by
geographic area, Uh, facilities
that shows us, um by county by
city per capita, uh, drug abuse
type.
Um, that basically, you know,
would help us to create better,
um
You know, creating or
coordinating existing services
or funding and, um, would help
us create better policy now and
understand my background.
Because I'm used to seeing
studies.
And one of the things that I
haven't seen.
And I've asked, like, Is there a
place a go to place where I can
go and say, Oh, there's this
study on transportation or
there, There's a study on, you
know, drug addiction, or there's
a study that would help me.
As a newer, um
You know, Get the ski, um so
represent where I often go to
first is LFC because they will
know
Um, if they've done a study
And often they have, frankly on
things like this. And if they
haven't they may know which
often they are actually offered
to go help you So my suggest, Go
to Charles. And if that kind of
information
Um, thank you, Madam. Cherne,
um, with with and I appreciate
your trying to defend us the,
uh, constant barrage of how, uh,
laissez faire. We are in
Albuquerque.
We don't really have the data
here. This we don't have data.
At all on mental health and
really we were hearing from, um,
the presenters that
A OT was in Dan Justice system
so it could be much without
without it.
So
The working group you're talking
about, and we need more data,
and that's where the LFC comes
in, because they're always
wanting the data.
Having the C saying you're now
spending 40 million parole. Do
you wanna spend, um, looking at
To the data show and and that's
where we really have to go. So
we all need to
I mean, we It's gotta be better
not to have drawn out lying in
the gutters. Whether or not that
means just makes
A neighborhood staple, a sense
of safety without like that, and
it it it's I mean, I was here
before. When we took years and
years and years and
Resisted a L authority on both
sides.
Saying, Do it. Don't do it, do
it.
So I think we need help. And I
do think we need, um
One and thank gosh that person
in the backdrop in the context
of this it really strikes me at
our last meeting competency that
are potentially taking a lot of
resources and requiring a lot.
But you know, we also have an
LFC study to represent a breo's
point. There is an there.
actually, a couple of really
incredible C studies services.
Um and I don't know about you.
But I, I think it would be very
difficult at all.
Just to get that. Well, um
And then the in the context of
this and exist whether to
practice and funding and
Um, either way. I think that
linkage is interesting. But
again, that would even be in
that on that path. Um,
Meanwhile, we're spending a lot
of time.
Thinking through what is
I
Existing statute kind of amazed
to navigate to create a system
that is grounded in the justice
10 calls and it's even more You
know, I have been looking at and
it was he has this slide here,
saying Long term vision with
this, um
Mental health and wellness
Center. So what? I have been
looking at what I what I will
share with you all a model
called certified community, um,
of which we have one that, but
it explicitly creates linkages
provider agencies to all the
criminal justice agencies as
well as physical health
services. Do you have one center
that can serve as everything
from crisis intervention all the
way to residential treatment.
They don't have to provide it
all under one roof meant but
they could also be in. So in
that way, where a judge right
now it really has to struggle to
figure out what resources are
available. And where can
somebody be sent to have a
point where a OC knows that
they're in this formal contract
with this agency, as does is all
of this sort of just seems like
that's a model that we should
invest in and that all
We are arguably this A law is
created a lot of different
wrongdoers. It's a very complex
law to create a community based
People in the community who need
help.
Have a way to access that really
invest in that for a couple of
years. How that starts to shift
I just think that would meet and
really try that instead. Um, and
every stop, um
Of timing getting worse going
by. I will bring that model
forward for it is it's based in
the community, so we're really
giving people a shot before we
You know my observation having
To organize the programs and you
know, I my focus hasn't been on
crime, you know?
It's always been when I'm
thinking about these things. I'm
thinking, how can we improve
these systems to help?
It's not about how can you know
How can we improve them to get
them through the justice system?
You know the criminal justice
system it is. We have some
tools and they're not working
very well. And it certainly, but
also the tools that we touch on
the justice system, But they're
not.
Hardcore criminals. They're
their mental health is causing
them to behave in ways that
bring attention upon themselves.
Is they're not effective. And so
I think it's productive that
we're having these
conversations. I really do
because I've learned a lot and I
bet because really, when we get
to the core, it's there are
people who are hurting. They
have a serious mental health
issue, and we have not helped
them.
And we are not helping. We need
to create a system of care.
Obviously, maybe wrap around
services and housing and so on.
But we also some of the tools
that help encourage people to
recognize that they, you know, I
think these are really good
gonna be productive. I'm not
sure there's I mean, these are
very complicated. Um, but it is
a productive just Ma. I'm sure I
think one take. We've got an a O
law on the books. We worked very
hard to get it passed And I
appreciate, uh
The passion of Senator Pin.
Because clearly I'm I'm sitting
here going. I need to go and
visit with the city of Santa Fe
in the county. I mean, we've got
a dedicated provider tax for the
county.
And again, it's gonna take an
individual at all.
And implement it. And I'm I. I
mean again, you look at the you
look at the The questions were
really good that represent.
Martinez asked me What's the
what's happening in terms of
recidivism? And you look at what
is this doing for those folks
that are in there and it goes
right to what you said Madam
chair need And that was the
justification and I. I struggled
with a TI. I went back. I posed
it in earlier versions and then
worked on it. But again, my big
takeaway and I really appreciate
hearing from Las Cruces because
it feels like it is
We take that to
Different other parts of the
state that have the
Part of it. Uh, I again
represent Martinez and I were
smiling because 100 and $50,000
seems like a a very low amount
as the recurring cost, uh, for
the program, so I think we need
to look into how that works. But
again, I think that I really
appreciate actually hearing
about what's happening on the
ground and seeing what one
representative
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
sorry. It was absent for the the
later half of this hearing.
And I would
Just reflect on what? Um
Uh, reader. We just said I would
encourage him to come in and and
work with me as I've been
working with the county Santa
Fe, who is actually branching
out and working with other
counties on their diversion
programs and the need for
financing, which I put forward a
bill.
Uh, appropriation Bill this last
session for that, Uh, purpose
and seeing where the root the
the root of the cause, Madam
chair a lot of the things that
we we don't hear are within our
local governments and with
Um, finances and and
And funding that we don't know
about and we don't care about,
um
What I've found out. Um, is as
I've been doing a deeper dive on
this. Some of the things I
didn't hear. And please, um
correct me if I if this has been
reflected on but to reflect on
what? Uh, representative um or
whip sassy is as mentioned on
this type of program. This is
something we've been talking
about.
And I know that representative
Um Heron has been working on and
there's this whole. We all know
about this because it was a
hearing last year on the Florida
plan. The regionalization of
these types of community
behavioral health centers Now,
are we ready for that? I don't
know. Do we have the resources
for it? I know. I know that
we've spent a billion dollars
Our state and our budget for
behavioral health resources and
programs and so forth. So if
representative Bogo wants to
start there when she talks with
Charles of C, start there and
ask him about where that billion
dollars is and where it's going
Um, one of the bills. One of the
efforts I have been working on
since I started with, uh, has
been in harm reduction along
with Senator Uh, Katie. Duh.
And am mending our Harm
Reduction Act and
Where? Where? Where? The
information there. How are they
coming into the conversation of
what we're talking about here? I
haven't heard from them, Madam
chair. The other thing I would
say is, uh, with with that, um
Said in discussion about harm
reduction for myself.
Um, I also had legislation for
Overdose prevention program or
creating these centers. Safe
site. Use centers, if you will.
What does that look like?
Have we had that discussion?
The other issue that we haven't
heard of. That's all connected.
The bottom of all this Madam
chair is
Where our youth
Uh, I have one of my best
friends that works at the, uh,
facility for youth educating
them in Albuquerque.
And the stories that she tells
me
Where's that In our discussion?
Where are they? Where is the
representation there? I haven't
heard from them.
Um
But
With that said in our youth and
our education our aces
As we have
Familiarized with
What are we doing?
Preventatively with our youth
and our Children and our schools
and our families.
In our courts, our family
courts.
How are they not getting the
resources there that they need
because they're not.
I know firsthand.
That they a RE not and that our
courts are not being educated.
And so IN. These issues.
Those a RE the things I wanna
hear about man and chair. I
appreciate the time and I think
Uh, I would also add, and I
don't know this are we having
our chairs of health and human
services? Um, doing a joint
committee with us because I know
they were talking about that.
That's so we're likely to have a
hearing. I think, but I'm not
sure it's before the special
session.
Right? I don't. I don't believe
so. I think this is as you have,
um
That
I don't. There's so much more
work to do, and I appreciate
that. I really, really think we
need to think about that. The
timeline here. Thank you. Thank
you. Um, well with that
Everybody's participation. We're
now at, um, the public have
anyone signed up online?
No. So we do have a person who
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um Ellen
pines representing the
Disability coalition. We
advocate for the interests of
persons with disabilities of all
kinds, including mental illness,
which is our particular interest
in these issues. Um, first, a
prefatory comment for Senator
Wirth. Yes. SB 16 passed out of
S. Um, but because you're sent
judiciary chair is so efficient.
You managed to dispose of it
without his taking up any of
your time.
You would say
That was your words, Senator
you said efficiently. Um
I hope this this mic is OK.
These new mics are a bit a bit
testy. Um, thank you very much
for all your really great
comments and questions today.
I've been really impressed with
all of you, Um and your
thoughtfulness in approaching
this, Um the first thing I want
to say, is sort of in the nature
of a movie trailer without
giving you actual scenes. Um, at
your next meeting later this
month, some of us will be
presenting on the issues that
the committee is
Considering including a OT,
which you spent much of today on
and, um, you're going to get a
different perspective. Then you
got today so I would ask that
you, um, reserve judgment. I
know that. What you heard today
sounded good in a lot of
respect, and, um there are other
issues to be considered, so I
hope you'll hold off and hear
those other perspectives. I
think everybody wants to do
right by people with
Mental illness and help them But
there are, um, shortcomings to
some of these approaches, and
you should be aware of them and
we try to to highlight those and
make you more aware of them. Um
the other thing that I want to
highlight and I know you all get
this, but I feel compelled to
say it, um
You're dealing with a lot of
complex issues. Um, you're
dealing with criminal
competency. You're dealing with
diversion from the criminal
justice system. You're dealing
with involuntary outpatient
treatment, which we think is a
more um, uh, accurate
description than assisted, which
is rather euphemistic. Um,
you're dealing with, uh, civil
commitment to inpatient
facilities. Each one of those is
really complex in and of itself.
And they interact and they may
have more interactions down the
road. Um, the idea that you
could possibly work all this out
in time for a special session
and then race through it in
whatever time happens in the
special session. Several of you
have made this point, so it's
not a revelation to you. You all
get this, but I just want to
underline it. Um, the idea of
trying to do this in a special
session on a very compressed
time frame, even if you
Handling trying to handle one of
these issues. I think it would
be unrealistic and to deal with
all of them is, um, beyond
unrealistic. It's just, um
Fantasy. So thank you very much
for your time. Um Madam chair
and my colleague in the
background didn't actually sign
in, but it's OK to make comment.
Sign in is not a prerequisite to
be. I am chair members of the
committee. My name is Gary.
Alcee I CEO of disability
rights, New Mexico and I'm also
an attorney. Uh, I do appreciate
the thoughtfulness and the
preparations and the
discussions. There were so many
things I wrote down. I had to
try to organize them here, but
it seemed like the one of the
prevailing things that came away
for me is that there's an
agreement that we have a failed
mental health system of care.
People are not getting the care
and services they need and want.
And so legislation may not be
the answer for that. Uh and I
would suggest to you four quick
points for you to consider as we
go forward to
Make New Mexico a better place
for a lot of people.
And speaking on behalf of
services.
Um, high percentage of these
individuals coming coming in and
out of the court system are on
Medicaid.
Why are they not getting
services and that's where it
points directly to the managed
care organizations. They are not
doing the job that they were
supposed to do Governor Grisham
when she announced the new MC OS
back in August, said new
Mexicans are not getting the
services they deserve.
They give $8 billion towards
man's care organizations and
that's gonna change. You've
heard Secretary Armijo talking
recently about holding them
accountable. I've read through
some of these contracts, 450
page contracts with the man.
There's some great provisions in
there. They've been in there
before. But are they gonna be
enforced and held accountable?
And so that leads me to the
second point? Because I'll tell
you this. We have clients all
the time coming to us and say
Gosh, can I get some care co
ordination? Can I get some
transportation for some
services? When you talk about
individuals not being able to
show up for appointments and
people? It's it's interpreted as
if they don't want that
treatment. It's so hard,
particularly in the rural areas
that in transportation is an
obligation to match care
organization, and it's not being
done so there's a disconnect
there.
So then it comes down to, um,
holding them accountable for
it. Care coordinators. You ho!
You heard miss. Uh, Michelle
talking about when a peer
support person comes up to an
individual and say, Would you
like some help? They embrace it.
They want it. But do they show
up? No.
And so that I would suggest to
you is an important part of the
Legislature is to hold the M C's
accountable and who is to hold
them accountable.
A health care authority, the
health care care authority has
that requirement to make sure
there's an adequate provider
network provided by these
managed care organizations and
that they're fulfilling the
contract again. There are some
strong provisions in the
contract, but they don't mean
anything unless they're
enforced.
When the health care authority
recognizes that its constituents
are the people of New Mexico and
not the managed care
organization. We're going to
have a better driven system here
in New Mexico.
And then the third point is
housing.
You cannot talk about improving
the well being of individuals
that we've been talking about
unless we start getting them the
housing they need. When they're
coming out of the system.
They're either sometimes being
unhoused or they're gonna end up
in unlicensed boarding homes,
enhancing a bad image again
about individuals and they're
not gonna do well in that city.
And finally, I would just
recommend that we all always
consider the value of
voluntariness a person wanting
the treatment being engaged in
that treatment being empowered
to to seek the treatment and to
access it with it, and that
there's articles out there on
the research on the enhanced
value when when treatment is is
provided and access to the
voluntary needs.
I. I know you've had a long day.
I appreciate you listening.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Uh, well, uh today. Um, we're in
recess. We will be in room 307
tomorrow. So just be aware I'd
take your materials with you if
you can or have one of your
assistants. If you have an
