Hello everybody thanks for
letting us be a little bit long
on lunch reminder we've been
joined by some you all a little
bit late you've got two
different forms to fill up for
you predim that's because the
split in the fiscal years old
one for today in one for
tomorrow you need to do too
please want to thank a lunch
today
catherine carol and l park in
jason weeks
were doing lunch for a state
thank you all very much
appreciate in for being here you
are mister exciting morning
it's actually pretty good
discussion we had some some fun
so we're
yet right at an hour behind
scheduled so i'll figure out a
way to fix this
occurring justice the pacheco
with courthouse security.
The.
Thank you for them.
Fat better oh I can hear it so I
apologize I had a presentation
with some videos of photos to
show you guys uhm I see that the
rooms not set up for that so I
will be very descriptive it may
be recruits and people to
reinact some of the events as I
describe them
today
and before I begin mister
charity didn't want to let you
know that the city of seventy
has promised us that the bridge
will be done by the end of this
calendar year
we are
city of sanity said that at a
public meaning
by the end of the calendar year
mister
this calendar year that's what
they say no the calendar year
december thirty one so.
We are
um
much more than I think it should
mister chair.
Yeah.
Again mister chair members of
the committee thank you for
keeping people on the correct
path sometimes is mister chair
i'm
my name is cynthia percheckle
i'm the director of court
operations for the
administratory of office of the
courts today I also have with me
general toya who who is our head
of security and j good headaches
who is our facilities manager
both of them are are involved in
security and attacked you guys
today a little about the
historical context of court
security new mexico discuss some
of the trends and increasing
threats
are suggestions for minimum
standards and our
recommendations
going back to prestored from
eighteen forty six to nineteen
twelve are quotes operated under
us military governance after the
mexican american war security
was minimal and was most often
provided by local sheriffs or us
martials the first justice of
the new mexico supreme court joy
about helping
was in a very basic cordhouse
that had normal no formal
security nor did he have any
security attached to him in
nineteen twelve when new mexico
became a state the
it took about twenty five years
chair give them a building the
building was built in nineteen
thirty seven and again no
security features and local law
enforcement was called to
address any issues that we had
now in nineteen fifty this
crimcourt became a designated
fallout shelter and at that time
we began to have conversations
about security in the building.
But early in those days no
formal security was ever
provided to you any of the
courts in the state.
Now in the nineteen nineties
upgrades to the supreme court
building addressing aday issues
also included a focus on
enhancing security there post
nine eleven we are really
serious about security
metal detector security cameras
access control but metro court
from a security perspective is
the first and only fully
modernized court from a security
perspective
how
could houses were not always
violent places if we look back
to you tennessee in nineteen
twenty five the most polarizing
trial of that time was known as
stated tennessee versus john
scopes also known as the scopes
monkey trial it was very high
profile trial with hardly
contested issues it was the
first trial to ever be broadcast
to the public over the radio
spectators were seated
shouldered a shoulder in the
cordhouse they were gathered
outside and i've got some
photographs it you can you can
look at later when you when you
have the presentation and the
men are wearing suits and ties
the women are wearing dresses
and throughout that trial
there was no security in the
courthouse the judge never had
to admirish anyone to behave nor
were there any arrests me
would happen since then
is two thousand and nineteen and
lost crucials judge period I had
a case called state of new
mexico versus sigmant comments
some of you term sure you saw
their son on television mr gomes
objected to you the fact that
judge period had denied his
release and even though he was
wearing belly cheen slight irons
and handcuffs it took seven
deputies to remove them from the
courtroom and one of the
deputies sustained a career
ending injury from that time.
Moving on in january i'm sure
that most of the
legislators here saw the big
brill in the album court that
was student in mexico versus
alexander or cheese that was a
routine pretrial hearing no
indication on whatsoever a
violence there were two
corrections officers in the
courtroom for the inmates who
were appearing that day one of
the corrections officers left to
take a defend it back to a
holding cell and at that time
the family the victims family
jumped upon you and began to
beat the corrections officer and
the defender
I don't know if any of you ever
been in fistfight
but it took one minute in
eighteen seconds.
For a response to get to the
program that's a really long
time when you're when you're in
a fight
cross the cross the country were
finding that threats to the
judiciary are increasing the us
marshall service reports a one
hundred and four percent
increase to judges across the
country
now we don't track threats
between the public unless
they're reported to us we know
that threats will spike during
election cycles and highly
politicized cases social media
amplifies the tax because they
provide personal information for
our judges and our staff and
already this year this calendar
year we've had a hundred and
sixty two threats to judges some
title high profile cases some
not
but threats are not just for
judges our cordhouses
we constantly receive threats
that someone's gonna blow up the
building we have medical serious
medical issues incidents that
occur in the cordhouses and
threats to court staff or the
highest number of threats that
we receive and that's because
it's the staff that answering
the phone it's the stack that it
actor at the front
are courthouses today are
security has to be trained for
bore then just do escalation or
a separating people are judges
and staff are trained and how to
deliver in our can
in two thousand and twenty four
at the real ribbon magistrate
court a defendant came in to
complete some paperwork he
collapsed due to an overdose the
judge in his robe went out into
the lobby and moved the
defendant into the rescue
position to administer in our
account when he did that a lot
of three eighty five out of his
we spent
uhm
thinkfully that judge is a
retired state police officer and
knew how to handle
clearer and make it safe for the
court.
So
the long and court security
district courts are resecurity
in courthouses are provided by
the county I don't know if they
have dedicated funding for these
are if they just work it into
their operating budget
and wanting to remember about
this as that when the
legislation requiring countries
to provide a courthouses and
security the county courthouse
was the county building the
clerk the treasurer that sure if
they were all there together but
as new mexico is grown that's no
longer true our magistrate and a
pellet courts.
Courthouses and security are
paid for by the alc or am the
appellate court itself
and
in
two thousand and twenty two this
legislature made it a felony to
threaten a judge or an immediate
family member of a judge and
made it a mister meaner to
maliciously share a personal
information of a judge docsing
and from that time to now
fourteen people have been
charged with that I think it's
too soon mister turner to know
if that lies having an impact
it's it's just been a couple of
years or just beginning to
charge and take those to a trial
but here's a couple of examples
of the threats to judges that
were charged in january of
twenty twenty three in angry
definitely said to a judge i'll
see what you're next yard sale I
know where you live that person
was convicted in august to
twenty twenty three person said
to a judge while he was on the
bench either you accept it and
fight me old man if you refuse
to step down this is one that
person was also convicted in
december of twenty twenty three
a defendant said I will throat
bleep that judge kill his wife
cooker corps on the store and
eat it
that case was ultimately
dismissed in april of twenty
twenty four
a little again said that blank
judge is going to hang i'm in a
make sure that she does
june twenty twenty four I will
find the judge beat him up and
kill him and these are things
that are being such a judges in
in the courtrooms in january of
this year a suspect round one of
our district court judges off
the road approach to his vehicle
and said your dead i'm going to
kill you
about tro will begin in august
then in february of this year we
had a suspect threatened
violence to multiple courthouses
and specific ac threatened
specific acts of sexual violence
to the female judges.
And threaten violence to the
mail judges that try will
proceed in federal court in
april of last year a gentleman
called a law firm and said i'm
on my way to the civil
accounting cord house and i'm
going to kill a judge and he
appeared at the cordhouse about
an hour later with an acts and
thinking he was stopped by long
force.
Some of the challenges that we
have we expect to deal with
people who are not always happy
to be there most of the people
who are coming to court are
having
the worst day of their lives but
one of the examples I want to
present to this committee is the
general mean by the name of
cailey wanted mr valenter's a
military train ordinance expert.
He has
made a multiple pipe bombs
there's videos all over youtube
with apd is.
Pulls them over and he's got a
pack bomb in the car he was
actually shot at the federal
courthouse by smart shows to
prevent him from entering the
record house to cars home
he right now is writing letters
threatening to blow up one of
our court houses and to shoot
one of our match street judges
and if we if we didn't have
security in our quote houses the
number of guns webbind knives
that would come in putting the
public judges staff in danger is
it is a lot in two thousand and
seven.
A gentleman entered the second
judicial district court in
albuquerque thanksgiving eve
want an emergency hearing he
wanted to help us with his
children over the holiday that
was denied so he left the
courthouse angry and when he
when he entered the building he
was not allowed to bring his
backpack so we left it in the
planner is outside the cord
house so he left angry picked up
is bag and then the judge
realized they needed to give
them some paperwork so they sent
told to currently send that guy
back up no one noticed that he
had gone outside he picked up
his backpack so when he came
back in he had a knife that he
had retrieved from the backpack
I need multiple threats and when
an officer threw into t's him he
tried to start the officer and
he was shot and killed at the
second judicial.
So the rural versus urban thing
if security is an issue in all
of the records urban or a rural
are rural courts suffer from
sheriff's departments who don't
just don't have the staff
required to provide the security
and then also maintain the
safety and security of their
county there are differences in
ideology that limits services to
the courts from sheriffs much
longer response times in our
more rural areas and our rule
court houses are typically
historic buildings which makes
it difficult to improve the
security infrastructure in those
locations
but our urban courts have
trouble
more people means more problems
and while shares departments are
certified law enforcements and
dedicated public service some of
them lack court security
training and all the skills that
you need to be a police officer
are much different than the
skills that you need to be a
court security officer
so what do we need and how can
the legislature help
we have to modernize court
security infrastructure last
year the court tasked for twenty
five million dollars to upgrade
the infrastructure we received
six we're gonna start upgrading
the following counties catering
similar debacle harding her dogo
real rebur send a while santa fe
sacro and union will be asking
for additional money is this
year and what we're talking
about with infrastructure is we
need magnatomers we need extra
machines we need direct alarms
access control cameras solely
ports lock down but ins we have
to strengthen the physical
security of our clerks areas
with
bullet resistant material but
even if we have lower that we
still need the personnel and we
need to have security present at
all times when the court is up
into the public right now that
is not the standard in any
courtroom anywhere in new mac.
School we need to have real time
threat monitoring I could
control room so that we know
what's happening and we can
respond we need to train in
certify court security personnel
if I had a matter guand and
money was no object and I can
make whatever policy I needed to
meet I would say that we need
between two and five full time
people at greening stations
depending on the size of the
court we need one ft and every
courtroom when hearings or
trials are in session one to
three to monitor security
cameras and then at least one
additional to act as e cover
unit
and what what should come next
mrperiod turn committee I think
that we should begin having a
conversation about whether it's
time for the judiciary to have
court martials similar to the
federal system.
I think that we need to
collaborate because it's not
just my quote houses that are
threatened it's the people in
this room it's the governor it's
any electric official in the
state and I think that we need
to start having a conversation
about minimum security standards
for elected officials across the
state
and that is all.
The.
Thank you mister chairman and I
don't think i'm gonna have to
hold my
witnesses into a time limit
cause I just have one comment I
I do think and I apologize
because I I do saddam senate
financial now sit on the
legislative finance committee I
think we have a tendency
to not fund particularly very
important things that we need to
find and you have my commitment
from here on out that I will be
an advocate for the money that
you need for security I think
it's a little frightening that
we mean listening to those are
threats and those
it's it's emotional and i'm
sorry that the court staff and
and that any of us that are an
elected positions have to
manage those kinds of things I
think you know years ago I
stopped and putting my
grandchildren on facebook
because the terrified me I just
stopped and and I know it you
know was always fun to do it was
it was it was great to keep up
on things but I I just I just
i'm really sorry i'm sorry that
we've come to this but I will
see in public at this committee
meeting that you have my
commitment to advocate for the
security measures that you think
you sell.
Thank you mister chair
also quick reflection and then I
question
clearly I I feel like a threats
are increasing you just went
short history all things
considered but I was wondering
you talked about the passage of
legislation that we passed a
handful of years ago
making a threat's felonies and I
was just wondering if there was
data previous two the passage of
that legislation and if so has
the number of threats are
incidents gone down since we
passed that legislation mr
current representative we we
have some data from before the
passage that i'm i'm happy to
get to you if you like what we
recognized at the time is that
the amplification of social
media and just the number of
daily threat was increasing
thank you that's on the street.
Thank you mr chair thank you
to see you so a couple questions
so
the bill I I guess I thought we
saw a bill that was supposed to
help with some of this security
concern can you tell me a little
bit about recent legislation if
that's even been
added to your docket or added to
the legislature mr and
representative like I think what
you what you're talking about as
during the session there was
discussion
in the house about a ten million
dollars pilot program for the
court you explore options like
is it time for a marshals arrest
private security but that did
not come to provision
okay thank you so much mr chair
thank you send you and then I
believe was the twenty twenty
two bill hb sixty eight that
what we were
it started out as house bill
ninety nine and then became part
of the omnibus bill.
Okay thank you mister chair and
I did see that it was like a
bunch of different crimes in it
it increased penalties correct
mr chairman represent a block it
created the penalty until that
time it was not illegal to
threaten a judge specifically
okay mister chair was this
endorsed by the new mexico
sentencing commission
mr chairman representative I
don't recall but I will find out
you know and I asked that
because I looked at the fire and
I couldn't find that and I just
wanted to make sure cause I
didn't see a specific
endorsement of that and I know
we've spoken about that today
about other legislation so that
did go through the senate
judiciary committee as was the
house and I just want to make
sure that we're being consistent
thank you mister chair.
Thank you mister chair
just a quick question there are
director pitcher I appreciate
the
what you the stories you told us
to regard to
threats and r two
to court personnel I it it's
borrowed and because none of the
should be have to be expert
experienced on any of that in so
I appreciate your comments here
you mentioned several different
things that you need security
personal real time threat
monitoring and all that across
all the courts in the state do
you have a basic overall number
in terms of how much how many
fte she would need to hire over
the course of for the entire
state to meet your needs in
security
mr chair senator I don't have a
total number of person now but I
could certainly.
Put that together at but it's
it's a significant amount or at
we're talking at at least a
hundred and fifty people if we
were to staff it in the way that
I believe is is necessary so
total hundred fifty people to
to basically give you some
confidence that you can handle
any threats that come through I
think that's not an unreasonable
request and I think would be
good for you to put that in and
in a package for it I mean the
states been running budget
surpluses for the last several
years and I think three billion
over the last several years
billion surplus I think if we're
looking for security for our
personnel I think that's
something that the we should be
able to forward and she better
to make priority for so I
appreciate that but I think
you'd be helpful for us to help
specific number that we can then
legislate legislation together
with thank you.
Thank you mister chairman
thank you misperchecko cynthia
santia
great to meet you I just wanted
to know like
is it only a bernio county or
the are the courthouses
connected at all to the gis
system for the real time crime
center in burning a county
mister chair representative
outside of burnerly or county I
do not believe that they are if
you don't mind all i'll just
double check with my security.
So not even in the second of a
connection and burning your
county
cause out seems to me like that
would be something that we could
do immediately at least in
bernalyo county is to try to
connect it to the real time
crime center
and then
I mean as we go forward you know
glt house of gia system across
the state also which may be
mister chair we might want to
consider thinking about how we
can you know connect to as
gissistems wherever they're
available cause I know they're
not available everywhere in the
state
set out some one that
also missed your chair I just
wanted to mention you know the
the threat of them
a violence toward elected
officials and judges is real and
I just last and hide out just
happened to go swimming and I
met some folks for minnesota
last night and we were talking
about the senator and the
representative that we're just
murdered
you know at their own homes and
this is not very far removed
because we had worked just a few
years ago our county
commissioners and some other
elected officials are state
senator who actually they know
they have violence in their own
home so I mean this is a real
threat that we really really
should have some discussions
about
how we protect ourselves
basically but I appreciate your
your candidness for and you know
this is something definitely
that we need to look at if you
looked at you as for twenty five
million you only receive six
million
yeah it's a something that maybe
could be phased or or but there
there needs to be some immediate
fixes to to connect to some of
the real time crime centers.
So thank you mr chair.
Thank you for the presentation
III hope in addition to the
suggestions that you heard today
that the court will take it upon
itself as well too and perhaps
work with law enforcement that
so don't enter canny when I go
into state court there it's the
sheriff's department who were
staffing the security there are
there usually pretty well
staffed but i've got to tell you
when I went to federal court
else securities far stricter for
me to get into the federal
building and to get into court
there i've got a show various
forms of id I got so my barcard
they're sure driver's license
i've got a century take down a
lot of my clothes
sound effect santa fe is pretty
rough sound fee makes me take
off my boots in my belt and the
the whole bit more than
information you all probably
want to know but but i'm just
trying to take there's a lot I
think the courts can do
themselves in
we all get inconvenience when we
go to the airport and they make
you take everything down
everything off and I don't like
it in the fed court and I
grumble about it but i'd much
rather do that and know that i'm
safe and everybody in their safe
too and so I would encourage you
to has the courts to ask their
security they are there to do
more to ask for a higher
standard because again i'm
repeating but the security for
me to get the federal building
as far as stricter and i've just
become used to doing it as a
lawyer and I just accept that
part of the process so suggested
anyone else alright thank you
for being here today thank you
mr terrano you're you're ready
for on time I really would like
to and not today necessary but
over the next few weeks listen
to what this committee thinks
about whether or not it's time
for the judiciary to have a
marshall service.
I know that's a complicated
question that one we can answer
today but I would really like to
to hear some feedback you're
running a few minutes ahead just
look at what why why do you
think that there would be a
difference between having a
marshall service versus really
on.
Uh what you have right now I get
the right simply really on
shares department
in those districts where the
sheriff is able to provide that
security and that's only for the
district court the sheriff is
not required to provide any
security for the matter or the
appellate courts and so in our
larger communities we will find
mr that the sheriff has
sufficient staff
but in most of our districts
there is no security at the
district or the magistrate at
all um also mr chair there is a
difference between being the
duties of a police officer and
the duties of a security officer
and so if we had an internal
service we would also be in a
better position to train them
for public interaction in a way
that's different than how long
enforcement operates and this
may be a good transition to the
next presentation but but when
when I shop it takes our state
court doing any kind of there's
going to be half a dozen
sheriff's deputies their how is
security who's paying them to
count
so that so the county's paying
for that security so then if you
have matters in disrecords
around the state who do not have
security wire at the countries
in those countries paying for
security
the counties are not required by
law to provide security at the
matter just at the district
well but I thought I understood
you say that they're not
providing security even at the
district courts they're they
just don't have the personnel
and so link again the part of
our presentation this morning
you you weren't here for that
but we're hearing a lot about
the fact that they can't recruit
they can't hire law enforcement
so for itself yet if we if we
say what we're going to create a
marshall service
why would they have more success
hiring and recruiting law
enforcement than the sheriffs
would have to do the same uh i'm
just saying i'm always trying to
really logically make some sense
of this to do we really create
another branch of state
government we really create
another agency and so forth.
Or do we really try and bolster
the sheriffs or office here to
be good here from the sheriffs
in those places so yeah we don't
have enough personnel but maybe
hire it's more personal there is
there is a good thing to do as
opposed to a new marshall
service I believe mr target we
would have more success in
hiring because of what we're
looking for or looking for a
more seasoned so i'm forced by a
professional who's been around
for a long time and understand
the importance of the escalation
once a job that's indoor five
days a week does not have to do
not driver a county as last to
say really but county
what what they're recruiting for
versus what we would be
recruiting for as much different
that makes some such plus you
get a good personal time off
policy too that not any more
restaurants from
but that doesn't mean that they
do this isn't the best
the best branch of government to
work for in the entire state but
i'm ****
thank you
very much
all right
miss phillips miscarol
you all were not here this
morning but.
You were here this morning but
we had a little discussion about
who pays for what so a good
transition I know that's the
subject here today too I I had a
chance to visit with miscarrel
yesterday to talk about the
subject matter and I know we
have a very specific narrow
topic which is the
transportation in jailing of of
individuals but you may get some
questions that a little bit
beyond that not much we'll try
and keep up trying to keep us in
the end of the end of the
subject matter but i'll go ahead
and recognize you miss foots and
miss carol whoever scoofers and
again i'm i'm just bracks in the
miscarl park this again that's
not that's new to me so it's
like carol call
okay miss phillips
thank you good morning good
afternoon everybody i'm grace
philips and the risk management
director for the new mexico
county insurance authority and I
was really glad that I got to
hear both some of that
presentation and some of the
comments
senator to hear talking about
needing to pay for things that
need to be taken and don't be
paid for it certainly that's
what we're talking about here
and that senator thought and
saying give us a number and
guess what we've got numbers for
you here so
we
there are a lot of things that
counties do that we don't really
get funding for it and
courthouse security and not just
the security but the
provision of adequate quarters
for the courts is also something
that falls to counties and in
recent years the state has
started you have started to
legislate um some matching funds
to assist counties and ping for
those renovations but that's
really a fairly new development
happy to take questions in any
category but what we were asked
to specifically address today is
an issue that I know some of you
have heard her just talk about
before because it's something
that comes up literally every
year and that is the cost of
detention and how to pay for it
now at the state has an inmate
reimbursement fund that was
created by a statut.
In two thousand seven that was
not
that didn't happen in a vacuum
from many many years the new
mexico counties had been trying
to get the state to appropriate
money to pay for the cost of
housing folks stayed in mates
and I column state in mates
cause their literally sentenced
to corrections but they're in
the community on parole and that
didn't happen and so the
counties
sound semi gold county on behalf
of similarly situated counties
actually sued the state it was
when joe williams was the
secretary and the court of
appeals in january of two
thousand seven issued an opinion
in that case and the opinion
said the state has to pay the
cost of housing these state and
mates even if you haven't
budgeted for it even if you have
an appropriate the money the
obligation to pay the cost of
folks who are literally
sentenced to the corrections
department and in the community
you know because around parallel
is still a an obligation and
that very same session the
legislature is said okay we're
going to adopt this you know
create this new act we're going
to fund it it was funded at the
level of five million dollars
that may have been the only year
catherine that we actually got
funding to match what was then
the the obligation the amount
that the state was obligated to
pay it is a a lie that uses and
I see we've got douglas carboard
in the room the sentencing
commission plays a role they do
a survey it's actually as of
today it's sort of the
anniversary june thirtieth of
every year they asked counties
how many state and mates do you
have in different categories and
they calculate that that based
on a three year rolling average
and whatever you appropriate
they distribute according to the
formula that's in that law so
it's not these are not numbers
that we make up or come up with
this is something that the
sentencing commission does.
Um based on data that it
collects from from the counties
each year
and I say that because I think
it would be really wonderful if
the state wanted to say we're
going to appropriate that dollar
amount every year so we didn't
have to sort of argue about it
and request that you at least do
a little better to pay it every
year
the.
We're gonna show you some slides
about how that looks a little
later in the presentation
because what you'll see is that
five million eroded over the
years while the cost kept going
up and the the gap between what
the state is legally obligated
to pay and what the legislature
is appropriate has really gotten
out of control but I want to
give you a little context of
jails and before we get to that
the the county is run county
jails and there to be used to
house people who are arrested
within the county borders
pursuing to a statute that has
been around since before new
mexico is a state it's a very
old statute
and some people think that means
counties have to run jails but I
I disagree with that I think
they have to arrange for the
housing of people and but they
don't necessarily need to
operate a jail themselves
personally I think we have to
many jails but that would be
another topic that we could we
could discuss but slide three
shows you said where the where
the detention facilities are in
the state and then the next
slide is the map that shows you
how many beds with the design
capacity is for each of those
locations they're only four
counties that now operate you've
now detention facilities we used
to when I when I got here we had
fourteen I think before that
there were even more but they're
still quite a few county
detention facilities and today
aid of those facilities are
credited they're actually more
detention beds in the state than
prison beds and from many many
years counties that we were one
of the two or three states in
the country where there are more
people in jail than in prison
and that even up douglas
probably knows the actual answer
to that today but you know it's
or neck and neck with their
state system we do process many
many many more people than the
state does as the state has a an
average daily population of
around seven thousand I don't
know that number of the top of
my head it's been as much as aid
and I think.
It's been closer to five
counties or booking tens of
thousands of people every year
so we process just a ton of
folks
and most people are short term
sort term residents and no
detention facilities.
The cost of detention is its
staggering when you think about
what county budgets are like as
opposed to the state and I know
you guys are used to
thinking about big numbers but I
want you to keep in mind that
two thirds of our counties have
a total general fund budget of
less than twenty million dollars
were much smaller than the state
and we spend an extraordinary
proportion of that budget under
tension facilities in fiscal
year twenty four counties
collectively spent three hundred
and eighty three million unjails
and the we're gonna find out in
a couple months what the fiscal
twenty five numbers were but the
projected amount was over four
hundred million it's going up
and an extraordinary rate
the slides beginning on page six
all shows sort of in different
ways how that money is being
spent on whether where the
revenues are coming a large a
large component of that cost is
medical umm I have some hope for
the medicaid waiver that is not
yet rolled out but they've been
working on
I have some hope for the the
legislation that you all passed
senate bill three and one
and what might come with that I
did attend the executive
committee meeting on tuesday and
heard that that funding is not
expected to roll out for a
couple of years so I understand
that planning is important but
keep in mind when we're talking
about this extraordinary burden
on counties that that there's no
money
like in the wings to be to help
us out immediately and I think
the funds that will come of
course will focus on that on
that medical piece of the of the
puzzle which is a really big one
um
so the amount of funding that
the state provides is puny rate
do you know what you appropriate
last year less than five million
dollars.
So we've got three hundred and
eighty three and then we've got
less than five million.
Keep in mind that the state pays
not a penny to house people
arrested by state police so when
I think of a detention facility
I think we have customers the
biggest customer of the cities
they're the ones who were
arresting most of the folks
the second biggest customer in
in some counties is state police
and the state pay is not a penny
for that
and that's a significant sum if
we if we actually charged per
damn for that and then counties
also house but the the the
funding that we're seeking here
to today is like a sliver of a
slipper it's literally again the
folks that are sentenced to
serve time in that in the estate
prison system but you can see in
the in the slides that the state
the only the only entity that
you can't pay more than or the
municipalities and that's that's
another issue we we do need some
more contribution from the
minister paladis the federal
number is a customer number and
I just want to be clear that
counties do not honor in new
mexico do not honor federal
immigration detainers those are
civil requests to to hold
somebody while the the federal
well ice determines whether they
want to pick them up those are
not honored in our state and our
county detention facilities the
federal funding is for us
marshalls which are folks who
are charged with federal crimes.
Um.
So just a moment more
unpopulation slide ten shows you
what happened between the low
point of covered may of twenty
when I detention populations
were really smaller than they
they been historically as far as
my my frame of reference up to a
year ago we always update our
data as of today june thirtieth
so I don't have the
the numbers for fiscal twenty
five yet but I did see the chief
of mdc and I know a lot of you
were from bernaldio county and
so on slide twelve I wanted to
just show you you know to the
extent their metropoles
attention center is a is a bell
weather for the state state as a
whole in it often is what's
happened in burnalyo county and
specifically there has been an
incredible jump in population
almost twenty four percent in
the last year.
And.
We could probably explore what
that's about I know there's
there's a lot of interest in
enforcing crime but in bernelio
county of a really big and
eighteen um fifty is worth the
chief told me it was when I
talked him on tuesday that is
not um that is not a a lot with
respect to the design capacity
of the facility but it is a lot
with respect to the maximum
amount that they are allowed to
hold under the federal consent
degree and so I just think
that's that's another thing we
could be exceeding we could be
leaving behind the days when we
had extra capacity in our
detention facilities and not be
that way
something else that I thought
would be interesting we don't
have a resent in made length of
stay study from the selling sim
commission but santa fe county
keeps track of their data and it
looks very consistent to what
we've seen around the state as a
hall and so on on page thirteen
or slide thirteen wanted to
point out the the short nature
of most people stays sixty seven
point five percent of folks
arrested
are released within four days in
santa fe county and forty five
percent the majority of them are
within forty eight hours only
five percent say launder them
thirty days and I think that's
really important and interesting
particularly when you're talking
again about the medicaid waiver
and the idea that we could have
really a lot of folks who could
qualify for reimbursement for
services if that if that waiver
is rolled out in counties or
able to use it
another interesting point that I
got from santa fe county was in
what is the the nature of the
population of folks and
detention facilities with
respect to substance use we've
always known that there is a
correlation but what does it
actually look like and so the
county has been doing um.
Drug testing and folks that are
booked into the facility and not
not for alcohol so I keep that
in mind but this is substances
other than alcohol eighty seven
percent of the folks that they
booked in this this first
quarter tested positive for at
least one substance
and sixty seven percent at least
two substances and then I just I
listed in other top the type
substances and this morning I
reached out to the detention
administrator I said where is
heroin like I would have
expected that to be on this list
where do you think
is they do test for it.
I think it's been a replaced by
fentile it's less than two
percent positive for heroin that
is that's just I I thought that
was somewhat remarkable we
certainly
are counties continue to work
hard on implementing medication
assisted treatment so I believe
every county for a couple of
years now has been continuing
medication assisted treatment
that's different than initiating
care which is a bigger left I do
want you to know that the
healthcare authority issued
regulations last september that
imposed a lot of new
requirements on counties
representative hockman v hill
asked the attorney general about
the enforceability of those
given the fact that here's a
theme the state didn't
appropriate any money for
counties to implement those
requirements
you might recall the legislation
with sponsored by senator or tc
pino and initially counties were
in and there is a ten million
dollar appropriation when the
appropriation was taken the
senator removed the obligations
but by regulation the health
care authority site to reimpose
additional requirements in the
attorney general's view such
underfunded mandates do not have
the force of law until the state
appropriates funding to enable
counties to actually accomplish
those those requirements
I thought I was moving to you
right now but there's another
one okay so
costs of operation or not the
only costs associated with
detention operations liability
is tremendous
I could talk to you about
liability for a far longer than
you'd like to hear about it but
just to give you a frame of
reference in the nine years from
two thousand thirteen to two
thousand twenty two the self
insurance pool that i'm now at
the director of
um incredibly over a hundred
million dollars in liability not
just civil liability.
That includes workers
compensation and the reason we
included workers compensation is
because in this slide seventeen
counties have dozens of
departments
the detention department is the
one that has the most frequent
workers compensation claims and
the most costly workers
compensation claims and I get a
list in my capacity now every
every week you know here are the
new claims that were filed and
they tend to be
interaction the erising out of
interaction with detainees so
you know we are talking about
boys hard to fill positions it's
hard to fill these positions and
we're seeing more injuries than
we want to see at all for folks
who are working in our detention
facilities
in terms of the big picture the
slide before that illustrates
what's going on with respect to
coverage for these really high
risk operations and bottom line
today compared to ten years ago
and the pool provides much less
coverage the year that the new
mexico civil rates act was
enacted bernilio county had ten
million and liability coverage
today they have five and there
is a very specific reason for
that no private carrier will
take that risk and so now every
dollar that's paid on claims
arising out of law enforcement
and detention operations are
county dollars we created a self
insurer a created a captive
reinsurance company in the state
of utah couple years ago funded
that because we are our own
reinsurer today which was never
the case in the history of the
pool so we've had to decrease
the dollars that are available
to it for somebody who has been
hurt and who saws we've had to
increase the cost and we've had
to increase our own self insured
retention along the way so I
know that's not entirely the
topic for today.
But it's all in a related and
when you um create an
environment where so many
dollars are going to compensate
individuals who have been hurt
there's a real cost at the end
of the day I
what kind of services were going
to be able to provide how are we
going to be able to
make sure think that things
don't happen again in the future
in our view with sway or swung
way too far in favor of
prioritising individual
compensation and the cost of
that is on
citizens as a whole so on that
cheery no catherine
thank you grace arm and thank
you mister charity members i'm
catherine carol and the
government affairs for new
mexico counties and I want to
cover some number detail for you
this is the part of the
presentation that grace
mentioned on some of you have
heard year after a year on
unfortunately we can't seem to
get any traction around
reimbursement for housing state
and mates at county jail so we
thought today if we provided
maybe a little bit more details
showing what counties are paying
versus the deficiency and what's
being reimbursed by the state it
might paint a better picture for
you so on side of number
eighteen and again like ray said
this is information that's
coming from the new mexico
sentencing commission this is
data that comes directly from
them we aren't making it up on
it is data and we provide it
during the inner on every year
to ccj
we even cover this a little bit
in the tax committee on usually
at the december meeting and we
just want to make that clearer
that this is their data and not
ours and so if you look at side
number eighteen you can see the
county detention costs starting
with fiscal year two thousand
and nineteen going all the way
through fiscal year twenty
twenty four you see a slight up
during covered but then post
covered those costs go back.
And as grace mentioned after the
initial appropriation of five
million the reimbursement from
the has fallen pretty
dramatically
we were able to get it back up
to the five million number and
for fiscal year twenty twenty
three but that coverage just
short of house of what the
county cost is for housing state
and needs and again in twenty
twenty four
and if you flip to the next
slide slide number nineteen
we can look at twenty twenty
five the state did give us a
slight hero cut on reimbursement
from five million
legislature appropriate four
point seven million dollars
and on in the twenty twenty five
legislative session
we're not sure about this three
point four seven million that
was distributed to the counties
for the total cost of nine
million for housing state and
meets
there might be an error there
were not sure we have heard from
some counties that they're not
ref- receiving the reimbursement
find so that's something that
will want to look into but that
leaves a sad a total not
reimbursed for twenty twenty
five over five million dollars
then the new mexico counties
asked for during the twenty
twenty five legislative session
and increase of three and a half
million dollars over the five
million to get us to an eight
and a half million dollars
reimbursement on we weren't
successful in that and again we
received four point seven
million of an appropriation
and just so you know the new
mexico sentencing commission
does take a thirty thousand
dollars fee each year for
compaling the data and providing
us with the detention
reimbursement data
and so on on slide number twenty
it's just sort of some final
thoughts here and we really hope
that looking at this um over a
time and seeing the
reimbursement went all.
Yet you thinking about
appropriating that money
especially looking at everything
that grace covered for county
costs the cost of jails is high
over four hundred million
dollars and twenty twenty five
that's a significant number but
if you add up the deficiency of
the state dollars and the
difference between what the
counties paid over seven years
for housing state and mates
versus what was reimbursed it's
over forty five million dollars
that's owed by the state to the
counties for housing those state
and meets that's a significant
number to counties especially
when you look at the smaller
budgets like grace mentioned for
some of our smaller counties
what can you do we'd love a
champion or two to help us out
with how appropriations and
senate finance we try every year
throughout the inner on again
like I said and throughout the
legislative session without not
much like it's not the most
exciting appropriation but it is
falling short of what it was you
know required as the result of
the last suit back in two
thousand seven so
we're hoping that providing this
information today will put them
information in your hands to
help get us closer to what we're
owed.
And that is it.
Yeah.
The.
The.
Thank you mister chair thank for
the presentation but the
question on the reimbursement
and just seeing this over the
years how do you get judges to
understand and prosecutors and
defense attorneys for example
you have a dwi that maybe has a
year sentence and where the time
her sentence they end up with
you know four months left as on
their sentence that I aside
after whether you know I did it
or defense did it or the judge
allowed it or did themselves you
can s- you can serve the
remainder of your four months in
the county or how very many
months are lapton and I didn't
dig that was really legal
is that hard the problem is that
judges are allowing fellows that
are sentenced to unfelt is which
should be served in the
department of cractions
allowing them to serve their
time in the counties and is is
pushing that message out to her
judges and prosecutors and
public defenders something that
we can do to help that or is
this just
does that make sense
mr mr representative read that
is a problem but we're not even
including that problem in this
this is literally folks who have
gone to
corrections and have been
released on parole beat the the
the act.
Provides reimbursement for
people who are all people who
are on parallel and probation
dual and people who were
sentenced but a waiting transfer
and that's a little bit
different that means that there
that they they're gonna go but
nobody's coming to pick them up
for a period of time so those
who the categories that that the
that the sentencing commission
they the sensing commission also
calculates probation violators
bed and and and I can tell you
that number is in the hands of
millions a year
but that's ninety we're not even
asking for that and mister that
I was wondering so it's even
more of it it's much more money
yep and is it maybe we're not
asking for enough
care because that's where you
know I know what other issues
you're talking about mister
chair and um experts is just I
see that happening all the time
and I can't imagine what that's
classed in when those people
should actually be in the
department of corrections and
beginning prolled out so okay
that doesn't even clue that so
that answers my question thank
you chairman.
Thank you mr chairman thank you
for being here to present mister
chairman I do have my computer
open but i'm doing it on what
we're talking about so I don't
want to think i'm not paying
attention
I I was hoping that there would
be more information on juvenile
detention um it's minimal but I
I just want to kind of go over a
few numbers number one is when
were these numbers.
What what are these numbers you
got seventy eight for bernalio
forty six for san juan thirty
two for the county in thirty
four donyana what day is that oh
i'm sorry um
I don't see a number this one
amount
must be is it the matter the map
I just don't see a number on it
for sorry page for
what's what date were those
numbers pulled from.
Um mr chair secretary to heal
those numbers are the design
capacity of the buildings so
they they have not fluctuated in
years so I think what you're
referring to perhaps is lee
county having thirty two beds um
but not necessarily accepting
that many juveniles my
understanding is that that that
that does happen but that's
related to staffing so even if
the beds exist if there aren't
sufficient staff to maintain the
required minimum ratio
they would turn away a youth.
Potent potentially thank you
mister chairman thank you
actually i'm referring to burner
county which when I spoke with
cyfd two weeks ago they said
they had eighty nine children in
youth detention that's something
that used they has capacity for
seventy eight.
Um mr cheer senator correct
although burning the county has
been doing some renovating so I
don't know whether they are in
excess of their design capacity
or whether they're designed
capacity whether they've done
modifications
so I that that sounds like a
very high number to me during
covered they had part of their
facility was was closed and they
weren't accepting folks but I
will look into that because that
is a really high number thank
you mister chairman and then so
I i'm gonna assume I added those
numbers together that we've got
a approximately a hundred and
eighty six bads for our
juveniles who need detention now
this is not incarceration i'm
not sure that's what we call it
for juveniles would that be
correct.
Uh senator juveniles are
detained and when they're
sentence to cyfd then their um
in personal incarcerated area
that's called at the deep band
so and I just want to make sure
that when you said the cyfi gave
you the number of eighty nine
that wasn't referring to the
CYFD facility and.
Okay yeah
um it's so mister chairman I
will just point out that in
house bill too.
We just appropriated eighty two
million.
Eighty two million.
One hundred and twenty two
six hundred dollars for juvenile
detention.
And when I and and I know that
number of a hundred and eighty
six is not correct because
there's juveniles who have been
incarcerated and I don't know
what the number is for that but
it seems like we're paying
somewhere in the neighborhood of
just under half a million
dollars for you to do so really
what I wanted to see is what are
we paying for individuals to be
detained what is the cost of
that cause i'm just not i'm not
feeling like we're getting a
good bang for the buck on this
and the reason I say that is
because our kids are being.
Incarcerated instead of
rehabilitated that's what I see
as I look at what we're doing a
leak leak dony and account it
may be different they've got it
they've got a really good system
going on there and maybe it's a
model for the rest of the state
but I pointed out earlier when
you look at the math
northern new mexico north jeasee
mexico has nowhere for our kids
to go so my question is do you
know how many of our kids in the
mexicor being sent out estate.
Mr chair senator need to make
sure you understand that the
numbers that we provided other
than on this map all concerned
adult detention facility so so
they are not so in terms of the
funding in the cost it's only
for adults attention mr chairman
I understand that that's the
cost i'm just saying I pulled up
house bill to to see how much
we're giving to cyfd for
juvenile detention across the
state and it's over it's over
eighty two million dollars um
when we talked with missouri and
there's a group of us that
talked with missouri they
thought it was outrageous that
they were they were getting
sixty four million dollars and
so we looked up like what do we
actually pain in the mexico and
it's over eighty two million
dollars so the the state is
paying a larger money.
And again I will just say that
i'm just not convinced that I I
understand that some of our kids
are being sent out a state.
Um senator mister chair I do not
believe but I will double check
that any of the money that is
appropriate to see why fd flows
through the county detention
facilities and i'm not aware of
youth who are being detained
again not sentenced i'm not
aware of any youth who are being
detained out of state
but that is not a question I
best recently but historically
that's never been there well a
long long time ago that might
have been the case but it in the
last say ten fifteen years now
so
I think and I I will double
check it but I think what you're
wanting to know is what cyfd
doing with the eighty two
million dollars i'm I am trying
to figure out what are we
spending total mister chairman
i'm sorry what are we spending
total for juveniles who are find
themselves.
In in in contact with either
detention or incurseration what
do we how much are we spending
for that and what are we doing
and how are we doing it and are
there better ways that we can do
it and so I I you know you've
got the numbers on this slide
that for I wasn't looking at
your numbers for the budget I
really just looked at what money
is going to see why fd and my
suspicion is that that money is
flowing out to help p for some
of this and that's inaccurate so
it's even worse than I expected
mister chairman if none of that
eighty two million dollars is
going to these four juvenile
attention centers then then
we're spending even more money
on juveniles
i'm sorry it's it's just really
disturbing to me um I was hoping
to have more information on
juvenile thank you mister chair
and a mr chair senator I do not
believe any of that money I
don't believe that our juvenile
detention facilities receive any
money from the state but I will
confirm that.
And I am looking specifically at
the premiums uh the premium
column and i'm wondering in
twenty sixteen and twenty
seventeen is there something
that happened those particular
years that made the premiums
jump to even higher than they
are today.
The.
Mr chair representative the
premiums were going weigh up the
coverage is much less today than
it was then um so so the.
When the coverage went down the
premiums went down as well.
Umm that was one way to make it
more affordable but the um.
What you can see is the annual
aggregate was ten million.
Um
and the self insured retentions
started out well in the
beginning it was seven hundred
and fifty thousand so just to to
try to explain the pool is not
an insurance company we are a
pool of member counties that
contribute there they make their
contributions it's put in a pit
and then the question is how do
you how do you use that money to
pay claims at the first layer
it's the self insured retention
it's those dollars that are in
the pot that are gone out
historically we always purchased
on the private market or there's
a there's a carrier that's a a
pool of poor county reinsurance
limited we would purchase our
reinsurance elsewhere so that we
could get up to the dollar
figure we were wanting to
provide to our members so
the short ask your question is
nothing dramatic happened but as
cases resolved as the cost of
claims went up there was a very
large jury verdict in during the
end of county the sleven case
but that case was from two
thousand seven and I think the
verdict may have been in two
thousand and twelve so it was it
was a bell whether it made a big
difference but over time private
carriers just decided they
didn't want to do business thank
you and mister tariff I am not
mistaken I think that new mexico
celebrates acts was passed in
twenty twenty.
Maybe yes okay
I have a couple of other
questions do you I see
the page before this on page
fifteen that there is an
aggregate award and i'm
wondering do we know what the
average award is.
Am I page fifteen you have
total claims and that it is the
cost of claims and i'm wondering
if that's related to page
sixteen as well if you're
talking about the amount spent
and wondering if there's an
average amount.
For for claims.
Mr chair representative no that
would be all types of claims so
would I can tell you is of that
hundred and four million about
twenty three and a half million
would fall into the workers
compensation bucket and then the
balance the little over eighty
one million would be for
liability type claims
I could probably tell you what
the average was over over that
period of time i'm not sure how
useful it would be because it
wouldn't be it might be easier
if it was like death claims or
you know you suppose there's by
category I think to make it
maybe more meaningful I mean the
reason i'm asking is because i'm
i'm trying to figure out the
correlation between page fifteen
and sixteen
in terms of are we seeing like
increases in the number of
uhm
actual cases meaning are we
mitigating risk in any kind of
way what is the medical gation
of risk look like because i'm
flipping back and forth i'm
going well if we're having.
More claims brought forward are
we medicating that risk in any
sort of way and the number is
just going up or is it that we
have a small amount and the
amount of the awards are larger
thank you mr chair
representative I do have a slide
that I didn't bring that would
show that the number of claims
out of our detention facilities
has pretty steadily declined.
So to the extent um we do invest
quite a bit in last prevention
hopefully that's what's the
cause of it but we do see fewer
claims we do we are seeing a
very market increase in the cost
of those claims.
Thank you mr chair.
Thank you mister chairman and
thank you miss phillips and
miscrush yada
for the presentation i'm going
to go to page eight and county
revenue sources um
what percentage of the federal
revenue.
Comes from programs like
medicaid medicare
mr tear representative none that
is literally how much the US
marshals is paying to predium to
to house
detainees we.
Really don't get medicaid money
yet and i'll i'll explain why um
the court reason is that
for many years when somebody was
in jail they would lose their
medicaid benefits now new mexico
a couple of years ago made it
possible to access those
benefits for the first thirty
days of detention and under the
medicaid waiver that's being
rolled out now the
expectation is if it continues
to move forward that the last
ninety days of detention
qualified medical services could
be billed to medicaid
which I think is fantastic in
terms of policy and should cover
most of the people in jail
except for the fact that you
have to be in a medicated
provider and you have to build
by service so you have to follow
the rules for billing medicaid
which is something that um none
of our counties have experienced
with currently um almost every
county santa fe is different
uses a private contractor to to
deliver
medical services unm is not a
private contractor there there
are the mdc provider now they
could probably do it but the
those are contracts that provide
for millions of dollars for a
service and so those providers
have not ever had to bill for
service which is something that
they would need to do i'm in
order to access medicaid dollars
medicaid dollars have been
accessed for impatient care for
some detainees which is a great
help sometimes someone will be
booked into a facility and
they'll need umm you know open
heart surgery or something like
that if they go to the hospital
they're there for more than
twenty four hours and the
hospital can bill medicaid for
those costs which is a big help
but we have it's going to be a
huge learning curve to make the
promise of medicaid
reimbursement a reality in our
detention facilities and thank
you mister.
Thinking misfelt so they answer
everything reason why I ask is
um if this is potentially
another part of money that can
be pursued especially as we can
say we continue to offer more
services like many kids
assistant treatments and the
like um in a perhaps it's a way
that we can kind of get access
to get you access to additional
dollars while also moving
forward those part that those
policy.
You know philosophy is that we
have been talking about
throughout the legislature and
as part of our budgeting process
but um.
At the same time if you were to
become more reliant on medicare
what happens if we lose those
medicaid you know dollars and
that funding so just wanted to
ask the question and see if that
resonated anyway so they can
either three counties that are
going to be the pilots for
rolling out the medicaid
expansion santa fe county which
is I think well positioned
because they have employees um
as opposed to a contractor
providing their services
valency accounti
and
sacoral county and the each have
somewhere different models and
so we're going to see how
feasible it is but I agree with
you it's it's a little
concerning that we don't know if
that's a secure source of
funding going forward.
The.
Thank you mister chairman thank
you both of being here
grace how is a little bothered
by something you set so i've
done some research on it
so you said that senate bill
that funding for senate bill one
and three was not going to be
available for a few years it's
available to morrow july one is
the beginning of the school year
what you made then referring to
as the behavior health trust
fund that will not be available
until july twenty seven I would
be the first dispersements but
in house bill two
there is funding available to
execute local plans and fill in
the gaps that identified after
you bring him to your behavioral
health executive committee and
there is money for every
department that's involved when
I get that summary which i've
just asked for i'll send it to
you so we're ready to go with
system
mr chairs senator
I agree that that's what the
losses with the committee
schedule that was shared on
tuesday said was that there
would be a period of planning
and meeting and with the with
the funding available in twenty
twenty seven secretary on me
home expressed discontent about
that
I suggested that some funding
could be deployed immediately in
our detention facilities but I
was I was responding to the the
engineer that was shared with
the public on tuesday so mister
chairman twenty twenty seven is
when the behavioral health
health trust fund would be
available but we were careful to
put money into the budget so
that this could happen in the
new fiscal year when I get this
summary i'll give it to you but
secretary army hoes in error now
people are meeting etc that
money is available starting
tomorrow.
For the meeting for the planning
for executing this cause we we
don't expect people to do this
out of a goodness so they are
hard I mean these are plans that
we will forward to repair of
every health system and it's
urgent and we put the money in
the budget and it was signed by
the government or so much
terminal not when I get that
summary i'll give it to you
thank you.
Thank you mister chair
thank you after being here
just that that's fresh and my
meant to
protem suit or just talk about
the meeting with.
Dig the executive meeting was
just last tuesday I was up in
los almost i've been all beyond
the have a health commission for
a oc as it legislative earlier
is on I
starting tomorrow actually so
the planning the so grace I
believe what you said is is I
have concerned you after what I
just heard from our protempt so
let's let's try to facilitate
their their conversation mister
chair arm I too will look into
that
but I believe what I heard and I
have been supposed to have the
meeting
this week also with them
um aoc over this information was
that they're gonna first plan
they're doing the mapping so the
funding that the there is
available what's going to go for
the
the travel that they're going to
do across the state to get them
out being done to get all the
information on and I believe
they're going they're looking at
contracts as well to.
Uhm get the information that
they need which for me as a an
issue because I have a problem
or a question of whether that's
redundant of information that's
already available but those are
other questions but thank you
for bringing their out my
questions or why my piece to
your presentation is on page
seventeen um
so
you said
um
we were so much my my issue too
is a little bit tip to
representative and I was talking
about that the cost going up for
for coverage
or coat and then coverage going
down but the cost without is
going up and if you can just uhm
tell me tell us a little bit
again.
You said ten million dollars was
what we were we had in coverage
and now we only have five
million dollars is correct
mr chair representative that's
true for the classe counties so
for bernalio um
donator santa fe
trying to think wheelseas and
the port for those for those
counties for many years they had
up to ten million dollars in
coverage per claim
for a civil rates claims but
that that amount the max is five
million and
um tony and accounting has for
so thank you mister chair so
what does that mean if we have
an in a more claims
this this next fiscal year in
and what does that mean with
only five million dollars
available
mr chair representative it's per
claim so the most for one for
one license for one well let's
see one occurrence that's the
that's the maximum coverage it's
available so share and what are
we seeing this last year in this
claims that were paid out was a
that number the total number I
do not have that with me but I
can get it to you it's a it's a
lot it's a lot thank you mister
church and i'm bringing it up
because I did and I can't come
up with a number myself I was
looking at this uhm
during the budget and it is
quite a bit so if you can get
that to us i'd like to know what
that is and what them so is
there a cap mr chair
mr chair representative it
depends on the kind of claim
you're talking about so if it is
a federal civil rates claim
there's no cap for that
there's no cap on the damages
the punitive damages or the
attorney's fees and um and the
attorney's fees being awarded in
state have been um.
Further the most experienced
attorneys about seven hundred
and hour so it's a lot of money
on the state side there is a
tort claims act which has caps
in different buckets depending
on the kind of damages per
occurrence for the new mexico
civil rights act which somebody
mentioned the cap is an
escalating cap I believe it's
approximately two point six
million dollars per claimant so
if there are multiple claimants
you multiply that times the cap
and what I should tell you was
when I am saying that the
maximum available in coverage
now is five million I was
referring to the maximum
available for a federal civil
rates claim the maximum
available for a state civil
rates claim is two million
through the pool and with that
effectively means is our
counties are underinsured well
they're under insurance for both
right
five million is not adequate for
some claims on the federal side
and two million is not adequate
for some claims on the the state
side and so this year this last
year for the first time we had a
county have to come up with a
money out of its own budget to
resolve the claim that
the plain is declined to resolve
and that has a very direct
effect on services for the
county and
I don't believe it's going to be
the case in this case but the
the
the solution for a county that
doesn't have money is to assess
the property taxpayers and that
is something that
is happening with some
regularity and oklahoma
and it is it is a symptom of the
fact that claims costs are sky
rocketing and there isn't enough
coverage to pay for them and so
you know counties are forced to
assess their residence I will
say.
A a piece of legislation that
i've mentioned to some of you
nobody's excited about it yet is
that we could amend our law to
allow counties to declare
bankruptcy currently that's not
an option but the the
circumstances with
I would call it excessive
liability
may require counties to be able
to do that
because
there it's a it's unsustainable
and it could be fixed with
reasonable caps in my view thank
you thank you mr chair thank you
for the would answer so when
with the so you mention that the
caps are going to continue to go
up to what your or what point do
you know what used to be
I love these questions
representative missed your chair
there's no disguise the limit on
the the the the caps the
legislature did not um they the
legislature said the caps can't
go down if if the if the cpa
goes down they can only go up
and um they've been there's
there's no there's no ended
sight and and representative if
you're interested in talking
about potential solutions to
that I would love love to to get
they have that conversation with
you because it's not it's it's
affecting the ability of
government and it's not just
counties and cities this affects
the state as well and the
general services department to
be able to continue to provide
services thank you mister chair
that that is something I I would
potentially like to look out
with so you I just want some
clarification so we could so
local government counties could
will they can't unless we act
allowed to well them to
increase property taxes to cover
these
please give me some
clarification though thank you
mister chair representative no
under the the constitution the
county's currently have the
authority to assess.
Taxpayers property taxpayers if
they don't they don't have but
they need the money that's an
existing law what isn't an
existing law is the ability for
a county to declare bankruptcy
in the event that it found
itself with them with a judgment
that was not covered
thank you mister chair and thank
you for out for all that
information that just you know
the I think we need to have a
conversation has this and and we
frank we are but a little more
frank and I know our chairman
mister chair you are taking
notes on this I just feel like
this is opening the door to and
you know to this past
legislation and maybe looking at
some kind of reform or some kind
of ability to help our our local
governments
that with increasing other
insurance issues we have around
you know fire and
this is an interesting place so
I think we need to really focus
in on thank you.
Thank you mr chair um and thank
you ladies for your
presentation
was going to ask you a question
about slide four of it because
we're talking about the county
is reimbursement I want to start
with that and if there's time
i'll go back to the other
so the forty five million
dollars that you're talking
about here over forty five
million does that also include
interest in like now that's just
that that's a fixed number when
was that number arrived out.
And mrperiod chair
representative I I just o I just
added up the deficiency from
what the state appropriate vs
what the counties paid for
housing state and mates for over
seventy five is a say twenty
that number is twenty twenty
five
mister chair representative
that's correct okay thank you
and then on and I will go back
to page for and that's very
concerning by the way mr
chairman we've already heard
that
on slide number four is there
anyone
that does any kind of analysis
er with regard to
mental health facilities
for me it would have been really
great to see amount that showed
the detention centers but down
an overall amount that shows
where the mental health
facilities are
um is there anyone that does any
kind of analysis like that for
you guys
mr chair representative we don't
have someone who does it but
quite a few years ago
I created one that showed where
the the psychiatric beds were in
the state
it's been a number of years so
that would need to be updated
but there you know there's one
state hospital and then there
are a number of hospitals that
have psychiatric beds and so I
don't think of them so much as
me metal health hospitals but
just hospitals that have some
capacity and that I would I
would want someone else to
verify that information but that
is certainly available and then
did you do that
I it was it was in relation to
house joint memorial seventeen
it might have been in two
thousand eleven I have been
around too long yeah it's
probably not current
so you know I just think mister
chair as I sit here and I look
at this at night and I think
about people that are referred
out of the oven carcerations
into facilities.
Where they probably would be
better served rather than just
you know like we're gonna put
you into a detention center and
leave you there and and mister
chairman the reason that I bring
this app is because just on
on saturday I was having a
conversation with one of our
wonderful new mexico state
policemen and i'm not going to
mention any names but he happens
to work with the juvenile
detention center in albuquerque
and what he was telling me as
the and this is I think the
appropriate time to ring this up
mr chair
is that in the last six months
over five hundred of our youth
have been released back into the
community because of capacity
issues and you know it was very
concerning to me when he gave me
that number in in about six
months he said the
morale levels of the disrespect
toward our state police officers
when they call them in to help
is this alarming so I just
wanted to bring that issue up or
so because I don't know if that
number is correct mister chair
but that was what he quoted me
and
I just about fell off my chair
when he mentioned that to me
because he does work in the
detention center currently
you know went on and those calls
so I don't know
to representative which
detention center can bring only
a county i'm sorry the burning
of county detention center at
the cycle
the detention center okay yeah
five hundred year that i'll look
into that that's that sounds
incorrect it sounds like
maybe he does bills that way but
I mean it's a high number from
what he was telling me so if I
could get some information
regarding that they appreciate
it.
The.
The.
Thank you mister chair I just
wanted to follow up a grace with
kind of how you characterize
damages
I I found it interesting that
you phrased it in the following
way uhm it's in compensating an
individual is out of proportion
with whatever I think that's
kind of what you said in my my
little antenna went up when you
said that because will he
damages serve multiple purposes
and one of the purposes is to
maybe get a little wake up call
to the employer as don't how
they're doing business and how
maybe they're not supervising
their employees appropriately or
training them appropriately or
taking action when they're
unnoticed they have a bad actor
in place and I say that from the
perspective of defense
and I think you know I represent
it in a very large organization
and when we got big judgments
we started paying attention to
what was going on in a
particular division if they were
coming out of the particular
division or a particular
supervisor or particular
employee and we'd start
wondering what we need to do to
make sure that doesn't happen
again and sometimes they're
involved fireing a person
retraining a person firing a
manager
and so I think allowing you that
count is to believe that this is
all about just paying an
individual and is it an unfair
that we have to pay this
individual has been damaged is
really not the right way to be
thinking about it and if you are
conveying that message it to
your members you're doing them
at a service what you need to be
telling them as they need to be
correct in their behaviors and
that these judgements are
reflective of what is going on
in their communities and to
their.
To the individuals who are being
injured so I I just want to add
their cause i'm not a plan of
lawyer unlike this very capable
gentleman but I know what we
would do when we have a big
judgment and it wasn't blame the
system it was we operate within
a system and we need to take
action to improve on things so
we are not facing these kinds of
damages again
mr chair representative there's
no question that fair
compensation is essential and
yes it that does that does have
results I mean certainly my
board would not invest the
substantial funds that we invest
in last prevention if we weren't
worried about you know claims
the problem is that
if you are beyond fair
compensation if you are in you
know as stratospheric number in
the tens of millions as we are
in the state then is you start
to damage your ability to do
good things rate if you have to
put your money to pay claims
then you can't devote your money
to you know more rigorous
background checks or
better training or improved
facilities there's a point at
which
the and the prospect of
potentially damages in the tens
of millions which there are I
mean that's we join the last
chris is settled it a a case for
twenty two million dollars and
the reason I mention that is
because again two thirds of our
counties have an entire general
fund budget that's less than
that you know that that's just
that it's a lot of money and i'm
not sure that actually that was
even a a legal settlement but
that's that's a whole other
story what would happens is you
create an environment where even
cases that should be defended
because they're not that bad
people are you know where
pressure to compromise them.
Because there is this fear well
maybe we should try the case but
maybe it'll come out with the
you know forty million dollar
judgment or something and so
caps I think perform a very
important function in
an
making sure that there's fair
compensation available but also
making sure that government can
continue to function as it's
supposed to and there are caps
in the new mexico civil rights
act so and we we did take care
of that great so i'm really not
sure what you're talking about
there and there are not caps in
the federal law and we have no
control or without but there are
caps in the new mexico civil
rights case that's something we
all talked about and we actually
listened to the counties in the
municipalities when that issue
came up so
i'm not really sure where you're
going with that argument and you
don't need to respond it's not a
back and forth um thank you
have you been through
our groups and block
thank you mister chair could you
please respond to the last thing
what are the caps on the civil
rights act I don't know mister
chairman mr chair representative
the cap is an escalating cap I
believe it's approximately two
point six million dollars and
it's per claimant as opposed to
per currents and so in my view
the the cap is important and I
think it's too high when we when
the bill was being negotiated or
debated we pointed out that
counties had two million and
coverage for state claims but
it's per per occurrence which
means the event
and so having it per claimant is
a big difference in having it
escalated as a big difference.
Okay thank you so much mister
chair and thank you for that
great so
under the civil rates act what
if what is the new mexico
county's paid out
since then do we have a ballpark
of kind of what we're looking at
them
mr chair representative I don't
want to guess that I could
calculate that for you item it's
a moving target it happens it
you know we we update our data
regularly
it's a significant amount but
it's a little tricky to track
because sometimes claims have
civil rates that claims and and
federal civil rights claims as
well and as the representative
mentioned that there's no cap on
the federal.
Thank you mister chair thank you
grace and then can you just tell
me if there was a bump in.
I guess just not not the
premiums but just the payouts
after that bill was put into
place and was significant as in
could it really hurt account is
bottom line in their budget so I
know an arch city in county I
think our cities like thirty
million something like that
operating I don't know what the
county is so it can be
significant and i'm not sure
what that would look like so can
you just tell me a little bit
about history after after the
fact what we're seeing currently
and what the challenges are
other than having to self
insurer yourselves which is
crazy but for less insurance
you're paying more money rates
though could you just go a
little bit into that for me and
that's the last question ahead
thank you mr chair
representative I love these
questions and fortunately I
didn't come prepared without
presentation
but yes the the net position of
the pool has crated since the
law was put into effect we think
that it is done i'm very
significant damage and is
threatening the viability of the
poor I think on the state side
this the legislature I believe
had to subsidise the general
services department to the two
of fifty million dollars last
summer and my understanding is
that was spent by the time the
session began in january but
that's you know just from me
observing the legislature at
work it it has had a very
profound financial effect on the
pools.
Thank you mister chair thank you
both for being here and thank
you for what the new mexico
counties do I know that you do a
lot everything from treasurers
to county clerks and everything
so you're really working hard
and have a lot of moving parts
so I really applied both of you
thank you so much
everyone
so we
joined us this afternoon this
morning we we spent some time
talking about cell rates act in
the we have municipal league
they're still here too so that's
good in and I I wanted to stay
on topic you're so not get too
far but we've dealt into that
somewhat so i'll come back
around a little bit but first on
miscarel you you said his word
many times
that the the counties are owed a
certain amount of money in but
i've been looking for the
presentation and the numbers the
country's way by your analysis
by your presentation the
country's road but forty five
million dollars over seven years
and and I want to focus on the
word only because to me that has
some some significance which is
someone else your money if i'm
gonna expect you to pay it you
know
you're laughing dear but I mean
I mean you know what's I mean
you know if you make it back
with somebody in if you're never
going to pay it then do you
think the money this may be
semantics for lawyers to enjoy
but but my question really is a
serious one which is is there an
intention for the state to pay
back what is o to the counties
are you gonna have you make
sense of demand if you gotta
make collections for closing
their house taking their cars
garnishing their wages I mean
you know all the stuff that that
lawyers are used to doing when
you want to collect the debt
there's a lot of things you do
one of them is suing
the state
I hope we say you plenty to do
something about this or is it
just make us feel bad for you
mister chair thank you for that
and whip there's something that
we've been talking about for the
past year just because we
haven't had much luck at the
legislature for with the
reimbursement and what you don't
see in this to appear a big.
Piece that we left out as is
prisoner transport as well we've
asked for that reimbursement as
well over the years and not
received it and so I mean I
think it's we were hoping with
the presentation today and
providing the numbers and really
showing the full picture of a
forty five million dollar
decision see it my trigger on
some
representation at the
legislature to help us get that
reimbursement but other than
that yeah I guess the countings
would have to look at a second
lawsuit
regarding this issue yeah that's
regrettable always when we find
herself suing one another we
that it hear this last year a
couple of times and some of the
service committee in lessons
have had this executive branch
or others along the way too so
i'm hoping we don't get there
but i'm i'm hoping that you're
not left with no options I guess
is what i'm saying and I I know
we've got a member of the
finance committee over here
which is nice to have and maybe
others but i'm really kind of
just possible by the fact that
we have any large that says
you're supposed to get
reimbursed for this and we just
say now we're not going to
follow that line and this
becomes important to be because
this committee in this
legislature is always you need
to pass a law for this you need
to pass a lot for that we you
need to pass a lot for pan
handling need to pass a law for
this and we pass these laws and
then then I for medical appeared
and always similarly find out a
year to there yeah that's that's
when we ignore right we forget
about that one and so then I
feel very much like I have
better things to do with my time
if if i'm going to be part of a
legislature that passed his laws
that we kind of just tend to
ignore when it doesn't suit us
to do anything about so might
make as my question is what kind
of response do you get from the
budget finance people when you
say hate the law says you're
supposed to reimburse us this
money and they say no we're not
then word is that leave you guys
mister chairweight we've met
with lfc and lfc staff and
provided them with the
information.
We've had detailed meetings with
them actually the past couple of
years during the interam
and we always get told oh okay
thank you will consider it and
then we get towards the end of
session when the budgets sitting
over and senate finance after
trying to work through this and
house appropriations and get
told there's just not enough
money there to reimburse the
counties for
housing state and nates so it's
the same answer every year
there's not enough money
even though we we start out in
the inner on going forward it's
been a legislative priority for
the county's as long as i've
been there for five years now
it's at the top of our list so
we're sort of.
It's hard for me may be
impossible for me to answer the
question accept to say it is
it's an it's an impossible goes
for you answer I I bring it up
only because again I know and
are some way colleagues here in
others in the senate
particularly it's last session
kind of consumer lawyers
pinyatters I guess and it's a
beat away a joe in the lawyers
that those of us that remain and
see what shakes lose but but I
would take a soon I I and maybe
that's a callous attitude of a
lawyer but that we we have
courts and we have the law for a
reason we have lawyers for
reason which is to have people
assert their rights and and seek
redress and you're saying you
talk to the staff and the staff
says sorry in the second we like
to the staff
they like the dust and elected
the governor who passed a law
that says you're supposed to get
reimbursed and you don't get
remembers so who made the staff
king
I don't understand that and and
so we should either change the
law and make it clear that we're
not going to pay you for that
and and somebody should do that
past that law that you don't get
reimbursed or you offered soon
and get it enforced
and and maybe that's a a
lawyer's perspective on
everything that's a solution
everything's a lot of it but but
i'm i'm you know again forgiving
for that i'm a big fan of the
you will may be surprised to
find out i'm a real big fan of
law and I tell people for all we
want to give lawyers a hard time
or or criticise us there's one
thing the law makes people do it
makes people do things they
would otherwise never get around
to doing that so my new when
you've got a statute limitations
you got to file lawsuit with
them as period of time when you
get a complaint you got to
answer within thirty days we get
in roberto she got to do this
when you get something the law
makes people do things otherwise
they would never do and get
around to doing and and that's
the only vehicle we have for for
doing that other than violence
which is then alternative that
some resort to but I don't see
the winning you too going that
route so
so you know
grace you're a lawyer soon I
mean you heard so many feelings
who the staff of it.
Lfc okay they've hurt your
feelings a few times so that's
kind of way goes that's that's
what we need a lot more
information we're hearing a lot
about this here we hear and
about medical malpractice that
rates are going up on and on
i've raised them three daughters
they've all been through the
teenage years one thing you
learned about insurance is that
the people who accept the rates
do so with a lot of information
they do so my third daughter
wrecked a twice in the first
month her rates went up
you know the the get agreed to
get good rates right they're not
boys to get good rates they
drive a red car they get bad
rates I mean you you know the
drill they take so many things
into consideration and I can't
process the rate increases and
yourself insured without knowing
how many claims have their bin
been what are they classing to
seven what are the bad verdicts
who are the problem counties
what kind of claims are they
being sued for
we've talked a lot about the
slevin case here interesting
case that was one or one of our
former governors was a district
attorney who was sued for
keeping an inmate and in jail
and donated county for twenty
two months who was mentally
early he was he was waiting
trial for those twenty two
months for a dwy
he was mentally alan was not
cure for whose and solitary and
combined for those twenty two
months the jury a jury of our
peers decided that he was
entitled at twenty two million
dollars and i'm a big fiscal big
spreadsheet rigor i'm a big fan
of juries and
when we talk about these big
settlements in these big numbers
the thinking is always what's
lawyers that are doing that
what I do as I present an
opportunity to adjury to people
when they they decide the
numbers and whether it's medical
malpractice or these cases
average people beside what these
things should be in that case
that's what they decided it was
several for fifteen and a half
million dollars and now was
looking to the the result of
that in the in the months after
that result.
Donate county first appeal that
verdict and then ultimately they
doubled their budget for medical
care for a mental health care to
the point of represent chair the
county's deal budget for medical
care facility double after that
and the implemented dedicated
wings from the ill illness with
expanded medical and mental
health services there was a
result that I think most of us
would say was good is costly you
want to respond I want to see
one thing about that because yet
though those are good things it
also they were on the precipice
of opening a crisis trash center
that would have served exactly
mr levin and people like him and
actually opening that was
delayed by seven years yeah and
that's and that's unfortunate so
you're you're right you can use
made the common earlier graces
are well um when we pay these
claims and things that takes
away from money that's available
for other things and and that's
those of us elect officials no
that's always been the case and
you know it was a county
official the the concern I have
is that we've talked about the
four as we see fewer and fewer
people and in jail in jail and
we're gonna see that
presentation here the moment
statistically it seems to me
that local government officials
less and less want to spend
money on jailing people
and and why would they it's much
more fun to go to a ground
breaking for a bike trails and
and new recently and as the
county officials worth I don't
get any mileage by telling my in
may my my concisions I put a lot
more people in jail
and you never get that and
choose and so we were seeing
less and less
population in jails now we're
seeing your presentation right
here you're saying the n DC
populations were up rate it's an
election here and so we've seen
an increase of twenty three
point eight percent in mdc
population this year what
happened with impassing new loss
we didn't do any of the things
that we were told we needed to
do to come back crime but the
population of n b c's weigh up
now maybe we'll get an answer to
that while we're here but.
You tell me it wasn't about
passing the us because I was
around for that part in I don't
think that's the explanation for
what there is there seems to be
a an interest maybe in in jail
and more people are right now at
mdc and there may be good
reasons for that too but I want
suggesting is that that when
you're saying well there there's
maybe that we should be spending
on things other than settling
claims we all agree I think I
think that's what I heard
represent challenges saying to
we don't want to see that spend
the money there either but maybe
that means
not creating the liability and
the last thing i'll just all my
comments all at is that the the
important thing to remember here
is that that the cilrights act
did put caps and in my
experience as a lawyer and
there's some really good lawyers
out in the room and then here
and i've practiced with them
caps can be a really good thing
when it comes to selling cases
and I think you said that
gracing would agree with that
when you know as a lawyer here's
my best day
he was the most i'm ever going
to see from any jury and collect
the there's a tendency to settle
the case within the cap and and
not expect more than that and
and so I was putting a cap in
the civil rights act I think was
intended so I was intended by me
is one of the prime sponsors to
increase out and to
assure the maximum risk so that
when you're trying to insure
yourself you know you were stay
is going to be x two and so well
we'll with the suggestion of
others maybe revisit the civil
rights act down the road but I
know the presentation today here
was different and and I hope
we've offered you the
opportunity to tell this group
oh while you're bombed out that
unit getting compensated for
things you did the law that we
and actors says you're supposed
to get compensated for an I
don't think we can do anything
about it here except past the
memorial or something to tell
them told
the committee finance committee
we really meant it when we pass
that long I think it's in your I
think it's in your house.
Anyone else you are anything to
that.
You said something that I did
want to respond to which all you
said counties are spending less
than jails that's not true if
you look at the budgets there
they're only going one way even
in years when there are few
people in custody because
there is no direct correlation
between i've got a hundred
people are a hundred and ten or
eighty you still have to run the
facility and counties continue
every year to increase the
amount that they're spending on
jails and eighty three last year
we fully expect it to be over
four hundred this year no you
right now miss spoke by saying
that wrong which is that that
were the spending is going up
but the populations have been
declining and it may be overly
simplistic for me to say well
the crime is going up and up and
up and populations in jails and
people that are being held gels
are going down and on and do
those things intersection is
there any correlation some may
say not there's no correlation
i'll i'm in a simplistic might
say you got we we we were
inclined to jail fewer and fear
of people whether it's
prosecutors and got him in the
room we heard from others this
morning if it's prosecutors of
its public defenders if its
judges whatever it may be
i'm not here to point with that
finger but but if you're jailing
fewer people in chiferon if your
people dramatically
dramatically jailing fewer for
people at mdc than that might
have something to do with the
fact that the cops are getting
burned out and bumped out of the
they're having to arrest the
same people every day and bring
him back in the next day maybe
may my creative moral problem
might create a moral problem for
prosecutors or for public
defenders to see same people
over and over I I we heard about
all struggle senator mister
macia talk about the fact that
that what they're doing in doing
a county I don't know when it's
legal or not the issue just find
out but essentially so they
realize that most of crime has
been committed by a small group
people we've been hearing that
over and over and they know
where the small group people are
so they're really trying to
focus on those people
prosecuting those people and
doing a lot of things with those
without that group of people so
there may be a lot of solutions.
Okay i'm thank you very much
thanks for being here today
thanks for the opportunity and
what a great transition
come on up or days
yeah yeah and while you're all
are coming up thank you for
being here good to see all of it
I know
you have other things to do
with busy don't feel the things
but thanks for taking the time
to come up here the committee is
going to have passed out a
report from last july
from the legislative finance
committee it's entitled update
on crime and you make some bird
on the country I know you all
are probably very familiar with
the the report may have things
to say about where it's right
where it's wrong eight a
heard a lot of presentations on
its reporting they find them
very interesting just to there's
a lot of data in there it it may
not I may be drawing the wrong
conclusions from the data and
the data may be inaccurate but
but I hope that committee
members will refer to this for
the presentation as well to and
it may lead to some questions
but we we had a special session
on the last year and we sold out
a u miss bregman at the process
and from the days as well
so we wanted to have you all
here today to say hey here's
where we're helping here's we're
getting in the way here's what
more is needed so or will leave
it up to doc but each of your
prior give us maybe fifteen or
twenty minutes and then we'll
offer some questions so
thank you no it's fine is this.
Okay no i'm i'm sorry about that
mr chair members of the
committee my name is mary
carmack altering same the
district attorney in the first
judicial district which are
santa fe rearier in los alamos
counties
I git invited her volunteered to
come testify on thursday
afternoon so i'm sorry that i'm
showing up without
anything to any data sets to
present to you but I am familiar
with that I can probably answer
some of those questions and so I
was told that the subject of
this presentation was our new
mexico's laws enough and how do
the laws either get in the way
or or affect what we as
prosecutors do end um I want to
say and I have a feeling that
mister bregman and I are going
to have pretty divergent
solutions to this and probably
pretty divergent ways of of
going about this but from my
perspective the short answer.
Two are new mexico laws enough
is yes they are i'm not there
are places that we could three
there are certain areas that
could be reformed or changed but
for the most part in our office
we are able to operate within
the laws as they are passed
there are some laws I think i've
spoken to some of you about them
that I would encourage longer
sentencing on but it would be a
very particular sentence for a
very particular crime juvenile
justice is a place where we need
reform and I don't mean longer
sentences there I mean we do
need reform from the very bottom
of the of the
crimes
I can't think of a word that the
very least of the crimes all the
way up to the very most of
crimes we need more diversion we
meet need more opportunities
more ways to help these children
and then we also need some some
different sentencing options for
violent juveniles that are
committing crimes with guns i've
been working with senator tricio
and ends uh and senator duheg on
that very topic
but what does yet in the way of
successfully prosecuting and
quickly prosecuting or there are
three things the first is
unfunded mandates are that are
imposed by our supreme court i'm
specifically talking about the
pre trial detention system and
the cmo which mister bregman is
very familiar with I am also
familiar with it having started
my practice and practiced all
the way through the
implementation of the cmo as a
defense attorney in albuquerque
we have been
told hinted to
we're not sure but we believe
that the cmo is coming to the
first judicial district in
january in preparation for that
last year we asked for thirteen
new positions
and.
This la- for this at this last
legislative go around we got one
and what that is going to do to
us if the cmo is implemented is
going to be the exact same thing
that happened to albuquerque
long before mr bregman d a
bredman took over and that is
that thousands of cases are
going to get dismissed a
justice is not going to be
served and people are going to
get away with crime and and then
I believe
ten plus years down the road you
were going to see a an
astonishing increase in an
escalation of crime we haven't
seen in santa fe I think unlike
all the kirki
huge increase in overall crime
but we have seen an increase in
violent crime in particular
amongst juveniles.
I sort of just went off on our
own a tangent of the other thing
that has affected a society from
the cmo is our pre trial
detention system and you all did
tweak that last year the year
before
but the pre trial detention
system what what it does and
understand I support it and
still support bail reform
but what it does as it takes the
the most complex cases first
degree homicides child sex cases
armed robberies and it forces us
to be ready to go to trial on
those cases in two weeks and by
that I mean we have to fill the
motion yet somebody is complete
criminal history and then we
have to get all of the discovery
the police reports the body one
cameras surveillance anything
that we can short of lab results
and we have to present those at
prelim because the rules of
evidence apply we have to get
every single witness civilian
witness police officer witness
in front of a court within about
two weeks in order to prove that
that person should be held in
jail and it sets up this very
person perverse system where the
hardest cases are so front
loaded that the other cases we
end up having to tries and deal
with kind of on down the road
when we have the time and when
we go through a time period like
we did in may just last month
where we filed in in my little
office I have two attorneys that
file for all three counties well
sell must hardly ever has any
but
we filed I want to see twenty
two
that does not mean that all
twenty two were granted I have
some policies in my office like
we file on every single
aggravated fling we file on
every case where a gun was
discharged at someone I believe
those impact public safety and
those people need to be held in
custody or placed on house
arrested the ankle bracelet.
We cannot get conditions of
release like house arrest or the
bracelet except by filing pre
trialled attention motions those
are the rules in our district
and so we have to file more pre
child attention motions in order
to get people on
conditions of release even if
they're out in the community
and so again that is front
loading those cases
the other the the two the other
two things that I wanted to
bring up to the committee really
kind of stem from these unfunded
mandates from the pre child
attention the cmo that's coming
the first is
um
the cmo requires that we have
oliver discovery everything and
this could be hundreds of
thousands of pages of
documentation to the defense
council within ten days after
arrangement except for
scientific things those those
have slightly longer timeline um
that the the problem that we
have is that we cannot
physically get the things from
our police or police agencies
into our servers into our
systems so that we can share
them there was never a thought
about putting money into law
enforcement software that talked
to district attorney software
and so we have been working for
I don't know five six seven
years to to all of us separately
and together to try to get that
funding so that we can get on
the same systems that they're
answer that we can actually meet
those mandates what we have
found in and albuquerque had to
create an entire shield unit
with apd is that it is nearly
impossible to do that if your
systems don't talk for example
and we've mostly taken care of
this but if there is since
everybody warn camera is now in
each day
if there is something longer
than about five minutes it takes
my office twenty four hours to
download one five minute video
most scenes cops love to
converge on scenes.
Most scenes there are fifteen
twenty officers and so it it can
take weeks before we're actually
ready to present a case just
because we're still trying to
get everything into a systems
the third thing and I think this
this effects both days and low
pd but they are well represented
so.
Understand that I am speaking
about them but not for them is
that dear's officers throughout
the state may be accepting the
second are underfunded in the
sense that we do not have enough
employees and the ones that we
do are not paid well um when I
was testifying in front of the
lfc.
Last year or maybe a year and a
half ago one of the
representatives asked what day
is made and in surrounding
states and and I wasn't
testifying at that point yet and
so I just got on my phone and I
googled it and
arizona and colorado in
particular those days starting
days are making forty to fifty
thousand dollars more than than
my attorneys most of the
attorneys that have life left my
office over the last few years
have left because they were
moving out of state and it's a
particular problem for me
because I live in santa fe our
main officers and santander and
we have the highest housing
prices in I don't know the world
it feels like and so
so my most of my attorneys they
live in albuquerque and then sam
tries to poach him and
he is unsuccessful but III
really
it's so important to understand
if you don't have prosecutors
living in your community well
they had to come to work and
they do their thing and then
they go home and they don't
really care as opposed to
prosecutors that really want to
live and stay in the communities
and I know that every other d a
if you brought them in one by
one they want attorneys that
want to live in clovis they want
attorneys that want to live in
las vegas we've got to be able
to pay them I mean I I lost an
attorney that I spent three
years investing in and training
and in I took her to trial
another attorneys took it or
trial and then she got pulled up
to fort corns car colorado with
half the case slowed and was was
literally making a hundred and
forty thousand dollars a year
and I was paying her eighty five
and i'm not cheap I I want to
pay a my attorneys and so those
are the three things it's not
the wise it's that we've we've
really put a lot of resources in
the law enforcement over the
last few years and that's great.
But now we need to look up
stream and put the money into
the days officers.
And with that I will stand for
questioning and or turn it over
to sample I can tell has things
to say
mr chairman members of this
committee thank you so much for
the opportunity you could always
invite me to tell ski valley
even on short notice I will do
my best to be here that is for
sure
as my colleague said I didn't
get noticed until this late last
week and I was an exactly sure
what you wanted asked all the
visit with accept for the
headline but I will a will kind
of diet delve into that if I may
forget a little bit I think one
of the things i've said all
along despite laws and
everything else that the most
effective thing you can do is
could continue to fund your
prosecutors to continue to fund
law enforcement the way you do
and for that I am so grateful so
grateful to this legislature
because you have absolutely
funded our office for the most
part for what we've asked for
I will just want to give you a
few numbers to think about in
twenty twenty two the year
before I became day we had
sixteen thousand nine hundred
and seven cases referred to our
office in twenty twenty three we
had eighteen thousand seven
hundred and seventy in twenty
twenty four we had a twenty
three thousand three cases
referred to our office we are on
pace to go over twenty five
thousand cases this year we have
increased our capacity as a
prosecution office because of
all of your help we still are
trying and what I think we are
for the most part meeting the
challenge but we will be back
again continuing to ask for
increases and i'll give you an
example our probation violations
department we have four
attorneys that work on that
this operation route sixty six
which we've been are operating
with with the state police and
with britain of county and our
special agents in our office.
In four months we've arrested
eight hundred people just in
that operation in the
international district alone.
Two hundred and seventy two of
those already add pending cases
we are rested one individual
five times.
So
it's just for what it's worth we
took thirty five thousand fifty
pills off the streets we took
close to a thousand grams of
method feta means fifty three
firms that were recovered sixty
four stolen cars seven
individuals who wanted for
murder in all counts that that
operation has been a great
success and in some respects
crime I will tell you is
starting to get better all of
course and i've said this I
select a broken record except
for the real fundamental issue
of juvenile crime just to give
you some more basic numbers to
kind of put things in
perspective so this is these are
numbers so foreign twenty twenty
five.
We have seventy eight new
homicide charges per attorney
when I got and we had fifty
cases per homicide attorney
fifty cases fifty homicide cases
perhaps so twenty we are now at
twenty eight that's because of
your funding in this legislature
it's given us the up to those
are better cases presented to
jurors to let them do justice we
are better off in our community
because of that.
We filed so far in twenty twenty
five seven hundred and eighty
four pre trial attention motions
of which are rate is up by a
couple of clicks to fifty five
percent have been granted.
As my colleague just mentioned
to you pdms are a real challenge
and under our system let me tell
you why there's such a challenge
this morning I looked at how
many new cases came in last
night new felony cases came in
to my office last night that
immediately go to a bridge where
we have someone doing
backgrounds where we have a
couple lawyers looking at all
the cases to actually make a
determination because we have to
make a determination that
morning basically after their
arrested on whether or not to
file a pretrol attention motion
I have lawyers and people get
get up at five am and go through
all the records of everybody
that we arrest and look at every
every aspect to make the best
decision possible.
So seven hundred and eighty four
p m's have been filed.
Now now some some and in fifty
five percent of them granted one
of the things that that
legislative finance report
mister chairman that you
referenced when we first started
was that some cases and there
are a number of we filed pdams
on because we have such a a
short window to make that
decision within hours from the
time that we get the case we
have to literally say whether or
not we're found AP d m so what
happens at the the charge the
initial facts as they come in or
horrific the witnesses we've got
some names but then shortly
thereafter maybe the witnesses
are homeless or some other
reason they're in the wind the
cases aren't as strong as we
thought they were initially
because we had to make that
decision decision so quick on
the pdms then we find ourselves
down the road dismissing some
cases that we followed pediums
on that's frustrated for us it's
frustrated for everybody
involved in the process now when
it comes to juvenile crime.
I'm just to give you a little
bit of a stab shot of what's
going on so for and twenty
twenty five.
We have had four hundred and
nine juvenile cases referred to
my office seventy two percent
were considered violent or
serious crimes eighty three of
them
were driven our gun cases
eleven juvenile harmiside cases
have been referred since i've
been day for two and a half
years my office is indicted
forty seven juveniles for
homicide.
Now moving on to pre prosecution
version which is near endure to
my heart because every time we
get an opportunity we should be
diverting people
and who wouldn't normally be in
the criminal justice system if
it were not for their addiction
for example we have five hundred
and seventy five cases currently
in our pre prosecution diversion
program this is so far in twenty
twenty five we've had sixty five
graduates from their preparation
to version we have literally
referred in the last two and a
half years thousands of people
if they get treatment we'll
dismiss the charges often times
they get the sign up for
treatment and they come back and
we ask them are you going to
follow up on your treatment and
we will dismiss this case and
they tell us yes and they say
well if you signed up and they
show us yes in the date on the
sign up for the addict is four
months three months two months
away what is an addictive when
they're let out they go right
back so there's not in with all
the respect as it's pretty much
outside of my lane but I know
how important is we have to
continue to build back or behave
your health that was so
destroyed a decade or so go
right I mean we do because we
don't have just stone and
there's no real way for anybody
to look up on a dashboard and
say there's three beds they take
medicate there's five beds they
take private insurance right
instantaneously and we need to
get people help when they went
when we've gotten at their
lowest point when they got
arrested and they wouldn't be in
the criminal justice system but
because their diction let's get
in the help I need and then when
they come back and say I signed
up but I can't get any treatment
for this long period of time
that's very very frustrated
obviously
we've had a seventy three
percent trial conviction rate so
for and twenty twenty five and
we've now could create a
competency team within my office
for obviously the incompetency
law and really beefing up that.
Not only because the legislature
knows its own important judicial
system is ramping that up and we
want to make sure that nothing
falls to the cracks based on our
office i'm just a kind of things
to let you know going into the
future I know this isn't the lfc
I know this is c c j but I just
want you ought to know we've
hard seventy seven attorneys in
two years intend so far and
twenty twenty five we've had a
successful recruiting pipeline
from the law schools and I think
overall my office has fantastic
moral and we have reinstated a
dwi d v prosecution program at
the u and m school of law and
which lasted learn the very
basics of prosecution determined
whether or not they want to go
into the.
Been a prosecutor and we have
five people already ready to
start the fall we would be close
to we are this is the end of the
fiscal year
this budget was approximately
thirty four million dollars for
office as of this morning as of
this morning am we are looking
like we are going to avert less
than a hundred dollars to this
day we have spent every damn you
are given us and I can use a lot
more and i'm gonna come back and
ask for more but we are getting
things done i'm really proud and
it's all it all speaks buyers
about the people that work in my
office they are amazing so let
me just tell you real quickly
kind of the highlights so this
we are working within the laws
that are established the state
of mexico and I think we're
doing everything possible to do
the work of the people and
trying to hold people
accountable as you see by our
numbers there is more going on
but at the same time there's
more beat people being held
accountable and I truly believe
that as i've mentioned several
times now and and it's a drum
beat i've been doing for the
last year year and a half if you
will pretty steadily juvenile
the juvenile criminal code
needs to be needs to be updated
I want to I want to tell you and
I just thank you for this
opportunity because I just want
to say this I understand
everybody that makes the
argument we need to spend more
money or more resources or get
better focused on behavior
health and family intervention
for kids one hundred percent
agree in every way she performed
but I also want to give you the
most recent example I have that
is just so telling the seventeen
and eighteen year old.
We're charged with murder first
to be murdered just weaker two
weeks ago they killed a homeless
man they were just out there
shooting guns in the royal I
think he actually had the nerve
to say he cut down all the
racket so they went inside um
came back out in shadow and
killed the reason why use this
as an example because the
seventeen year old the seventeen
year old was charged or not
charged referred
to criminal to the juvenile
criminal justice system
seven times previously
six of those times were gun
related crimes
how many times did he do
anything other than probation
how many times that you spend
one day in a detention center to
learn anything despite our
requests in fact we asked him to
be kept to the geographic in the
juvenile center in the deal just
so that he'd get it finished as
high school education
we got zero
response we got zero so now
the first time he is going to
face consequences
forget the can't forget about
there's a homeless person that
we didn't do him any service but
how about the seventeen year old
did we teach him anything all
during those previous times he
learned nothing and now he's
going to face sixth if he's
convicted six decades.
It's good dying prison maybe
we don't do him any service when
you touch a hot stove you don't
do it again you learn if you
just if there are some
consequences built in and i'm
just ready for any type of
discussion about it at any time
I just want some consequences
built into our juvenile system
so that are young people learn
something that's not to say
don't give him any behavior help
don't give them all the behavior
help they need but we can do
both are firmly believe that let
me switch gears for a second and
then be happy to answer all your
questions i'm human traffic you
know
that is a legislative priority
i'm far too often human
trafficking and I know that's
been extended to racketeering
and i'm grateful for that
but we need to exit it's a
simple thing it didn't get any
hearing in the last session it's
simply
a just in expanding the
definition of human trafficking
to include harboring patronizing
and transporting this will allow
prosecutors to hold people
cannibal who were involved in
the chain of human trafficking
and rely on observations of
officers
because right now the way the
status written it puts all the
requirement for us to prove the
case on the victims the very
victims who were scared to death
we have to be able to prove our
case based on their testimony
but if we expand the definition
of all hours to prosecute these
horrific crimes of human traffic
in sex labor in in and working
labor all of those things to go
on within human traffic in it'll
be able to help I think overall
um pretry attention is never a
fun topic I will just say that
you guys have made it very clear
you feel anything.
That i've suggests in the past
is not appropriate under the new
mexico constitution and I
respect that I would add though
I think there's needs to be at
some point when it comes to
pretrol attention a real
discussion I think it's worth
the discussion again to discuss
whether or not there should be
greater way put on the nature of
the crime that is charged when
they are discussing this and
pretend to motions in giving
judges that opportunity because
of someone is someone is accused
of a vicious horrific rape and
we are concerned about having
them back out in the street
on maybe that should be given
more way and it consideration
then per whatever it might be a
third time drug possession
charge those things need to be
looked at a leave it at that but
my two biggest priorities if
you're looking at laws that I
realize this is a thirty day
session coming up
first of all my biggest priority
is always asking for funding
because it it makes a difference
but as far as legal law changes
I would respect we suggest to
just have a debate and look at
the children's code and human
trafficking changing the
definition those two things I
think if we accomplish those in
any meaningful way would go a
long way so i'm happy to stand
for any questions mister
chairman members thank you for
the opportunity to be here thank
you
very much made even one
acknowledged that we did it on
short notice I apologize for
that we were we were looking out
for d as we were actually
inviting that the da's
association to send someone and
we were having difficulties with
their prior plans and schedule
so if that my old friends will
come show up as which that's
what you do in your party bags
when you're when you chair you
to fill the spot and go I really
need somebody intelligent to to
really give this committee
something worth their time in
effort in yours do and
constructive so thank you for
that no I regret the.
Sure noticed but you did great
with it
i've got nobody signed up so I
think it's sanford dinner oh
senator trukio yes of course let
me start let me start on the
right side of the room first of
all i'm always given the left
left to write anybody over there
really green really nothing at
all alright alright represent
charges.
And others on my rate rant me.
Truly sound to me regarding you
when I all chrome that
sentencing needs to be changed
we have to have some kind of
accountability for juvenile
crime especially violent chrome
as you stated with the seventeen
year old
five gun crimes before he
unfortunately took the life of a
homeless man
that is not ok
I just celebrated my sons ten
year anniversary of his death
over the weekend this was
regarding juveniles that had
committed the crime as well as
adult criminals who had just
became adults and had other
crimes as juveniles clearly we
didn't hold them accountable
we have to do something but if
we constantly have this fight of
rehabilitation and only trying
to figure out the why they did
what they did and not including
accountability I don't
understand how we're ever going
to fix the problem and I
understand that we continue to
fight we know that we're out
number the ones that think we do
need to change the children's
code and accountability for
juveniles but the rest of the
state I think agrees that
something needs to be done with
the accountability but when we
don't have that power on votes
when we don't have that power to
control what gets hurt and
committee and what does it to
even get to a conversation how
do we address this
systematically now I have looked
you know I I think i'm in my
third month of just trying to
dive deep into what you taught
in and I know that they're state
looks very different from ours
when it comes to new max
accounts and the issues that we
have i'm especially with
generation or crime and poverty
but they did such a good job
with juvenile reform and it
looks like it's working.
Um how do we fix the problem and
exactly what do you think we can
do with that children's cold
that maybe we didn't look at
when we presented that build
this year so that everybody on
both sides agrees that it's a
good bill and a good piece of
legislation
mr chair representative
last time and i'm going to do it
again this time
I sent out
proposed changes there were
technically thirty six different
amendments some of them were
just procedural tweaks to make
sure one part matched the other
part on and I plan on doing that
again and I don't i've I don't
i'm that naive to think that
everybody's gonna like often but
there are things I think that
the people.
Would or should take a look at
an in have a robust debate about
you know you talk standard the
age of the kind of how many how
many years out.
They could have jurisdiction
over kids because right now as
you know too many of them are
out twenty one and there's
nothing I mean right now if you
commit second degree murder you
commit
second agree murdering take
someone else of life too often
it happens
you're only twenty one.
No
I can tell you I don't think
that at the age of twenty one
there are fixed
I don't think that kids are
fixed they're willing to kill
somebody the age of seventeen
how do we think that the other
son just because they turn
twenty one that arbitrary date
that you know
so if you extended it out for
example the age to twenty five
to where we could keep an eye on
it so if they did their first
crime was they got caught a
stolen par gave seventeen and a
half years of age
let's keep an eye on them so
they're not hanging it out with
other bad influences when they
hit eighteen when I hit nineteen
when they had twenty let's make
sure they're not continuing.
I also mean
if a seventeen year old.
Viciously rapes another kid.
The.
There are twenty one.
So I don't just talk about
consequences for this most
serious primes I also talk about
consequences for the lesser
crimes
when I was a kid grown up as I
scared to get trouble maybe
first because my dad but second
of all because if you did get
introduced and go deal with
something like it I grew up in a
different part of the country
but
but when I was eighteen years of
age here and I was here going to
college I remember very clearly
people kids were afraid that
they would have some happened to
him right now and burnly county
in albuquerque
not one kid is afraid of any
consequence because they all
know they all talk to each other
unless the new steel car four
times in albuquerque four nights
in a row no plan only but you
steal accord you break the
steering column you have wire
take someone's.
You know property expensive
property drive it down the road
get chased by comps.
You think there's any night in
the deal not even that an hour
because the demo take on
the deal won't take you unless
you have a gun crime right now
so the day home says one are
taking you so what happened to
that kit
note nothing he goes home the
mom dared at night whatever mom
and that is at home that night
because he's out two a m
stealing chorus just taken back
at six am when he gets got
does it again the next night
are do they have criminal
justice system in albuque same
thing happens he's out of it
what is he learning that first
one not a damn thing
third time does it again forth
time does it again this time
maybe all out of gun into the
equation shoots out of window
kills of money no kinds of
points as before but now it's
going to have conspiracies
that's just we can do better for
our kids I know we can
i'm sorry to get interrupted but
i've gotten we want to member so
travelers terms expiry when I
think closing absurd europe you
but we better get make sure we
stay close to a schedule
represent job living last close
mister chair mr thank you for
your presentation when I could
probably talk about this all
afternoon I just hope that we
take a serious look and can come
to even if it's a smaller
conversation of how we can
establish some kind of clear
graduate is system of
accountability as well as
talking about diversion and
early intervention combined
something we can do it again
looking at other states
something that is evidence based
i'm more than happy to work
across the air with everybody
thank you center brightly and
then serve my instance in a
braining for five minutes
thank you guys both for your
time I I think we'd all agree
that most new mexicans want a
safer state to live most of most
new mexicans agree that there
should be consequences in place
especially for some of our most
violent offenders and i'm no
different when it came into the
legislator I came in that the
way you make new mexico safer as
we.
Jail and we are carceried anyone
I mean there wouldn't be a j
walker out if I was in charge
you know just this is we're just
going to do everyone behind bars
and and regardless of what may
many may see I have a lot of
respect from my chairman a
senator serve active and for
many times i've listened to he
said we don't necessarily need
new laws on the books and
there's been many cases since
i've come in were I agree with
them and and very many cases and
and I appreciate release the
inside i'll tell you that saying
that we have some some day isn't
some judges that continue to be
soft on crime that there may be
a lot of truth to that and the
examples are before us today we
had a district attorney my estus
who was here who I think is
doing a great job down and done
and it
county we have your work that
you've done in bernio that is
phenomenal so then I question
myself well is it because people
weren't doing the job before we
had before we had competent
leadership in place
but but there's there has also
been proposals just this last
session we had before our
committee of proposal to
increase penalties for a home
invasion and many the lawyers I
am not one don't know any
different I see judiciary pushed
back and said there are laws in
place for this and and boy the
the president of that the
advocates are saying well know
there's not will come to find
out just the bill didn't go
anywhere there were laws in
place and ironically that
offender is going to spend more
time behind bars then the
proposal it was before us had
removed that policy for work so
i'm last confused what I remain
with the rest of new mexico
saying I don't know how we get
there but there's a need to fix
it one one area that I think
everyone is coming to consistent
on is we do have a void of laws
meaning for laws when it comes
to juth the juvenile criminal
code you have been a champion
and and this last session and
what I would ask is and you have
a lot on your plate but is to
continue to.
Look at this committee here to
send us information on what that
would take in the enter i'm very
specific as we go into next
session we all want to see a
safer new mexico the truth is I
think we're failing our
communities were failing the
victims but were also failing
these offenders these juvenile
offenders by not intervening
early today there was an example
about the young park murders and
that the law is doing its part
but it's taking place let me
remind everyone that those
fourteen and fifteen year olds
had a long history before the
young park massacre they had the
was human trafficking there was
rape there was assault and
battery and police officers in
general assault that had lead to
that and they had never faced
serious consequences we failed
those of finders why not
intervening early as well and so
I just think you mentioned very
quickly about we need
consequences for lesser crimes I
agree at this point and it's
come a long time for me to get
here you're right we need early
interventions but we have to
hold these offenders accountable
early on so we're not looking at
a young park so we don't have a
seventeen year old who got there
and so my request to you is to
again send this committee so
that we can continue to have
this conversation again and
again that we don't need a
multitude of new laws out there
to make new mexico safer but in
this particular area is becoming
very clear at mainly from
champions as you and many others
that are saying there are holes
in this and this is how we
continue this is the first step
in making new mexico safe in the
future and so i'd ask for you to
send sense very specifics of
what reform of that code looks
like toss in the enter and I
would greatly appreciate it
thank you for your work missing
germany as german saying I was
just gonna say what I how often
you know me another two weeks or
so
months two months whatever it
might be I will send that out
within a couple of weeks right
yes okay.
This was will send you some
certain others out within a
couple weeks thank you sir
masters and inside through you
thank you mister chairman thank
you days for for making it
I think one of the
I know you guys got just
overwhelming jobs time my heads
up to you for for been the
elected days but in santa fe
within here from the days in
senator
with regards to anything really
the best way you can help us the
following in my opinion help us
fix statutes it was a case
mister chairman with the other
day that the the courts are
opened at telephone harassment
does not include texting then it
was a really cool case from you
know if you're a nerd you gotta
love it but we need to cause the
judges were right
but what's the funny part is if
we create the crime of telephone
arrestment and we just kept it
good on fashion harassment
but because of the telephone we
created this new crime of
telephone arrangement it didn't
fit that definition of telephone
arrestment but it did fit the
definition of good fashion
harassment when we add words and
and and elements to statute we
think we're doing a good thing
we're making it harder for the
prosecutor to do their job you
need to like help explain that
to us in those situations
they hopefully will get it on
the call to add texting you know
because that's kind of a cool
fix so it's it's there's no
things that I think will help
the criminal adjusters system
that the big left in my opinion
is the child of you statute
which I don't think we'll ever
have the political will to do.
But as you know mister chairman
do you bregman da
the uji the uniform during
instruction the stuff that the
prosecutor has to prove has
nothing to do with the statue
because that statute has been
ripped apart by the courts over
the course of twenty three years
because we the legislature
didn't distinguish between
intentional reclass or carlos or
negligently that there's three
standards but intentional
reckless
negligent are careless but
anyway I know I think we there
could that could help us because
we need to take some top box I
don't think we've taken tough
faults in like the last five
situations and what I mean by
top vote is when we know it's
good public policy we're going
to we're going to get our
bookkick back home that's a
tough foot we ought to start
taking those stuff
domestic violence is horribly
prosecutor order respect for a
whole hoster reasons very
difficult to get a bus
conviction but also is returning
the collateral consequences of
that conviction are so high
that the defense is going to
fight ten times more than it
would for another misdemeanor
crime you know I mean we we have
to acknowledge that that may be
in fact.
The penalty is too high that's
something we've never
contemplated as a legislature
also.
Sometimes I was asked the other
day is a fourth degree enough
for arsenic as the bosket was on
further the other day to me you
can get quicker justice in metro
court on a misdemeanor if in
fact the judge is going to give
that person six months or a year
cause if you have a lowdashlevel
crime and in district court with
murders and rapists and arm
roberts you're like lost in the
shuffle but if you have a
serious crime in metro you're
like public enemy number one we
we need to learn that stuff as
policymakers
and then are
lastly a quick question
you mentioned a the rules of
evidence don't i'm sorry the
rules of events apply in a
prelim and that that's
problematic explained to us
just briefly briefly the rules
of evidence and why.
That should be changed it I
don't believe it's unjust for
that to be changed
I
was not at mrperiod chair
senator my assessor I was not
meaning to imply that it's
unjust what i'm saying as we
have set up a system whereby we
have to be ready for trial in
two weeks and and that is
because at prelims
the rules of evidence apply I do
not necessarily have a problem
with the rules of evidence
applying but understand if we
have filed a pre trial detention
motion on a first degree home
aside and it happened in front
of thirteen witnesses and and
there's ballistics and they're
cna and we have to bring in the
over my doctor and then there's
forty seven cops that arrived at
the scene we might not need to
call all of those people like
like we would at a trial but we
will have to call the majority
of them in order to get each
little peace in order to meet
probably carts and so that's
what makes it harder when we can
take those cases to grand jury
the rules of evidence don't
apply and that's very important
on some kinds of cases and it
makes it a lot easier because we
can bring in three or four
witnesses including a cop that
can come and testify about you
don't whether there were drugs
on the scene the ballistics
aren't well they won't be able
to test five ballistics but they
can testify about the guys
things that they would not be
able to say in a prelimined and
so I I was talking about that in
the larger context of the pre
trial detention system in order
to get someone held and the case
indicted or or bound over we
have to have the entire case
ready whereas if we take a auto
burglary to grand jury we have
one cop it takes
fifteen minutes of of testimony
and then we're done so thank you
for that and as you know the the
rules of evidence you know
here say the introduction and
authenticate out that
application of documents you
know it it's a bigger hurdle.
If those rules didn't apply to a
grandeury then officer could you
know given under the ethics and
what that
testified here say testify the
documentation test by the stuff
that they may not have personal
knowledge of and so I didn't
mean to suggest you thought it
was unjust but I I believe it's
inefficient I will leave the
significant and then lastly
mister
the leverage the leverage I was
talking about earlier on page
twenty seven on the top you have
a pre prosecution diversion in a
week for years and years to take
corny stuff off the books police
can no longer arrest for j walk
and they can no longer arrest
for driving on suspended license
or or or having not having your
correct address on your license
we took a bunch of corny stuff
off the books in order to
prioritise violin crimes we but
that just it didn't magically
happen like for some reason to
me there's online there's online
harmasides rapes
stab somebody you send some of
the hospital that that's
different than all the other
crimes but for some reason
there's not that big distinction
amongst our allocating scarce
resources to those to those
criminals but you can only
hammer the biling criminals
if you deal if you kind of get
rid of or deal with all these
other smaller cases so anyway
i'd just like to look the offers
the day and debate your county
is making eight hundred offers a
year and only half of them are
accepted I mean that's beside me
because if you don't accept the
plea there are consequences take
the plea probably a little
better than what the state can
prove or got a trial and get
hammered.
It doesn't seem like the
leverage is is correct because
to reject a pre prosecution plea
means that you're you're willing
to roll the dice on the on the
on the outcome of the case and
so I don't know what it is in
the justice and some money to
have an uncriminal offer ten
years but it doesn't seem like
there's leverage like there was
ten twenty years ago you have an
opinion on that was chairman
mister
we get it back mister chairman
in senator.
Start to legislature that needs
to make new laws on many of
these things it's it's the young
and i'm that critical of any
individual church have been very
consistent with that my entire
but if there's no fear if
there's no fear of doing any
time
why plead anything.
If there's no fear that there is
going to be a consequence
because most of them there isn't
one
is probably
i've just talked about your crap
for example that's an adult
system to right now let me right
now drugs the possession of
drugs my trafficking possession
all you made an open air
lifestyle decision you can smoke
from all and the international
district we arrest you
majority of these eight hundred
during root sixty six operation
we're drawn smoking federal out
the street and neighborhood
they get arrested they get lead
out the next day
they go back out
they do it again they do it
again and by the time you know
that we're picking them up on
warrants too because they have a
word for the rest because they
didn't show for court when there
is
I mean I that's that's just the
way the system is working right
now mister chairman no thank you
mister chairman thank you break
because we used to call them up
christmas please a pre end I
mean a plea means I won't end up
you if you do ex wanzie and and
we would jump the defense bar
would jump at that jump at that
it would climb over whoever to
get those please and now to
reject them it's just in that's
not a safe system that's not a
that's happening in our system
that city is not safe anyway
thank you mister.
Thank you mister chairman and
thank you both living for being
here umm I definitely appreciate
mary that you've been willing to
work with us i'm coming up with
some solutions I I do think it's
important to just recognize that
the majority of youth are still
afraid of their parents and
family there's a small
percentage you have been through
these incidents that I would
agree with you are not but the
majority of you thought in our
communities they're still afraid
I I can just tell you that
they're still afraid
so so we've kind of come to some
agreements mostly on some things
and and it's interesting because
they kind of follow the lines of
what you're talking about mister
rigmand and so I I know I only
got five minutes someone to try
to go quickly here the first one
is adding an attempt to commit
and
would you be interested in kind
of explaining why
mister chair senator yes of
course I was wondering if I
should bring that up earlier I
have been working like I said
was senator true here to come up
with some solutions to some of
the problems that we that we
also see
the the first that she mentioned
is to attack an ad attempt
crimes to the useful offender
statute so I don't want to bore
everyone because boy can I but
there are kind of three levels
of of juvenile offenders there's
the serious youthful offender
that's only for first degree
murders there's the youthful
offender and then there's the
juvenile something or other and
the useful offender are four
kids fourteen to seventeen that
commit a list of I believe
thirteen crimes we have
submitted a proposed bill to
senator here to add attempts to
that to that so attempted for
remurder attempted second degree
murder
and and then the attempts for
the the the other thirteen.
Um and that is really because it
if we don't have that it again
i'm gonna let's the drinking
word today it sets up a perverse
system where if you don't manage
to kill someone well then you're
still in the
um the the easiest of of
categories and you're not going
to get detention you're not
going to get a night in jail so
you can actually take out a good
unshoot someone send them to the
hospital and if they don't die
then they go home to moment and
so that that is one of the ones
that we did but then if if I
also may quid want because I
only have five minutes what if
the other ones that we have
submitted is to increase the
diversion opportunities that
CYFD can offer before they even
refer a case to the da's office
so often you're talking about
everyone's been talking about we
need to get these these kids
before they get the gun in their
hands before when they've only
stolen the car that one time
they come to us and they've had
two or three referrals and the
most services they've ever been
offered is a don't do it again
and that's it and so we are
trying to kind of simple some of
that power back to c y fd in
order to increase the version
thank you thank you mister
chairman and and and we say cyfd
but I really think that juvenile
justice needs to be removed from
c fd so you know that's that's a
whole different conversation but
the last one words increasing it
to twenty five years so that we
are we don't believe that kids
can be fixed by twenty one we do
believe that maybe twenty five
is a better number and we've
looked at the missouri model
which has much more local
treatment for detentions so that
kids can re engage with their
families they can re engage with
their community that's kind of
the model of that you know
getting back into the community
being able to
da bring a new actually have.
Kind of confirmed my suspicions
that it's not necessarily
tougher laws it's that we're
failing our kids in the juvenile
detention system were failing
them in juvenile justice system
were not providing them the
treatments that they really
deserve so we as a daughter
failing them umm I I think we
can walk into gum though and so
I you know happy to work with
anyone who's interested in doing
some realistic changes to
juvenile code but we really have
to figure out this detention
system and what kind of services
are we providing for our kids
you know I I part of my
challenges is that I don't get
to see these bills and tell
almost the last minute senate
finance I know I know mister
chairman thank you for reminding
me
so so it's not until they come
before me then i'm like on my
god like something's going on
here and and then I have to you
know deal with it on the on the
senate floor and that's really a
day latent dollar sort of my mom
and then dad used to say
but but talking with a lot of
folks why do we have a
reintegration facility and
eagles nest I love eagles now
that is not the place that
architos who particularly the
kids from south side of santa fe
are going to re integrate with
their families and rein a great
with the community whether it's
the connectors club or whether
it's a road reclub or whether
it's mathematics or you know
they're not gonna have an
opportunity to reintegrate with
any of those services so we
really have to think about where
we providing services what kind
of services are we providing
we've let those kids down mister
bringman I agree with you
wholeheartedly on that so I
would love to see us really work
towards separating out juvenile
justice we already know cyfd is
in a downward spiral
unfortunately.
It's just they just can not seem
to get the child protective
services really accurate it's
it's it's really struggling
mister chairman so why are we
having to now justice be a part
of that and and I tell you and
i've said this before i'm a
former foster child right and it
breaks my heart it stabs me
every time I hear the secretary
you say we can outsplit foster
care and juvenile justice
because they have to cooperate
together it's not a pipeline
it's not a pipeline foster kids
are one thing to be all justice
is another and yeah maybe the
two systems need to communicate
on some you know basis but it
shouldn't be the norm they are
communicating foster cheers
should be getting the treatment
and the services and the love
that they deserve to when i'll
just student kids I come
students because of the former
historic teacher should be
getting the treatment and the
rehabilitation that they have
the right to sell anyway
um thank you mister chairman
thank you mister chair
thank you
to her days for being here
my d a first district is here in
I want to thank you for all the
the work we you know you you
worked with me particularly on
has appropriations to get those
fte's and and let me know of
what would happen if we don't
get those we got you one at
additional fee
we just have to keep on working
much to which the chair is
saying today it's up to us to
make these cheap some of these
changes a lot of these changes
for you through the budget
and I just wanted to
kind of drove into because we
got to report from less
last year's report from lfc on
err the update on crime in
mexico and burned the county so
day from a second district thank
you for being here.
It's important that we kind of
do a little bit of a work but
mister
what happened is that a session
mister chairs we know
we appropriated five hundred and
fifty five point three million
dollars for behavioral health
services statewide including
three hundred and seven million
in general fund revenue one
hundred and one million in other
state plans and the health care
authority received three hundred
and seven three hundred and
forty seven point nine million
state
to remember read about the
behavior that system
and over the last couple of
years we spent two point two
billion dollars in behavior
health we know that this is a
cars a lot of the the cases in
the revolving door so to speak
of what we we now care you that
revolving to warrants from the
conversations were having i'm
i'm glad and i'm i'm delighted
we took these actions because it
was frustrating particularly for
for many of us that we had we
had done that but the money is
there I am one thing that you
discussed and
da brigman was
although most multiple fell
family offenders quite a seventy
four percent are eventually
since prison is it often takes
several alleged offenses before
they are fully priced security
and convicted of a felony
that's a problem so that was you
talked a little bit about that
that was in our report from last
year some of the suggestions we
gave you on it to see where
you're where you're out with
some of the things we we
discussed at the left at that
hearing lfc i'm you mentioned
also that you're you talked
about five hundred and seventy
five diversion cases so that was
one of the things we asked you
to really focus on can you tell
me with the new dollars coming
in for this fiscal year how
you're going to or potentially
use those dollars to
grow that day those diversion
programs and other programs.
Um
the map program medicaid etc
thank you
mister chair represent thank you
so much for the question so I
just want to draw a little bit
of a dissanction first when I
talk about five hundred and
seventy five cases in our pre
prosecution division that
doesn't encompass everybody that
we divert that incompasses the
people that we actually put into
our program minor all the time I
make sure they're doing the
things are supposed to be doing
going to their treatment there
is a weekend that we do not have
enough capacity in our
prepresentation despite this
legislature being generous and
despite the sensey commission
i'm giving us some grants that
we've been requesting two two
kind of build up even more pre
prosecution version so many
cases we actually send out we we
give them treatment option
please you get into treatment
and will know this because we
know by looking at what they're
dealing with you these are not
violent people these are not
people who may be even be
shoplifting these are just
people who are out there on the
street smoke and fat now and
albuquerque in the international
district so we give them that
opportunity unfortunately I will
say this I don't think it's
because of a lack of effort from
anyone I just don't think
in my gosh you've you're funny
that the hell out of this
behavior I just don't think it's
getting to the ground level to
where it's coordinated for
treatment options that everybody
else the county's working on
stuff the cities working on
stuff the states funding a lot
of stuff but where is the
organized effort really and when
somebody needs help we've got to
give them that help that minute
and too often they come back to
us and say well I got an
appointment it's two months away
that's that that doesn't work
right so
so I just want to be clear on
what are diversion is we have
listen we are hu.
Huge fan of our specially courts
I don't know how much the ail
the issue was additionally
funded for their specially
courts is last time i'm not
going to sit up here and be an
advocate to try to get their
budget speaker but it it is a
three legacy store justice
system in and we can't find
every single specially court now
but he is for
is for young adult behavior
health all of
all of those those specially
ports are form I don't know what
was asked for I don't know what
was funded can't be specific but
I know it's so much more work
than speed that I know this
competency that the new stuff as
it's going to be rolled out it's
good to be a real tough road
they handle all the cases I my
understanding that it's only
pulling stay as a one judge over
the second judicial this report
is going to handle all these
competency cases that are coming
in this isn't going to be a real
challenge right so I applaud you
all for putting for that money
but we can we don't can do
better I say that one
thank you just
when last question and it goes
to the the pre trial time minded
we have a problem with the
certain situation or all cases
subject to that same timeline
through the pre trial like that
two weeks that you mentioned
most cases across the board
thank you mister chair
representative no it is only the
the cases that we can and decide
to pursue the pretrial attention
motions on so the people that we
want to keep in jail which I
don't know that day breakman
does this although he mentioned
a bridge team either I were one
of my chief japanese read every
single arrest from the night
before every single morning and
we use our crystal ball and try
to decide if we should file
emotion on i'm each individual
case and so it in its because of
the way the system set up and
because of our capacity we can
only file so many and and so
we're the ones that make that
decision.
Based on usually a one page
criminal complaint and then we
then were running their
background to see how bad it is
is it bad enough that we will
actually get this person held or
is it not bad at all they don't
have a criminal history yeah
they committed a homicide last
night but we're not going to be
able to get them held because
the rules are set up that it's
not going to happen
so no it is not all cases it is
a it is the most complex and
hardest case is to prove
thank you mister chair these are
kind of quick questions not it's
it's
um da carmick you mentioned a
really important saying that the
it systems kept talk to each
other are you working on that
because I know that's been a
problem in many many police
departments other than mr chair
representative of yes we are
boost individually as our
district and then also the aoda
system we are trying to get new
case management systems that
talk to all of the different
police systems that that they
are having they all have
different ones I have I have
nine police agencies that I work
for they have eight different
software programs that we have
to try to pull from but yes we
are thank you just mister chair
that's a huge problem i'm dear
sound
it sounds like we really have to
have additional places to send
our kids to because some of the
gun crimes kids do they're not
going any place either
right we need we need place to
save place where they can get
the help
mister chairman representative
this german representative.
It's a combination of both now
they have a maximum capacity
sixtieth of seventy five and
only a work staff to handle
sixty eight in an individual day
we have sixty five in there
right now thank you in a mistake
sure that traffic you'd
understand that representative
can see chase excuse me two
years ago did have a trafficking
bill so that sounds like a very
good marching order right there
that expansion of the definition
mister chairman and in represent
absolutely human traffic in is
extremely important if choose
expanding that definition would
make a world a difference in the
prosecution in our abilities and
I can tell you through operation
disruption with the occ downs
out there were cases that were
not prosecuted because it could
not fit the definition and we
have a good faith basis not to
prosecute any case that we don't
fit the law but there would have
been if we did have a change
thank you and i'm just my final
point this goes cheer that
discussion session is
headed by person uh hb thirty
one with representative reebs
and parker in part of my
frustration is you work on
something and you have the
governor's office you have the
gsr first we have our days we
have our police department and
there not always on the same
page so that's just the
frustration that I really want
to show fits you chairman for us
to talk about but thank you this
is chairman thank you.
What i'm going to say probably
doesn't deal with the
legislation of legislative
healthy communities but it's
something that I think about on
a regular basis because I think
about it as a city planner in
our communities and the
breakdown and that some of the
things that were were talking
about here
and thinking about it mr
chairman from macro
from a macro perspective is that
we are living in a more violent
society and I think that goes
clear across the board we're
seen there on a regular basis on
tb on facebook on whatever
social media you're on we're
seen it with our our leaders
were seen it in in europe in
asia I mean across the board and
this is what our kids are seeing
and kids that are growing up mr
chair without families and you
go down to the micro level and
you're talking about a child and
a child who doesn't have a found
a family or house only parts of
a family or has a family that's
not a typical family I guess
you know what are they seen and
we can't legislate that
unfortunately that's a really
tough place to be you know
because we're trying to find way
the fix this problem
but really the family and I
think about when I was growing
up my parents if they does look
at me like you're not supposed
to be doing that or my brothers
we knew we weren't supposed to
be doing that but i'll tell you
when our answer uncles how that
seemed power over us you know
they have that exact sitting
like if we did something wrong
we knew we were in trouble today
it just seems like that how do
we bring that community.
Back and I mean I I and I have
to see this mister chair because
otherwise I would be a good city
planner
you know
how do we bring that community
spirit that
is there a way that like I think
about and I I relate it back to
the criminal justice system when
a kid goes down and does
something wrong and for five
times does he go before the
judge by himself or are his
answer non calls and cousins and
everybody else going with them
typically probably he's doing it
here she are doing it there by
themselves in front of that
judge and then they are going
through probation and they're
going to detention or they're
going through whatever that
system is they don't have that
support system and you know one
of the things that I think about
is is there a way to bring in
whatever that support system is
that that child has to help them
and I know i'm gonna relate this
back to something that we
probably have all experienced
somebody in our family who was
an alcoholic or a drug addict
through that matter
mister chair
you know
they
will they go to a rehabilitation
they get they get details and
then they go through we have
usually when they're
going to those systems the
family is part of that
rehabilitation
and I know cause i've
experienced it
and i've seen it in our in my
own family so I just you know I
have to raise that issue mr
chair because I think it's
important that we need to start
thinking a little bit out of the
box thank you
very much all right I think i've
gotten through the list thank
you all for being here again I
will repeat on short some short
notice I just want it.
And take a few minutes myself
and then we'll wrap things up
with a little bit of discussion
but I want to really acknowledge
center brightly i'm and thank
her for that per comments
although in the in the course of
making those comments I think
maybe she's misrepresented my
position which is frequently
done by the governor on down
which is I i've never taken the
position we don't need new or we
don't need more laws I just
believe that it's disingenuous
of us and dissonance and shorts
added to make the public belief
and make ourselves believe
that's the solution that's the
quick and easy solution because
we go up for thirty days it's
quick I just get so many
counsels right a bill and pass
it in sounds great and already
happy and and then we think
things are really meaningfully
changing I don't I don't think
that's case but I do appreciate
senate brently acknowledging
that we had a very strong effort
by a very highly placed
individual political operative
who
thought we need a new large was
very aggressive about it to
recreate it and this was an
important a difficulty
experience that she had
personally and how the tv
cameras in my face and why won't
you pass this bill to help this
board circumstance but
I have the benefit of good
people like certain my husbands
with criminal experience I have
a great staff you will no fill
up you know brandon we have
council service we have of great
committee and both chambers the
house i'll speak to the house in
some days it takes us pushing
back to say yeah you know this
is this is a great new story but
you know will have to be the
you're going to using profanity
again i'm comparing just keep
coming back to the
pulpy the person to take the
hits of us but all of us do it
and again i'm I really forget to
have the knowledgeable people in
annual to the commitment was
mainly I wish we had more of it
but i'm glad to see their here
in the district attorney's
representative here
is the title vice chair is that
technically the chairs you in
the vice chair i'm good that we
have the senate seen commission
here i'm trying more and more to
have you all help me make the
right decision and that means I
I gotta hear from the days when
we we had our special session
sam was good enough to you mean
we we spent two hours to have
three hours with fedon though.
In his office before the special
session looking at these bills
and saying does this really help
as it's really what we're going
to do in in apart from that
experience I don't remember any
of the d a's ever coming to me
saying
this bill in the special session
we've got to have we got and
we're gonna get off the was
banned on that's really
marketing us out or whatever the
other things we had a special
session I never heard anybody
say this is good bill bad though
and and we got to have more than
case cause you guys like me
really rely a lot on your
expertise I do that do
appreciate them issue of a quinn
discussion of cmos we're going
to spend some time talking about
that this is a challenging issue
for us and for me because
i'll be honest with you I i'm
almost as frank with the courts
as I am with all of you in the
public not quite as frank
sometimes i'm a little intimated
by the robe in the gaval and
fact that they being hang my you
know clients fate in their hands
but but I I have confronted the
justices before and they've
responded in fact change their
orders when I feel like they're
out of their lane uh this issue
of the cmos and these deadlines
let's be clear these are not
deadlines we've established by
large
these are deadlines the court
has imposed on its own
initiative and the question is
where does their authority begin
and word as ours begin and end
uh the law on this is not clear
and be good for us to have a
presentation of discussion about
that because there's a number of
cases about I think the
legislature gets to make policy
and we get to make substantive
law the court gets to make
procedural law and there are
number cases where the courts
have struck down legislative
efforts to in what they consider
to be an infringement on their
authority and we're seeing this
let's face it the federal level
every day we decide this
decision last week on friday
where where does the executive's
authority begin where does the
judiciary's authority begin
where it is
run into all of this and i've
been trouble about this for
quite some time this this ten
days in five days I I wouldn't
do anything in my practice in
ten days I mean that's an
unrealistic deadline by by.
My book in any world but the
court has decided that hey
you've got to do this in today's
or we're dismissing your cases
and and i've heard the d a this
gets imposed on your district
while the cases are going to be
lost in in tossed in I mention
that per happened to sam and I
know it happened around the
state as well too and and we've
got to say he is that is that
cause it is the court really are
we given the judiciary that kind
of authority to dismiss all the
case by putting deadlines that
are day cat me and where do we
step in and say maybe we're
going to decide what the
deadlines should be I don't know
the answer it's it's a hard
question but it's one we should
be asking and will have the
justice period tomorrow and and
I just want you to know that
he's been great and the former
chief just has been great
sitting down tonight i've set
down even with the former chief
justice and particular rules and
said you're I think you're
infringing on our authority and
they've been really good about
hearing that and they've
actually responded some cases
backed off of some of the orders
or at least one order in
particular
the pretrial detention issues
come up with I think we should
continue to talk about that the
the notion that that we were
treat individuals differently
based on the charge of the crime
I think is is the I think was
your suggestion as roman I i've
got to believe that happens
because I believe that's the
role the judge I think that when
the judge considers these issues
for pretrial attention I presume
they're looking at the severity
of the crime you all weren't
here but when the shootings took
place in los cruces a young part
I went to the pretrial attention
here because I want to see how
this really works and I wanted
to see the judge judge doing
their job is the prosecutor
fernando did the prosecution
himself he did that he did the
motions hearing
where is the process breaking
out of the judge decided to
detain these individuals now
this was a high profile case
and let's let's call it what it
is when there's high profile
cases the judges detain which
doesn't make any sense to me
when an individual goes and
shoots up a house that
legislators live in that
individuals going to get
detained if that individually
gone up and shot up someone
else's house.
May I probably we're going to
get detailed
we've got a kid who what when
stabbed his mother a graduation
is grandmother was at the one
stabbed here in the neck with
the night of judge decides now
we're not we're not going to
detain and only that but they
are using a tool
I think as a result of our
committees work we really begin
uh putting a lot of attention
the arnold tool about two or
three years ago and i'm hoping
as a result of that judges have
begun to really recognize that
that's a not an excuse for their
own discretion but I think some
cases the judge would say that
so that's an arnold tool I got
to use it and I think the island
who we when this committee and
particular incentive judiciary
we've looked at various cases
where we're you look at a crime
like that young man clearly
unbalanced at some level savings
grandmother on the stage of
graduation and the iron tools
has released right in that
acknowledge threat to the public
already better anybody else so
we're gonna we're going to
continue stay on the pretrial
issue and I I this will get me a
lot of trouble but yeah i'm used
to that the issue with the
pretrial detention issue and
bailed from really was a is a
product of the constitutional
member in the language of the
constitutional moment and some
point time we're going to be
honest about that the public
voter for that eighty eight
percent constitutional number
and if you go back and look at
the languages on the ballot that
language is all about getting
tough on chrime and giving
judges more responsibility to be
harder on crime and the reality
is that language really did the
opposite it it put a huge burden
on prosecutors but but prove
clearing convincing evidence
very very high bar and to prove
that there are no conditions of
release right now that could
keep the public safe or where
others save as well to we put
all that in the constitutional
language it was great language
of your civil libertarian or
criminal defense lawyer no
offense to any of them were here
in hard working into a good job
but we we we stacked the depth
against uh prosecutors when it
comes down to bried child
attention and as a result my
experience is that you all file
them.
Uh all the time because you have
to you have a short deadline so
error on the side of of finally
right in and then if you have to
weed him out you'll do that
later when you have the time
this that's of so now so nine
approach but I understand why
you do it and I don't fault you
for doing it but it's probably a
better better solution than the
now so we'll stay on top of it I
am I like the vote you tell me
you're getting fifty five
percent of those motions granted
i'm hoping that some of that is
a result of the attention you've
given to that so that the
attention of this committee even
do it to say judges you all have
to maybe better reflect the
sensibilities of the society
which you are charged to be
representing as well to an my
sense over the last several
years that sometimes judges do
not reflect the sensibilities of
the society they perhaps
sometimes reflect would they
consider be a superior
sensibility and I respect that
uh because they're supposed to
be constitutional scholars and
knowledge will lawyers but
sometimes I think our system for
electing and selecting judges
and retaining them maybe out of
touch and that's another big
live too but III will begin
trying to talk about that too is
is the way we select and retain
judges
a good way of doing it just a
last couple last things mister
regman you said that this
seventeen year old six times
seeing through
he didn't learn he didn't learn
use that repeatedly when I
should think about a little
differently which is I think he
did learn something he learned
that there would be no
consequence uh and so waiting
well you can say he didn't learn
anything he learned I can do
this and and seal a car every
night or or commit these crimes
and nothing ever happens to me
in and I I think there was a a
brilliant bit of learning there
too and I appreciate fact you've
disrupted that maybe on the
seventh uh tribe and I don't for
you for taking the the the hit
for people before you but but I
think these young people are
learning things which is there's
not a consequence of the
consequences worth it in we
should last talk about the fact
that adults are exploiting the.
The youth by by that knowledge
but they know to use a younger
criminals to help them commit
their crimes knowing that the
rest of the youth are or minimal
and um and that avoids in allows
them to isolate themselves that
something we have and talk about
today we'll talk more about it
too I think that's probably
among the most agreed on crimes
as the adults who solicit and
promote
the useful offenders to do their
bidding and and we know that
happens and so thank you again
apologies for the short notice
you're your time was useful it
was it was constructive I think
you the committees gained a lot
but you being here in what
you've gone back to doing thank
you.
Many members I had left some
free time we have a dinner
schedule for us shortly but we
have a few minutes so
what what is a burning
for you that you want to talk
about police trying to be quick
in succinct so we can give it
everybody chance to do that in
about fifteen mins represent
reap go
yeah I just wanted to mister
share just i'm glad we're having
these conversations about the
juvenile issues and I won't lie
i'm a little frustrated because
you know I really tried to have
this conversations in the last
session and nobody wanted to
talk about it nobody was acting
like it was an issue nobody was
acting like we'd heard about it
before when we had her from sam
you know last session and why am
happy and i'm hoping people want
to do whatever different
versions of it and bring their
opinions to the table on this I
also just have to say i'm just
somewhat frustrated that you
know I was listening to this
whole argument and I was getting
agitated because i'm like this
is a new information you know
this is stuff we've tried to do
I mean representative I was on
that bill to you and just nobody
wanted to have a conversation so
i'm thoroughly we're having the
conversation now and I hope that
you know we can do something
about this but on the other side
of it it's this is in a new
issue and I just want to express
my frustration with the the last
presentation it was great I
think it was great that people
were are starting to engage now
and starting to see that this is
an actual issue that represent
chappers and I were very
outspoken on in the sixty day
but I just want to say that but
I really do hope we can get some
good reform and some good you
know balance of diversion and
punishment as you said at
senator so there are
consequences in these kids
aren't laughing and you know in
the days faces and anyway I just
wanted to say that and i'm.
I'm glad we're having these
presentations so and also I was
going to see a senator my
estimates mentioned this
telephone harassment I did did
have a bill on that too i'm very
like to buy I think judiciary
heard it and it was a enlarged
in the telephone harassment to
include all the social media
harassment that's happening and
I do plan finally that again and
I will hopefully I can work with
a center of my assist on
something like that maybe we can
present something to you during
this intermont on that issue but
as all I want to say thank you.
I'm no common other didn't say
that despite my version to
lawyers in general um III want
to say that I do respect the
chair and I actually appreciate
some reasons gave it you listen
very well and you come back with
very good strong comments and I
learn from them so I appreciate
the fact that you you take the
time in the effort to to
actually educate us as well so I
do appreciate that and want to
make sure that anyone understood
that he's a very fine man and
and in a good uh lawyer
obviously and so being non
lawyer it it's it's difficult
for me to accept some of the
things that I don't understand
yet but if i'm hearing and
learning I appreciate the the
fact that you're willing to
teach and so thank you for that.
Yeah sure just more discussion
on penalties because people
people are saying you can
increase the penalties that's
you can't do that and yet when
you do that it's not that you
stop crime but it empowers
judges and other folks
especially in the juvenile
system
to insure that measures are
taken to help kids so I mean I
am probably the most ignorant
person on the panel about a lot
of this but I just feel we need
to have a duper understanding of
that and then more about this
people kept referring to the
sentencing commission I went to
the website and I didn't find a
whole lot and i'd like to have a
more clear understanding of
their role in these bills their
committees they have a jew
juvenile committee I couldn't
find anything of what they've
done or what they recommended so
a little bit more about that.
Might as well um mister chairman
thank you for her no seriously
this is a great committee it's
it's
you know
this committee deals with like
the nuds and bolts of
our criminal system and
you know I know that sometimes
my comments are a letter out
there because I think about how
everything else relates to this
committee then how it comes down
to the nuts and bolts and you
know I think about like youth
programs you know and how we
need to make sure that when
we're thinking about all this
and they know you guys do I I
don't have any doubt in my mind
about it
but just because I I think I
think a lot of my thoughts and
see it I guess is that those
connections between the
education system and the housing
and how we develop healthy
communities and our schools and
all of those things in the fit
and the breakdown of families
and that's why I mentioned what
I said earlier I wish there was
a way and I know there's not a
way to legislate you know either
families or friends to be able
to go through the system and
help those kids and and it's
just really frustrating to know
that some of those families they
don't have very stable families
and and and we're seeing the
result in the criminal just a
system of some of that you know
not all of it but some of it is
a result of of the breakdown of
of you know our society and our
kids and I I just would like
when we go to our other
committees to remember that this
is like the the end the outcome
and creating those other systems
that are so important like parks
for example or housing.
Or all of these things relate
back to this breakdown and so I
just wanted to to bring that up
because I think it's important
thank you
while we have a residential
communities and brand new would
you will take a moment to look
at the minutes in your package
please i'd like to have a motion
before we're done today for
approval of minutes I know we
may lose some of you for
tomorrow so we can have a motion
for that when you'll have a
chance to peruse that and then
i'll come back to you than soon
and brantley will last for that
motion a bit so brightly
chairman I just wanted to are
this is a much larger
conversation about how as we as
legislators appropriate money
but it took notes from today's
all of the old presentations and
there was a lot of funding
request that came from the da's
our public defenders there was
asked for money for courtroom
security or sexual sought
victims detention facilities and
I think that this committee
while we may identify priorities
some of my frustration is that
there is a we work in the silos
even in our interim committees
and so I really appreciate the
remarks that senator turheil
mentioned early as to bringing
these these requests to lfc but
we sat here and you made great
comments thing but they're not
the appropriators there are
stuff the reality is is that
when we all convene for session
though that budget is going to
be
right it's happening now and a
lot of those priorities will I
would guess will not reflect
those that were identified in
this committee when it comes to
the judicial side of things i've
never been more frustrated not
give an example of LESC i've
said this a number of times they
actually identify you know
programs and projects that have
results driven and then you
never see that correlated into
the budget and so it's my
frustration that if we're going
to if we're going to unite and
join and work over the enter on
is that perhaps at the end of
this we propose as we go into a
budget year or at least identify
to LFC the funding priorities
for of this committee so that we
have something to stand on we
can have all these conversations
we want then when we get to
session if it's.
Not reflected in the budget then
it's like the left hand does
never know what the right hands
do little.
And that we develop our own
budget that this committee
proposed a budget of our own on
this area it's a big left
probably upset while the finance
staff and people will tell us we
don't know we don't know we're
doing is in the back there say
don't do it are you saying don't
do it yeah but so you guys go
talk about later but I will tell
you i've been on my main share
for for two or three years of
mister lady good to suggest the
other your committee come up
with his own budget to exactly
your points and apparently some
uh represent luham
mr
charges to expand on that
conversation
water natural resources I
believe three years ago now we
had
during the interim committee we
we had a basically our own
budget hearings and the light
came out of that
says and we saw the in the
bigger increases for the uh few
of the agencies budgets osu for
instance
I think emergent in a couple
others that just really
benefited from us taking a
point
information from that interim
committee and developing a
budget ask from lfc and also a
mr chair I think
we discuss may be having
a combined meeting with correct
me from wrong a combined meeting
with lci think that's probably
the appropriate way of going and
I know of c now will bring in
the chairs of of a visa interim
committees or sitting committees
to have the budget discussions.
And so those those chairs will
then work with the committee
members to to draft the the
priorities so being on house
probably
I know that that's what we're
we've been doing we did during
this session
so just want to say the more we
work together the better the
outcomes are thank you
for these
senator him yeah thank you
mister chairman that I I will
have to agree I I think it's
easier for us to advocate I mean
i've only been one year on
senate finance and it was a it
was a hell of a ride
has a hell over
but I think it has provided a
more support to be able to say
like
hey it's not just my voice rate
because my voice is one voice
and and there's only so many
things I can threaten about
right home before you know I I
have to kind of make this what
i've learned is that I have to
kind of make priorities and so I
think for the committee to say
here's some of the priorities
that we've identified in our
work throughout the year and I
don't know if it's a dollar
amount that has to be you know
decided upon but here's some of
the financial but priorities
that this committee after
interviewing and and meeting
with individuals in in regards
to this believe needs to be
happening in order
on the things that this
committee see yourself I think
it would actually be beneficial
thank you sir
all right ask you all to help me
approve the minutes going to
have a motion
thank you roberts are read
there's motion to approve the
minutes of the meeting is there
any objections we've approved
the minutes nancy will be happy
about that we have a dinner plan
sponsored by the municipal
league thank you all that are
here for the municipally if
anyone still here but we'll see
the dinner I would just like to
address some of the comments
made in all just very quickly so
we will take much more time
represent rebure frustrated.
By the progress of the juvenile
builder in the last session and
I want to acknowledge your
frustration I voted for the lead
station I came up in the short
end of that one right in the
senate and the did not carry the
day there were a lot of very
powerful influential advocacy
group supposed to it at the time
and we've seen the same thing
with behavioral health in the
last session as well two letter
groups were opposed to those
efforts initiatives I just want
to take the opportunity to
encourage this committee and use
this committee as an opportunity
to develop the courage that it
will take to look to vote on the
courage of your convictions i'm
not shy but i've been doing this
for a long time i'm never showed
a book on by myself sometimes
when when it's a needed or when
it means going in front of the
cameras and so on then we're not
going to pass a bill in and it
doesn't make any sense so I hope
this committee in process as
part of that and that's two
centered thortons comments as
well too is I know i'll only
help for all of you the the
courage of the convictions I I
watched this morning I think
setters are till it's center
till us ndc who
I probably wouldn't agree with
his politics at all senate
republican very conservative
private agreement much of
anything he's ever done but
today he said he's going to pose
the big bill beautiful bill
whatever it may be and so you
are may support it I don't need
to get a debate about that issue
but it's a pretty courageous
thing for a guy like him to say
yeah i'm in a buck of the
president of united states in my
parties or in the problem for
for us is that in conjudge with
him saying he's got a vote
against it he also had to
announce his resignation
and and my experience in this
process for a long time is
moments like when john mcgain
had to vote against the effort
to repeal bombard care and he
did so because he was dying
any news going to be gone bore
to watch list cheney stay i'll
be part of an impeachment
committee on the interaction
days knowing i'm going to lose
my house see about it but I will
do it because I think it's the
right thing to do or middle who
did the same joint same
committee and.
Again i'm not trying to get it
in a partisan thing i'm using
all the examples that of course
I I see the world from my
perspective when I see
courageous republicans go
against their party and it and
they have to make a similarly
make the decision that it will
they will enter career over that
they're my heroes I mean I agree
with them at all but I
appreciate their courage and I I
i'll use the moment to plug a
boy's really through the green
eight in there I i've opposes
for all of my thirty years I
become a once in a while we're
talking about the issue of term
limits and I know all the
arguments against them well i've
used them for years i've opposed
to limits for many years and yet
i'm beginning to think that
that's the only chance for
survival of the democracy
because it's seemingly only
those who are leaving
office who seemingly have that
kind of courage that we saw from
senator tell us today and I I
admire what he did today i'd
mark this vote he's he's and
he's described itself as a
conservative fiscal republican
and he's going to vote that way
but he's going to have to
sacrifice his political career
to do so and that means we're
profiles encouraged get written
about so I wanted to take that
opportunity to encourage all you
to do the same thing when we get
the chance of the
the budget idea is a good one
somebody else about the role of
the sentencing commission I will
tell you with all respect to
those that are on it and have
been on it in years past the
sentence and commission from
when I first gave her was much
more implementable and much
stronger presence and I see when
digniting his head affirmatively
but I think those of you around
here would know that since the
commission we didn't used to do
anything on sentencing without
sensing commission listings and
very very rarely and then we
kind of begun to rely on less
unless on them I think somewhere
that was a product candidly over
an administration where he had a
district attorney who was the
governor who didn't have a very
well good thoughts for the
standards and commission and so
we love that that's kind of
linger into the administration
after that in this
administration so in the last
couple of years i've tried to
say i'm with the sensing
commission here they've been
great about responding I said I
want your advice in one.
A good active commission and I
think we're seeing that and I
appreciate again really trying
to do that it's an invaluable
resource and it was designed for
a purpose which is that we we
shouldn't be trusted with
responding emotionally or on on
political grounds or whatever
else to every bad thing that
happens in coming out and saying
we need to uh
on that so I do appreciate that
the last my last comment is so
since we met last
year
can see why they see okay
custody and and I think you're
not the circumstances of that
night I
president of the sense with this
I I think she would agree I
didn't go into a single caucus
this year without saying she
left he should be our number one
priority we're going to do a
special session if anything
should matter she managed that
we put children in our
responsibility and then they die
sometimes been and to be that's
where we've gone beyond work has
been described by the government
rightfully as this functional
we've gotten into I think
criminal uh negligence at this
point i'm when we have a four
year old but gets out of the
office where he's living walking
into the streets of traffic and
have a kirk nobody seems to
notice it somebody has to drive
by and pick up a kid please out
walking along when you have a at
least two suicides I think that
we know uh
I hope we'll do something
