OK.
How are you doing here? Good.
You all are competing against
cake in the back room, so I
yeah.
Madam Secretary, the floor is
yours.
Well, thank you very, very much,
uh, Madam Chair and members of
the committee, Maggie Tolis
Oliver in New Mexico, Secretary
of State. I am here with my
colleagues, Lindsay Bachmann,
our director of legislative and
executive chairs as well as
Mandy B. Hill, who is not only
the election director for the
state of New Mexico, but the
president of the National
Association of State Election
Directors, and we've been very
proud of her work over this
year. I'm gonna apologize in
advance because I forgot my
glasses today and.
And reading is a challenge at
this point. So, um.
First and foremost, Madam Chair,
I want to thank you and this
committee, your respective, uh,
Standing committees or
interests, not non-interim
committees, I should say, and uh
the legislature for its support
of my office over the last
several years, uh, because we've
been able to make incredible
strides, um, over, can I borrow
this? Thank you. Uh, uh, strides
over the last, uh, I guess I've
been in office almost 8 years
now, um, and really proud of the
work we've been doing and while
there's always more work to do
and there's always room for
improvement. We've been able
To do so much with your support,
um, during that time. Um, so you
have a presentation before you
and I'm going to do my best to
be brief, uh, and concise and
also give um Lindsay and Mandy
the opportunity to chime in um
on more specifics where and when
you need them.
But we wanted to start first
with uh just sort of the state
of elections in New Mexico, uh,
and talk about, you know, we're,
we're still actually I want, I
want to remind the committee in
the course of the 2024 general
election. Although election
night has come and gone. Um,
there is still a process. Hello
Representative Reh. Nice to see
you. Uh, there's still a process
of, you know, finishing the
counts, tallying everything up,
conducting our initial audit,
ensuring that.
Everything adds up. The I's are
dotted, the T's are crossed,
provisional ballots are counted,
etc. and we will not certify
this general election until
November 27th. That is when the
results become official, uh, and
then of course we'll go through
the process that we do with
automatic recounts, automatic,
uh, post-election audits to
ensure that our machines
tabulated correctly, etc. Um, so
we still, my staff and I still
have several in our county
clerks and their staff. Let's be
very.
clear, still have several weeks
of work left to go, um, but we
got through that initial uh
night last week, um, and so just
to kind of go over some of the
dates again. We had election day
last week, um, we will do our
post-election audit on uh
between November 18th and
December 2nd. That's a public
process, we will, um, randomly
select with our independent CPA
firm.
Uh, the, the precincts to be
audited, um, they will advise
the clerks, they will go through
the process of the voting system
check, there will be public, uh,
observance available for that,
um.
Again, we certify the canvas on
the week of December 2nd, we are
going to have automatic
recounts, um, right now I
believe we only have one in that
window statewide, which is
unusual. We usually have a lot
more, you know, races that are a
lot closer, um, but this
selection, that's how it turned
out. And so we're keeping an eye
on that until the county uh or
counties in that race, uh,
certified on December 11th, we
need to provide certificates of
ascertainment to the National.
ar ch ive s and our federal
partners regarding the
presidential election, and that
just is saying this is who won
New Mexico and these who the or
who the electors for New Mexico
are going to be, um, and then
we, uh, will convene the
electoral college on the 17th,
and of course, uh, everyone
knows the date January 6th.
Unfortunately, for reasons I
think we would all prefer not to
know it at this point, um,
Congress is going to convene the
uh to count the electoral votes
in joint session. Um, so with
that, that's sort of where
we are now in terms of the
process. Um, our counties are
still canvassing. They haven't
certified yet. Um, let's see,
I'll stop and just see any
questions about that before,
yes, Madam Chair. Well, I, I
think I'd like to hold questions
until we get your if that's OK.
OK, very good. So I do wanna
give some statistics on the um
this most recent general
election. Um, as of today and
again, uh, provisional ballots
are still being counted.
Um, and potentially qualified
and counted, um, we are at
921,342 ballots cast, um, which
is slightly lower than the 2020
general election. We always like
to compare apples to apples, so
the last presidential, uh, we
had 1,382 761 eligible voters.
Um, I will mention that a lot of
the same day registrations that
occurred on election day
happened on paper, um.
So that is still a process that
our counties are going through.
They're still um looking at
those entering them into the
system, so these numbers have
the potential to still go up.
Uh, just a little bit, um, but
That's the reality, so 66%
turnout is kind of what we're
looking at. We were at 68%
turnout in 2020. A little bit uh
lower turnout. Um, at this
point, as far as we know, we had
more than 52,000.
Folks, utilize same day
registration and more than
25,000 on election day, which is
uh just.
Beyond what we ever anticipated.
So folks we're going to the
polls, they were getting
registered and they were voting
right there on election day.
Um
We have some implementation
updates, and I'm gonna give
Lindsay her notes back and use
my notes. Um, so I'll move on
just from kind of the, the state
of the this election that we
just had last week and kind of
move on to the work that we're
doing more generally.
Um, first of all, uh, we are
going to this election expand
the the voting system check,
what we call the post-election
audit, uh, to every county in
the past, we, uh, you know, the
precincts are randomly selected.
We conducted the audit in those
precincts only and every county
decided that they wanted to have
at least one precinct, uh, so
even the small counties, right,
will be auditing in every single
county that select.
Um,
when we did this during the
primary election for the first
time, um, and well, we also did
it during the regular local
election, but they're.
were and still are no, there
have never been any findings,
um, that machines did not
function properly, um, these
audits are important,
transparency tools that help
bolster public confidence in our
elections and these audit
results are complete and post it
on our website after each audit
is complete. So again, we want
to emphasize the transparent
nature of the post-election
audit process for books that
just have questions about were
the ballots counted accurately,
which is an understandable and
very fair question and one that
we
have addressed here in New
Mexico for the last 20 years.
Um, we, uh, sent out a voter
notice to every voter prior to
this election. Thank you for
passing that legislation. Um,
this is an important way to let
voters know when and where they
can participate, um, and, uh,
we, we've received feedback from
the public that they really
appreciate that, you know, just
that little reminder, that
little card, they know where to
go, they know where to get
information. Uh, we did
implement this year for the
first time online nominating
petition signature gathering,
and I know a lot of you took
advantage.
of that, and I think, um, you
know, given the very quick or
short runway we had to get that
going, um, it was utilized very
well and I think uh a lot of
folks in the future are gonna
switch more to utilizing that,
uh, way of collecting
signatures. Um, we did implement
a poll worker pay increase this
year, um, and this was meant to
um address the increasing
challenge of recruiting enough
poll workers in New Mexico.
I would say we were one of the
states. We did not hear of
significant challenges of
getting poll workers recruited
and folks into the polls, um,
and, and being able to run that
process, so I think that made a
significant difference, and
thank you all for that, um, and
we also implemented Challenger
and watcher training to make
sure that folks in the polling
place knew what the rules were.
Uh, we did not have any
significant reports of any
problems in the polling places
in terms of, you know,
uh, folks that are there to
observe causing any problems or
obstructing. It was a very
smooth process, uh, folks were
able to get the information they
needed as challengers and
watchers, voters were able to
vote, poll workers were able to
do their jobs, so we think that
that was a really great
improvement to the process, um.
Let's see, uh, the permanent
absentee voter list that you all
voted to approve the last cycle,
um, more than 45,000 New Mexican
voters have signed up for this
option now so that they can
always receive their ballot in
the mail, and we know a lot of
the people that take advantage
of this are people that are
homebound, um, people that just
prefer for whatever reason to
vote at home, um, and just don't
want to have to sign up every
single election for a ballot.
Um, the Native American Voting
Rights Act, um, we conducted
presentations, communicated with
tribes and pueblos, um, we are
still working with the tribes to
make sure whatever they want in
the future or need pursuant to
the Navra, uh, is given to them.
We have ongoing dialogue, um,
but we felt very happy about
that process, um, voting rights
restoration is another
implementation that we did
before this election, and I know
there are a lot of advocates.
Here in the room, um, who were
particularly concerned about
that, and one comment that I
want to make on that is that our
office, uh, immediately went to
the rulemaking process, um,
after the bill was passed, we
worked together very closely
with corrections to try to get
the data that we needed to
implement, um, as you were all
more than likely aware, there
was a lawsuit brought saying we
weren't doing this right. And uh
we said, well,
This is how we read the law.
This is what we understand our
job to be, um, however,
The judge determined
differently, and we worked
together with the plaintiffs in
that case to come to an
agreement, um, and thankfully
the Department of Corrections
was very helpful. They were able
to get us data so that we could
do our job a little bit better,
uh, and, and hopefully, you
know, I, I think the good news
is that a lot more people got to
vote this election that were
eligible, then would not have
otherwise been, um, was the
process a little sausage making,
yes, um.
shouldn't have had to be that
way, but I think moving forward,
um, we're able to build on what
we did right before this cycle
and make that process better
moving forward. Um, I've already
addressed automatic voter
registration, but it was very
successful this cycle.
I do want to just mention to
you, uh, and you know, there's a
lot to talk about here, so I'm,
I'm trying to be concise as I
said, Madam Chair. Uh, a few of
our legislative priorities for
the next session. Um, we're not
coming to you all, uh, asking
for big white sweeping policies
or
Excuse me, or, you know, any
major changes, but as always,
every time we run an election,
we can, we, we run up against
something that is in the statute
that we go, oh shoot, like
statute just doesn't really
address this. Um, and we, we, we
need guidance from you all, the
legislature on how to handle
this issue or this actually
doesn't work.
that well in real life, so, um,
for one, for one, we're going
to, uh,
be talking to you about a county
clerk training program and
requirement. This is coming from
the county clerks, not me, um,
but we're going to be supporting
this and it's a, it's a great,
um, opportunity to help improve
um the professional, uh,
training and uh uh education of
our county clerks. Um, we are
going to be asking you all, uh,
because at this point, um, let
me back up. The municipal
officer election.
We have a regular local election
now every November.
And of the 130 so municipalities
in New Mexico, uh, we only have
approximately 7 or 8 that are
not already part of the regular
local election every November.
They've all opted in, except for
maybe those, those 77 or 8 that
are still outstanding and of
those we know at least 2 are
planning to opt in.
For 2025. So we're talking about
an election now, municipal
officer election in March, of
which we're only gonna have 5 or
maybe 6 municipalities
statewide. However, the
resources that are dedicated to
supporting these 5
municipalities to conduct
elections on a different day at
a different time is totally out
of whack now. Um, so we are
going to be in, and again, this
is just a preview and we'll get
into a lot of.
the data and the and the sort of
decisions behind this later, uh,
we are going to be asking you to
just say, you know what, it just
makes sense to have all the
municipalities having their
elections at the same time. Um,
um, and, and, you know,
etc. Um, we do need some
emergency election procedures in
the event of natural disasters.
What we do have, I mean just the
the Chavis County flooding.
We, what we have now is if
you're a first responder.
You can totally.
Uh, go, uh, to uh apply for an
electronic ballot and receive
that because especially if
you're serving on the front
lines outside your county.
What we don't have is the
ability for voters to do that,
and we saw that firsthand, uh,
during the fires in northern New
Mexico, uh, at the beginning of,
uh, the primary in 2022, so
folks were in who were displaced
from Mora, uh, or, or San Miguel
were in Taos, etc. and they
weren't able to vote in person.
Uh, in, in those places, um, and
so we do need some procedures
for those voters and of course
Travis County, um, we were, we
were trying to figure out on the
fly, how do we make sure voters
can still vote with all this
flooding, right? Um, so that was
a huge challenge. Uh, and, and
we're, we're gonna come to you
and, and ask that question. Can
we make this easier for voters
who are displaced due to natural
disasters.
Uh, we are going to ask, uh,
probably, and we haven't, you
know, figured this all out yet,
but expanding our confidential
address designation opportunity,
not just to election officials
and elected officials, but to
election administration staff as
well. Um, so, you know, not just
me, but my staff here, not just
the county clerk, but their
staff, um, just the reality is
and and I am currently
experiencing
Threats, harassment.
From even some members of this
committee online and I want to
say that thankfully, we do have
a law in place that protects me
from this behavior, but
Unfortunately, that is not the
case for all staff, poll
workers, etc.
Uh, we do want to clarify that
presiding judges who work at the
polling place are authorized to
administer oaths to newly
appointed election board
members, that's really boring
and sexy one, but we need that,
um, and there you can read for
yourself through our
presentation. There are uh a few
other just technical changes.
We're also going to be coming to
you, uh, we need to make some
improvements on uh public
financing, um, and campaign
finance, campaign reporting act,
um, changes that
that are, are long overdue and
for those of you that struggle
with campaign reporting issues,
um, are
Campaign reporting system is
planned to be overhauled. We are
working on that. I know, Madam
Chair, you in particular would
like to see that. We have great
plans. I would love to chat with
you about and get your feedback.
She hears a lot from my husband.
I, I, and I very much respected,
appreciate his opinion, so I'll
always, always, uh appreciate
hearing from that, uh, from him
on that, um, but we do have some
issues that just need to get
fixed and, and some of them are,
some of them do.
Come from the legislation, um,
that I think everyone would be
happier if, uh, you know, we
adjusted those a little bit. Um,
and so with that, um,
The next part is the MIT part.
Yeah, is that right? OK. Why
don't I hand that over to you,
Lindsay? So, uh, the next part
we wanted to talk to you about
is, um,
We are very proud that here in
New Mexico, there's they're not
really a whole lot of
organizations that kind of rank
elections, um, but one that does
is, uh, is the MIT, uh, uh,
elections lap, um, and we were
ranked number one in the nation,
uh, for this election year, and
it's not often that New Mexico
is at the top of a good list,
um, or, you know, the bottom of
a bad list. And so we just want
to talk through that what
What does that actually mean and
why, um, I will tell you all
that I just jumped with joy the
day that we found out that we
were ranked that way, um, and
you know, we've been in the top
10 before, but um, I'm gonna
hand it over actually, whichever
one of you wants to present,
Lindsay, uh, on this piece.
Thank you, Madam Chair, if you
don't mind. OK, thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, um, I
will very briefly just expand
upon what the Madam Secretary
has said about um this study
and, and how much it means to
election geeks across the
country to be ranked highly
within it. Um, I thought that
and we, when we were preparing
to speak with you all, um, that
it was important to highlight
the study because I think in a
lot of ways people really reduce
the performance of election
administration.
like a few indicators, right?
that you hear them all over the
news. It's like voter
registration rate or it's
turnout, um, and I think that
sometimes it can be really
conflated and certainly like
when we have these performance
discussions with with you all,
um, people look at turnout and
they're like, well, turnout was
low this time. That must have
been a really bad year for you
guys in terms of administration,
um, and that's not actually
true, right? Cause a lot of
things impact turnout, um,
election
administration and how efficient
it is, is, is one of those
things, but also many things um
bear out whether or not election
administration is successful,
so, um, the election performance
index is a project of MIT, um,
and it's part of their election
data and science lab, which is
dedicated to the nonpartisan
research um of elections in your
packet, there's a list of
indicators. I will not go
through all of them right now,
um, but they do range from
things like voter registration.
Um, statistics, um, provisional
ballot rejection rates, so they
really dig into how the systems
are functioning in each one of
the counting groups, so
provisional male ballot in
person, etc. So there's like
wait times are considered how
responsive and transparent we
are in terms of the provision of
data to to folks is is a big
factor, um, so we, we, we rose
up through the ranks. Um,
there's a link, um, in the
presentation.
as well, but I just wanted to
add a footnote and I may ask
Mandy if she had anything else
to add, um, and that many times,
um, when we are with colleagues
from other states, what we
understand is that those offices
often have much more resources
um to work with in order to
achieve a number one ranking. So
the fact that we are punching
above our weight speaks volumes
to um the people that I get to
work with every day and our
leader in in the Madam
Secretary.
And you are supporting us, yeah,
for passing those reforms. So,
um, thank you so much. Um, I'll
yield to Mandy if you have
anything to add. I think we're
good.
Thank you.
I'll just look at my staff, is
there anything else that we
wanted to make sure we mentioned
too.
So one item I just wanted to
touch on in terms of the
campaign Reporting Act, um,
that's everyone's favorite.
It's definitely
to work through, um, in addition
to, um, the item that the
secretary mentioned um in
regards to the physical system
itself in a desire within our
budgeting process to seek um an
answer to ongoing issues that we
see within that system. Um, we
also need to take a peek at the
campaign reporting Act due to a
federal court decision um that
pertain to contribution limits.
Um, so a federal court, um, said
that, um, there were
certain provisions within the
CRA that were unconstitutional.
One was a cap from state
political party to county
political party, um, and then
there was a discussion and an
ultimate finding of of
constitutionality of
nonconstitutionality, um, on the
provision um of of how we give
to non-gubernatorial candidates
and gubernatorial candidates and
that those limits were not
narrowly drawn. So we, I don't
know what the ramification
ations of that are just yet, but
it is something that we're gonna
ask the legislature to look at.
And on that point as well, I'm
sure, uh, we do also have the
recent federal court decision
around how uh funds from from
campaign accounts can be
donated.
Uh, to nonprofits, we've had
this provision for years that
says it can go to a 501c3, um,
and we were challenged on our
enforcement of that and the
federal judge unfortunately
hasn't given us a whole lot of
guidelines only that we cannot
apply a de facto.
Uh
Provision or uh a procto
prohibition on that, um, what
does that mean? Not de facto,
um, so there could be some other
charitable causes that could be
given to that do not meet the
501c3 threshold. Um, so that's,
that's a challenge that we're
going to need your help with
because then we don't know how
to enforce, uh, that provision.
Um, so we will be coming to you
to say, hey, how do we
How do we define this then, um,
given the guidance we've gotten
from the Federal court. Thank
you. And, and with that, unless
I, I think we're happy to stand
over open for questions and just
again want to appreciate the
opportunity to talk with you all
about the work that we've been
doing over the last year, the
support you've you've given us
all and kind of where we're
going into the future and, and
I'll I'll stop there, Madam
Chair.
Um, thank you very much, madam.
Check
secretary, um.
OK, I'm just taking names here.
I see Senator uh Duhe Martinez,
representative block.
Uh, Jay.
All right. Oh,
representativerago.
OK, to start, let's try to stick
to about 5 minutes each.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um
Ma'am, uh, and
Thank you all for for being here
presenting, uh,
I just want to, uh, again.
Uh, focus on the fact that we
are first in the nation for
election administration. We have
an amazing Secretary of State's
office who has
Done so much with so little, um,
and I, our state like frankly,
this is, this is one of those
things where we're at the top of
the list and we do not trumpet
it nearly enough, Madam Chair.
Um, I'll also say, ah,
especially given our, our
exceptional Secretary of State's
office and Secretary of State,
uh, fact that any legislator
would be uh harassing our
Secretary of State is shameful.
And that is not something that
should should ever happen. Um,
but I'm, I'm really happy to
hear that a lot of the stuff
that we implemented after
passing the, the Voting Rights
Act and uh and SB 8, which
doesn't have a fancy name, but I
did a lot of just clean up a lot
of our our election
administration procedures, it
sounds like they are, they are
working exactly the way they
should. Um, you're talking about
the, the, the poll worker pay
and
not having any problems getting
poll workers, uh, the Challenger
and watcher training and not
having any issues around that.
It's, it is really good to hear
that what we're trying to
accomplish, it sounds like we,
we actually are. Um.
I, I wanna kind of voice support
for the idea of, uh,
Getting rid of that municipal
municipal officer election. Um,
I say this as a former city
clerk who, uh, and, and when I
was the, the city clerk, we,
that's when Albuquerque opted in
to the, the regular the regular
election, regular election. Yes,
regular local election.
Um
But man, it's, it is just, it
makes so much more sense to have
these elections as consolidated
elections, also, apart from just
an appropriate use of resources,
uh, there's nothing that
increases voter turnout more,
the consolidation of elections.
When you make people show up to
all these little elections over
and over and over again, less
and less and less people do. If
we want, uh, the people of New
Mexico to use their voice and
have a say in our elections, uh,
Pursuing this consolidation is a
good thing. Um,
On the, the reinstatement of
rights thing, I will say I think
that the Secretary of State's
office got kind of unfairly
maligned, uh, around that. I
think there was a uh other folks
on this committee who were in
Las Cruces, um, we'll remember
that we, uh, we're talking to
the Secretary of Corrections
about the the data issues that
were happening and the fact that
they're their program, they in
in instituting a new program
that they've yanked basically
half partway through because.
difficulties that they were
having, um, but it, in my mind
that was far more a correction
issue on the correction side
than than it ever was uh on the
Secretary of State's side.
Um
And Madam Chair, that's, 01
other thing on this nonprofit
donation issue, uh, the
secretary mentioned about this
recent federal court decision.
So this is, this is a really big
deal, because the way that we
have it now saying you can,
here, here are the limited ways
that you can use your campaign
funds. And if you're going to
give them away to someone, uh.
Requiring that it be a 501c3.
That was really important,
because without that limitation
in there, I can give it away to
whoever I want and call them a
charitable organization, so I
can give my friends a whole
bunch of my campaign funds, and
that would be legal and
appropriate. So this is
something that we really do need
to address, uh, this coming
session, and, and figure out a
way to put appropriate
guardrails on the use of
campaign funds, uh, while still
respecting the the ruling that
we got from the federal court.
But thank you all so much for
all of the work that you've
done, uh, during this election
and all the other ones that that
came before it, and, uh, thank
you, ma'am.
Yeah.
Thank you, Senator. Um, we have
Representative Martinez and then
Representative Black.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Thank you, Madam Secretary of
State and Staff for being here.
Um, I, I do have to say that I'm
a little disappointed that we
never
We're able to get a response on
our IPRA.
Um
And we, we're still waiting.
For that information.
Um, I am a little disappointed
in that.
My question is,
On uh
I'm not sure what page, uh, but
your new changes and
initiatives.
Uh, the very last one, automatic
voter registration, can you
explain that to me?
Sure, um, absolutely
representative Madam Chair, uh,
so briefly on the Emperor, um,
we have responded and, and we've
been very clear that state law
unfortunately prohibits us from
providing you with that data.
We're gonna follow the law,
Madam Chair Representative. If
We get a change to the law. A
court tells us to do something
different, of course,
Representative, we will provide
that information as requested.
Um, so that's the
the real quick. That's not the
last thing that we got from you.
Uh, the last thing that we got
was a totally different
communication. I can talk
offline with you, OK. Yeah, I
think that's appropriate for
none of us know what you're
talking about, so, um, let's,
OK, sure. OK, madam chair. Sure,
let's
Connect and exchange numbers,
I'd be more than happy to talk
to your representative.
Absolutely. Um, automatic voter
registration is actually
something we sort of already
have here in New Mexico, um, the
difference is after the bill
that was passed, uh, last year,
it's going the the process is
going to change. So the process
as it stands now is that when
you go to MVD and you get your
license, you're asked if you
would like to register to vote
and you make a bunch of choices,
party and.
Things like that, or you say no
thank you. Um, after the
legislation that was passed last
year, the way it works now, uh,
or it's going to work as of
2025. That's our charges to
implement this is that you go
into to get your license and you
just, you are registered to vote
and you get a postcard in the
mail that says, hey, you've been
registered to vote.
If you don't want to be, send us
this card back, saying no thank
you, or if you want to make a
change or whatever, or you can
go online and make that change,
and here's how you do that. Um,
so that is going to be the
process based on the
legislation, uh, that we are
currently implementing and we're
working very closely with MVD to
do that.
Properly and effectively.
And you, Madam Secretary, so
I'm kind of concerned because
the state does afford a driver's
license to an undocumented.
Whatever the label is, um.
These days.
Wood protection does the state
have that those people aren't
going to be registered to vote
and actually cast a ballot.
Good question, Madam Chair
Representative. There are
essentially three tiers of folks
in MVD. You've got folks that
are providing documents like a
birth certificate or a passport
to say, yes, I'm an American
citizen, so we know those folks
are definitely eligible.
Uh, and they can be registered.
We've got folks who are showing
documents.
From another country or what
have you, showing you're
definitely not eligible. Those
folks are not going to be
automatically registered, and we
have this 3rd group, um, so say
you're an American, but you're
trying to get just a regular
driver's license. You don't care
for uh real ID. You can provide
different types of
documentation, and those folks
are not going to be
automatically registered, they
will be asked if they want to
register and attest to the fact
that they're citizens.
And that information is readily
available to you.
At the time of registration? It
is Madam Chair Representative,
readily available to MBD.
They're the ones that have that
data, and that's all that
private protected secure data,
um, but if there were an issue
to pop up, say someone says, oh,
this, you know, non-citizen was
registered, we could go to MBD
and talk with them and see what
happened here. Um, cause they're
the ones that are gonna have
the, the insight into that data.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Madam
Secretary, I'm, I'm just
I'm a little, I, I.
As an elected official one,
everybody in my district that's
eligible to vote to cast a
ballot, and I will work hard to
make sure that that happens.
I just want to make sure that um
there's less opportunity to
question.
The integrity of those ballads.
Um
So I'm, I'm, I'm a little
I'm a little concerned about
this.
Um, is there any way for you to
Make sure that
People aren't
Registering for with motor
vehicle.
And popping into another
category.
I, I, I think the short answer
to that this is your last
answer,
OK about representative
is that we're always gonna rely
on that partnership with MBD and
and in reality it when questions
arise, that's when we
investigate.
Um, you know, I, I'm not trying
to throw MBD under the bus cause
I think they do a tremendous job
and they know exactly what their
job is, and they have to be
really tight about it, um, under
the federal guidelines that
they're required to operate
under and so there is a lot of
trust that goes on, um, with the
motor vehicle division and the
Department of Tax and Revenue
that they're doing those
vettings, but that they will
also be an incredible partner to
us, if questions arise and help
us investigate and, and get to
the bottom of those.
questions.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Thank you, Madam Chair. I
appreciate the time.
Um, Representative block.
Thank you so much, Madam
Chairman. Thank you, Madam
Secretary and staff. So I did
have one question regarding the
emails and your email system at
your the SOS. I know a few
people, they got some emails
that said that they were out of
compliance, and it was like
right before the election, uh
reporting deadline, and I was
just making sure is that fixed
and then how, how does that
occur? because I know it's
happened before, Madam Chairman.
So, uh, Madamur representative,
that is such a fair question,
and um that we, we
a glitch. It, it's sent out and
it was to pack specifically, so
I don't know and I'm looking
here if any candidates got a
noncompliance notice, um, to
your candidate account, but we,
it did go out to packs and I
don't know if our uh state
election director has any more
insight into why that happened,
but it was corrected. Yeah, I,
um, Madam Chair and
representative, thank you for
the question. Um, I don't
necessarily have anything to add
except it was a mistake um that
occurred and so as soon as it
was identified.
we were able to get it corrected
notice out and it was restricted
to only political committees, so
not candidate campaign
committees.
OK, thank you so much, Madam
Chair. I'm sorry for that.
The microphone. So, you know, I,
I know one candidate, there were
like a judicial candidate, I
believe they did get that and I
appreciate it. I didn't mean to
throw anyone under the bus on,
on, on the mistake, but it's
good that it's been corrected.
So, uh, thank you so much for
that. Secondarily, Madam Chair,
and uh, uh, Madam Secretary, I
did have a question regarding
potential legislation coming up
in the next session and
regarding voter identification,
Gallup polls show about 84% of
New Mexicans and Americans
support it, and I'm just
wondering, do we, do we see any
support from the secretary's
office regarding voter
identification requirements,
Madam Chairman.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
my longtime position has been
that.
That is a solution in search of
a problem, we don't know and
have never been given any real
evidence, um, if evidence were
to be provided that that
particular policy would solve a
major problem in the state, of
course, we would support it
wholeheartedly with that being
said, we, we, we implement the
law that you all pass. And so if
you all pass the law that says
that this needs to be
implemented, we will implement
it with, uh, every
the threat of our being and and
do it the way we do everything
else, Madam Chair and
Representative.
OK. Thank you so much, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative. I, I'm sorry,
uh, Madam Secretary, I
apologize. I, I guess I just
upgraded you or maybe downgraded
to representative, but Madam
Chair, lastly, I just wanted to
address comments about
harassment online, you know,
myself, I've been the victim of
harassment online as well, sex
threats, things like that, very
vile stuff, and that has no
place in in this body or
anywhere. So, uh, on behalf of
whoever did those, I apologize
that that could have happened to
you, you know, when it comes to
asking people about their
political position, I feel like
that is something that is OK,
you know, not and harassing way,
but if it gets to to violent
threats like, like you've
described that you got, I
apologize that that has happened
to you and I, I think that's
something that
We as a body, hopefully it can
address in the future, but
Thank you for bringing that
forward and hopefully we can
move on from there. So thank
you, Madam Chairman. That's all
and representative, thank you
for your apology. I appreciate
that.
Are we done, Representative
Buck? OK, sorry. OK, we have
Representative Chasey and then
Representative Brego and
representative of Madrid.
Take him out of the chair, Madam
Secretary, and um both Ms.
Bachman and Miss V Hill, glad to
have you here. Um,
Congratulations on your.
Our rise to the top, really
appreciate it. Uh, I was just,
uh, reflecting with Senator
Cervantes, the number of
hearings this committee has held
on um supposed voter fraud and
need for voter ID and we had all
of these um
Supposedly a lot of complaints
in Donana County, and we had a
huge hearing down there and
nobody came.
Nobody came with any of the
evidence that they said they
had, and we, we asked for it and
so forth, so I, I commend you
for your um position on that
particular issue.
That's when you were on County
clerk. I was, um,
What was that?
I'm sorry, he's misbehaving. I
should gavel him down, don't.
Well, he and I both just kind of
go, oh my, not this again, um,
when they start talking about
voter fraud because we did have
any number of hearings of CCJ
inviting people to tell us what
what happened. And um it is a
felony in New Mexico. So, um,
Anyway, and you know, after the
Supreme Court allowed voter ID.
There were, um,
There were, there were a whole
bunch of nuns in Indiana who
didn't get to vote because they
didn't have their birth
certificates. So I thought that
was kind of
Emblematic for me of this is
why.
You don't want to do that. Um,
So I back to when you were the
county clerk and I was
A um
I wasn't a poll worker. I was a
watcher for the party or a
challenger for the party, and I
was trained to do this. I
couldn't be in my district cause
my name was on the ballot, but I
was in another district and, and
I'm glad you're training the
election workers because we had
this main presiding officer at
this, um,
At this school, and he basically
said to me,
You can't come in yet, and I
said, well, the rules say I can,
I can come at 6 o'clock a.m. or
whatever it was, 6:30, when the
polls open at 7 he says I have
my own rules. And I reported
that to you and you
You, uh, took care of that, but
it's really annoying when you
have these little kingdoms, and
sometimes they're they're just
like little kingdoms and so I
really support.
The um professionalism of the
staff at the early voting sites
and so forth. I really, really
appreciate it. And so I, I hope
that you get the um what you
need.
In the bills this session with
uh training for poll workers and
um as you say, I, I, um,
That's really key. I just one
quick question and that is in
the states that vote by mail.
They have huge turnout.
And I wonder if at some point in
time, we might want to be
looking at that.
To increase our turnout, and
this will be, of course, the
legislative initiative and
perhaps constitutional
amendment, who knows, but um,
I have kids in um
In Colorado and then other
family up in Washington state
and I think both of those are
are exclusively vote by mail in
there. They participation in the
elections is just phenomenal.
And um so I, I think that might
be the call of the future and um
I appreciate all of the work
you've done over the years.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative,
Representative Brego.
Human here.
Um, secretary, thank you so much
for being here today and your
staff.
Um, I just wanted to commend you
because I watched you when you
were presenting before Congress,
and you made me really proud to
be in New Mexican. So I just
wanted to point that out because
I think that needs to be said.
Um, Madam Chair, um, in the
current election, I mean, it was
probably one of the most
unprecedented times of our
lifetime, especially because of
the national tension that was
involved.
Um, probably something that I
know I have not seen before.
Although maybe um Reagan took
office, I don't know, I was much
younger then, but um you're,
Although maybe um Reagan took
office, I don't know, I was much
younger then, but um your, your
handling of this election has
been very good, and I know that
The national leaders have said
that they would ensure a smooth
transition. So I hope, I hope to
see that, um, transition of
power really be a smooth
transition, and I think it
already or it's already headed
in that direction. Um, I think,
I just wanted to mention also,
um,
My own personal campaign. I was
really.
So pleased with your staff. We'd
have questions, um, we call your
staff, they would answer them
almost immediately, um, very
professional and responsible,
and I just want to point that
out because that's really
helpful when we're, when we're
involved in a campaign or
ourselves we're, you know, time
is of the essence. Um, and so I
just wanted to point those
things out, Madam Chair, um, and
thank you for that. Thank you
and thank your staff for that.
Um, also, with regard to uh
campaign finance reform, I was
looking at the people sitting up
here, and I'm probably one of
the only individuals that has
actually gone or experience
campaign finance reform twice
when I ran for city council, and
I am extremely happy to sit down
with you guys and give you some
of my perspectives because when
you're in it, it's a whole
different
ball game, and when we're
legislating, and, and I know
that this is a bill, um, the
last bill, which was in 2023, I
think, um, that's when I met um
Majoritylo leader worth and,
and, you know, I, I really would
like to sit down with you guys
and just give you some thoughts
about it because
When you're in it, and you're
trying to follow the rules.
There's always this sort of um
space of interpretation, and
it's not always, you know, a
smooth.
Space. So, um, I would love to
just chat with you guys
sometimes. They you Madam Chair,
we'd welcome that. Thank you,
Madam Chair and Representative.
Representative of Madrid and
then I have um
Center City Lopez.
You wanna
Find a mic.
Rep
Thank you, uh, Representative
Martinez for allowing me to sit
at the desk for a moment and ask
a couple of questions. Uh,
question number one, I, I'm
pretty sure most of you will
know what I'm gonna ask. One is
the, um, issue of a two-county
in District 53, and one of them
Uh, what do you call it since
I've been running since, since
2016, doesn't have early voting.
And we took it to a fight and
gave 3 days. I had to let it go
because it was rushed and we
rushed it at the end, but since
then, I've hoped that we could
move to some level because of
the fact that on that county
side,
That is not permitting, but the
3 days.
It's a population of 16.5.
And you know what the response
has been?
And I feel like it's a dual
side, their response in some you
all's response, and that is,
well, the numbers don't show
that there's enough of a turnout
to put more people there and to
give you more days.
I had it worked out with Donana.
To be able to have a box placed.
And, and have votes dropped
there and then wait till the
state troopers come at the end
of the night, pick them up, and
then escort them the same way we
would do it on Otero site when
we are open.
But the fact remains.
Is that how many other places in
the state of New Mexico, can you
say exist like this.
And, and if it does exist,
Where we see that this is
justice and the fact of the
matter is, I think it extended
the hand.
By what happened this year.
To allow 8 people in the South
Central Committee.
To make a decision whether I'd
be on the ballot or not.
And completely
Mindful, completely.
Did not allow Otero County to be
at the table of the process
other than to make some
suggestions.
Hm
So when I say this, I'm not
trying to be a disgruntled
dissatisfied representative.
But a representative is still
fighting to cause he started to
fight to begin with, which was
to give people their rights.
And to encourage.
But we all talk about.
The freedom
Of choice.
Not to hindrance.
And you know what my response
has been when they've said to
me, well, you just don't have
the right number of people
coming out.
And, and, uh, you even have 3
days now, and it's not increased
more. And my, my one response to
the county and to you,
maybe we've been shaped that
way.
When we talk about all these
ways of shaping for more
turnout.
How do we miss the boat on one
population.
And it's acceptable to all of
us.
To allow a standard.
To be dictated.
by a few
Justin
was set on the course by 8
people.
There were 165,000 people on one
side of the county.
And 15,000 on the other side.
To have their true
representation here, but you
have the true representation of
what the people voted for in the
primary.
I know it's a lot to answer.
But if we can do nothing else.
Nobody can use.
The disenfranchising clear
tactic that was put on.
To not understand that I'm still
here.
At the end of the battle, still
saying.
I hope we can work together and
resolve this to some degree,
because I need the help of
everybody on this on this body.
Senators representatives.
This is injust.
This is not right, and we can
make it right.
Just like I have faith.
In the process that we accept
the outcomes of our elections.
You don't see me tossing out
here.
You see me tossing facts.
And the facts still stay.
We're a great state of New
Mexico. It should not have any
of this at any level, to any
degree. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um
You're welcome to respond and
let's talk more after your
response, please, Mad, Madam
Charl, I'm mindful of your time.
I'll, I'll give a brief response
to the representative and first
of all, thank you and uh I've
enjoyed working with you very
much over the years, we'll
always continue to work with
you. Um, secondly, a lot of
these issues are
Just realities of
The law in New Mexico and, and
as they're always room for
improvement. Yes, that's what I
said at the beginning of this
hearing. Johnty clerks get to
decide where early voting sites
are. The, the parties get to
decide how they replace
candidates. So, you know, if
there's policy issues that need
to be addressed by this
legislature will absolutely work
on those. Thank you, Madam Chair
and Representative. Thank you,
Madam Secretary. And lastly,
Senators the deal opens. Thank
you. Congratulations again on
the honor and all of the work.
It's just, it is.
It does make me proud to be a
New Mexican when you see this,
this wonderful successes. I did
get, um, and maybe you answered
it somewhere else, but I did get
some of the people in my
district complain about long
lines to um
To do same day registration and
I went, made a big point in my
district to say same day
registration is available,
especially these independent uh
people. So I was just wondering
what plans you have to fix that.
Sure, briefly, um, Madam Chair
Representative, we are, we got
overwhelmed with same day
registrations over half of the
52,000 that we got, um, this
year happened on election day.
Um, and so our systems were.
Like on the struggle bus and
then we, we gave, we, we gave
him all the power. We put more
extra servers behind them and
then at that point, county
clerks were already behind in
their queue, and the county
clerks have to process those,
like that's very specific, and
it was just overwhelming. So I
think as a collective election
administrators, uh, at the state
level and at the county level.
We know what our homework is, I
think the clerks know what their
homework is to do, and then, of
course, we moved everything to
paper and that sped things up,
um, but, but yeah, we went, oh
my God, like we could have never
envisioned this many happening
now we know it can happen. So
it's a, it's a good thing so
many people came out and
participated, but it did slow
the process down, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Oh good. Thank you, thank you,
Senator. Uh, anyone else?
Well, really appreciate your
joining us today, Madam
Secretary, and sharing your
perspectives on the last
election and thoughts moving
forward and you know, I just
wanna echo everyone else's
comments with regard to the
professionalism of your office,
um, notwithstanding my husband
is on the phone a lot about that
recording thing. Other than
that,
Madam Trey, I just wanted to say
thank you again and to all of
you and and for those who are
leaving us, we are going to to
miss you and and you all know
who you are. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you very much. Appreciate
it.
OK.
Our next item on the agenda is
Bernalillo County District
Attorney, um, Sam Bregman, I
think he has some bills he'd
like to discuss with us.
Ma
Can you hear me, madam chair?
Yeah.
Madam Chair, if you will, um,
Troy Gray is running 5 or 10
minutes behind, but I'm gonna
start with Adam. He's a deputy
DA in charge of our juvenile
division. I just wanted to let
you know in case someone joins
me while we're in the middle of
this. Right now I'm, I'm, I'm,
I'm having a, a binder passed
out to all of you all, um.
And
Ma'am, sure, let me start off by
just saying it is an honor to
present to you in this
committee, and I'm certainly
very, very appreciative of this
opportunity.
Um, I do have a, a few items I
want to discuss, and of course
answer any and all questions.
It's no secret that I have been
very emphatic about
Or I have a big emphasis on the,
on the fact that I believe.
We need to make some changes to
the Children's code. Uh, just a
couple of thoughts briefly and
then I'll talk specifically
about them. Last month, I was in
the courtroom at the sentencing
of a gentleman named Joseph
Tony. Joseph Tony was 15 years
old when he attempted to rob two
young mothers and ended up
killing them.
He was sentenced to 45 years in
prison.
Remind you, he was 15 years old.
Not only did he destroy the
families of those two mothers.
They just ruined his own life as
well.
That's why, that's one example
of countless examples, I can
tell you.
Um, that we are experiencing.
In Berlingo County when it comes
juvenile crime. It is real, it
is escalating, it is
unacceptable at every level. Too
many people, too many victims
are killed by juveniles in our
community. So basic numbers for
you just to kind of put this in
context. From January 1st of
2023 to November of 2024,
approximately 20 months. We've
had 1,448 cases referred to our
juvenile division. 24 homicides.
Refer to our juvenile division,
cases involving firearms 386
armed robbery 49, rape 44,
shooting at or from a motor
vehicle or a dwelling 69 from
2022 to 2023, there was a 57%
increase in cases referred to
our office that involved kids
with guns. And this year alone,
we already have this year alone,
this calendar year, we have 119
felony juvenile cases in.
involving
A firearm. The last time the
children's code was updated in
any meaningful way as far as the
delinquency Act was in the
previous century. It was before
the iPhone was even invented,
and we all know things have
changed dramatically, especially
when it comes to juveniles and
iPhones. It was over 30 years
ago.
My office after seeing seeing
these clear trends of escalating
violence involving youth
determined that we needed to
take a thorough review of the
Children's code, to look at what
changes perhaps we could suggest
to the legislature. And at the
end of the day, it's to have
consequences for young people so
that we're not sentencing him to
murder. It's just so there's
some consequences to understand
that there's certain laws and
norms in our society that people
need to follow.
Um, I would also like to point
out that I'm not just simply
asking the legislature to change
laws. My office has been very
active when it comes to doing
things with juvenile crime.
We've implemented policies to
address these kids with guns. I
personally visited more than
dozens of schools, well, a dozen
schools with thousands of kids
I've talked to myself about the
dangers of firearms and playing
around with them when you're
young or not playing around with
them, but just doing terrible
things with them and the
discussion, quite frankly, has
been very robust, to say the
least. Also,
There are no plea discussions in
my office when a, when a crime
involves a gun unless they
actually tell us where the gun
came from. And it is clear that
the guns for young kids, a big
percentage of them is coming
through the dark web where they
set up within 2 hours with
somebody else on Telegram, for
example, they get on telegram,
they find someone else in 2
hours later, they have a firearm
in their hand. Then by then
they're, they're posting and
they're getting a bunch of likes
when they take a picture of it,
and all of a sudden they're
celebrity and they got lots of
Friends because they're posing
with guns and all of a sudden
that they take the next level.
They go to the next step if you
will. Let me be very clear, and
I want to say this before I talk
about the specifics. I am not
and please understand this, I am
not about throwing the putting
juveniles in and throwing the
key away. That's the farthest
thing from the truth. I don't
want the sentence people like
Mr. Tony the 45 years in prison.
I don't want to see kids
murdering anybody else. I want
the exact opposite. I want them
to know that the first time they
get in trouble, there's some
consequence, some consequence.
This morning, let me give you a
highlight this morning. I know
the sheriff perhaps is in the
room. I spoke with him today. A
16 year olds driving a stolen in
Albuquerque.
It may not seem like a lot, but
I can't tell you how many times
we have, we have arrested so
many young people with stolen
cars with a bag of fentanyl in a
semi-automatic weapon that's
been turned into an automatic
weapon now in their, in their
automobile.
Just a few more points before I
go into specifics. We have a 17
year old. These are all recent
cases, just, just took place in
the last few weeks. We have a 17
year old who knowingly leaves
the scene of an accident,
resulting in death. He was
sentenced to 2 years' probation.
We have a 14 year old charged
with unlawful carrying of a
handgun by a person under 19,
negligent use of a deadly
weapon. The juvenile that we're
talking about here, shot at a
government employee, the water
authority, the real
of this case is that he had, if
he had better aims, someone
would have died. He got
probation for that. Um,
probation, by the way, let's be
clear what probation is in the
juvenile system in Burnley
County. It doesn't include a
curfew, and it doesn't include a
requirement to go to school,
unless we as the prosecution
demand it and we get it.
Case description just a couple
of serious violent crimes. Mario
Lang intends in, in, in, in
2005, convicted of first-degree
murder. He was sentenced to 57
years. He'll have to serve at
least 3 decades in prison. When
he was 15 years old, he was
charged with unlawful carrying a
handled by a person resisting an
officer, domestic violence, the
list goes on and on.
Jamal Lewis, 26 years old. This
year he was charged with
second-degree murder. He has a
history of 74 prior cases. Many
of those juvenile.
Another team charged with
shooting and killing someone
this spring. Currently charged
with first-degree murder,
kidnapping, and armed robbery.
He has a history of the
following unlawful carrying of a
handgun by a person under the
age of 19 unlawful carrying of a
deadly weapon on school
premises. For those cases, he
got probation.
Another example, currently
charged 2nd-degree armed robbery
shooting at her from a motor
vehicle. History of that person,
shooting her at from a motor
vehicle. Unlawful carrying of a
handle by a person under age 19.
His sentence probation.
Currently charged with a 15 year
old currently charged with
second-degree murder, armed
robbery, unlawful carrying when
he was 13, he was charged with
armed robbery. His sentence
probation.
So
Juvenile crime is an
unacceptable levels. So I think
we can all agree on that in this
room.
So we're asking the legislature
to consider 36 changes to the
Children's code.
And I have um a binder that I've
given you.
It's outlined specifically the
changes. It's also giving you an
entire rewrite for your
consideration, including those
specific changes. The first
priority, and I have several
priorities. The first prior
priority is to expand the list
of things we can charge a
juvenile as an adult. Currently,
the only crime you can charge a
child as an adult is first
degree murder.
We want to expand that to
include 2degree murder,
voluntary manslaughter, rape,
shooting at or from a motor
vehicle causing great bodily
harm or death, shooting at or
from a dwelling or occupied
building, causing great bodily
harm or death.
Because at the end of the day,
if you commit these kind of
heinous, awful adult crimes, you
should be charged as an adult. I
would ask that you consider
extending the jurisdiction, but
for youthful offenders or to 25
years of age. Currently,
Let's say they're convicted of
2nd degree murder. They're done
at 21.
They're out, they're gone. They
could committed 17 years of age,
maybe a year before they caught
the person, maybe another year
before we try to get a
conviction at 21, they're out.
Let me give you an example of
why I also want to extend it to
25 years of age.
So, looking at what was going on
with young people and crime, we
developed the gun team thanks to
the sentencing commission and a
grant that they gave to focus on
18 to 25 year olds who are
committing gun crimes.
So they handle cases involving
18 to 25 year olds involving
guns that do not result in
death. They've been at it for 6
months.
They have over 100 cases already
in Berlio County.
From 18 to 25.
And many of these cases, these
same juveniles were in trouble
at the juvenile level.
And so I want to extend the
ability of jurisdiction, not
necessarily to leave him in jail
or something like that till 25,
although some may deserve it.
For the safety of the community.
But
Make sure we're checking in on
how they're doing. We make sure
that we know what they're doing.
We make sure they're getting all
the necessary behavioral health
treatment. They may be
necessary. To make sure, to see
how the family's operating to
make sure this kid isn't going
to be using a gun between the
ages of 18 and 25, for example.
Thirdly, I'd like to allow
juvenile records to be used
during any conditions release
hearing without having to obtain
an order to unseal the juvenile
record. We have motion, uh,
pre-trial detention motions,
which I know of all have been a
subject of great debate here at
the legislature, but the fact is
the turnaround on that is 10
days.
Uh, for us to get it going, and
we have
Judges who do not know the
history of the juvenile and that
juvenile may have been very
violent.
During that period when they
were juvenile. Now they're an
adult, and I would respectfully
suggest, at least when it comes
to violent crime, that we should
not have to be required to get a
court to order an unsealing of
those, of those crimes before
they could even consider them at
the pretrial detention motion.
I'm asking that we remove the
number 4 where I'm asking that
we remove the detention risk
assessment. That's similar to
the Arnold tool. It is not the
Arnold tool, it's similar to it,
and the, and the reason is
because I want to allow judges
to deter
detention based on allegations
and circumstances of the case as
within 24 hours or whatever time
frame, but certainly, let's have
a judge be able to use their
common sense and discretion,
rather than just having a chart
that says, I know this is your
8th stolen car in 12 days, but
sorry, you're going home to your
parents. And by the way, the
juveniles in Burlingo County
that are committing a lot of the
crime, they know exactly what
the results are. I have law
enforcement that literally tells
me they pick up.
juveniles and they laugh at them
when the when the officer says,
you're going to the D home and
they go, no, I'm not.
I'm going home to mom.
That's what they say the police
right now, because they know
they're not going to be booked
through the DO unless there's a
gun involved, and then they get
booked in the deal.
That's not learning any
consequences at that level.
Um, in, in any shape or form,
and in fact, we have juveniles
who commit.
A number of different crimes who
never actually
Spend one night in the D home.
And I'm not a, I'm not some
somehow that the Dhos the magic
thing, the magic wand, but let's
have something other than just
saying,
You're on probation.
Don't violate the law again.
Another one, I want to remove
the requirement for prosecutors
to file a petition only after,
which is the current law, only
after consulting with juvenile
probation services. I don't have
to tell you all how busy
juvenile probation services are,
but I believe it's appropriate
for felony charges to go
straight to the DA's office.
We're gonna make that charging
decision anyways, so why delay
it because we all know that the
best form of justice is swift
and sure, and for us to be able
to get our hands on it sooner,
it's going to make it probably a
bigger impact.
more of a better outcome for the
juvenile who's in trouble. Um,
Finally, I want to change um the
definition.
Uh, from handgun to firearm
under the age of 19. It is
illegal for anyone under the 19
to have a handgun in their
possession. I have gotten some
pushback from a few legislators
anecdotally about what we don't
want to stop um young people
from being able to hunt with
their father or grand. I
completely agree, and I
understand that. The 4th tab, I
think, let's see, 123. maybe
it's uh past the 3rd tab of what
I have in front of you is a
proposed piece of legislation.
Which includes that exemption
for that, but what we're doing
is, it doesn't make any sense if
it is against the law and the
legislators, legislature's
wisdom against the law that a 19
year old cannot have a handgun.
Why can they have an assault
right?
I, I, I don't, I don't know how
that's how that drives. It just
doesn't. And I understand
wanting to be able to teach your
kids and grandkids how to hunt.
I get that. I love that. I get
it, but this, I think makes
total sense and I think would,
would go a long way. Um, others
just, and I'm gonna, I'm gonna
go through these fairly quickly.
Um, others, when you turn 18,
you're an adult in the eyes of
the law. We know that. We know
that if you commit a crime at
the age of 18 years old,
currently.
be very differently charged or
very, the consequences are gonna
be very different than if you're
17, 364 days old.
It's not appropriate for 18 year
olds to be housed with 13 year
olds.
It's, it's just not, nothing
good happens with that.
And I would respectfully submit
that they should be transferred
to the county jail when they
turn 18 years of age. Whether or
not they're waiting on their
murder charge, or whether or not
they've already been sentenced,
they should not be hanging out
with 13 year olds.
Um, we, I, another one is to
remove special masters from
conducting the detention
hearings. I believe this, we
should require judges to preside
over detention hearings. And I
want to remove the secrecy law
that's encoded in 32A-2-32.1. I
believe in transparency. I
believe the general public
should have a right to know what
happens in our courts and that
means our children's courts.
We're not talking about kids
here stealing bubble gum.
But we are talking about violent
crimes that the public has a
right to know about. Currently,
my office isn't even allowed to
mention anything online on the
website about anything that's
going on in children's court,
very rarely, if you will,
anything.
And that's, I would ask and beg
you all to take another look at
that law to make, makes, so it
makes more sense for everybody.
This isn't something that we can
do that just the legislature,
just the DA's offices around
town. This is going to take
everybody involved. I recently,
I read this morning uh on, on
the, uh, the crime package, um,
center that, the, the Democrats,
for example, are are asking for
more behavior. I support that
100%. I believe we need all the
treatment we can get for these
young people and their
families. We have to do that,
but at the same time, there has
to be a little bit of an ounce
of consequence when these kids
because they're not learning
anything. If you just slap him
on the hand and say don't do it
again. And the 9th time they do
it, unfortunately, it's a gun
and someone's dead.
And then how do you explain that
to the families of that victim.
And how did we do any service to
the kid who actually committed
the crime, because we gave him
no consequences. And I know last
thing I'll say on that, on this.
I know that some people said
there's 30 years of study out
there, 30 years of scientific
study and data that says any
type of punishment towards
children is, is, is not
acceptable. It's just the wrong
thing to do.
How's that working for the last
decade?
It's not working.
And I will tell you my own
experience.
As a kid, as a parent, and as a
grandparent.
If you tell someone, if you do
this, this is what's gonna
happen. You gotta follow through
on it.
We're not doing that. And so, I
know this is this is a lot um
under this, it's under the 2nd
tab, the entire rewrite. I told
you about it past the 3rd tab is
the handgun bill. Now this is a
different bill that not
necessarily, but it does
unfortunately involve too many
juveniles is we all know that
there's a federal law against
machine guns.
Um, and the US attorney's office
and specifically the US Attorney
has suggested to me that the we
needed state law.
Because he does not have the
resources now to prosecute the
number of people who are turning
semi-automatic weapons with a
switch, a Glock switch into
automatic machine guns and, and
some of you may know, but these
are 30 rounds and 2.5 seconds.
You can't even control a machine
gun when you're shooting that
kind of a clock. It goes
everywhere. But what these are,
are these are cop killers.
You just point the gun and 30
rounds right off the bat in 2.5
seconds.
And the US Attorney's office and
I have discussed this, and they
need help, and there's too many
of them out there, and kids have
too many of them out there, um,
finally, um, and I, and so, so I
would really like to see a state
law so that we can help in that
effort.
Um
Finally, the last tab.
Is the human trafficking bill. I
know that most of you know this,
you may have heard it, but you
can, you can do less time
currently.
trafficking human beings and you
can trafficking cocaine.
I respectfully submit to you
that over the as chairman of the
Organized Crime Commission, I
have been involved in seeing two
major operations.
Um, in which a lot of migrants
were rescued.
From human smugglers and human
traffickers.
But you know, of the dozens.
Dozens of individuals.
That were human trafficking.
Based on the state statute, do
you know how many we were able
to charge with a crime?
0
Dozens of people were let go
that we know we're human
trafficking in the, in the last
6 months on operations carried
out by the Organized Crime
commission in New Mexico State
Police and not one of them was
not one of them was charged with
human trafficking because the
definitional changes that need
to happen.
And um I know Rob Hart's here
and if you want to get into the
specifics, I'm happy to tell
you, but I know the Attorney
General's office is in full
support of this legislation as
well. And the time is come
because on the real life on the
ground, we need this
legislation.
So, I know Mr. Gray's here now
as well to, and he's um I call
him my expert on juvenile crime,
uh, but any questions that you
have about that, the children's
rewrite, or any of the other
things that I discussed, I'm,
I'm happy to answer, uh, for
you, and I'm honored to be here.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, thank you, Mr. DA, and I
just want folks to know we, we
have till 3:15, so we have a
fair amount of time I allocated
a little bit more cause when I
saw the number of your bills,
um, which I wasn't anticipating,
so we, you know, so we have a
little bit of time to discuss
this. So far I have on the lists
representative Chasey,
Representative Reeve,
Representative Rehm, Senator
Doig, Senator Maestas,
oh, Senator Sadia Lopez, uh,
Representative Luon
representative Martinez. OK, I'm
glad I allocated a lot of time,
um, Senator, um Nibert, and did
I get you representative Berega,
are you raising your hand? OK.
Rego, OK.
Um
That's 10 people.
Keep it to about 5 minutes or
so. Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, first of all, I just
want to say one thing about
human trafficking and, and along
the lines, um, usually,
I don't in in um approve of
increased sentences because it
doesn't work unless it's a white
collar crime. I actually think
human trafficking is a white
collar crime, I think the level
of planning and foresight that
goes into it, um, merits.
Its own statute and its own
punishment, and I'm, I'm fine
with that. I will not be here
voting and I've never advocated
for increase in penalties to
prevent crime, but that's one I
think would work. Um, with
regard to the juveniles, the
last time when you first alerted
this committee to these issues
in um July.
Um, I think it was before the
special session, I was talking
about the 1996 RAND report about
diverting youth from a life of
crime, to bringing children from
a life of crime. The um
That report, and I, I honestly
think even though it was in the
last century.
Uh, as you
Refer to the Last Amendment to
the Children's code. Um, you
should look to see what is meant
or what's included with
intensive supervision because
for juveniles with um we've
already started to offend. What
that report found was that by
doing intensive supervision, you
could turn um kids around. And
I, I will admit there in, in 28
years ago, there was not the
proliferation.
proliferation of guns that we
have now and the availability of
guns. So that may be a factor
for you to look at, but I, I
think you should look at it
because quite frankly, you
talked about sometime the
probation people don't have
enough to get back to the to you
before the um the detention
hearing.
Frankly, if we need more
personnel in this field, we need
to budget for them and fund it,
because you shouldn't be short
and we shouldn't be doing
anything, you're, you don't want
to end their lives on the first
defense or the 2nd offense. Um,
now this,
this guy who's done all of these
things is now is now going to be
in prison for life, and you're
actually trying to prevent that.
So, um, I, I, I commend you for
that. I
or plea bargaining idea. I don't
know if that's working. I read
about in the paper that if they
will give up where they got the
gun, you'll look at um reducing,
do you want to say something
about that just to respond,
Madam Chair, just to respond to
that, um.
The rough kind of percentages,
um, 3 of them have told us where
the guns are coming from, and a
third of them are a little bit
more than 1/3 are telling them
it's coming from the dark web,
from the telegram, and that's
how they, that's how they're
getting these firearms, and
that's a whole another issue
that I'm willing to have that
discussion about whether or not
there should be some kind of
penalties for people that give
or sell firearms to children
other than contributing to the
delinquency.
There should be these, these
individuals who are giving and
selling firearms to children.
There should be something about
that.
Madam Chair, um, I, I agree with
that. But um the it did it did
occur to me when I've talked to
other people about some of these
kids might need protection if
they're going to give that up.
So that, that's certainly
something you need to be looking
at and um so I, I just want to
um
I, I want to support you in the
idea that there need to be
consequences. Kids need to be
clear on the consequences. I
first taught high school, and I
agree with you, they probably
all know exactly what they're
facing cause they're smart about
that sort of thing. And I, I
found that as a teacher, if
you're strict in the beginning,
you can let up a little bit as,
as the, as time goes by. Um, I
think for the sake of those
juveniles and for the community
safety that it's not wrong to
want these things.
To be
Settled, I just, I urge you to
seek.
Um, evidence of their
effectiveness as you try to
implement these things. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Um,
we have Representative Reeb and
then Representative Rehm. Um,
thank you, Madam Chair, DA
Bregman. We kind of had some
offline conversations about
this, and I the things that I
think might make the committee
hesitate a little that I think
maybe you and I understand as
prosecutors a little bit better.
I wanted to kind of talk a
little bit about the extended
jurisdiction to 25 years of age
and extended commitment
possibilities to 25 years of
age, um, and
I think you explained, you give
some more chance to rehabilitate
and, and work with them, but can
you explain to the committee,
uh, Madam Chair and DA Bregman,
if let's say they're 21 years of
age and they go commit another
crime and they're on juvenile
probation. How would a situation
like that work?
But turn that over to the
expert, um, Madam Chair,
Representative Reed, actually,
if they're 21, there's no more
jurisdiction, period. Well, now,
yes, but in your currently is
now, um, the idea is that if we
are able to enact this change is
that with the court would then
have the ability to supervise
them beyond 21 years of age
until 25. Um, we certainly
received some data, some
information to suggest that
brain development for young
people goes all the way through
age 25.
At that point, the frontal
lobes, the brain has been
developed to such an extent that
they're now making better
informed, better decisions.
They're not relying on that
instinctual.
Part of their brain when they
act and react to things. So,
that's what we're acknowledging.
That's what we're recognizing.
That's why we want to treat them
as juveniles.
But we know that they're not
fully equipped at age 21.
And we lose jurisdiction. And as
Dave Bregman has pointed out, we
have over 100 cases of that
group.
Engaged in gun crimes. Madam
Chair, and DA Bergman, and I
think more of my question is, if
they're on juvenile probation in
your extent or even committed,
let's say till 25 years of age
and let's say they beat up a
guard or they shoot somebody on
probation.
How is that going to play? You
can still prosecute them as an
adult, correctly and drop their
juvenile probation or do what
you need to do. And in fact, we
do have individuals that fit
that exact profile. They've been
committed to the custody of the
youth diagnostic and Development
Center, and they commit an
offense either against other
residents or against guards, and
they're charged as adults. All
right, and so Madam Chair and DA
Bergman and an expert, so
basically you're, you're kind of
actually giving more opportunity
with up to 25 to
deal with them, um, before they
get out and work, you know,
hopefully they don't do
something like that, but get in
a situation like that because
they're under more supervision.
Is that kind of the idea, Madam,
yes, that is the idea to have
more supervision over them, and,
and to be able to
You give, if you extend the
jurisdiction out, you have more
jurisdiction. You can deal with
them, but you can still
prosecute them if I'm sure as an
adult if they commit an adult
crime, you bet. OK, and, and
Madam Chair and DA Brigman and
an expert on the ceiling of
records, um.
I understand that originally I
believe and I say this to the
committee to ceiling of juvenile
records was for let's, you know,
these kids go out and do a
stupid thing like shoplift or
commit a burglary, you know, or
steal a golf cart or whatever it
may be, and then we don't want
that to affect them the rest of
their life, but these aren't the
kids and you can correct me if
I'm wrong, generally that you're
seeing, um, turn 18 and go out
and shoot a cop and can you
explain the significance of the
fact that
When you have and and I guess
I've dealt with it too, Madam
Chair and and DA Brigman when I
had an 18 year old who the judge
is like, does this person have
any record? And they just, I
think the example I use, I had a
case where a kid took a rock and
hit a girl over the head, and he
had a record and there was,
there's just nothing you can
say, but uh you can just say he
has no other adult record and it
kind of gives the judge a hint,
you know, that there's something
there without really saying it,
but it's not to get those
younger like 12 time offenders
who do nothing.
wrong, you just want to be able
to use my understanding is these
violent offenders, long criminal
histories at at conditions of
release hearings and
dispositional sentencing type
hearings. Is that my
understanding, Madam Chair,
Madam Chair, that's exactly what
we're thinking. We're thinking
we just want if someone is
charged with another violent
crime as an adult. We want to be
able to at least have the court
know of the violent behavior,
perhaps just 6 months ago when
they were a juvenile.
So yes, we want, that's, that's
what we're looking for.
And Madam Chair and this the
criteria to put somebody in
detention, um, and Dregman, an
expert. It, we've talked, I
think in the previous committee,
it's pretty low to get to hold
somebody in juvenile detentions,
and I, I guess I would remind
the committee also that there's
a huge problem with the lack of
juvenile facilities. I know in
my area if someone is to
basically go to detention, we
have to drive him to Farmington
or Lee County or Las Cruces, and
it doesn't really incentivize,
well, once you we.
He doesn't criteriaize them high
enough to actually detain him
half the time. The judges don't
necessarily want transport to
have to go back and forth, and
I, I think we need to be looking
at funding juvenile detention
centers, um, and it as part of
your program. Um, I know
Albuquerque has a detention
center, but the rural, more
rural areas are really
experiencing a problem. Um, I
hear it all the time from law
enforcement, so I would, I would
hope and I believe I've heard
the governor say, I'm sure that
that is.
Part of the plan, but the
criteria basically would not be
so difficult under your new
version to get somebody detained
and maybe get him in detention.
Madam Chair
briefly where this is we're
winding up
Madam Chairman, uh,
Representative Reed.
To be clear, even in Burnley
County, we reached capacity in
terms of young people that could
be taken into custody. Uh, I
personally experienced over the
summer where somebody had shot
at a security guard and was not
allowed to be booked because
there just wasn't room. So it,
it's not just a
Problem in the rest of uh New
Mexico but also exists in
Burnley County. In terms of the
criteria for them to be booked,
the tool itself is implemented
by the juvenile probation and
parole Office. Um, as I was
driving up, I got a call from
the sheriff's office who had a
young person that had stolen a
vehicle, had wrecked it and
drove in it so wreck uh
recklessly that he had actually
exploded a tire and kept driving
on it. And they were calling me
to see if I could do something
to try.
Get him booked. And I said, no,
I don't have that ability.
That's strictly within the ambit
and decision making of the tool
as implemented by the juvenile
Probation Office. Uh, discretion
has been removed from officers
when they see the most violent
conduct.
And I think, yeah, thank you,
rep 11 quick question.
Just, just a quick point, uh,
no, they don't even need to
respond very briefly, you
don't thing I'd also point out
is one of the things that you
want to do is amend the
probation violation hearings,
just in case the committee
doesn't know, when you violate
probation as an adult, you just
have to prove it satisfies the
consciousness of the court in
order to violate their
probation, but as a juvenile,
you had to prove it beyond a
reasonable doubt, which is such
a lot higher of a standard,
don't understand why that's
different, but I think it's
something the committee should
think about.
Um, but thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
Representative Rehm.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and um
thank you DA Bregman. Uh, let me
begin by the Christmas riot down
in Berlio County at the
detention center. After that, I
met with uh Sheriff Allen, and
it became very clear that the
older juveniles were influencing
the younger juveniles. So in
2024, I introduced house Bill
156, which is
segregation bill. And DA
Bregman, thank you for your
support. It was tabled in the
first committee.
Let's now go to tab 3.
And talked about tab 3 for a
moment.
You want to extend the
definition of the handgun now to
a firearm.
And that's gonna be problematic,
uh, because under the Heller
decision, it said all adults and
adults are 18 year olds and
above.
Now
The shotgun and a rifle, I think
you're gonna have to leave
there, and I would also point
out that hunting guides.
Uh, at age 18 can be a
registered hunting guide, and
therefore, most all of them
carry some type of firearm.
Um, I don't know if you have a
comment on that before we move
to the next one.
No, and, uh, Madam Chair, just,
just to respond to that.
Um, Representative, I, I
understand perhaps there may be
some language that needs to, to
jive with another statute adult
versus juvenile.
But I am emphatic about the fact
that we absolutely need
To make sure it is against the
law for 16 year olds and 15 year
olds to have assault rifles, and
currently it's not.
And that needs to change.
Uh, so we will, we will work
with anybody on changing the
language so that we can address
the concerns you have, but I
just feel like, uh, um, if, if
they can't have a handgun, and
that's understandable because
their decision making process
is um messed up sometimes. We
all were kids that they should
have, it should be the same way
for assault rifles.
And man of Chair and DA Bregman
go to tab 4. Yep. So on tab 4
we're talking about um
prohibiting the possession of an
unregistered machine gun. Well,
if this legislature
would have passed my house bill,
about 10 years ago, it would
have been illegal to possess an
unregistered machine gun, but
the first committee
Voted in the majority to go
ahead and table that
legislation.
Um
Madam Chair and DA Bregman.
As we've spoken in the past and
I really enjoyed working with
you, um, I am committed to help
you fix those two bills.
And um,
And look forward to working with
you on fixing them, and we'll,
we'll get them to where they can
pass. Thank you.
Thank you,
Representative Senator Dohe, I
believe is next. Thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you, DA
Breckman and
I'm so sorry I can't remember
your name. Deputy District
Attorney Troy Gray.
Thank you. Um,
So,
I'm where I'm, I'm getting a
little
Caught up on some of the
juvenile stuff is, we're talking
about how their brains aren't
fully developed till 25 and and.
You need extended jurisdiction
over them until that age, which
that makes a lot of sense to me.
But it seems like that's not
being applied that that
consideration of their not fully
developed frontal cortex is, is
not being applied consistently.
Um
Like with putting uh the the 18
year olds, uh, in with an adult
population.
Um, I understand not having 18
year olds and with 13 year olds.
Absolutely.
Uh, but I.
I'm sure I I find it.
I'm, I'm troubled by the
solution to that being putting
18 year olds in with
40 year olds who
I, I
I, I suspected that 18 year old
will come out even more likely
to uh be engaged in criminal
behavior.
If that is who they're hanging
around with and and just the.
The
The Security concerns there or
That kid. Um
Madam Cha response, Senator, let
me just say this that um
We draw that distinction 18
years old in the law across the
land. So, if you commit a
first-degree murder at the age
of 17 or a second degree murder,
let's just say 2nd degree murder
at the age of 17 years old. Your
penalties can be far different
than if you commit it when
you're on your 18th birthday.
And I would respectfully submit
that the law is determined that
it's 18 and you are treated as
an adult at 18, and that's the
way it should be.
And I strongly believe that, I
mean, what's, we have to draw a
line somewhere, it's 18. What is
it? 19, is it 20? No, it's 22
year olds, you don't want
22-year-olds in with
15 year olds. Yeah, it, 18 has
been the line. I'm more than
willing to stick with that, but
I'm also more than willing to
tell you that I believe that 18
year olds should not be housed
with juvenile people who are in
the juvenile detention home
detention facility because when
they are convicted, we have
said, we've sent as young as 16
year olds.
To adult prison for life for
murder in Burlingo County within
the last few years.
I mean
That happens if you want to add
anything. Well, and and and
because I have some, some other
stuff.
I don't being cognizant of the,
the committee's time, um, the
stuff about uh and you describe
it as taking out barriers for
electronic communication for
detention hearings.
Uh, some of the language that
you're taking out is stuff
saying like the child shall have
legal representation present
with the child, um.
Like why?
Why, why is that? Why should
that be taken out?
Madame Chair, uh, Senator Doig,
uh, that's captured in other
sections that a child is always
entitled. In fact, it's state
law that they are.
have to have a legal
representative for them. That's
just a reflection that the way
that things are done now.
It, we, we have to actually find
exceptional circumstances.
Uh
Mine's working.
Hello hello.
