Making a greater announcement
and more detail about the
efforts to pilot a program here.
So, you know, the governor's
dialogue on AOT has been
important and there's been some,
some results of that. So I think
it's important to acknowledge
her for that. And, and I'd like
to also just point out to the
committee that from my
perspective, the 3rd district,
Donyan County, has been touted
as something that's probably
worth more than others with the
existing law. And, and I think
what's important to recognize is
the reason that law was passed,
the sponsor was Mary Kay Pain.
Mary Kay comes from a
Very well known uh family member
who suffers from very deep
mental illness. She is shared
that with us, and she, she made
us her passion. She made this
bill her passion, she made this
project her passion, and she
made sure that it didn't just
get passed as a law here. She
went to go make it work and she
went to get the money to make it
work, and she, she looked
tirelessly made it work and so
there's an example in there, a
little bit of us, we don't
always need new laws, and that
was the point I think you're
making Representative Chasey,
and I appreciate you doing so.
We don't always need new laws.
Sometimes we need, uh, need some
more money.
Maybe some more attention, and I
know Senator Worth doing that
with the chief now too, so I
wanted to follow up on that, uh,
Representative chasing your
comment and then Madam Sher if I
can just make one last uh
general topic discussion.
Uh, this will really uh toss my
hand grenade, but I'd like to
leave you all with something.
Uh, one of the, one of, one of
the controversial issues,
one of the controversial issues
the last session was the 7 day
waiting period. Boy, I'm looking
at you represent a block, um,
and whether, and whether a 7 day
waiting period would be
effective in gun violence. And
I'm reading the news accounts
today that the person who
attempted to assassinate uh
President Trump bought the gun,
uh, where his father bought the
gun the weekend before the
shooting.
Um, so just as.
And bought ammunition on the
same day, so the, so I just
thought I'd leave you all with a
little bit of unused information
and you all can take that for
what it may mean to any of you.
So thank you, Madam Chair,
that's it.
OK, um, Senator Neibert had on
to say. Um, Madam Chair, I do
have one question since I'm not
in the loop and we have those of
you here that are in the loop.
Do we have any idea what is on
the call?
Well, when the leader talk,
he might governor's having a
press conference.
So I think we will get
definitively.
What's on, on the proclamation.
OK, very effective way to
communicate with us through a
press conference, so, um, yes,
representative Block.
Thank you, Madam Chairman. So
I'm just reading the governor's
Twitter account or ex account
and it says uh the state
lawmakers will have an
opportunity to approve 5 public
safety bills that will reduce
crime and improve the justice
system response. So it appears,
Madam Chair, that there's no
change from what we've heard
before and uh it'll be an
interesting discussion at 2:30,
Madam Chair. And, and I would
just add.
Public safety bills. I think
there's gonna be a fire bill,
potentially, that's the change.
Money for Rio does so.
relief for Riodosa, potentially,
and who knows what else and and
understand the proclamation can
also change between the time the
first versions and
introduced in what we see at 12
o'clock tomorrow.
sitting on pins and needles,
Madam Chair.
All our representative, we and
we have been. So, um, yes,
ma'am.
Misrepresenting, yes, um.
I'm, I'm gonna, sorry, I'm not
gonna get into the governor's um
bills and I just wanna, I just
wanna reiterate the need for a
comprehensive water planning
strategy for the state and how
important it is, not only to
northern New Mexico, but
southern New Mexico, all of the,
the entire state, but I, I wanna
reiterate a couple of things.
One is use of water, reuse of
water, and conservation. I think
those are important issues.
issues that we actually could,
you know, look at our 60 day
session for some sort of a
comprehensive water, state water
plan. So, and you know, guys,
you know I'm a planner, so I'm
gonna keep talking about that. I
hear you, Madam people are
getting a little antsy though. I
just want to share that
perspective for you. So, seeing
no other comment, we are
adjourned.
