Chandler chair this year of
courts Corrections and Justice
have with me, um, my colleagues,
we're going to be starting in a
subcommittee a mode until a few
more members get here, but I
don't, I want to try to stay on
track, uh, with our agenda as
best we can. We have a, what I
hope will be an interesting
agenda, but it's also very
packed, so people need to be
mindful of their time and so on.
So before we get to the mayor of
Espanola and the president of
Northern, I'd like those
Members who are present to, um,
give a brief introduction of
themselves. So let's start down
here with Representative Hall
and you can come around this
way.
Good morning, Madam Chair. I'm
Bill Hall. I represent, uh,
The Aztec Bloomfield area of San
Juan County District 3.
Madam Chair, my name is Alan
Martinez. I represent District
23, uh, which is the northern
part of northern part of Rio
Rancho, not I haven't moved yet.
I don't know.
Rancho I let the cat out of the
bag,
the northern part of Rio Rancho
in the western edge of the town
of Bernelio and
Representative Brego and I grew
up in this town, so it's a
homecoming.
Glad to be here.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Greg
Nibert serving Senate District
27 on the east side parts of
Curry.
Uh
Lee and Chavez and all of Debaca
and Roosevelt.
Good morning Madam Chair and Mr.
Vice Chair, um, members and the
public in Espanola I'm
representative Cynthia Brego. I
represent, uh, District 17 in
Bernalio County, which is, um,
Cottonwood Mall area closest to
Rio Rancho
and Corrales, and I grew up as a
representative Martinez said, I
grew up on the east side and he
grew up on the west side, so we
were comparing notes this
morning.
And uh thank you for having the
meeting here, of course. Let's,
uh, representative Herrera.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, and,
uh, guests, uh, my name is
Representative Susan Herrera,
and welcome to the beautiful
41st district. Um, it's, uh, I
think the most beautiful starts
in Espanola goes all the way to
the Colorado border, New Mexico,
Colorado border. I represent,
uh, the counties of, uh, Rio
Riba, a little bit of tows, a
little bit of Santa fall, a
little bit of San uh Santa Fe.
So, uh, welcome again and it's
good to have you here.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair,
and everyone. I'm a state
senator Mimi Stewart from
Albuquerque at the International
District and the East Gateway
area of the city where central
runs through my district and out
to the east. So happy to be
here. What a beautiful drive up
early this morning.
Good morning everyone. Peter
Worth, Senate District 25, just
a fun fact, President Balderas
and I were freshman members of
the House of Representatives in
2005, so it is very good to see
you here in your home turf this
morning.
Good morning. They're all old.
I'm not, um.
We were in the house together
once upon a time. My name is
Joseph Cervantes. I represent
Donana County, the district I
represent includes about 4th of
the city of Las Cruces, and it's
a district that is a farming
community for the most part,
borders El Paso, Texas, borders
Texas, and borders Mexico at the
southernmost part of the state.
Um, hello, I've already
introduced myself Representative
Christine Chandler from Los
Alamos, um, neighbors to this
wonderful community and happy to
see you. I don't know how
President you and the mayor, I
know the mayor wanted to say
something, a welcome, how you
want to split that up. Um,
he's gonna have OK, great.
Buenos Diastodos, welcome to the
beautiful Espanola Valley,
members of the committee, um, so
honored to have you here in our
beautiful valley this morning
and for the duration of the
week. Uh, welcome to our
community, you know, people have
been living in this valley for
thousands of years here in the
Tewa Basin. The Spanish arrived
in 1598. This is one of the
oldest colonized settlements in
the United States right here in
the beautiful Espanola Valley
when Don Juandoat established
the first colony of New Mexico
about 12 miles north.
here at Yun Yunke we're so
excited to have you here to talk
about some of the issues that
are affecting our state of New
Mexico as well as you see the
law enforcement panel that will
be presenting after me, but the
community of Espanola is a very
tri-cultural rich community next
year we'll be celebrating our
centennial anniversary and um
commemorating our 100 years of
incorporation as a municipality
in the state of New Mexico, but
this valley is so rich with
culture, so much, uh,
agriculture comes from this
valley where
It's the chilies from Chimayo.
It's the apples from Belarde.
There's so much history and you
have right here actually in the
city of Espanolla you have
generations upon generations of
families living here in the city
limits, um, and, and it's very
agricultural actually around the
college and I was just talking
to the president. He's trying to
look at some land acquisition
opportunities, but, um, some of
these families don't want to
give up their land because the
land and water is so special to
people here in northern New
Mexico and
defines us, uh, because we've
been so tied to the land and,
um, it's so rich here in this
community about heritage, but I
just wanted to invite you to
enjoy yourselves in our
community, our beautiful valley.
We're so excited to have you
here and Jooste bendiga Todos
and uh President Balderas, thank
you, members of the committee
for having me this morning.
Thank you, Mayor, President, the
floor is yours. Thank you.
Honorable Mayor, uh.
What a great opportunity and
honor it is to host colleagues,
friends, and most importantly,
one of the most important
legislative committees doing all
great work, uh, to, to really
protect our families and also
our students and we're, we're
grateful to have you here. It's
a real honor. It's a real honor
to also know some of you, this
is your home roots and um and so
welcome back to those honorable
legislators. Honorable Chair
Chandler, uh, members of the
distinguished committee.
Thank you for the important work
that you do, um, not only in
higher education but on the
front lines of public safety.
Uh, nowhere is this more
important than in this Rio
Grande Valley, uh, espanola and
Rio Riba County. I understand
how important the public safety
issues are. We can never have
prosperous communities if we
don't have safe communities. But
most importantly, I'm excited to
give you a very brief update uh
about Northern New Mexico
College. It is not just a place
where we create opportunity, but
I would encourage all of us to
think of it as a harm reduction
strategy as well.
So, um, I'm fixing of toilets,
roofs, and I want to thank you
for your historic capital
investment.
This community has not seen that
type of size of capital
investment in the most recent
years, uh, but we have a lot of
work to do and our students and
our community deserve, uh, the
highest standard, and I want to
thank you for being equity
partners.
Um, on that point as well, uh,
we're truly at an inflection
point, uh, when I took over a
year and a half ago, uh, we had
not had a clean audit in 10
years.
And this year was the first year
that we had an unmodified clean
audit opinion and so really
setting a tone for high
standards of accountability and
compliance is something that I
don't think we're just trying to
meet the standard we want to be,
uh, better than and compete
against other government
institutions in New Mexico and I
will tell you the community has
responded amazingly.
Uh, on a second point to prove
that that we're not just trying
to compete, but we take your
investment very, very
importantly.
We're also leading record
enrollment growth among our
peers, uh, recently 13% and the
semester, uh, and that's, uh,
besting last year's growth at
12% increased enrollment and
what I'm about to do is defer to
maybe some unconventional
approaches. Uh, everything is on
the table, trades, uh,
engineering and math, which
we're taking some students that
are behind usually and really
trying to meet them at their, at
their midpoint and then final
unconventional, uh, uh, justice
and education and um I'll defer
to two leaders very, very
briefly to kind of uh share with
you kind of we, we have a.
Grow our own leadership program
that starts from the, the very
beginning point where most
families in this county are in
vulnerable.
Uh, situations and could either
become victimized and then
criminalized and so we're doing
everything we can to get him
into this system, and we
appreciate, um, your leadership
on the topics later today,
homelessness, uh, the, the
housing crisis, the economic
crisis, we're stretching every
dollar that you give us. Um,
finally, as, as this region
works to heal from decades of
issues of abuse and neglect. I
don't have to remind all of you.
You're at the forefront of this,
this county was flooded with
opiate pills for generations
and, um, whereas now feeling uh
longer term epidemics, um, but
if it's not housing and
stability or substance misuse or
food insecurity, uh, right
behind you is a, uh,
Food pantry we have a clothing
store on our campus. Uh, they're
amazingly progressive programs
really, uh, being put to use in
our community.
Uh, but I want to highlight that
we are working with our high
schools in a way that I believe
could be the future model of
education for all rural
communities.
Um, we have to go out and
oftentimes offer high school
equivalency or GED programs just
to save the dream that some of
these students could one day go
to college. We also have to
rebuild, uh, what has been years
of mixed messaging that they can
truly enter a career technical
education field.
Such as cosmetology or
carpentry, but end up at some of
the top engineering schools. Why
can't we teach welding?
And yet also mathematics and so
we're, we're, we're leading, I
believe, the education reform we
offer now 8 week courses instead
of 16, because oftentimes single
mothers, uh, statistically have
a better chance of finishing
coursework due to other demands
if we tailor our education, uh,
in eight-week courses versus 16,
so I'm very proud of the reform
that's quietly being undertaken
here.
Um,
Finally, we, uh, understand, uh,
the word resilience, and with
that, Madam Chair, I have 3 very
brief speakers, but one I want
to highlight our student body
president, Higher Ed has to
abide by the regulatory climate
of shared governance, and we
take it to a higher level. We
don't just work with our faculty
Senate, uh, our students in it
really drives policy on this
campus and, um, I'll be
introducing her in a second and
then we'll finish up with uh
Frank Loretta, who's leading our
trades.
Uh, revolution here in the
valley and also Cecile Romero,
who's on the front lines of some
of our most vulnerable
populations transforming lives,
um, with that, I will, uh,
introduce our student body
president JC Green, truly a
superstar and already not in the
making, but a superstar already
uh on my right side. You have
the floor President Green.
Um, good morning, everyone. My
name is Daisy Green.
And I have the privilege of Oh,
there we go.
Uh, hi, I'm Jay-Z Green and I
have the privilege of serving as
a student Senate president here
at Northern. I am a senior here
at Northern and I am pursuing my
degree in electromechanical
engineering technology. I'm
originally from Albuquerque and
I just recently moved up here,
so coming from a big city to a
small one has been a big shift
for me, but I actually really
love it. Um, I initially chose
Northern with the intention of
pursuing my basketball career,
but as that journey went on,
I decided that my career would
be best if I just studied my
academics and that's when I
really realized that I wanted to
be involved with the school here
at Northern, um, it's really has
become my second home here, so I
was involved in inlase. I did
student senate president, of
course, and then also I'm
currently a math teacher at the
high school equivalency program
here that's fairly new to me.
I'm not a teacher, but I'm
trying my best, so we're trying,
um, as students andenate
president, my prime.
aspiration is to support those
who struggle and may not have
the resources that they need.
I'm a very vocal person, so I
know how to stand up for myself
and I feel like there's a lot of
people here that do not know how
to do that. So that's why I
actually wanted to be students
at the president. We're working
on a lot of things, new things,
fun things. We're hoping to get
a lot of people involved here at
Northern. We know it's small, so
our community has to come
together and be a family again,
um, I'm committed to fostering a
more inclusive and supportive
environment.
by addressing the resources and
opportunities that we lack. I
firmly believe that every
student deserves a chance to
thrive and get the opportunity
that they need and I feel like
they can do that here at
Northern. So thank you for
having me today and it was
really nice to meet you all.
Oh, you
OK, thank you.
Good morning, everyone. I'm
Cecilia Romero on the adult
education, um, director.
And right now we are serving 151
students, uh, when I first
started the program, it was, I
had 20 students enrolled, 9
active in students, active
students. We graduated the 9
students.
And I've increased the
enrollment to 151, um, students.
Um, if you're not familiar with
the adult education, it is the
high school equivalency program.
Um, we also integrate, uh, the,
um, IET programs which are
integrated educational
trainings. Uh, we offer,
High school
Integrating and many continuing
ed classes along with that. Um,
I have been working with a lot
of the
Rehab centers in the Espanola
Valley. I work with. We had 8
graduates from Oy with their
high school equivalency. I am
presently,
we just recently graduated 20
students from the Darren's
place, uh, with their wildland
fire training, which they all
received their 5 certificates
and were hired pretty much on
the spot we chose the perfect
time to register those students
and get them out there to the
Riodoso fires. So I'm proud.
Say that we were able to help
the students.
Um, I will also work with, um,
The homeless shelter and that
is, I can never remember. Inside
out right now, um, and we are in
the process of
And I'm in the process of
sending my staff out to the
center we're getting computers
set up for them.
Sorry.
Um,
To get tested so that we can see
where they stand and start
helping the homeless out there.
I presently do have 2 homeless
students in our program.
And um.
And all kinds of students walk
walk of life. We do struggle a
little bit with our resources,
um, that we have a lack of
resources, which is our funding,
of course, and I think everyone
knows that. Our funding
technology equipment, support
services, staffing, sometimes
with our staffing, um, we can't
get the
Adequate, uh, support we need
psychologists out here for the
students that we're serving. Um,
Sometimes we lack, um, updated
materials because we're, because
of our funding, we're not
allowed to purchase a lot of,
uh,
A lot of the, uh, books that are
updated and stuff. Um,
Let me see. So yeah, that's what
we do here. I try to, we try to
save lives. We're saving lives
out there and empowering futures
out there.
Thank you.
Good morning, Frank Lotta here.
I'm, uh, CTE director for
Northern New Mexico College, um.
I primarily work with a branch
college right now and the trades
department. I was formerly the
chair of the trades department
there, uh, it was, uh,
reactivated here in 2019, 2020,
I came aboard during the
pandemic and uh, uh, we start
offering trades programs
virtual. Uh, it's the pandemic
went away and, and we continued
building labs. We have labs up
at the El Rito campus. We have
electrical, carpentry and
welding and plumbing and pipe
fitting, uh, as well as down
here.
This campus Espanola campus.
Um,
You know, we're in a rural area,
it's hard to get students up to
El Rito, especially dual credit
students, uh, the, the, the
faculty drive to the our
original high schools, our our
partner district high schools
and provide training there. We
build labs there, we build a lab
with Gina.
Uh, it's been a high Hemez
Valley, uh, Pueblo,
um, Mesa Vista goes to El Rito.
Uh, McCurdy, uh, comes here.
The Espinola
And, uh, our college faculty
teaches, uh, those dual current
students. That's the only model
that's working right now.
Secondary schools have
difficulty, um,
um, getting, uh.
Instructors certified with a
bachelor's degree, etc. I have a
trade background.
So, um,
We're working with them on that
as well, you know, so the model
is to get them out there now.
What do we want? We want
workforce. We need, we need a
workforce. We need a trade
workforce, so we introduced the
uh industry uh credentials of
interim it's called interim
credential with IBEW that gives
the student one year credit as
an apprentice.
At NIBW.
Uh, JATC, we have the MC3
program that, uh, uh, gives the
student, uh,
Direct entry into various
unions, uh, particularly the UA
412, we have an MOU with, uh, we
sponsor approximately 200
students who are apprentices
throughout the state and El
Paso.
Um,
There are students and we're in
Albuquerque. We have sites in
Los Alamos, Albuquerque.
Um,
So, you know,
As new traits uh program, we had
to find ways to to to recruit to
get students, and these are the
ways we did it, of course, but,
uh, we also partner with
Cecilia's group.
Um, the state Department of
higher ed, uh, adult education.
Adult education and, and, and,
and the wind Foundation
approached us to do the IT
program. They for Cecilia and
she loved it.
And that's getting these, uh,
Students, um,
There are high school
equivalency degree and and
concurrently giving them a
trades training, so.
As a uh.
Obtaining their their GED. I
know it's not called that
anymore, but that's stuck in my
head,
uh GED, um, they're learning,
uh, trades they're getting this
MC3 they're getting IC, they're
getting all kinds of trades
experience as well.
Now, and they're getting dual
credit.
So it's a dual credit program.
The problem with it is we
haven't found a funding
mechanism to pay that tuition.
So
So that's where we struggle. How
do we pay their tuition? So
that, that in that program, how
do we keep these, these faculty
driving 2 hoursmez Valley and
back to give the students, uh,
an education in trades and, and
support education too because
there's a lot of academic core
involved. Have you ever taken an
electric theory class that
compares any calculus course
you'll take.
So
Um, so the game our quality
education.
So
So resources, of course, now we
were approached by 3 Rivers
Foundation of Farmington.
They saw we were doing, OK, here
you guys are doing things. Yeah,
yeah, we're trying, uh, and, and
they, they asked if we wanted to
be a sub award on on the youth
bill grant, and we said, sure.
And the beauty of the youth bill
grant.
I it's almost identical to the
IET program.
So we're bringing the 16 to 24
year olds into the IET program.
And through this grant they're
getting uh the students are
gonna get uh a stipend.
Um, 6 months, a stipend, uh, um,
1000 bucks a month, up to 1000
bucks a month, depending on
their, their uh performance.
Uh, they're gonna get some hands
on training. You're gonna get a
high school equivalency diploma,
they're gonna get.
Um,
College credit and uh entry into
uh a JATC union apprenticeship.
So, so these are some of the
programs we have, we have here
and um our our continuing ad
which is under Cecilia's
department as well.
It's uh just got uh.
A little uh boost we're hoping
for a contract from, from HED to
continue that program, funding
for tuition.
Uh, for our continuing ed
program and we want to.
Expand our, our, our.
Our industry credentials in that
program as well.
Uh, with our partnerships with
the JATCs. We have an MOU with a
1319 carpentry and that
carpentry degree is just about
ready to rock and roll. It's
AAS. We have an HVAC, uh,
certificate coming out and uh.
Uh, a new welding certificate as
well, and and the solar, you
know, to complement all the
other programs that are, um,
needed.
Uh, in, in this workforce right
now.
Thank you, Frank.
Madam Chair, I just want to
close with, um, I think they're
um
They're being very respectful
out of the deference they have
to this committee. Um, many of
these students that they call
are are have already had
numerous contacts with law
enforcement have many
significant challenges and, and
so I just wanna.
Applaud them because I think
they're they're um they're being
professional, but the, the work
that they're doing when they say
they, they graduate or they get
certifications of these, these
youth, many of them are what we
would determine at risk and so I
just wanted to highlight that
for the committee. Thank you for
the opportunity to give you an
update. Thank you very much,
President. I very much
appreciate it. And, uh, Senator,
uh,
Stewart.
Sorry, you'll get it. We only
see each other once in a while
wouldn't get it.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. How
exciting to hear in person about
the CTE programs and the IET and
the high school equivalency.
This is, of course, I also serve
on the LESC and we were part of
the design of all of these, so,
uh, it's just thrilling to hear
it working uh as well as it is,
uh, and I think it's working
well if you've got the successes
you do so.
Um, you know, it's always
troubling though when people
say, well, it's a funding issue.
We're just not getting enough
funding.
Maybe we have so much money.
What are we doing? Not funding
programs like this. So if you
could give me an idea.
a little bit more specificity
when it's the, we don't have the
funding. Which funding, where is
it? um, we just need more
information. Well, I do anyway.
Funding. OK. So.
It's a lack of
My budget is, I don't have a
budget. is it adult education
adult education and it's a grant
fund that we're grant to fund
it.
Madam Chair, I'm sorry I'm going
to interrupt you a bunch because
I'm really so you're grant
funded from where? The state. So
PED correct for the IET program
for high school equivalency for
high school equivalency. IET is
a separate grant,
the grant is very minimal for
the IET classes. I just got, uh,
3 IT programs approved by the
state. Um, but again, our
funding is, it's very limited.
I mean, I have very little money
to hire instructors and keep
them there for the long term of
the classes. Um,
The price of books.
Uh, the supplies the students
may need.
Uh, so, Madam Chair, I think
this, it's all adult basic,
right? Is that the
Uh, the president ought to know.
Well, Madam Chair, Senator
Stewart, yes, I think, I think
this is a, a great time for this
body.
What I understand in terms of
coming in is um
this college was put kind of on
a scarcity budget. They had
embezzlement issues. They had
budget issues pre-COVID.
And, um, we struggle because
there's not necessarily, it's
either ING strict funding
formula for higher education or
there's these supplemental
programs and what I could what's
called grant starved. I would
love the opportunity to come to
the legislative body for some
type of other special funding
that's outside of either one of
those, the grant and but we
would have to have amazing
support from all of you because
we get the door closed
basically.
When, when, um,
When we asked for that type of
appropriation, but it would be
filling this gap. We have the
same issue in dual credit. We
are giving high school students
free credit, but we have no
ability to monetize or scale up
our growth, and I think uh
looking at the higher ed funding
formula or potentially some
other type of new formula, and,
and I'll say the third one that
penalizes us, Senator Stewart,
uh,
When I got here, we had about
1000 students. We're now up to
about 13, almost 1400 students,
but I have to go to literally
fight for every student based on
funding for us. So there's an
inequity just in the.
Per student headcount and I
would argue that if we lose a
student due to violence in the
rural area, still end up costing
the state much more money. So
we're trying to compete with CNM
and UNM and we're finally the
only school that is a trade
school and a four-year
institution, so maybe that's
some of the confusion of the
past, um, but there does need to
be clarity, Senator Stewart. I
think those are the, that's the
easiest way I can explain it.
And Madam Chair, traits is what
we need.
Um, we need 900 electricians,
more than we have now in this
state. We're sitting on $6
billion of unspent capital
outlay, uh, in part because we
don't have enough of a workforce
that will put that in play. And
we need to change that, and we
are, we are, we're changing the
the K-12 level. Uh, thanks to
you all and others, we all
started changing it at the
higher ed, but I, I would like
to, to talk to you
About the adult basic, uh, a
grant program, you should be
getting, uh, enough for this.
So, um, let's take this offline.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Representative Herrera.
And then we'll move to our next
panel, thank you, Madam Chair,
and I guess I'd like to address
the president and you know, I
want, I want everybody to
understand here that the
community also put a huge bond
up to fund these trade programs,
so it didn't just happen
automatically. We all worked
very hard under that, under Rick
Bailey's, uh, uh tenure here
and, um, and happy to see Hector
and and excuse me, President um
Balderas come in and um I also
know that you got 10.
from the governor last year. So
how are you working now?
That is true. We we get um the
mill levy provides about.
Uh, a couple million dollars a
year to fund
the trades and it also stands up
some of the programming in the
4-year institution as well. We
received a $100 million dollars
infusion. Some of that's going
to be.
Uh, going to the arts center,
this is one of the only.
Uh, art centers in Rio Ribo. We
recently hosted Beargrease and
so now I'm
Watching Santa Fe playwrights
scheduling and we're, we're
we're we're pushing for civil
rights that if there's a, a
feature in Santa Fe I call
donors literally in Santa Fe and
they've been generous to fund
Beargrease, um, we are also
going to be developing a new
student center, Student Commons
here, as you can see the, the
event center here we just
recently put in LED lighting and
new audio this year.
2024, there are certain centers
in this college campus that are
not up to code or to uh regular
higher education standards and
uh you recently, we apologize
for some of the parking issues
to some I saw a Corvette, I
think a very fancy. I think
that's Senator
here from um
but as he was trying to find
parking, we, we literally
asphalted the our campus hadn't
at all asphalt in a couple
decades.
But we still need infrastructure
dollars and so the senator and
his corvette couldn't go down
this back way because it's a
dirt road and um and gravel, so
I apologize for that, but, um,
modernization of classrooms, uh,
Madam Representative is where
most of the money is going to go
to this year, but the community
is very excited, so thanks to
all the legislature for funding
that
shout out to the president. Will
you please tell, uh, this body
how many teachers and nurses you
graduated last year at this
college.
Yes, I'm gonna actually
introduce you to our interim VP,
our provost, and he's got those
amazing stats. Those are better
than our enrollment numbers as
well.
Yes, in
But.
23 we graduated because you
want.
Yes, in the spring of 2023 we
graduated 11, uh nursing
students and they all took the
inclux immediately afterwards,
and they passed it, uh, with a
100% pass rate with all 11. In
the spring of 24, uh, we
graduated another 11 students in
the nursing program. 10 of the
11 students have taken the
inlect and 10 of 11 have already
passed the intellect, so we're,
we're we're about a 92% pass
rate at this point. So yes.
graduation
Yes, uh, the teacher graduation,
yes, as far as our teacher ed
program, it's, it's of course
the enrollment's increased, uh,
we're approximately 183
students.
And so we graduated about 45
students last spring as well.
So
And they all have a, the, the
employment rate with our teacher
at program course is 100%, uh,
employment rate at this point.
And he didn't share with you,
but per capita that we have some
of the highest teacher
graduation rates in our school,
and the keynote last year was
uh.
Uh, a deaf teacher who gave her
entire keynote um in sign
language, so pretty
inspirational.
So thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Just have to brag a
little bit. No, no, I think it's
great.
Uh
Cervantes and then we'll go to
our next panel.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
appreciate all the, uh, progress
that you're making in education.
I know that Senator Stewart
would dig into this all day
along with you and, and, uh, I
want to maybe move from that to
just a last topic very briefly,
this being the court's
corrections justice we're going
to have law enforcement here for
about an hour, which will be
good, but well, I have the mayor
here, um, first of all, I, I
think I, I can't help again as I
told you all the beginning, uh,
the presentation today. I
represent the southernmost part
of the state, so the very, very
far from here. So what I
What I know is what I read in
the newspapers, um, and your
local papers but also Santa Fe
and other words, which I, I read
diligently every day, but I know
one of your challenges has been
homeless encampment. And, and
that has been a topic important
to this committee, uh, to the
last special session, uh,
indirectly, um, and also to this
committee, it's been a focus of
what we do in this committee
when it comes down to the
interaction of the courts, um,
and public safety and so forth.
So, while I have the mayor here,
a couple of things. I'm hoping
that
Mayor, you'll notice, um, we
have some presentations coming
up on the issue of homelessness,
but if I look at the
presentations, for the most
part, they're all very focused
on hearing from the nonprofit
industry, which is what they're
doing to provide more housing
availability, but we really
don't have on our agenda the
struggle that you've encountered
of late. And, and, um, and I've
watched it and I've watched you
all struggle with it and I, I
know it's a really difficult
struggle. We don't have the
opportunity of that on our
presentation while we're here
and
So I want to give you that
opportunity to take just a
couple of minutes to maybe tell
us a little bit from your
perspective what you've learned
from the experience, where you
think you're going and what the
rest of us can learn from that
because, you know, your
experience here is, is something
that we're all encountering
around the state.
Thank you, Senator Cervantes.
Thank you, members of the
committee for allowing the
courtesy to talk about some of
our struggles going on in our
community,
um.
And, and, and, and Senator
Cervantes, I can't, I can't
agree with you further about
what's going on, what's going on
here in the beautiful Espanola
Valley is ongoing in
municipalities throughout the
state. I actually serve on the
board of directors for the
municipal league representing
this region,
um, additionally, espanola has
for many years been compounded
by the fact of a generational
drug abuse addiction that has
affected this valley for
probably 40, 50 years now. You
have grandparents, uh, their
children, and then now
grandchildren, uh, perpetuating
the.
Cycle of substance abuse in our
communities and unfortunately
what has created now is is is a
perfect storm I like to call it,
of what's going on now with
homelessness and uh the opioid
addiction that's going on in our
community and I uh invited up
here our new Department of
Social Services Director Ms.
Michelle Freyre of the city of
Espanola was a recipient of the
opioid settlement funding that
was negotiated with uh President
Balderas was Attorney general
for the state of New Mexico and
the city of Espanola has
embarked
Since since May of this past
year with utilizing that opioid
funding for the creation of a
social services department
that's well rounded in our
community to provide services
for the homeless unhoused
population.
But prior to that, uh, the city
of Espanola embarked in November
of 2022 with the passage of an
ordinance, solicitation
ordinance, and that actually is
what the governor is proposing
for her framework for regarding
uh the removal of unsheltered
and unhoused individuals from
medians throughout the city. Uh,
the city of Espanola utilize
that ordinance to remove
individuals for safety,
pedestrian safety situation, and
I understand a lot of other
municipalities have now.
that ordinance. It's been very
successful in allowing us to
remove these individuals from
medians. Um, we still have a lot
of work to go in regards to the
aspect of of how we patrol and
monitor our private parking lots
for our commercial businesses.
Uh, but in February of this past
year, the city of Espanola
created an encampment, a public
encampment prior to their
creation of our social services
department and I'm gonna let
Michelle Fra talk a little bit
about that.
Thank you, Mayor. Good morning,
everyone. It's a pleasure to
meet you. And, and maybe I can
just interrupt you here. The,
the chairs reminded me, uh, this
is supposed to be our
introductory part, not really a
full presentation. And so I, I,
I really probably need to, uh,
apologize for giving you a topic
that we could probably spend
many hours on and we probably
should. So we'll probably do
that another time, but just if
you just a minute or two if you
could just tell us what you're
absolutely. So as of my start,
June 10th of this year, I've
been able to establish a
multitude of programs that are
being looked at statewide.
At this moment have housed
several individuals in order to
Transition unsuccessfully into
life, not only with employment,
housing, I'm currently working
on multiple grant funding
because I do know that there are
multiple grants out there that
we can utilize and give back to
our community. Um, at this
moment, I am also working
closely with the governor's
office. I held a successful ID
enrollment fair, uh, the second
week of my employment here
because I was able to determine
that one of the barriers for our
individuals was IDs, insurance.
They had no case managers.
MCOs and as we know and we've
done case management in any kind
of aspect, we understand that
there has to be a permanent
Positive foundation before we
move on to the other additional
aspects of housing, transitional
services, and so on. So that was
one of the basis for my program,
um, at this moment I'm applying
for grants to bring in pallet
housing, um, pallet homes with
successful followship, sorry,
successful following a case
management services from
beginning middle to end. I'm
also working on bringing a detox
center to the city of Espanola
inpatient detox, which will help
with um IOP intensive out.
Patient afterwards. So there's a
full program that my department
is working on at the moment. Uh,
I do have a five-point approach
that will be, uh, completed
before the end of November. You
got, you got started when? June
10th of this year, sir. I came
in, I housed a couple of
individuals my first week
because I was able to understand
and take apart, you know, what I
saw at hand, um, because right
now what I feel is important is
housing first, because we need
to understand that there
Currently in this state of fight
or flight. They're not thinking
about how many resources we can
provide because you talk to
someone, they've heard resources
that word a million times. They
want to hear, where can I safely
go at this moment. So my
perspective has been provide
safety, then follow through with
resources because you have to
have a good permanent foundation
before you throw all of these
things at them. I've been doing
this 1516 years.
The felony competency court in
Albuquerque with Judge Maria
Dominguez, Chief Judge
Dominguez. Um, I've done medical
case management. I've done this
for years, and these are one of
the issues that I found to
constantly plague our
individuals. I hope that you'll
continue the enthusiasm that
you're showing us the committee
too, and you'll never let that
go. And again, I hope we'll get
a chance to really spend time
digging into this fully madam
chair sometime. I'd like to
provide my cards to you as well
just in case, but, um, yes,
thank you so much and thank you,
Mayor also for just one.
Just a question. Mayor, you
referred to generational drug
abuse and addiction is the
homeless encampment and the
things that we're reading about
so much in the papers here in
Espno is that a local
generational drug abuse related
or is this transient, uh,
homeless notede of issues. Not
only do we have substance use
disorder, but we also have
individuals who are
self-medicating. So there's
these co-occurring disorders
that happen, mental health,
generational trauma, other
circumstances. There's a term
that I'd like to say is that
some
Invids are addicted to
homelessness, and you think to
yourself, well, no one wants to
be out there. Of course, no one
wants to be out there, but when
they have no other situation, no
other solution, and no other way
out. This is a safe surrounding
for them. So with my experience
I've been able to immerse myself
in the encampment, which was in
the news everywhere. That's not
a topic that I'm not going to
talk about. It was in the news
everywhere, but it was for a
good reason. At this moment, I
know where a majority of the
individuals are from the
encampment. They've reached out.
To me, they've said, hey, now I
have an MCO, now I have
insurance that I was able to
recertify. I need help. So not
only am I helping those
individuals from the encampment,
but their families, their wives,
the husbands, the kids,
everyone.
So it's, it's been, it's been a
full circle and you think, well,
now they're dispersed, now what?
That's not how I see it. I know
every single individual, and I
know this because I know their
names. I see them and I know the
situation that they're facing.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair, let me get into this.
Thank you, Senator.
Um,
if you could turn your mic off.
All right, um, I want to thank
you, President Balderas, very
helpful briefing and thank you
for your hospitality. You've
been great to work with and your
staff's been great to work with
and organizing this meeting. So
thank you all for, for
attending. Um, before we go to
the next panel that perhaps, um,
chiefs, you can join us and
we'll have some introductions of
people who
Yes, Mayor.
I, I think Michelle forgot to
indicate it majority of the
population we have found of the
homelessness are local
individuals here in our
community.
Thank you. Um, we had some
members come in, so why don't we
do introductions, Senator
Cedilia Lopez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
Antoinette Cedillo Lopez. I
represent District 16 in
Albuquerque, and I'm glad to be
here finally.
Good to see you, Representative
Alcon.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair,
I represent Alcor.
I represent district 6, which is
part of Sibula and McKinley
County.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and good
morning, Linda Lopez, the other
Lopez in the Senate, uh,
representing district 11, which
is the Southwest quadrant of
Bernalio County, West Side and
South Valley. Thank you.
Thank you. All right.
Really appreciate your coming
and joining us. We have about an
hour allocated to local law
enforcement issues and I'm
gonna, um, give the floor to you
and you can address those as you
see fit. So I, I'd recommend
that you spend maybe about 40
minutes or so on the, you know,
conversation, you know,
directing your remarks to us,
and then I imagine there'll be
some members who have questions
for you or have their own topics
that they want to raise with
you. So, um, you can.
it in any order, but when you do
introduce yourself and why don't
we have everyone introduce
themselves first and then we'll,
we'll go through, um, your
remarks. So who wants to start?
Madam Chair, Vice Chair,
committee members, my name is
Michel Garcia. I'm the chief of
police for the Espanola Police
Department.
Thank you.
Good morning everyone, members
of the committee, you might want
to speak up, sir. You're soft
spoken.
Good morning. Is that better? A
little bit.
Good morning members of the
committee. Glad to be, uh,
Here this morning, uh, my name
is Roger Trujil and I'm the.
Public safety director of 00.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
committee members, thank you for
having us. Uh, my name is Chief
Mitchell Maestas and I represent
Santa Clara Pueblo.
Madam Chair, good morning,
members of the council here.
Good morning. I'm Sheriff Billy
Merrifield for Reward County
Sheriff's Office.
Um, I know that you all have
some interesting and not
necessarily 100% unique, but
certainly some unique aspects of
how you all work together, given
that I know espanola has, has,
has the pueblo's represented and
I imagine there are coordination
issues, so that's setting the
stage, but you all feel free to
address us in whatever way you
think is most um important to
you and
Well, Madam Chair, I can start
um
You know, the valley itself, uh,
as you know, our county is just
under 6000 square miles, huge
city of Espanola, but we do, we
have our tribal leaders and our
tribal um.
Uh, areas that that surround us
in the county that that we do,
we do have some, you know,
jurisdictional boundary type
issues that we all fall into and
deal with whether it's tribal or
non-tribal, but, but more
importantly about that, I mean,
we're here today that
we we're doing our best to try
to work together and create
partnerships amongst ourselves
to overcome some of those
boundary issues and um.
You know, sometimes a lot of
that has to do with us trying to
find the funding or the
infrastructure to certain
things. I know for all of us in
law enforcement, it's been a
struggle to obtain numbers and,
and, and recruiting for us has
been really, really tough, um,
and that goes for all of us.
So I think for, for those of us
here today and what we wanna do
is we want to continue to move
forward on creating these
partnerships with each other,
strengthening this partnerships
so we do come to you folks at
the legislature to obtain some
of these opportunities, we get
that direction of where we need
to go. Thank you. Anyone else on
the way in here?
Madam Chair, Vice Chair,
committee members like Sheriff
Mayfield said, uh, the espanola
Ririba County is extremely
unique in the city of Espanola
alone we're divided into two
counties, Rio Riba and Santa Fe.
We have two of our tribal
entities that also
checkerboarded within the city.
So some of the challenges that
we face are in fact very unique.
Some of the ways that we deal
with that and, and coming from
Albuquerque, I spent 28 years in
Albuquerque and not having to
deal with that, but
collaboration is the force
multiple.
Supplier that we have in in
Espanola and Riariba, uh, the
collaboration between all the
agencies you see before you is
the force multiplier that helps
us achieve the goals of our
city. Like every other law
enforcement agency across the
state, we're all shorthanded.
We're all short staffed. We all
need money, right? Every one of
us, but our job is to come
before our communities and do
the best we can with what we
have.
So when we received this, this
opportunity this morning to come
speak before you all. Um, it's
not about coming and asking for
money. It's coming and asking to
demonstrate to you what we as a
group can do to enhance our
ability to serve our community.
Three things, um, and real quick
if I may, I think I would desire
is coming from Albuquerque, our
mobile crisis teams. The sheriff
and I speak on that repeatedly,
setting that up. I spent many
years in the mental mental
health.
Well, um, well, I was a
commander at APD, we have the
resources here, what we need is
the ability to create those
resources and have them go out.
One of the other, one of the
other projects that the, the
sheriff and I have spoken about
quite a bit is having our own
local detention facility,
something that we can have in
espanola or in the valley that
we can all utilize. I can tell
you personally from from my
standpoint, I have to decide
whether I'm going to send our
prisoners to Santa Fe County.
County or sometimes to Rio but
those are issues that I never
had previously that we have to
address, and I think that the
last issue that that I would
like to talk about is crisis
crisis treatment centers have
something here local. We have
the resources, we just don't
have the infrastructure to
address it.
And the last thing I talk about
and I know the sheriff will
bring it up here in a few
minutes, is the collaboration we
used to all be on the same type
of, uh,
Software systems being able to
speak to each other on the
radio, being able to have our,
uh, automated license plate
readers being able to have our
cameras being able to have, and,
and that all takes funding, but
as long as we're all in the same
and same thing with our tribal
entities we work on JPAs so that
we're able to assist each other
in dealing with issues that come
up so there's that opportunity
that hopefully we can speak more
with you all in depth and and
tell you, but that's kind of
just uh skimming over the top.
And with that being said, I'll
I'll defer to the other chiefs.
Good morning again. I think, uh,
like the other, the sheriff and
the chief, uh emphasizes. I
think we're all in the same boat
here, you know, with retaining
people,
um.
I know we have our own budgets,
but sometimes we need that extra
for equipment because we're
we're all small departments and.
I think uh some of our.
Our pay is like uh, we're not
competitive enough to retain
people, so we're losing people
and then with the uh.
With the jurisdiction issues
sometimes you know we face that
every day pretty much and.
And.
What I have seen lately is with,
you know, working with with the
city of Espinilla and River
County, we, we have a good
working relationship because
with uh with a lot of our
businesses within our
reservation, you know, we deal
with a lot of non-natives where
they come into play to assist us
with prosecution and then.
The same way with them if they
within our boundary because we
fall into the city on our south
southern border, so when they
need assistance if they're
dealing with the the tribal
member from any place, you know,
then then they call us and then
we assist at that point, but you
know, I think we're all
shorthanded to you and you know
that some days where, you know,
we're overwhelmed and we can't
provide that service sometimes
and then another
dis
us to is the detention right
now, you know, we're, uh,
For us we're going to Los Amos
County at this point, and you
know there's times that they
don't have the capacity either
so we're kind of left, you know,
without detaining someone.
So that's another issue. I know
there's been talks in the past,
but nothing has happened, you
know, those talks won't resume
and, uh, nothing has ever.
You know,
You know, been set in stone if
there's going to be a detention
center in this northern part of
the area which would serve
probably all our tribal
entities, service department in
the city.
And those are some of the issues
we're facing too um plus the uh.
Homelessness that came out
earlier too, we deal with that
too, so.
I think uh if we give you some
of that information we can maybe
provide some or get some
assistance from the state.
In a form of um.
Advice on wording maybe.
Look for more funds to.
For equipment wise and.
And for more personnel at that
point.
Thank you, thank you.
Chief
OK, good morning, madam Chair.
I was just reiterate what's been
said. I won't take too much of
your time because a lot of it's
been said it's across the board.
You know, uh, detention center
is definitely something that's
needed that we can cooperate on
um.
We go to Taos presently we don't
have anywhere else to go, uh, if
they're full, then we put them
on, uh, house rest or we let
them go, um, so you know, having
the ability to have a detention
center would definitely, uh,
would help, um.
And then the treatment centers,
we don't really have a, a, a big
facility here for, for
treatment, um, so anything in
that fashion that could be
brought to Northern New Mexico
would also be of great help, um,
and, uh, and assistance to, to
some of the crisis that we're
dealing with, uh, as to where to
put them where to go to get them
help, um.
And sometimes local because
you've got to have the family
members to help uh with that if
they have sponsors and so forth
to to be a part of that and be a
part of that, uh, you know,
assistance to that, to that
member, um, but outside of that,
um, you know, we all want to
have our jurisdictional issues,
um, or, or boundaries and, uh,
you know, working together when
they're non-tribal or tribal, if
they're non-tribal, you know,
they've they've got to be
transferred to uh the state
entity, uh, if they're travel
members.
And we obviously assumed that so
we we work together to to work
on those issues because a big
part of the cities within the uh
red boundaries, exterior
boundaries, so you know,
espanols on both sides, uh, one
on San Juan and one's on Santa
Clara, so, uh, you know, it's
definitely encompasses most of
uh the city and the county, uh,
so, you know, we work together,
we have to work together. Uh,
the goal is to provide that
service to the community
members, uh, and make it a safe
place.
Everybody to be so, uh, you
know, we're always challenged
with that and and working
together to, to assist with
those items, so, uh, thank you.
Thank you, Chiefs. Anyone else?
Sheriff, did you want to weigh
in? Anyone else wanna?
We can make this conversational.
It doesn't have to be, you know,
strict boundaries between Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Overall, I mean, we have, we
have our, I think it's already
been discussed some more issues
that we, we deal with daily
here. I mean, law enforcement,
it's a, it's tough these days we
we deal with a lot. The drug
epidemic that we all deal with
and have been dealing with, you
know, it's, it's tough finding
those um deterrents to to help
us to enforce that is something
that's huge for us and I know I
spoke about this a little bit
when the governor was down here
that.
Our legislative leaders, we have
to do a better job on finding
deterrents, stricter laws for us
to enforce, especially those
that wanna intentionally
distribute these narcotics. We
don't put a stop to it, it's
gonna continue. We're just going
to continue to grow. Um, I know
that I have a letter that I've
created for all of our
legislative leaders here in Riba
County that I'll be sending out
with some of those um uh
concerns that I've talked to
with our tribal leaders as well
with with the chief. um, but
we'll send that out, but we're
always looking for the direction
Trying to find ways to get
better and do better. I, I, you
know, I, I know they talked
about earlier about, you know,
detox. We have to have detox
here and we got to get better at
that as well because you can't
put someone in treatment if
they're not detoxed. It just
doesn't work. And, and we got to
do better at that. But on the
law enforcement side of stuff,
it's hard for us smaller
agencies, we don't get all the
funding that other agencies may
get our legislative leaders do
their best for us, but we, we
have smaller agencies, it's,
it's tough when it comes to the.
Recruiting, you know, it's tough
when we're, you know, trying to
be creative on how we can bring
people in. We, we recently uh
hired a young man 90 years old
and uh he passed all the phases
to get in. We started his
background, he doesn't have a
GED or high school diploma.
You know, and so we brought him
in and he's like, I've never had
an opportunity. I had to leave
school to take care of my
grandma.
So thank God to President
Balderass and his staff, I
contacted them and they put this
young man through the program
and he successfully graduated
and, and we're gonna hire him on
so I think us going into our
schools and finding better ways
to get our young generation, our
younger kids and, and starting a
program for them to have an
interest in in in public safety
or as first responders is
important as well, and I think
our college here has made great
strides in and movements, and I
think that's something I've
talked with the president about
for all of us on finding
is to keep our folks here and,
and want to provide a service
for the people in this in this
community but when Santa Fe is
paying $10 an hour more or state
police is getting these raises
that affects all of us, just you
guys know it really does is it's
hard for us we can't be
competitive, competitive. I mean
Los Alamos is another one that
just there's no way we can be as
competitive with them, so we got
to find ways to be creative and,
and, and one of those ways is us
working together, you know, we
don't have all the officers.
We're working on MOUs and what.
Not to allow commissions and
things in the nature to to have
each other's uh assistance where
we need it because we don't have
the numbers, um.
And, and as we all know, public
safety is the backbone to many
of the communities, if not the
backbone, so, uh, the
enforcement part, there's,
there's, we could stand here all
day and talk about it, but
another thing for us that's
really hard that we're trying to
be creative on is is
infrastructure and housing. I
mean, we just don't have it, you
know, for some folks don't wanna
be here because we don't have it
here. Um, I know, uh, talking
with President Balderas, I know
that the the college has some
rooms and and dormitory things
that we talked about maybe.
Finding funding to upgrade those
and maybe having some of our law
enforcement personnel will be
able to live in those housings
to, to, um, not only protect the
the community at the the actual
college campuses as a perk of,
of wanting to to work with one
of our agencies, so.
Anyone else want to weigh in?
Real quick, ma'am, the sheriff
brought up a great point about
recruitment, Madam Chair, Vice
Chair, committee members. Um, I
never had this issue, like I
said, 28 years at APD, we would
have hundreds of people apply
and, and that's what I was used
to coming down to Espanola was
eye opening. I mean,
unbelievably eye opening. Um,
but it's been as much as
rewarding as it's been
challenging, but when it comes
to recruiting just like the
sheriff said, the difficulty we
have is pay. Uh, my department
specifically, I would say that
60% to 75%.
10% of my officers aren't from
the valley.
They are from Rio Rancho Santa
Fe, Albuquerque. I've had a
couple that have come as far
away as Los Lunas and one from
Belen.
Which, which makes it difficult
for us and, and the way a lot of
people don't see it the wear and
tear on some of our vehicles.
They have to leave them at
Sandia because of what our, uh,
how far the take home program
can go so it's it's very
difficult and speaking for
myself, I mean, I'm gonna be
honest, I'm from the valley and
I was born here. I graduated, I
came 41 years later to be a
chief. Reason being is the mayor
had a great vision, showed up
twice, and he sold me on the
vision. He sold me on. You are
from Espanola. He sold.
Me on you want to serve the
community, which is what I
wanted to do. That is what we
try and do as the chief
executives of our agencies is,
it is so difficult to sell our
own. We're trying to set up
programs, internships, um, I've
talked to, uh, we talked to
President Balderas. We've talked
to Espanol Valley High School,
potentially senior 2nd semester.
We're doing everything we can so
that we keep our own so that
it's not only about pay, it's
about we're from here and I
think throwing money all the
time isn't, isn't the answer,
but.
Sometimes it is because they
have to live like the sheriff
said we don't compete with Santa
Fe County we don't compete with
Santa Fe. We don't compete with
the Alamos. We don't compete
with the state police somehow I
wonder how do all our agencies
actually have officers.
But those are the ones that are
from here that have that
passion, and I think that's what
we try and impart on our
officers, you're from the
valley, you're from Ria Riba.
You want to serve our community.
I myself, I placed my
retirement, um, I froze it to
come to Espanola because I
believe in what we're doing here
and like I say, I give credit to
the mayor for that.
It's not always about the money
and, and I think I've learned so
much being here and that's what
we're trying to impart on our
youth. I wish I had the 1920
year olds the sheriff has. I'm
jealous sometimes because you'll
probably keep those for a long
time.
But I think he's right about the
recruiting. I think working all
of us together, everyone up here
has that experience and, and
that's the first step we all get
along, we all speak. We meet
once a month at a, at a meeting
where all the, I call it the
players in the county show up
and we just talk just like you
all, and we talk about our
issues and and I really love
that exchange and you do see the
passion and, and I think that's
what we try and sell here in
Espanola.
Thank you. I know we have
questions, but, um, Chiefs,
anything else before I move on
to the questions. Very good. I
have Representative Martinez and
Senator Cedilia Lopez, um, uh,
Alcon Barrego, um, Herrera,
anyone else? OK. All right. Oh,
I'm sorry. Hall.
Very good. OK.
All right, um, Representative
Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Chiefs. I know that the job
that you have is.
Credible in both the challenges
and the rewards.
Um, I had a conversation with
Chief Stoyle in Bernallio.
And we were talking about the
challenges that the smaller
departments have in
Sometimes not recruiting but
retaining.
Those officers.
Um,
I'm, I'm happy that Chief
Stoyle, um.
is fully staffed.
But it's not always the case.
The problem is that the smaller
agencies and it and it's a
different perspective. I get to
talk to.
To the chief in Rio Rancho who
gives me a perspective of a
medium sized agency, the sheriff
in Sandoval County, but Chief
Stoy's perspective on a small
agency.
Um, we just provided them 4
units and.
It was a big deal.
You do that to Albuquerque and.
It goes unnoticed.
There has to be a solution.
Because you can't blame the
officers for trying to better
themselves and going for more
pay in Santa Fe County.
Chief Stoyle just lost two
officers to Santa Fe County.
And it seems to be
Almost a revolving door, these
officers going from
City to county to state.
Um,
We need to come up with a
solution that's beneficial not
only for APD.
The state police, the sheriffs,
but for small agencies.
You know, Chief Garcia, your
entire
Department is probably one unit
at APD.
And there's different challenges
at a small agency has that big
agencies don't have a clue
about.
Not only recruiting but
intelligence gathering.
Equipping vehicles with plate
readers being on the same
communications channel.
Um, we're dealing with that in
Sandoval County. I want to make
sure that everybody can talk to
each other because of an
emergency, you want to know that
if you put a call out, there's
gonna be people on the other
side that are listening.
So I think
We need to come up with a
solution to
The recruitment and retention.
Uh, for especially the small
agencies, how do you, how do
you?
Compete with these larger
agencies, um, and I think
there's, you know, there's
solutions out there. We just
kind of have to put our heads
together and figure it out. Does
the state come up with a fund?
That will help the smaller
agencies compete when it comes
to a $10 pay gap with an agency
right next door.
Uh, we need to figure that out,
um, you know, now is the time to
do it because it's election
season and everybody supports
law enforcement.
So you know I'm just throwing
that out there. Um, I am very
curious about.
Your stated need for a detention
center, does Espanol no longer
have a jail.
Um,
Madam Chair, um,
representing Martinez committee
committee members. Um, the city
of Espanola only has a contract
with Rio Riba detention center.
Um, we have a, we have not had a
contract in 2 years due to
issues that they're they're also
the overpopulation that they've
had and they've been making
changes. So with that being
said, I have very, very limited
um avenues for the arrest of my
misdemeanor for the city of
Espanola's misdemeanor
prisoners, um, I cannot
Take him and we understand and,
and the sheriff and I have
talked that they cannot take the
sheriff does a great job. The
state police do a great job of
arresting the misdemeanors and
taking them to Ria Riba, but we,
our options are only to.
And Santa Fe and sometimes now
that Albuquerque's been sending
their overflow to Santa Fe.
There's weekends where they call
me and say, Chief, you only have
2 beds, so you're telling me I
can only arrest 2 people over
the weekend.
We're averaging 5 to 6 arrests a
day, and you're saying that on a
Saturday, Sunday, Friday night,
Saturday, I can only arrest 2.
So I think that's the biggest
thing and we've all spoken even
uh something locally that we
could put temporary prisoners. I
do have a transport center, a
detention center. The longest I
can keep him though is only 6
hours, which, which pretty much
is, is nothing.
So I think for us up here in
northern New Mexico in our
county in our valley, that is
probably going to be one of the
most essential things we need
because the last thing we want
is to offenders to realize that
it doesn't matter what I do,
they're not going to be able to
book me we're just gonna, you
know, be seen in front of the
judge and be released. To me
that's not deterrence.
It's just emboldening people to
say, um, this is the first time
in my, in my life where I've
seen that we summons felony
offenders, property crime
offenders, so I have my eyes
have been opened, the changes
in, in how it is. So one of our,
the sheriff and I have talked
about this repeatedly in the
chiefs we need a detention
center based out of Espanola or
in the general area.
Thank you for that, Chief Madam
Chair. They, they used to have a
jail right down, right down the
street. What, what happened to
that?
Location representative
Martinez, uh, Madam Chair,
committee members,
unfortunately, it became, it's
in disrepair and it's not cost
effective to, to replace, I
believe if I'm not mistaken,
there are some serious issues
with the plumbing. There may be
asbestos. There may be other
issues, so the cost
effectiveness isn't there. And
I, and I understand that. I
mean, I'm a realist like
everybody else, but, but that
doesn't mean that we all as.
Law enforcement executives, we
understand that and that's why
I, I, I really love this
opportunity to come and speak
before you all to tell you some
of the challenges that we face
in our community and you're
right about that our smaller
agencies, um, we have to fight
for everything we get. I am
nonstop.
Looking for grants. I, I love
our LEPF fund because it kind of
equalizes the ground. So I'm
very, very familiar with some of
the grants that the state does
provide us, but many times, um,
like the sheriff said that's not
enough, that doesn't give me
money for vehicles. That doesn't
give me money for infrastructure
and I'm gonna, I, I want the,
the sheriff's gonna talk to you
about a collaboration he and I
have in reference to basic body
recording devices, cameras in
cars and less lethal.
Uh, um
Weapon that we all can use. So
here it was his idea. He and I
have collaborated. I want him to
present it to you all. It's a
great idea and I think we can
all share it and what it'll do,
it'll bring us, bring us up on
par with the larger departments
equipment wise, there's no
reason why I should be carrying
Marshall Dillon rifles. Just
recently, uh, we finally bought
some new stag arm rifles, short
barrel rifles. Um, there's no
reason for us just because we're
smaller entities and we're
further away from Albuquerque,
that we should be doing without.
Rep, we probably need to get to
the next question. Thank you,
Madam Chair and Chief, I just
think not having a jail here is
like having a doctor with no
medicine, um.
I can't even imagine the
frustration that you must feel
if you arrest 3 people on a
weekend instead of two.
Um, and I think it's incumbent
on the
The legislature to
Figure out how we're gonna fix
that, especially in Espanola,
so.
Again, thank you all for what
you do every day, your
dedication to your community is.
Amazing. um, thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Representative
Senator Cedilia Lopez, keep it
fairly tight. Thank you. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you for
everything you do back in the
day, my father was an underchef
in Valencia County. So I know a
little bit of, well, I'm sure
the drug are very, very
different these days. Um, I, I
actually had some questions
about it, the, the idea of a
detention facility versus the
jail. So is your idea that that
we're all of the law enforcement
would share
Uh, detention facility in this
area, or is it,
I see you nodding. So how would
that work and how far has it
gotten? Have you drafted any
plans? Have you?
Um, because I think it is a good
idea and I think we need, I
think it's, I was surprised to
hear that you didn't have that
each of you didn't have a jail.
Madam Chair, um, S Sergio Lopez
members, um, you know, es
espanola has always, so I'll
start back the county seat is in
Tierra Maria, so the county has
their jail. The jail was built
in 1991. There's a lot of issues
at that jail right now, a lot, a
lot of issues for infrastructure
purposes and Representative
Herrera will know, I mean she's
helped to try to find funding so
they can upgrade and do things
like that, but again when it
comes to housing, uh,
There's only a certain amount of
beds you can house, and then
that.
And of course the county we get
to go first, us or state police,
but then it puts the chief and
the other chiefs in a bind
because we don't have the bed
space. The majority of the
inmates come out of here in the
valley, you know, the majority
of them, so having a short term
detention center here, and I
call short term keeping the one
in tea is what the intention is
to keep a long term holding
facility because I think 80% of
the prisoners in there right now
have been there for a year or
more, you know, it's, it's,
it's, it's crazy till they get
through the court system.
So it's, it's long overdue for
us having a facility that we can
share amongst all of us, and it
wouldn't just be, I'm not sure
if you were this, but we would
like to have one where even had
a juvenile holding facility. We
don't have a juvenile facility.
We have to take everybody to San
Juan.
And that's really rough on us. I
mean, that's, that's a whole day
of travel for, for, for one of
our guys for transport.
You know, so it's long overdue
and, and, and that facility
would be a detention facility
for, and again, I, I would like
to see it as a short term
holding facility which 90 days
maybe, but other than that if it
was beyond that, the judges
could still utilize the gel and
TA and we keep.
Find find funding to keep
infrastructure and keep that
thing going if we could, but.
It's we've all come to the table
and then it, it, it stops. So,
uh, I know some of the.
Some of the individuals of the
county have have put plans
together and try to go forward,
but I think it, it stops at that
point. So I think that we have
to do a better job of getting to
the table together as leaders
and see how we can approach this
and, and, and.
Get some playing design going.
Thank you. That seems like a, a,
a real problem because when you
talked about being able to
arrest somebody over the weekend
and then knowing that they're
going before the judge and then
get released. It, it just seems
crazy and I think it it is time
or beyond time to get the kind
of facility that would help the
whole region, um, but speaking
about that, with judges
releasing people, how is the
relationship with the DA in the
context of not having enough
jail space and, and cooperation.
You.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
Silvio Lopez or or senator, I,
I, I'll tell you that from our,
our perspective, there, there's
not a, I don't want to put it
off on the judges. I don't wanna
put off the DAs, but, but the
timetable of discovery and all
these things that we gotta do, I
think we gotta come back to the
table and do better at that
whole time frame that was
created because a lot of these
cases just come out to just get
pushed out because we're not
able to meet those time frames
and I didn't say us, but the
DA's office versus getting with
the public defender,
It's tough, it's tough and, and
I I hate pointing the finger at
the judges and you hear that or
you point the finger at the D's
office, sometimes the ball is
dropped, but there's all these
timetables that have been
crushed upon us when we're doing
these cases and if I don't get
discovery or evidence within 10
days and if it's a high profile
case, you're not gonna get that
discovery there. So it it
affects us. And I think for the
chief side of it when you talk
about misdemeanors, what's
really hard here in the valley
is a lot of these individuals
that choose to do what they do,
and I say.
and, and they know that he can't
just go pick him up in a
restaurant because they know
it's gonna be a slap on the hand
we gotta release them because
there's not jail space, which
makes it harder, you know,
really hard. So, so they, they,
the, the defendants who want to
do this really don't care.
And if we don't have better
deterrent or they know hey I
can't go to jail, you know it it
it's, it's a, it's a revolving
door for him, you know, and the
same goes on with the tribe.
They don't have bed space. The
judges are calling me and I'm
trying to find butt's, uh, bed
space for him. We don't have it.
They're having to release them
back in the community.
Thank, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator.
Representative Alcon and then
Representative Barrego.
Thank you Madam Chair. I was
just gonna address the,
the problem with uh retention,
you know that uh the flastala
session.
Uh, we passed a bill last year.
Where the people that uh are
there at uh in, in other words,
if you had a, uh, you're able to
get to 90% at your retirement.
And you had in those extra ears
where you would get 90%. Now
you'll get 100%. So this gives
you the ability or the gives an
incentive to the uh
PERA employees, they got to be
an employee of PERA, of course,
to uh to qualify for this, uh,
for this it said to you,
and I hope that you're aware of
it that you can talk to your
officers and see if you can uh
keep it uh keep them hanging in
there for another 2 or 3 years
instead of retiring earlier.
There's something to think about
it. It's the legislation.
And it's just waiting for people
to take advantage of.
Uh, I just, uh, the other
question that I have, do you,
uh, as a, as a group, do you
have a?
You have power or uh to to
handle the Native American, uh,
uh does the sheriff have the
power to go into the American
Latin to make an arrest.
Yeah jurisdiction.
Madam Chair, um, Representative
Valcon, no, the sheriff does
not, um, there is those
boundaries if, if the chief
calls me and says I have a
non-tribal member on tribal land
for something that they did,
that's different. We, that's
where that partnership comes in,
then we do have the authority to
back them up, but anything
tribal is all tribal. Um, same
thing if, if we're on tribal
land, a state highway that runs
through tribal land. It's a
tribal member and a courtesy
we'll call tribal law
enforcement to deal with that
tribal, uh, individual.
So, OK, the tribal member
commits a crime with a
crime with uh charged for
committing a crime out of the
pue or do you have the right to
go out to the Pueblo and pick
him up.
I'm just trying to hear the
question if it's a tribal member
commits a crime.
So, so you have.
You're pueblo, your reservation.
And outside of that you have
exterior boundaries.
OK, so in that in that land,
which is probably about halfway
into the city.
Uh,
encompasses the city of
Espanola.
If, if somebody commits a crime
and they're a tribal member
within those exterior boundaries
that that to the Pueblo, then we
will go get them.
And we will prosecute them.
As long as our travel member if
they're not native, we don't
have any jurisdiction.
So for those who have to revert
back to to the state entity.
I'll leave it as that. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative, um,
Representative Barrego.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and let
me just begin, begin by thanking
our chair and our vice chair for
holding this meeting in
Espanola,
um, I, you know, I come here at
least once a month to visit my
mother, who's 96 years old. Um,
so because you guys were talking
about the juvenile detention
center, um, didn't Santa Fe
convert their detention center
into a juvenile detention center
and why did that close?
Uh, Madam Chair, Represent
Borego, I'm not sure what
prompted Santa Fe to close their
doors. I, I actually used to run
that program way before I came
back to the streets, so I ran
the the detention facility in
the juvenile justice for a long,
long time, but um I was just
told it was budget issues that
they're dealing with, staffing
issues, and so when they shut it
down, they created a, I think
there's 3 teams that just do
their transports for the
juveniles. Now juveniles are not
being arrested or detained like
they once.
were 10 years ago, um, so the
numbers are not as high as they
used to be, but nonetheless,
there's still crime that is
committed by juveniles where
there is incarceration
requirements and for us it's,
it's all the way to San Juan
County. Um, that's the only
juvenile facility that's that's
that we can provide I mean
Albuquerque we tried with
Albuquerque and it was just a no
up right up front so.
Madam Chair, I wanted to mention
that because I think that's
something that we need to look
into, um, because that, that
juvenile detention center is
right on Airport Road, and it,
it was being utilized for
juvenile detention. Um, Madam
Chair, I wanted to talk a little
bit about, um, this whole
discussion in terms of being a
crisis in Espanola, and I truly
appreciate that all of these law
enforcement officers are doing
their very best.
to work together regardless of
jurisdictions to, you know, deal
with the lack of staffing, the
lack of funding, the lack of all
these things, um, espanola has
always been, um,
The the butt of many jokes and
has had to deal with not just
drug drug addiction issues, but
also reversing stigmas and
barriers, including poverty,
addiction, homelessness, um,
the, I mean, so many different
things, the, the flow of drugs.
Per capita in Espanola being
extremely high and one of the
highest in probably the state
and the butt of those jokes, may
I add, um, and, you know, it
just seems to me, Madam Chair,
that, you know, as an urban
planner, one of the, one of the
issues that I see is that the
state put the drug rehab
facility right in the center of
the central business district.
And as an urban planner, I know.
That that is not a good place
for a drug.
Rehab place to exist. And so I
think the state may have
actually contributed to the
situation that we're dealing
with which I consider a crisis,
Madam Chair, and members, um,
And I'm just going to give you
an example because my mom lives
about 1 mile off of the of the
central business district. And
she's terrified to go to sleep
at night. I happen to know that
there's a drug dealer that lives
just across the way from her,
across the ditch, and last
night, Madam Chair and members,
I was watching TV with her
because I came in early last
night and she was, she was like,
close the door.
The back door and I said, why?
She said, because I think that
guy's watching me and that's the
fear that our people in
Espanolla are living with,
especially our elderly people,
because there's so many, and
Madam Chair, I mentioned to you
that I'd love to give you a
tour, but if all of you just
take a drive down the main drag,
you'll see so many people
walking the streets because they
don't know where to go and just
last
We when I came up here to bring
her some groceries, I walked
into Walgreens and a young man
had convulsions right in front
of me at the entrance of the
Walgreens, which I know has been
a problem that Walgreens, um,
the other thing that plagues
Espanola, Madam Chair and
members is just the whole issue
of vacant, abandoned buildings
right around my mom's house,
there are 3.
Vacant abandoned buildings, one
of which is in severe
deterioration. Um, and I'm just
I feel like I need to say this
because I see it and I see it on
a regular basis, Madam Chair and
members, um, and, you know, our
responsibility is to protect the
public safety general welfare of
the public. And so I'm really
glad that we are here today
because I and I know that this
is not just an espanola, it
happens in a lot of our little
towns across the state. But I
think that this committee being
here today.
Helps us to start really having
these dialogues about the needs
that, um, you know, and I keep
asking about that, um.
That lawsuit for the opioid
settlement and how that funding
is being used.
So that's it. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I appreciate you allowing
me to do that, but I, it,
there's, you know, there's a
true need for someone to speak
out. Thank you. True. And
remember, we have committee
discussion opportunities at the
end of the day as well. So, um,
we will have additional
opportunity to talk about what
we've learned today in our and
comment. So representative
Herrera, and then we'll have
Representative Hall. Uh, thank
you, Madam Chair. I'd like to
thank the panel for your
presentation.
Uh, we keep working on these
issues and to no avail, uh, uh,
um, um.
So, excuse me, Mr. Merryfield,
will you please tell everybody
how many sheriffs you have for a
district the size of
Massachusetts.
Yes, Madam Chair, Representative
Herrera, so.
You know, just to, just to kind
of piggyback off of
Representative Borrego said real
quick on this is that we do
have, it's not just the valley.
We River County has many rural
communities, just under 6000
square miles that we cover and I
And just up to 34 deputies,
which when I got appointed and
elected, I added 12 positions,
which was huge for this county,
but that's, we had 2 deputies
for this county.
So as Austin State police or
city and, and relying on our tri
tribal um uh law enforcement
agencies, but 34 deputies to
cover the county is, is, is
tough, very, very tough because
you have to remember the
sheriff's office is the
responsibility of us. We have
state mandates, so it's not just
patrol and responding. I have
court security, so I have a
court in TA. I have the cord in
Chama. I have the court here in
in uh rereba at the court in
Santa Fe, wherever we're told to
go, we have to do the inmate
transports.
We have the sex offender
registry that were monitored by
the state and the FBI, you know,
we have extraditions, uh, which
I I want to get into that topic,
but extraditions, we have to go
pick up fugitives of justice all
the time, wherever it is. I
mean, I just had some 2, a
couple of our staff go to South
Carolina, or, uh, so, so I mean
we have a lot of
responsibilities on our, on our
desk before we even go respond
to a call, but we still make it
happen so represented that I, I
appreciate you bringing it up
because we, we cover a lot, a
lot of room and, and.
All of our citizens and
communities deserve our, our,
our support as law enforcement.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Sheriff Maryfield.
Um, I
We struggle with this all the
time, but you need to understand
is, is our detention center in
Chama is an hour's drive away.
An hour's drive away, so if you
have to take somebody up there
and you know, I, I put money in
over the years to try and fix
that detention center and then
the governor vetoed it because
she happened to be mad at the
sheriff for a while, and, you
know, so it's just been this,
it's just been this back and
forth scenario. I'm just saying
that's the truth, you know, so
we were gonna.
Replace the doors for 200,000.
We got the bid, we did it, we
got the money. The governor
vetoed it, and then of course we
had COVID and then the price
went up to $1,000,000. So I'm
just saying
it's not easy and we aren't
funding small rural counties
enough to handle what the
workload is. It's that simple.
And you know, we, we're talking
about building a jail in a, in
a, you know, with a, with Los.
Almost espanola Tao and we're
talking about doing that, and,
you know, but the price is in
the, you know, it's just
exorbitant and, and, and we do
have the money now and you know,
I'll gladly carry an
appropriation, uh, bill, uh, for
that, for a detention center
here that makes sense instead of
having all of your officers have
to drive everybody up to, up to
Chama. I mean, I'll gladly carry
that we'll see if this
legislature.
Pass it, it's a problem. And,
and I guess as far as you, we,
you know,
Also, we got money for a detox
center from uh Senator Heinrich,
but I don't know if it was,
yeah, I think it was Heinrich or
Lujan, I can't remember. And for
the hospital here, but it was
enough money to build a detox
center, but it wasn't enough
money to keep it going. So the
hospital had to kind of pull
back on that. So it's not like
we all haven't tried, but I can
tell you at at a statewide
level, and when I talk to other
rural representatives from
around the state, we asked these
people to do a tremendous job.
And, and you know, we talk about
30, it was 30 or 36 years, 34.
Remember, they have 24 hour
duty. That's just not 34 on one
shift, so you're talking about
about 10 people on one ship and
then half of them have to go to
court.
So that's the situation we've
created here. And, um, I will
carry an appropriation bill.
We'll see if it passes. Uh, wish
me luck, uh, but really it it is
looking at the infrastructure
and half the time I, I didn't
want to vote for races for state
police that we get.
Because it just hurts rural
communities.
So it's, it's a huge problem
and, and, you know, it's this
committee's job. God bless you.
I'm just, I'm just a guest here
to to kind of try and figure
this out with appropriate
appropriations to actually do
the jobs that we have.
Yeah, I know.
Representative uh Herrera, Madam
Chair, so
You know, when we talk about the
salaries like this last 16%
increase in state police got in
Santa Fe Sheriff's office up
there, City of Santa Fe, Los
Alamos had already done their
their upgrades and the, the pay
on top of incentives is what you
look at when you want to go work
for an agency and if I have.
Terrible equipment and cars over
here, but I have great cars and
pains so it's it's just it's an
eye opener for these kids and I,
I don't remember who mentioned
this, but you can't blame
someone wanting to better
themselves for them and their
family. We can't blame them for
that. So what do we gotta do to
be competitive.
are pretty much at the same as
we have an hour of $30 an hour.
You go to Santa Fe, you go to
state police, a rookie comes in
making 80,000 a year.
So how do we compete with that?
And I think that uh
This is something I brought up
musical as I said, we're all
state certified. We're all
certified law enforcement.
Our teachers are all state
certified teachers. They're on
this we found a way to fix that
across the state. We wouldn't
have these wage wars, we
wouldn't have these revolving
doors where we call gypsy cups
they jump around,
you know, and they jump around
because they go after these
little bonuses that they offer
that the department's offer. We
can't do this.
This, uh, this
This 3 year plan that we were
given the retention recruitment
retention where it went from
100%, 50%. So that was very
helpful to us because we were
able to provide a, a, a stipend
to the officers or deputies that
came in and it was so it was eye
catching for them, but, but
being able to do that for the
recruitment part and save some
of our little bit of budget we
have.
It went away because that was
the first year and they dropped
down like I think on the 3rd
year round for 25% and we'll
have enough just for a little
bit of sleeping, but we can't do
the salary and the retention or
the the sign on bonuses that
everybody else is doing. We just
can't do it.
Thank you. I think we need to
move to, um, Representative
Hall.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Panel, just a couple of real
quick things. As far as the
tribal law enforcement goes, do
y'all have SLAC cards from the
Bureau of Indian Affairs, and
has that been, are, are they
working with your local agency,
so there's.
The ability to cross boundaries
to assist in, in, in Indian
country.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative,
most of us are cross
commissioned SLAC. We got a
couple of new officers that are
working on getting their uh
cross commission.
Uh, so with that though, it does
not change the jurisdictional
issues, right? So when you're
looking at cross commissions.
Um, those are boundaries that
have to be discussed in a lot
more depth.
on how that's gonna work, right?
Uh, and, and how we can, we can
work through those barriers,
right? Uh, because, uh, travel
entities are very uh sovereign
and they don't want to lose
that. And so when you're looking
at cross commissions you're
looking at at that point you
fall under the state rules and
rags when you take on that
commission if you're falling on
the state, uh, so, so there's a
lot of particulars, it's not
just, oh, we're gonna be cross
commissioned, we're good. Now
there's a lot of detail in that.
Uh, that has to be ironed out.
There's liability, there's
costs, there's tort claims,
there's all kinds of stuff that
needs to be uh uh looked at as
far as a legal perspective uh on
how that will work and whether
or not it it.
Protects both sides, right? Uh,
from, from doing that. So SLAC
allows us to be federally
protected under the Federal Tort
Act, um, but, uh, and, and.
There's, there's some extension
to handling non-natives when it
comes to CBB, which is central
violation Bureau citations, uh,
but it's very limited on those
citations that we're able to
give, uh, so does it really make
a big impact having all of that,
um, you know, it's good to have,
but I don't know that it it
creates that big impact.
Uh, because
if, if a non-travel member is
trespassing on tribal land. The
only thing that we have at this
point is a civil citation.
And it's whether or not they
choose to show up to our court
or not.
Um, with the CEB you're able to
give a criminal.
Citation
Uh, but at that it's about $25
fine, uh, if they show up to
court in Albuquerque in Federal
Magistrate Court, um, and if
they don't, uh, 9 out of 10,
they're homeless. You don't have
an address.
You're probably not going to
prosecute that individual.
So, so it's, it's definitely uh
some complications to work
through. Thank you. um
fairly familiar with that and I
just know it helps a lot in the
major Crimes Act for the SLEC
and the crossover with that. Um,
my other comment was regarding
the gypsy cops, and this has
been a, a, uh,
Issue in law enforcement since I
started in the 80s. There's
always been the hiring away what
what I would applaud is the
Chiefs and your efforts.
To get some hometown pride and
try to get some of these people
to stay. The, the, the pay is a
difference, but also a cost of
living in the different
communities is, is different.
And if you could attract people
back home, so to speak, or keep
them here.
And I don't know how we, how we
do that. It's just policing has
become extremely difficult in
this, uh,
This time we, we put much more
effort into protecting the
victims and we do our own
officers.
And so with that being said, um,
I just applied your efforts to
try to get them to come home to
stay home. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Senator Worth, and then we'll
close with Senator Cervantes.
Madam. Just a couple of things,
uh, it sounds to me like the
jail space issue.
Really is driving.
Your determination about
misdemeanor, possession of
fentanyl, which is a misdemeanor
with 364 days potential in jail,
but what I think I heard is
you're not.
Picking folks up because there's
not a place to take them. Is
that correct?
Madam Chair,
Senator Worth, committee
members, we're still arresting
him, and let me tell you the
issue I'm coming up to, and, and
this is where that motivation
comes, um, the way we, and I
hate to say it, it might not be
the right terminologies, not
sell it, but the way I tell our
officers is.
You need to arrest them. They're
so sometimes frustrated with the
system. Why do we arrest them,
chief? They get out anyway. This
is my problem. The 9 if you
arrest them only 9 out of 10
times, that one time you don't,
they could commit a felony and
hurt somebody's family member
regardless of what's outside of
our purview, we don't worry
about that. We make the arrest.
So we are making the arrests.
I go before our own public
safety committee. Our arrests
have not gone down. The only
thing that's changed is I have
to wake up the judges on
weekends, say, Sir, can you
arraign this person over, you
know, and, and get him out. So
the arrests aren't stopping.
What isn't happening is time
spent in jail. So the arrests
are still there. We count the
rest and that's part of the
difficulty I'm facing in my
agency is that we need to make
that arrest regardless of what
happens afterwards. This is our
purview from
Point A to point B, whatever
happens after you put the
handcuffs, that's not your
issue.
So, Madam Chair, I appreciate
that and I think that's
certainly the right approach.
Uh, I guess the question is, are
these cases then, are they not
being prosecuted, the
misdemeanor.
So you arrest for misdemeanor
possession.
And it sounds like there's a
real problem with there not
being jail space on the back
end.
But are the cases just where do
you think it's breaking down?
Like the sheriff says this I try
and be real, we try and be real
honest PC about this. We're
trying not to blame anybody
because I have my purview and
and this is a conversation we
have, whatever happens after, I
can tell you this if my officers
are subpoenaed to go to court,
they're going to go to court.
Um, I can tell you that
unfortunately, like the sheriff
said, there are a lot of cases
they're overwhelmed, they fall
fall between the cracks. Um, we
have a weekly.
Jaywalking, um, initiative where
we arrest 6 to 8 people that are
just crossing in the middle of
all these quality of life
issues. We know that if we're
lucky, one of those people will
go to jail. The rest are just
going to get citations and be
released within an hour or two.
Um, I think for us we need to
keep focused on what we can do.
That's why I applaud this
opportunity to tell all of you
the issues we face daily, so
we're not going to stop
arresting, but unfortunately we
have no control over what
happens with the DA's office or
when it gets to the judge and
and I can't tell you that we
don't go to court as much as we
used to because I see all the
subpoenas, but, but that does,
that is the crux of everything
that we're talking about that
detention space that we're all
lacking. No, I appreciate that
and I think it's good to have
this.
discussion and it's good for us
to understand just one other
line of questioning and, and
Sheriff, you mentioned stricter
laws, uh, regarding
distribution. So to some extent,
I do, that's kind of a finger
coming at our direction because
that's what we kind of do and
we've been looking at. So as I
understand it, possession of
fentanyl, a first offense is a
second degree felony, a second
defense is a first degree
felony. I'm just two things.
Are drug dealers here in the
valley being prosecuted under
state law number one, and number
2, what is your proposed
stricter law that you think you
would like us to consider?
Madam Chair, uh,
Senator Worth, I, you know.
I was I was born and raised here
for the most part, you know, I,
I lost a daughter to.
To opioids. So I have a, I have
a I have a real deep heart for
it, and I have an understanding
of it, but when I talk about the
deterrence, uh, we're better off
if I catch a criminal with what
they call boats. Boats are like
there's 500 plus pills of
fentanyl and.
We'll get into the whole uh
acronyms of what the street
stuff is, but.
If we charge them on the state
side, by the time that is
processed, they may, it may get
processed or or prosecuted or it
may not. It just depends on the
workload these guys have.
But if I were to try and charge
federally, you're looking at 7
to 10 years on these guys right
away there's no, there's no ands
ifs or buts, and I think as a as
a legislative leaders creating a
no tolerance kind of statute is
what I'm talking about because
of no tolerance like this stuff
is killing thousands of people
all the time. We're, we're
losing people all the time and
it's not gonna stop. The cartels
are here. The cartels are
feeding this stuff in. We
arrested a 12 and 13 year old
four months ago.
right? and the kid had wads of
money in his pocket. He had
10,000 fentanyl pills and they
both had firearms, so the
cartels are now using our young
kids because they know that we
catch them, it's a slap on the
hand for them. So we need a no
tolerance type of statute that
if you are going to
intentionally distribute this
kind of narcotic, OK, and I'm,
I'm of course we got to prove
that in court, but if we can
prove you intentionally trying
to sell this stuff and
distribute it. It needs to be
goodbye. We need.
They have a strong deterrent so
we can get these individuals to
stop wanting to distribute it.
It's, it's they're not, they're
not afraid. They're not afraid
to shoot it. I can throw a rock
here in Marriba County and I'm
gonna hit 3 houses and people
are doing the dope.
You know, so we do need help on
stricter laws and deterrents for
the for those individuals that
choose to want to distribute
this.
So, Madam Chair, I just think
it's important to kind of
understand that we're in this
together. We want to help and I
really appreciate you all, the
work you're doing
collaboratively and it's
important for us to hear kind of
what's working, what's not
working, the frustration on this
side is that we do have
penalties on the books with
existing statutes that may not
be enforced or there may be
different pieces to that and the
immediate reaction is, well,
let's go past another, another
bill to address it.
And I just think it's, it's all
the above. We need to have the
discussion. I really appreciated
the city of Espanola and kind of
The treatment side approach
they're taking as well because
the idea that we're gonna, gonna
lock folks up to get ourselves
through this crisis. I, I just
think that's not gonna happen.
We've got to really attack this
at the root level, which it
sounds like the city is doing
and sounds like you all are
working collaboratively in a, in
a tough space. So just
appreciate very much and I thank
you, Madam Chair, for having
this presentation.
Thank you, Senator Cervantes.
The audience may not have seen
and certainly the folks online
may not have seen when Senator
Worth asked you gentlemen,
whether the prosecutions were
taking place for fentanyl.
Sheriff, you shook your head,
no, they're not. And, and, uh,
that's, you know, as a lawyer,
we're looking for that kind of
body language where people tell
you the truth, right? And, and
the audience needs to know the
people that line need to know
when Samworth asks you, are
people being prosecuted under
the existing laws? You shake
your head, no, they're not. And,
and I appreciate your candor
because that tells me that we're
not going to solve this problem.
I've been saying this for a lot
of the last year. We're not
going to solve this, these
problems by creating more
penalties that are not being
prosecuted with the laws we have
now.
Um, so I appreciate that. I also
want to reemphasize what Senator
Wood said. Um, you're reading
the press, you're seeing the
press conferences, some of it
happens up here that we are your
enemies, we're your adversaries
that we're tone deaf, that we're
soft on crime. Uh, I, I want,
I'm glad you're here. We want to
tell you what you heard from
Senator Worth, I think is shared
by this committee over the last
year we're part of the team and
we respect what you're doing a
great deal. Um, many of you all
know this, we were talking about
earlier. I was in Mass yesterday
in Santa Fe, um, at the noon
mass when, uh, there was
Gunfire in the plaza and I was
in the middle of all that. I, I
respect what you all do every
day. It, it, I admire the fact
you leave your house and you
leave your families every day to
do this job. So we're with you.
We, we don't believe what you
read in the press that we're
somehow the adversaries. We
really want to be part of that,
um.
I did want to follow up. Senator
Wirth said, you know, one of you
said we we may need some
stricter laws. You're hearing
this from me again too. Please
understand we have, we collect
so much data. We're presented
data and studies and so forth.
We will tell you back to the
point just made, what we see is
the, the greater effect comes
from the certainty of being
prosecuted, right? The certainty
of being arrested and prosecuted
has a far greater effect than
increasing sentences that are
never used, right, and never
prosecuted. The certainty of
being, and that's where you guys
come in, right, the certainty
of.
in cases, arresting people, uh,
even if it's jaywalking, you
know, I, I, it, it seems like
comical, but I appreciate very
much, Chief, what you're saying,
which is that sends a message to
the community. Equality, use the
word quality of life, that, that
means something to me, right?
Is, is the small offenses. So I
agree it's the certainty and
it's the swiftness. It's the
speed by which they, there's a
bad offense, bad conduct, and
then there's certainty of of
that happening quickly. There's
a consequence not years later.
Um, Chief, you, you use some
words I want to emphasize them.
You were with the APD, I think
you said 28 years, and, and you
said the mayor sold you on a
vision. I wrote that down. That
was really important to me. Use
that word over and over and over
again in your presentation. You
were sold on a vision, you were
sold on passion. That's, that's
what leadership looks like, uh,
and you're telling me you've got
it from your mayor. Uh, I'm
seeing it in you, in, in all of
you on this, on this panel. And
so thank you for that. Um,
you're using the right words
and, and it seems to me that,
that you came here with a
passion.
And with a vision and that's
what it's gonna take. Uh, there,
there's, and we can't legislate
that. You know, I can't pass a
bill that says we're gonna, uh,
have people in charge who have
vision and passion. So I thought
that was important.
One of the things that came up
in the last special session here
was data sharing, the, the fact
that that we're we're, uh, there
was a proposal we needed a law
to data share. Let me just ask
you, gentlemen, are you already
doing the data sharing with DPS
that's required under the
existing state law? Are you all
in compliance with that?
Madam Chair, uh,
Vice Senator Cervantes, I
believe we are, uh, I know that
there's the new RMS record
management system that we all
went to our Spelman system, and
that RMS system is amazing. Uh,
I know, OK, we can get just
finished purchasing it, uh, it
took us a few years to to find
the funding to purchase it. City
has it. So that, that sharing of
information is definitely
happening if with the DPS
portals that we're required to
submit, do you need another law
from us to ask you pretty
pleased to do it, uh,
you know, I mean, I mean, is
there something we need to do to
tell you?
Really mean that we want you to
share data. Is that gonna, is
that gonna help you guys?
Yeah, yeah, yeah. And do you, do
you, I mean, is there something
we need to tell you that hey, we
really mean the existing law
says you got to share data. If
we keep telling you over and
over with more laws, is that
gonna make things any better for
you guys?
necessarily make better, but I
mean I think that we're, you
know, you know, technology, I'm
gonna say technology today for
us has just expanded and, and,
and we got, you gotta have the
funding which these vehicles
for.
It's a $100,000 vehicles with
the technology we need, um, the
sharing of information, the LPR
cameras that we're now trying to
purchase, uh, that the city has,
that Santa Fe has Poia, uh,
Chief Trujil were meant to be
here, but they had a shooting at
Buffalo Thunder and so he had
to, they have a crisis with some
of the stuff in their community,
so you couldn't be here but
we're all trying to share this
technology and information and
it's been huge for us. We've
solved a lot, a lot of cases
with some of that technology,
um, stats, my major city.
He's my stat guy, so he, he can
tell you, but we, we clearly
believe in the stats, we believe
in the me all I need to know,
Sheriff, which is you're doing
it, right? You're you're doing
it and you don't need us to tell
you again to do it, uh, and,
and, you know, I'm not here to
micromanage your department,
right, or tell you, hey, please,
please do this again. You're
doing it and I appreciate that.
Um, there was some mention
earlier that the Espanola has
had a median bill here that's
upheld been upheld in the
courts, uh, Chief, are, are you,
uh, are you arresting people?
Are you citing people?
Jailing people for sending on
medians or solicitation, Madam
Chair, Vice Chair committee
members, um, we worked quite a
bit on that and we went to
Texas, of course, Florida, and
it's been challenged and as far
as we know, and and the way we
presented it is that we don't
target, we, we don't target or
criminalize homelessness. Um, I
even made the joke that if the
fire chief has his firemen on
the median trying to get money
in those rubber boots. I'm gonna
take them to jail. Um, I was
sued personally by this.
Our local newspaper because in
Espanola they sold the sun and
the medians, um, we took them
off, so we weren't targeting,
but you know what it was all
about safety, it's presentation
and what I've learned now and
being a chief is that.
If you present and you make it
all encompassing and we're all
in it together. There's always
going to be one or two people
that don't like it, and that's
fine. That's what social media
is for, but for the most part,
our community sees the
positiveness. I mean, I don't
have social media. I don't want
it because I'm sure, you know,
I'm, I'm, I'm me me my that
that's a word, right? Because
here in Espanola, we get used to
that. That's just part of who we
are, but I think it's how we,
and I don't want to use the word
sell like I said, that's not a
good word. how we present it.
We're all in it together.
but it has been, we have
arrested people. There's a
gentleman in front of
Dandyberger that they used to
call the 50 set man because
that's all he would ask for 50
cents, and he'd get probably he
was he was a regular and he made
a lot of money and I, I got to
know his first name, his last
name. I know his mom works at
Dandy Berger. let me interrupt
you, Chief, because the chair
over here is going to cut me off
in any minute and
and,
well, and this is a this is a
rule I created for many years.
I'm dying by the sword that I
that I live by, which is to put
time limits, but, um, I, I did.
You did answer my question. You
are making some arrests under
the existing words you're able
to do this with your existing
law, right? And your existing
ordinance. You're able to take
care of your problem, right? Uh,
with leadership and and with
effort, right? Um, and, and, uh,
just one last thing, Chief, you
know, you've talked a lot about
um, I, I really want to spend
more time talking to you because
you came out of APD Albuquerque,
Bern lived for 28 years, um, you
said that you're making arrests,
uh, for even smaller
infractions, jaywalking and
median and so on,
was that your experience in
Albuquerque?
Uh, coming from Albuquerque, um,
it was all about when I first
started back in the 90s, it
started with signature service.
That was before community
policing and and the way I look
at it is that our the fear of
crime is worse than actual crime
itself so if they see my
officers dealing with the
smaller stuff, it's almost like
the broken window theory. We're
taking care of the small quality
of life things, and I can tell
you the great thing about
Espanol in the Valley when we do
have violent crimes, the
community reaches out to us. We
are
Young man who lost a bike, it
was stolen $2500 within two days
we had people calling us in
telling us where it was and who
got so that's the thing about
small communities, if you build
that for lack of a better
camaraderie. Now the small
things, it's our job to do and
they see that and they
appreciate it. You hear a lot
about Walmart. I know I
Representative Borego talks
about what I go by and we'll
talk to those next door
neighbors and say we know you're
drug dealers. I have a
reputation this me I'll knock on
the door and say, I know you're
a drug dealer.
Let me, let me, let me interrupt
you, Chief, so my question
really is, uh, because I'll just
tell you, I'll brag a little
bit. I told you earlier when I
introduced myself I represent
communities include Sunland
Park, which is on the border of
Mexico. Uh, I represent the
community of Anthony, which is a
couple of miles from the border
of Mexico. We're we're rated the
safest cities in the, in the
state, uh, Anthony and Sunland
Park, El Paso is one of the
safest cities in the country,
uh, so the, the question for me
for you is, how, how is it
different that you're, you're
tackling every, you said the
broken window, uh, approach to
crime.
Right? How is that different
than your experience was at APD.
That APT APT we had a lot more
customized units as a commander
at APD when I was there, I had
probably 15-20 units assigned to
me to do different things uh
here one I have officers that
are multi-purpose. So we become
a lot better at what we do, um,
we do, if I had more people, I
could have a unit that would
just do dealing with with people
in the media. I think the
difference is like we why we're
here today is the availability
of the resources so that we can
and find those people. We would
love to have like Albuquerque
community service department, we
would love to have all those
differences. That's the biggest
difference is a lot more people,
uh, a lot more money, and here
we have to do with what we have
and I think that's the best
approach that we can take. Thank
you and thank you, Madam Chair.
One last thing's just it's not,
it's not a question.
I just want to emphasize
something you said, uh, Chief,
because we'll come back and I'm
sure, which as you said, we
don't go to court like we used
to. Um, and, and that's
something I think we need to
really
think and talk a lot about
because that's our observation
here is we don't go to court
like we used to. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, everyone. This is a
very interesting conversation
and I want to commend all of you
for your public service and
support for your community. um,
my, um, takeaway from this
conversation is we have plenty
of laws on the books.
But there seems to be um lack of
resources and facilities to then
follow through on some of the,
the, the people that you, you're
charging. Uh, it's clear to me
you intend to charge people. You
are charging people and then
there is a breakdown with not
even being able to jail them for
a long enough period of time and
then deal with the situation or
they're not being prosecuted
promptly and
As some of my colleagues
mentioned, Senator Cervantes
being one, it's sure swift
justice. That is what is a
primary deterrent crime, not
additional laws, not additional
penalties. I'd like to see the
laws that we have on the books
now being utilized and I'm, I'm
not directing these comments to
you as critical of what you're
doing, it's clear to me that all
of you are intend to and are
following up and enforcing the
laws in your community to the
fullest extent that you can.
But there is obviously a
breakdown as we move forward
with trying to prosecute and if
a person knows that 9 out of 10
times the charges will be
dropped or they will not be
pursued. That is not a
deterrence. That in and of
itself is encouragement to
individuals to continue to do
what they're doing and we need
to be thinking in those terms.
We need to be talking about ways
to address those issues. So
thank you very much. It's clear
to me, Chiefs, that you're
dedicated to your local
communities and
You're working well together,
so, um, that's great to hear and
keep it up and look forward to
talking with you again and you
can always reach out to any of
us on this committee with
suggestions or ways to move
forward to improve your lives
and work, um, yes, Chief.
Sure. uh, thanks, Madam Chair. I
just, I know I speak for us up
here we we thank all of you for
spending the time to come down
here and it was nice to have you
actually down here in our lovely
area to be able to meet with you
folks and and discuss some of
this and put it out there. It
means a lot to us. I know it
does, um, there's no, there's no
magic, uh, crystal ball for any
of us, you know, we know that,
but, but again, the partnerships
and what we're trying to do, I
really hate saying that we're
doing what we have, but I'm, I'm
over it of us.
Do more with less. So this,
this, this area for us, we, we
gotta fix that so but we do
appreciate you guys. Thank you
so much for allowing us this
opportunity. Thank you, thank
you, Sheriff, and thank you,
Chiefs. Very much appreciate
your participating in this
Hi, Dylan.
Um, we're running a little
behind, so if we could try to
maybe allocate about half an
hour to this if that's OK with
you and so maybe your remarks if
you spend about 15 or 20 minutes
and then um we'll ask you,
they'll probably be questions
and I'm gonna ask you to say
your last name for me and
introduce yourself in in terms
of who you are, um, because I
might mangle your last name and
I don't want to do that. That's
understandable, yeah.
Um,
Thank you.
Um, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, my name is Dylan
Schweigel. I am here as one of 3
representatives for Allianza
Tenant Union based out of Los
Lomos apartments here in
Espanola.
Um,
So the story of, of our tenant
union of Alianza begins around
this time last year, uh,
specifically on August 22nd of
last year. Uh, on August 22nd of
last year, uh, when the current
property manager, uh, Ms. Mary
Lewis took charge of the
property. Uh, she announced her
arrival with the mass serving of
notices for nonpayment of rent
and non-compliance to about half
of the apartments. Um, the
claims and amounts were highly
suspicious. hundreds and for
some even thousands of dollars.
They had previously not been
notified of charges for
utilities on months that were
already paid with dollar amounts
3 times higher than we had paid
before and not justified by our
utility usage. Um, Section 8
voucher holders were falsely
told that their subsidy checks
had come in late.
that months of late fees had
been applied despite the fact
that these were not reported to
them, nor their case managers at
the housing authority, despite
that being a requirement of the
program.
Other residents were given a
series of lies and excuses,
particularly around the issues
of um uh the utilities
themselves, um, these excuses
ranged from speculating that,
well, perhaps you're just using
3 times more water than you were
last month or um telling people
that, uh, oh well, you must have
been undercharged in those
months that you had already
previously paid. Um, when these
excuses and explanations were
not sufficient for us, and
people began to ask, I want to
see documentation of my utility.
usage, which is my right
according to the law, or simply
asking questions about what
appeared to be some very shoddy
bookkeeping in terms of people's
account balances, um.
And also just plainly asking
that these, uh, uh, amounts be
removed from their account
balance. Um, we were all given
an ultimatum. Many of us who
challenged it, you either pay
this amount in 3 days or we're
going to evict you.
Now, many of us did not take
these threats, uh, lying down.
Instead, many of us went outside
and spoke to our neighbors, and
after some time of speaking to
one another, of crossing notes,
of knocking on doors to speak
about this current situation,
what emerged was, uh, uh,
Certain frustrations,
grievances, suspicions that had
been harbored for years since,
uh, the company that owns the
property since 2021, Cornerstone
Residential, which is based out
of Utah, um, acquired the
property back in 2021. Um, the
gist of, of these concerns being
that since Cornerstone
Residential acquired the
property in 2021. Uh, we have
seen our rent rate increase by
over 50%.
In addition to fines, fees, pet
rent, and obviously utility
charges which are paid directly
to the property. All of these
have increased significantly in
the past 4 years. At the same
time, there is an observable
drop in the quality and
conditions of Los Lomos
apartments. Um, the conditions
of units were in serious
disrepair, uh, people had
reported concerns about mold,
poor ventilation, uh,
furnishings and disrepair.
Care, um, issues with AC and
heating units, etc. um.
Maintenance requests were being
ignored. Maintenance requests
are being marked as completed
when they in fact were not. Um,
maintenance men were coming and
trying to repair broken
appliances with old recycled
parts and or just in general,
not repairing, uh, requests
sufficiently.
At the same time as you looked
outside, the conditions of the
grounds were not being kept up
with weeds and grass growing up,
um, the perimeter of the
property in poor disrepair
issues around security, etc. um,
at the same time, amenities that
were advertised and listed in
the lease by the company such as
a pool, uh, a laundry room, a
gym where in fact not available.
The, the pool had been closed
for 4 years. The laundry room
had been closed for a year. The
gym sporadically opened, but
People would find that the
equipment in there was not in
working condition. So obviously,
people began to ask, where's all
the money going to? Why are we
paying so much more and getting
so much less. Um, rumors had
been circulating for some time
about potential fraud happening
out of the front office, um,
there had been, uh, we don't
know for certain what is true
and what isn't true. We've
received a lot of conflicting
statements from longtime
residents, former and current
employees of the company, um,
but it appears
According to what people are
saying that rent checks have
gone missing from the deposit
box, um,
There's been a history of
potential embezzlement out of
the front office. But
ultimately, this did not explain
the significant gap in terms of
what we were paying for compared
to what we are actually
receiving.
It was at this point that we
began to look at the bigger
picture of this.
Cornerstone residential as a
company makes its living off of
acquiring affordable housing
units in various states and
flipping them.
Uh.
The way that they begin doing
this is like other companies
that have done this in the state
is to acquire affordable housing
and maximize profit, uh, through
the rent share, uh, wherever
possible, while decreasing the
overhead costs as much as
possible, hence why there was a
serious lack of maintenance on
the property because as we've
learned, um, not just from
inference but from statements
made by current maintenance men
as well as uh former employees
that when Cornerstone
Residential acquired this
property, they completely
defunded.
The maintenance budget entirely.
Um,
The arrival of Ms. Mary Louise,
this new property manager, uh,
signaled to us the next phase of
the company's redevelopment
plan, which was and is the
gentrification of Los Lomos
apartments, beginning with the
phasing out of the poorest
members of the community,
primarily Section 8 voucher
holders, people who have at any
point relied on rental
assistance to pay for rent, um,
people who are on fixed incomes,
which are disproportionately the
elderly members of the
community.
And recognizing that this was on
the horizon and recognizing what
had been done to us, we
understood that we had to
organize as neighbors to fend
this off.
So
Uh, Alianza formed on October
29th of last year to combat the
neglect, the abuse,
exploitation, and gentrification
of Los Lomos by the company.
Furthermore, to bring the
company to justice for its
treatment and taking advantage
uh of current and former
residents. Uh, now that battle
between us and the company has
been intense and costly to the
mental, financial, and housing
stability of our members, uh,
immediately upon our formation,
we have received uh uh.
Various forms of retaliation.
This include harassment,
stalking, assault, punitive
notices of noncompliance, lease
non-renewals, lease
terminations, and evictions.
Uh, by the property manager and
her associates, uh, on the
property, the maintenance men
and one of the maintenance men's
wives, uh, who lived there on
the property.
Not only have their intentions
been clear by their actions, but
they have not hidden it either.
The property manager has stated,
uh, several times openly that
she is seeking to get rid of
every union member from the
apartments.
Um,
Initially, they retaliated in
the form of evictions, uh, the
very next day after the union
was formed, uh, I received
notice that I was going to court
for an eviction. Um,
That it was on the premise that
I had not paid my rent when in
fact I was uh withholding the
utility portion of my rent, um,
because they had failed to give
me documentation of my usage,
which I'm entitled to under the
law. That first case was
dismissed.
Later on, we went to a 2nd
hearing that did not go my way,
and that decision is currently
pending appeal.
Um, another glaring, uh,
incident in which uh members
were retaliated against in the
form of an eviction. A member
family who has relied on Section
8 to live at the apartments for
over a decade, uh, admitted to
the property manager that they
are members of the union. A week
later they received a notice of
nonpayment of rent and an
immediate, uh, suit for
eviction, um, claiming that they
owed $2000 in unpaid rent.
Fortunately, this family kept
very good receipts so they could
prove that this amount was
fabricated. And fortunately,
with some assistance from the
union, we were able to secure
them some legal representation.
That case was dismissed as well.
However, that did not protect
them from what the company did
next, which is after they no
longer had that representation
and did not have the means of
going on the offensive for the
damages done to them. The
company proceeded to terminate
their lease.
This was a noticeable shift in
their strategy to deal with us
was to rather than try to evict
us directly, they would start
handing out lease terminations,
sometimes in the middle of, uh,
uh, a term, uh, usually based on
frivolous claims about lease
violations, um, or at the end of
the term when it came time for
people to renew. Um, they were
relying on the fact that many
residents are not knowledgeable
of their rights under the law
and are not aware that a lease
termination does not mean
eviction. So many people out of
fear that they are going to
court left the property. While
some did choose to stay and
fight it in court. Um, a notable
incident of such a case involves
one of our members who had her
lease terminated in the middle
of the term off of the frivolous
claim that she was smoking
marijuana on the property,
smoking marijuana in her home
and she plainly had marijuana in
her household. This was notable
because this has never been
enforced.
As a rule until this point, this
comes up nowhere in the lease
agreement, but it is a common
tool that the company has used
to justify terminating a
person's lease. Um, she and her
family chose not to leave. They
dared them to take them to court
because of the frivolous nature
of their accusations. They did
not take them to court. Rather,
what happened.
Is the company engaged in a
prolonged campaign to bully,
harass, spy on and price gouge
this woman and her family. As
soon as, as soon as they said
that they were not going to be
leaving when the lease
terminated. Maintenance men
arrived at their door.
Claiming that they were there to
fix a plumbing problem that had
been reported a year ago.
It was very obvious that they
were not there to fix the sink
because they began taking out
their phones and started taking
pictures of the person's
apartment, taking pictures of
the dogs that were in there and
one of these maintenance men
later
Admitted that they were also,
they were also looking for
marijuana that was left out and
open for them to take pictures
of. We know for a fact because
of another member's case that
they, their intention was to use
any pictures of marijuana laying
out, um, to justify taking them
to court for a lease violation.
Um,
We met the later on, uh, they,
this family received about $2000
in uh pet fees, pet deposits,
pet rent, uh, anything, any
charges that can be applied to
pets in the home.
Um, fortunately through some
resources through the union we
were able to get them to help
them pay that off. That
unfortunately has not stopped
the pro the staff there from
continuously spying on,
harassing, making regular
accusations of lease violations
against his family and whenever
other family members have come
to the property to visit them,
the staff are always quick to
make them feel unsafe and
unwelcome on the property.
Property manager and her
associates have also endeavored
to silence, uh, our members and
to prevent us from doing union
activities on the property, most
notably in the case of our other
representative, Monica Mendez.
Monica Mendez, um, first came on
their radar when she was a cited
in a New Mexican article
alongside her daughter where
they just they talked about
their frustrations with the
conditions of the units, and
they talked about the
frustrations around Monica's
daughter's, uh, eviction
procedure.
When that process was completed
and it was time for Monica's.
In order to leave
Um, she was treated very
vindictively by the property
manager who went so far as to on
the day that she was moving out
officially, bring her down to
the main office where she gave
her a trespassing notice. This
is something that does not
happen unless someone is being
evicted for a criminal offense
on the property.
When Monica's daughter explained
that this cannot, this, this
can't happen because she is in
fact a home health care aide for
her mother. The property manager
told her, well, I guess she's
just gonna have to find somebody
else.
Not too long after that, Monica
received a notice of
noncompliance, um, for
soliciting. In this case,
soliciting being defined as her
activities going to people's
doors to speak with a union
members about union activities
and also attempting to recruit
other neighbors into the union.
Um, since then, this property
manager has continuously
interrogated people and tried to
gather uh or build a case to
have Monica's lease terminated
or
Have her evicted based on this
least violation of soliciting on
the property. And I will let you
know now that, uh, earlier this
month, Monica's lease was
terminated, um, or set to be
terminated by the end of this
month. Um,
She is entitled to an
explanation of that. We have not
been given an explanation as to
why it's going to be terminated.
Um,
Other, there's been similar
incidents around this, such as a
rally that the union held on the
property back in February. As
soon as the rally
began, the property manager and
her allies called the police on
us, falsely claiming that we
were soliciting, that we were
being rambunctious, belligerent,
a disturbance to the peace, etc.
Um, an officer arrived, spoke
with us, and then promptly left.
Thankfully, um, that did not,
however, stop the other side
from continuing their antics,
um, they were harassing and
heckling us, uh, throughout, um,
intimidating some of the
attendees and trying to
intimidate other residents that
had come out.
To either join or observe the
rally, um, compelling them to go
back inside. Um, later on in
that same rally, as we had
passed by the apartment of, um,
one of the maintenance men and
their wife, uh, we found that
their family was outside, not
only hurling profanity at our
group but also hurling rocks at
us.
Um, now, since then,
This fight has gotten only
uglier. It has gotten worse. Um,
the treatment of people on the
property has gotten
significantly worse. Uh, we
believe firmly as a consequence
of the fact that there have been
zero repercussions for this
company or its employees or
their associates' behavior.
Over the course of this last
year, the union has compiled
substantial evidence,
documented, undocumented through
witness accounts of numerous
violations of federal and state
housing law, Federal laws, uh,
around discrimination and their
handling of uh Section 8 voucher
holders, which are
disproportionately in our case,
elderly, mentally ill, and
single mothers.
We have had specific incidents
in which there was a very direct
form of discrimination against
these people.
There have also been violations
of federal protections for
people who are, uh, exercising
their rights according to HUD
and as well as people who assist
other residents and exercising
their rights according to HUD.
Um,
Some of these, uh, violations of
New Mexico uniform owner
resident Relations Act that we
have found includes sections
such as 47-8-11 obligation of
good faith. It should be evident
based on what I've described in
terms of the way that they
handle their dealings with their
residents that they are not,
that this company is not acting
in good faith.
Um, section 47-8-12 an equitable
agreement provision. We are
arguing that since this property
manager had taken over, she is
weaponized a specific clause in
the lease that, um, wherein the
company does not accept rental
payments from a third party.
Um, and they have chosen to
define a third party as
including rental assistance
programs.
The consequence of this has been
that when people fall behind on
their rent, even if they have
made a good faith attempt to pay
in full, utilizing rental
assistance money that is valid.
The company will refuse to
accept it and then proceed with
an eviction anyway, where these
people will become even more
financially indebted to the
company. This will have a
significant impact on their
credit score and their ability
to secure housing after the
fact.
Um, they've also violated
Section 47-8-20 of the uniform
owner resident Relations Act,
uh, obligations of the owner.
The sheer fact that they have
defunded the maintenance budget
for the property is in itself a
violation of this statute, which
requires all landlords to
provide for the maintenance and
upkeep of their property. Also
under this statute, um, rules
around, uh, a landlord's
obligations to provide
documentation of people's
utility usage as well. They have
never complied.
With anybody's request to see
documentation of their utility
usage.
Um, section 47-8-36 diminution
of services prohibited. We don't
know in every instance whether
it's out of spite or malice or
just sheer laziness, um, in
certain cases, it does appear to
be an act of retaliation against
people, um, but the staff have
often refused to, uh, perform or
provide services that they are
required to under the lease
contract or under state law. Um,
this is the most notable example
of this being that when member,
when people have their leases.
Terminated, they will be locked
out of the tenant portal where,
which is where they can access
their rental account history,
their current account balance,
as well as, uh, putting in
requests for maintenance.
Um, most notably in our case,
In Section 47-8-39, owner
retaliation prohibited, which
clearly outlines that a landlord
in the state cannot retaliate
against a resident who exercises
the following rights under this
statute, the right to abate
rent.
In accordance with the law, the
right to, uh, file a report or
complaint to any relevant
authority as to violations of
housing law or, uh, any consumer
advocacy group or anything like
that. Um, people who residents
who have prevailed in a lawsuit
against with the company such as
an eviction case or people who
have spoken on their behalf
during such a suit. And most
importantly for the union's, uh,
case, uh, the law prohibits any
of retaliation against anybody
who organizes, joins or forms a
what the law describes as a
tenant association.
We have
Raise the alarm and filed many
complaints reached out to many
people, every authority that we
could possibly reach out to in
the state, the Attorney
General's office, um, the local
housing authority, the police,
the, uh, to HUD, um, we've even
gone to the real estate
licensing board for the state.
We have, um, raised the alarm
with, uh, all of our local
officials as well. And we've
received a lot of sympathy.
For our plight, but what has
become very obvious to us over
the course of this year is that
though these laws exist on the
books, there's 0.
Mechanisms or struck
infrastructure to actually
enforce them whatsoever.
Um, there's also
Very little to none, uh, in
terms of case law that sets any
kind of precedent for this
experience that we're going
through right now.
Um,
We have cited many of these
laws, um, in magistrate court
during certain eviction
hearings. Um, we have cited
these in counterclaims. We have,
uh, spelled it out as clearly as
we can every single time those
counterclaims have been ignored
by the magistrate judges.
The consequence of these things
is, is that
The system is enabling this
company to continue its abusive
treatment of its residents, uh,
to continue, uh, just
increasingly and worsening acts
of, uh, authoritarianism on the
property of maltreatment of
people, uh, etc.
Because of this, multiple dozens
of families have since left the
apartment complex in the last
year alone.
Um, these are disproportionately
union members. These are
disproportionately voucher
holders and people who rely on
rental assistance or on fixed
incomes. And for those who have
not been forced out, many have
fled the property out of concern
for the worsening conditions in
the units, um, or have simply
fled out of fear.
Because nothing has been done,
because the other side has not
faced any consequences
whatsoever. They have been
emboldened to get worse and
worse. Many of our members who
are still on the property have
reported that there is an
intense fear, there's an intense
atmosphere of fear and
intimidation and oppression and
tyranny and constant
surveillance. People are afraid
to go home. People are afraid to
walk outside their door. They
are afraid to interact with the
property manager or any of her
allies for fear that
negative interaction will
jeopardize their housing
security.
Um, I'm going to close now with,
um, uh, a more prepared
statement.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, a few years ago, our
community was rocked by scandal
as the out of state landlord
company which owns Santa Clara
and Vista del Rio Apartments was
profiting for years while
utterly neglecting the
properties. When those
properties were shut down fully
or partially, hundreds of people
were cast out onto the street
overnight.
Some of them remain homeless to
this day.
A similar practice has been
unfolding at Los Lomos
Apartments, but the only
difference being that the
intention is not to shut it
down, but to displace existing
residents, many of whom have
lived here in Espanola their
entire lives and have gone back
generations in this place.
Um,
So their goal is to displace
these residents so that so that
they might upscale to cater to
higher paying tenants. Needless
to say, this practice has
destroyed people's lives and
left many homeless as well.
Meanwhile, those who are duty
bound to protect and serve the
people are standing idly by, but
as their constituents are
robbed, displaced, and
immiserated by out of state
capital.
The recent ban on public
camping, the breakup of the
sanction camp, the falsehoods
perpetuated about the root
causes of homelessness and the
origin of people on the street,
which is overwhelmingly right
here in the valley.
Paints a very dark picture of
what is in store for the people
of Espanola.
The failure of our leaders to
provide for the people and
enforce the laws that pertains
to the behavior of landlords,
has created a reality in which
the poorest and most vulnerable
members of our community must
accept that the rights and
protections they are entitled to
as citizens can be disregarded
at best and at worst sold to
real estate developers. They
must submit to an exploitative
process in which they cannot
even act freely in the market to
choose their housing, but rather
are subjects of a landlord whose
greed ensnares them physically,
mentally and financially. And
should they fail to maintain
Expectations or their use as a
profit generator is over in this
oppressive relationship,
regardless of the reasons why.
They will be discarded.
An increasingly likely to end up
on the street.
Then the same government which
has failed us by allowing the
situation in the first place
we'll move quickly and with full
authority to relegate a person
from citizen to peasant to
persona non grata.
We, the members of Alianza are
calling for a reversal.
Enforce the rights of tenants
according to the uniform
owner-resident Relations Act
uh, expand upon those rights
with a new tenant bill of
rights.
Outlaw discrimination based on
source of income in the state
and repeal the prohibition on
rent control.
Hold landlords and large
companies that come to our home,
accountable for the instability
and destruction they've heaped
on our communities.
We are calling also on the
Attorney General to join the
growing list of states and the
DOJ's lawsuit against the price
fixing software real page, which
we have recently discovered is
being used by Cornerstone
Residential at Las Lomas.
The people of Espanola who have
struggled and been neglected for
generations deserve better. They
deserve to live in their land
with dignity.
They deserve to live in their
land with respect.
The situation is simply
intolerable.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee,
Be forewarned, the espanola is
only the canary in the coal mine
for the entire state of New
Mexico.
Thank you.
Thank you, thank you, Dylan. Um,
please, no, we, we try not to do
that in these meetings, so
please, um, questions, comments?
Oh, Senator Cedil Lopez and then
Represent Borega and then
Senator, I mean, representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair. This is
a horrifying story, and I think
you're absolutely right that
it's a canary in the coal mine.
We've seen some of that in
Albuquerque where these out of
state people come in and I've
represented some individuals,
uh, pro bono, um, who have that
happen, um, who've had that.
This kind of thing happened, um,
where they want to get rid of
them.
For reasons unrelated to
nonpayment, or they try to gouge
them, um.
My, my question is,
it was very disheartening to
hear you say that there's not
even the infrastructure to
enforce existing owner resident
relations laws. And we've been
trying, I know a group of people
have been trying to strengthen
owner residence relations laws,
and that's frustrating if the
existing one isn't even
enforced.
Um, what are your, have you
looked at what we're, what the
proposals have been to
Strengthen the existing laws and
Are they adequate? What are your
suggestions? Because I, I think
we do need to focus on this,
these out of state people who'd
really just want to use them to
generate income, and then they
sell them. What happens? It's
really frustrating is they
generate a lot of income and
then they sell them.
Um, so it's not even, they don't
even have a commitment to of
their capital in the area. So
what are your ideas? Well, thank
you, Senator, um, Madam Chair,
uh, Senator, uh, Lopez, um, I'm
not too familiar with, uh.
Certain initiatives to uh.
Uh, I guess, strengthen the
enforcement of these laws. I am
familiar with a growing
initiatives around, um, banning
source of income discrimination
here in the state of New Mexico,
I know that uh legislation was
recently passed there, uh, in
Santa Fe, um, that I think that
that is uh in a very important
blind spot here because uh
source of income discrimination
overlaps so often with already
established forms of
discrimination, according to
federal law. Um, in our case,
Um, the, the victims of this
kind of price gouging and
displacement are overwhelmingly
those people, um, so I would, I
would propose that as sort of
something that has not been
brought up as far as I'm aware
of, um, in terms of, uh, the
existing laws as they're cited,
um,
Early on, we were instructed by
legal aid to report um this
issue to the Attorney General's
office, specifically the
consumer, uh, advocacy
department, um, even on the
website for the consumer
advocacy department, it does say
that they, um, they deal with
this sort of situation, um, but
what we ended up finding out
after we had submitted those
reports is that they in fact
don't.
Um, oversee or enforce um these
specific laws that we're citing.
Um, we've also found that when
we have cited these laws as
clearly and meticulously as we
can during, um, magistrate
hearings over things like
evictions, um, it's, uh.
It appears that the magistrate
judges are not familiar with
what we're talking about.
Um, I'll be honest.
So perhaps judicial training of
the magistrates on the, on this
might be.
Um, might be something.
Yeah, absolutely. OK, well, I
encourage you to, um, work with
the groups that are, um,
proposing strengthening, and
I'll I'll share with you my
piece. My piece is to protect
victims of domestic violence and
sexual assault, um, in these, in
these, um, facilities so that
they could get out of their
lease without consequence. And
the local, the local
organizations are in support of
that because they say they want
to be able to do.
but they don't really have the
authority to change leases and,
and do that. So that's, that's
how I got involved with that
little, that smaller piece and I
held back because the groups
wanted to overhaul the whole
thing instead of just make this
small piece, um, but I, I love
the idea of the source of income
discrimination. That seems, um,
in a state like New Mexico, we
should not have that.
And I encourage you to keep,
keep, uh, your involvement.
You're absolutely right.
This is a canary in the coal
mine, and I think why it's
gotten so, um, so far in
espanola is they're counting on
not having the infrastructure
here to, uh,
To stop them.
And, um, I, I don't know, like I
said, I've done some pro bono
work on this, and it's, it's
really interesting. I've ended
up settling.
And not taking it to court, so
I'm not so sure about, about the
infrastructure failure, but I
think what happens is when an
attorney shows up, they just
want it to go away. That's what
my experience was. And so we
ended up settling just having
people walk away.
Um, but that's not satisfactory
for people who really, really
want to stay. Um, my clients
both just wanted to get the heck
out of there. They were sick of
it.
Um, so I encourage you, I'd be
happy to talk with you later and
source of income discrimination
seems like the least we can do
from a legislative standpoint,
the infrastructure. I'm
disappointed to hear that the
Attorney General's office is not
working on this. This is a major
problem. I will certainly, uh,
Raise that with them and wonder,
you know, see why they're not
doing it. It seems very
important. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you so much.
Representative Brego, then
Representative Chasey and then
Senator Lopez, um, thank you,
Madam Chair.
Young man, Dylan Schweigel.
Schweigel Schweigle, um,
thank you for the work that
you're doing.
Um, have you guys filed EEOC
because I didn't hear that in
your presentation, uh,
complaints.
I'm familiar with that, um,
yeah, it's a, it's a process and
I think you file it through the
through the state, and it's also
goes to a federal level, but um
it sounds to me.
Me, like there's some real civil
rights violations, and I'm not,
I'm not a lawyer, but I just, I
used to sit on the regional EEOC
board, and, um,
You know, it, it seems to me
like it rises to that level. Um,
and I, I think, um, that would
be something that you may want
to look at, but I just wanted to
thank you publicly for the work
that you're doing. Can you
pinpoint to me where Las Lomas
apartments are exactly,
so Riverside Drive here, um,
there's an intersection, I
believe it's um.
Riverside and.
County Road, um.
Thank you, reenter. I'm not sure
that EEOC is quite the right,
um, way to go that generally
employment, but, you know, it's
always.
Yeah, sure. OK. Representative
Chasey and then, um, Senator
Lopez and then Senator Wirth.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you for your thorough, uh,
presentation on these issues and
it's very alarming. Um, and I
think you may be right about the
coal mine. Uh, I, I had
constituents I spoke with,
especially toward the end of the
pandemic who were,
um, actually retired from, uh,
professions that, um,
You would think they would be
able to afford rent, but they
were living in subsidized
housing, and when there's a
subsidized housing situation,
the, um, what was being
described to me is that the
landlord started neglecting uh
his or her responsibilities and
basically request to like fix
the plumbing or fix the air
conditioning or fix the, um, the
furnace in the, in the winter
time.
Or just ignored. And there
seemed to be no recourse, um,
So I think that, um, perhaps.
You might rather than, um,
We might want to look at the
Human Rights Act is a suggestion
that, uh, uh, mine's chief of
staff just made rather than
equal employment opportunity,
but, uh, see if there's, if
there's something there. But I'm
not saying that this should all
be on your shoulders. I think we
ought to be listening to this
and and looking to see what kind
of fair housing legislation may
need to occur. Thank you very
much, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative Senator Lopez.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for your presentation. It
hits home to use the word,
right, for, for many of us and
uh Madam Chair, these are issues
that are, that exist in
different pockets in Albuquerque
and um.
There are some groups, uh,
there's a people's housing
coalition in Albuquerque that is
doing some work, um, advocacy
with regards to those who are
unhoused and how the push goes
for what you have just explained
to us. Um, I do remember Senator
Jaramillo bringing that to our
attention, Madam Chair, during a
session and it was just, uh, to
listen to what has taken and
continues to happen.
Um, Madam Chair, there was also
a convening that Congresswoman.
Stansbury had um in Albuquerque,
maybe not even a month ago that
I was privy to sit down with as
we talk about the issues on how
people are pushed out, um, which
creates such a bigger problem
for many, many reasons, um, so I
know that at the congressional
level, there's some eyes on it,
but I think, Madam Chair, this
is not just a one-stop type of
resolution that we can look at.
It does go back to what was
mentioned.
We talk about violations I call
human rights, um, because that's
also part of what I call Madam
Chair Maslow's hierarchy, you
can't have that bottom rung
taken care of, which is to me a
human right. You're never going
to be able to advance in
anything, um, but the, uh,
There's, there's also the
governor's office does have a
person that, um, we can, I'll
give you the name if you're not
aware of, of a person who's
coordinating coordinating issues
with regards to persons who are
unhoused and all the issues that
lead up to it. So when we
finish, I'll make sure I get you
in contact because I think this
is, Madam Chair, something that,
um, they also need to put on
their list of to do.
And review and see what else,
um, to garner more support.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator.
Thank you. Thank you, Senator.
Senator Worth.
Uh, just a comment, Madam Chair,
I think, um, I found online the
New York Attorney General just
last month announced a huge
resolution where they
investigation under the human
rights statute in New York, uh,
for something similar, um, a
housing unit that basically was
refusing to rent to New Yorkers
with housing vouchers,
intentionally ignoring potential
tenants who disclose voucher
status aren't officially
inflating rents above voucher
thresholds, telling voucher.
Holders an apartment was rented
when it was still available.
Other discriminatory practices,
Madam Chair, I'm not a voting
member of this committee, but if
I was, I would make a motion
that this committee sent a
letter to the Attorney General
and ask him to.
Kind of use this example.
To send a message because I
think that's what needs to
happen if we don't do something,
this is going to continue and,
and perpetuate and it looks like
his colleague in New York or his
counterpart in New York has done
this successfully using human
rights laws and so I think it's
a good suggestion and again,
it's just something to throw out
there because it just, again, as
a lawyer who's practiced for
more than 30 years.
And I've done some landlord
tenant and as Senator Cia Lopez,
it's super frustrating to hear
the list of things that you are
going through which are clear
violations of the owner resident
Relations Act.
And yet you're not getting
recourse, and this is continuing
and it's just perpetuating. So
again, just some comments. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Madam Chair,
may I make that motion?
I just heard a motion to write a
letter to the Attorney General
pointing out that we believe he
may have authority through a
through a similar case, similar
to what New York is doing, and
we can ask staff to, to, um,
prepare such a letter and asked
that he look into it and and
proceed if
If he finds a sound basis to do
so.
OK, and we have a second, um,
from representative Alcon.
Why she kicked you under the
table.
Um,
is there any opposition to such
a letter? Opposition from um
Representative Martinez, anyone
else?
Motion passes, I believe, yes,
OK.
I'm sure
I did, I just make sure that
your point gets inserted in that
there's a sound base, you know,
I, I get it and you're right,
we, I know, and no disrespect to
you, but um, certainly they'll
be validating and I would expect
that our attorney General knows
that he only brings claims when
he has a sound basis to do so,
um, since we have an ethical
obligation to do that, as you
know, um, my dear colleague. So,
um,
I.
So
I, you know, just I want to
share with you the reason I
asked, um, uh, Dylan to come is,
you know, I've been following
this in our local papers, you
know, Los Alamos is a neighbor,
and so I do pay attention to
what's going down here and, you
know, my concern is we're all
concerned about homelessness, no
question about it, there's an
epidemic in Albuquerque. There's
obviously an issue here in other
parts of the state. And we when
we have this kind of, I mean,
you might call it predatory, you
know, if if in fact.
That's the case. We're pushing
people out. There aren't other
opportunities for affordable
housing, and what does that lead
to that has the potential for
exacerbating the homeless
problem. And, you know, and, and
the myriad of other issues that
we need to address, so I, I feel
it's important for people to
hear at least perspectives in
the local community where these
are challenges, so I want to
thank you for for joining us
here today, Dylan, and being
willing to share your story. Um,
and so let's conclude this
I'd like to break, we have
lunch. Um, my suggestion is we
take a few minutes to get our
lunch over here, come back,
we're going to hear about the,
um, homeless shelter that is in
Espanola from some individuals
who are running programs through
that. So thank you for joining
us and you're certainly welcome
to have lunch with us, Dylan and
others. So thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you. Thank you.
So let's take about 5 or 10
minutes and then we'll come,
we'll sit, sit here and.
En and listen.
