The health New Healthcare
Authority, I guess M arms, So
welcome to the committee. We've
got you for about an hour of
time so that there's enough time
for a committee questions. Would
you be watching the start time?
We're starting a little bit
late, but it's about 918. But if
you kind of make sure that you
allow us at least 30 minutes for
questions at the end and be
watching yourself on that, if,
uh, if it looks like we're gonna
run a little long, I'll ask you
to wrap up all right.
MA mio.
Um, good morning, Mr Chair and
members of the committee. Um,
uh, as you mentioned, my name is
Kerry Aijo. And I'm the cabinet
secretary of the Human Services
Department, which will become
the New Mexico Healthcare
Authority. And, uh, just about
four more days, Um and I'm here
to talk about the continuum of
behavioral health care here in
New Mexico this morning, So I
thank you for having me and be
and before I begin. I'd like to
thank the committee for
demonstrating its very sincere
and genuine interest in learning
about the behavioral health
system of
Here in our state, and I look
forward to today's discussion.
Uh and I should have mentioned
you have a slide deck in front
of you. I'm gonna try and go
through those pretty quick but
lots of material that I wanted
to talk through today. Um,
before I go through the agenda
for my presentation I'd like to
introduce, uh, the director of
the Behavioral Health Services
Division. Who's here with me
today? Nick Bs. I'm also here to
help answer questions that I may
not know the answers to, um And
as I mentioned, I'll be talking
today about the behavioral
Health Service continuum in New
Mexico. Um, I'll be starting by
talking briefly about where we
started from, uh,
Administration and why
rebuilding the behavioral health
network has been such a high
priority for both, Uh Governor
Lujan, Grisham and for the
agency. Uh, and then I'll talk
about the current state of
access to Beaver Health and the
need here in New Mexico and then
um, our future and where we're
headed.
Um, moving on to slide three.
I'm not gonna read through this
entire slide, but I did want to
take this opportunity to
introduce you to the mission
Vision and goals of the New
Mexico Healthcare Authority. Um,
the slide really represents our
North star and describes the
system of care that we envision
for our wonderful state. Um, we
are, uh, striving. Our mission
is to ensure that new Mexicans
attain their highest level of
health by providing whole person
cost effective.
Accessible and high quality
health care and safety Net
services. Um and our vision is
that every new Mexican will have
access to affordable health care
coverage through a coordinate
and seamless health care system.
We do have four main goals and
you can read those yourself. But
all of the work we're doing as
an agency is, uh, really
designed to advance those four
goals with new Mexicans at the
heart of everything we do.
Uh, moving on to slide. Four. I
don't actually often have the
chance to present, uh, at this
committee very often. Uh, but if
you've seen me present
elsewhere, then you know that I
always like to begin with a real
patient story that illustrates
the real life impact of the
programs and services of our
agency and why we do this work,
so I'd like you to meet Jenny
Jenny is a real HSD customer.
Um, although her name and image
have been changed to protect her
privacy, But this is her real.
With the behavioral healthcare
system here in New Mexico Very
recently, Uh, Jenny is a mom of
five Children. She's in an
abusive relationship with their
father that ended one night
after he shot her friend in
front of her, resulting in the
removal of her Children from her
home. Jenny's life spiraled out
of control. Her dependency on
alcohol increased in an attempt
to, um deal with her severe
trauma.
Jenny has not seen her Children
in over one year. Uh, but
knowing that she would do
anything to get her Children
back, Jenny sought help from a
local social services
organization, which then
referred her to recovery Center
for alcohol use. And I ask you
to remember Jenny as we talk
about this. I'm gonna come back
to the end of her story. Um, so
that you can hear the conclusion
of that and how those services
helped her at the end of this
presentation.
Moving on to slide five. So
there are basically four
components to the behavioral
health system or continuum of
care, all of which are are
substantial and have great
value. Uh, which we are focused
on building here in our state.
First you have prevention. Um,
that includes things like harm
reduction. We have, uh, multiple
programs, including P behavior,
good behavior games and yellow
ribbon suicide prevention that
are really aimed at elementary
school Children.
Schools across New Mexico trying
to teach, uh, Children self
regulation skills and teaching
communities about suicide
intervention and prevention. We
have early intervention, which
includes, uh, screening during
primary care visits to make sure
that people know, uh, providers
are really flagging Risk. Um,
we've got multiple types of
therapy, and then we're
providing a really have moved
and advanced a very robust
system of peer support for
families and youth. Um, I'd like
to say that my team is on the
ground.
In Roswell and Riodosa right
now, providing peer support to
those communities, Uh, for
families in crisis right now due
to the weather disasters, we
also have treatment. Um and
those are those involve a lot of
outpatient and inpatient
treatment. Um, options,
including and I wanted to point
out, um what it's called core
crisis services. Um, you can see
in the map on the right that New
Mexico is one of 12 states that,
um, covers the full suite of
recommended, uh, core crisis
service.
That includes a crisis hotline,
mobile crisis and crisis
stabilization, so all new
services that have been kind of
rolled out in the past couple of
years. Um up to very recently,
uh, getting approval for those
mobile crisis services, and then
we have recovery, and that in
involves again peer support
Wellness centers, Um, supportive
housing, uh, through the
Medicaid program and through
State General Fund, um,
medications for opioid use
disorder and, uh, medications to
treat alcohol use disorder, Um,
and then support such
Sober living.
OK, moving on to slide. Seven. I
think it's important to
understand where we started in
order to recognize the progress
we've made. Um, I think you all
are probably familiar with this.
But in 2013, New Mexico,
Medicaid froze payments to 15
behavioral health provider
agencies that resulted in their
abrupt closure and withdrawal
from the state of New Mexico.
Um, this really exacerbated an
already existing problem. Uh,
making, uh higher, wait times
more limited.
To the care. Um and really was,
uh, the genesis for this
governor, uh, in her
administration, really focusing
to build and rebuild and expand
a foundation of services, Uh,
for providers in behavioral
health, um and making sure that
we narrow as much as possible
the deficit in access to care
for behavioral health or new
Mexicans. Um, I also want to
recognize that there has been
substantial, very substantial
legislative support and
investment. Um, over the past
five.
Half years and as a new Mexican.
I want to thank you, uh, for
partnering with us on this
important important work since
2018. We've seen a 68% increase
in behavioral health visits. Um
uh so you can see there in the
graph on the right. Uh, the data
from 2022.
The Medicaid program is
currently covering 875,583
people. 26.2% of them are
currently receiving behavioral
health services, so that equates
to 229,000 individuals receiving
mental health care in the state
of New Mexico through the
Medicaid program.
On slide eight. I wanna make
sure you understand that the
investments that you've made um
and the policy efforts of the
agency are making a difference.
We've seen a 73% growth in core
behavioral health providers in
the network since 2019 and those
core behavioral health providers
include the Nonphysician
behavioral health Network of
psychologists, social workers,
um, licensed counselors, et
cetera. Um, I'm gonna talk a
little bit more about the growth
in psychiatrists as well.
On slide nine. I wanna sort of
emphasize that we achieved this
growth growth through a number
of strategies, but a big part of
our focus has been on building
that continuum of care and
adding services and fostering a
greater reimbursement culture.
Um so maybe making sure that
providers are really receiving
adequate reimbursement to
reinvest in the service of care
here in New Mexico, um, that has
included optimizing federal
funds through the Medicaid
program. And, for example, you
see the full list. Um
On the right there of all of the
expansions that we've taken
since 2019. But one example of
that optimization of federal
revenue is through the support
of housing program, which before
2019 was funded with General
fund and is now supported
through the Medicaid program
through our Medicaid waiver.
Um, we have seen, uh well,
thousands 2000% growth. Uh,
since 2020 treatment through the
adult accredited residential
treatment center, Uh, that was
option that was implemented in
FY 20. That trend is very
positive, and I want to point
highlight that trend in
particular. Given the pandemic
you don't see a dip there, uh or
sluggish growth. You really see
that exponential growth over the
course of multiple years and
that growth is continuing.
Um, in fiscal year 24. We've
added mobile crisis response and
stabilization services. Um,
multiple new community based
evidence based practices with
enhanced reimbursement and
training to providers to build
their capacity. We've added high
Fidelity wraparound Services for
Children medication and then
most recently, medication
assisted treatment at our public
health offices here in New
Mexico.
We've also invested significant,
uh, funding through Medicaid
rate increases starting in
fiscal year. 20. We moved our
rates, Uh, up to about 90% of
Medicare and fiscal year 20 that
was up from about 60% of
Medicare. So a pretty big
infusion to the behavioral
health system that I'm sure has
driven much of this growth in
fiscal year. 24. We increased
those rates to 100 and 20% of
Medicare and coming in calendar
year. 25. We're going up to 100
and 50% of Medicare for
behavioral health services.
Also gonna be implementing
provider reimbursement parity so
that mid level providers, um are
paid the same as a physician for
the same service. Uh, right now
they're paid a percentage. But
we'll be, um, increasing that
reimbursement to support that
mid-level provider Network. Um
and I also want to highlight
that those rate increases have
also applied to primary care,
which is in a very important,
um, entry system for our
behavioral health service
network as well.
Um, moving on to slide 11. I
wanted to give you some a sense
of the prevalence of serious
mental illness in New Mexico.
Um the prevalence of mental
illness is about 21% of new
Mexicans. That's about 338,000
people and our rank among states
is 32nd the prevalence of
substance use disorder about
7.7% That's about 100 and 22,000
New Mexicans in our among states
is 22nd. Those are, of course,
estimates.
Uh, uh, based on, um you know,
the data of the state we're not
the highest. We're not the
lowest. We are falling somewhere
in the middle, which is probably
not bad, uh, knowing that New
Mexico often falls at the
bottom.
Moving on to slide 12. I spoke a
minute ago about our growth in
the core Behavioral health
network. Um, but I also wanted
to talk about where we've seen
that growth here in New Mexico.
Um, one of our very top
priorities has been to improve
access to care where we need it
most, and that includes frontier
and rural parts of our state.
Um so you can see that, um,
we've seen 83% growth, uh, in
our core behavioral health
network in our frontier parts of
our state. Um 77.
Close to 77% growth in our rural
provider network in 70% growth
in our urban areas.
Uh, on slide. 13 just wanted to
kind of highlight that this
hasn't been growth simply just
in the core Behavioral health
network. We've really also seen
an influx of psychiatrists. Um
100 and 4% increase from
calendar year 2019 to Calendar
Year 23 on slide 14. We've also
seen, um, substantial growth in,
um behavioral, health,
outpatient and medication
assisted treatment capacity here
in New Mexico. 36% growth in
Um, the availability of mat,
which is medication assisted
treatment. Um, that includes for
both opioid use disorder and
alcohol use disorder so overall,
a very positive trend. Um, and
we've also increased the number
of outpatient primary care
clinicians serving individuals
behavioral with behavioral
health conditions and Medicaid.
Um, and again, I just want to
highlight that our primary care
providers are vitally important
part of behavioral health
network. Um and we are on track
on that note, uh, to
You have doubled the number of
residents here in New Mexico by
calendar year 25 through other
efforts, um, really designed to
rebuild the provider, the PC P
provider network here in New
Mexico.
On slide. 15 wanted to kind of
make sure you saw, uh some of
the work we're doing to measure
outcomes and service
utilization. There are just a
couple of measures on this
slide, but we have dozens more
measures. We have a performance
scorecard. That's uh, on our
website. Uh, the address if
you're curious is below, but we
track quite a few measures in
our performance. The the, um,
graph on the right or sorry. The
left, Uh, shows treatment for
alcohol and drug
Dependency. Um, what I want to
call out here is that our
performance has improved. Uh,
21% since 2019. Still probably
not where we want to see it
overall. So we're at about 51%
of individuals who need a
treatment receiving treatment
for alcohol or other drug
dependency. Um, we are
performing ahead of our region,
which is seeing about a 47%
treatment. Adherence rate. Um,
we also have a on
Right hand side follow up with a
behavioral health provider after
hospitalization again. An
aggregate increase since 2019
with our performance at about
55% of individuals receiving
that follow up care within 30
days, um, and our regional
average We are performing above
that. So it kind of gives you a
sense of how new Mexico
performs, Uh, compared to our
neighbor states. Um, I don't I
also think it shows you where we
have room to improve on slide.
16 I we wanted to provide
Information today. There's been
quite a bit of, um, commentary
made about wait times. Uh,
what's the real true access in
the system? Um, this is data
that we just recently pulled and
I'm gonna talk a little bit
later about what we're gonna do
to improve our tracking of wait
times and accessibility in the
new Medicaid program that
launches also on July. 1st. Um,
we currently have, uh, 12
locations for health homes. No,
wait times for those services
today.
Um, we have intensive outpatient
programs about 86 sites across
New Mexico, uh, with about up to
one week. Wait time at some
sites. Not all have a wait time,
But referrals are made between
the different IOP programs to
see if we can ensure access
immediately. Um, we have seven
sites that offer assertive
community treatment. Uh, no,
Wait times for those services
today, although, um, it does
take about a week to engage with
an individual and get them
connected to service.
Um, we have 10 locations
providing adult, um, residential
treatment and again, I talked
about that increase in
utilization. We have five of
those 10 providers have no wait
times and no wait list. Um,
those providers can enroll a
client in treatment within the
same day or at most up to 42
hours. 48 hours. Um, the
providers that do have a
waitlist report waiting periods
of of the highest that we heard
of was, uh, three weeks. Um, and
those
Times are primarily affecting
the detox, Uh, system and men's
residential beds. Uh so that
tells us a little bit more where
we need to invest access. Uh,
invest in access to care. Um and
then we have comprehensive
community support systems with
no wait times. We also track
inpatient to access through a a
system of care. Uh, system. Um,
IT system called open beds. Um,
and we have that number. I think
we're pulling that number so we
can give you the number of
inpatient beds available as of
today.
Um on slide 17 in terms of
improving access to care and
that ongoing investment I want
to thank you all for supporting
the governor's rural health care
delivery fund. Um, that was, uh,
initially approved in the 2023
House Bill two budget, and there
was a bill that corresponded to
that, Um, we awarded $80 million
that full appropriation has gone
out the door or is it fully
accounted for or obligated? Um,
for so that $80 million to
provide our organizations we're
funding.
54 projects across New Mexico
with 50 different provider
organizations, 30, so by and
large, the largest share was in
behavioral health. Um so 30
projects to expand behavioral
health in another 18 to expand
primary care. We are expanding
or creating services across
every eligible county in New
Mexico. 85% of those projects
have fully launched since the
funding was awarded at the end
of 2023. The total service
revenue that was generated has
Uh, so those services are
starting to become self
sufficient. Which is what you
wanna see when you invest that
kind of start up fund. So, um,
they've generated $1.5 million
in revenue so far for those
providers, and we do have
another 46 million in our FY 25
budget that will be going out
the door to providers, uh, very
soon.
Um And lastly, on slide, 18. I
wanted to talk just a little bit
about other efforts that we're
taking to support the behavioral
health workforce. Um, we've got
the Health Professional loan
repayment program. Uh, we do
have a a mental health block for
that about 26% of the repayments
made through that program, um,
have been awarded to mental
health professionals who have
made a three year service
commitment to practicing in an
underserved area in New Mexico
and the data do show that
there's high rates of re
Ongoing retention here in New
Mexico among those providers
that have received that debt or
loan forgiveness. Um you can see
it at 85% of behavioral health
providers have stayed beyond
that three year commitment here
in New Mexico, and then we're
also focusing on administrative
simplification. So most
behavioral health services at
this point exempt from prior
authorization or administrative
requirements attached, uh, that
might block access to care.
We've expanded training for peer
support workers to make sure
that we are building
That network, um, where we'll be
rolling out in our Medicaid
program? A single credentialing
process? Uh, credentialing is
being one of the big headaches
for our providers, Um, and we
will have a new provider
Enrollment system much more user
friendly that will roll out in
the fall.
OK, so a little bit more about
where we're headed, and, uh,
this is the last section, so
I'll try to keep it brief to
save time for your questions,
but just a reminder, um, that
the healthcare authority is
launching in just a few days.
Um, that transition really means
that we are going to including
current human services
Department. Uh, we include all
those divisions that we have
today. Uh, but we are also going
to be taking on the
developmental disability
supports division and the
division of Health Improvement.
From the Department of Health.
Um this purchasing of state
health benefits for state
employees, Uh and other public
employees through, um, from the
General Services Department, and
then the Healthcare
affordability fund from the
office of the Superintendent of
Insurance, um are agency will be
growing by about 500. More
employees. Uh, so we're prepared
for that transition, uh, really
excited to be at the finish line
of that lots of work has gone
into making sure that we're
prepared to stand up and the
most important thing for you to
know is that
Customer will receive. It will
experience a delay in any
benefit. Uh, issuance as a
result of that transition or
change. We also have the
Medicaid turquoise care program
that's launching on July. 1st.
Um, so another big transition
for the healthcare system
happening in just a few days.
Our current Medicaid program is
called Centennial Care. Uh,
we've rebranded that as
turquoise care, And there's a
lot of, um work, uh, done sort
of identi, uh, create the
identity of the program.
We're sending people, um,
information in turquoise
envelope, so they know it's from
us. Really trying to really
emphasize that turquoise care
concept. Um but our vision for
the new Medicaid program is that
every member will have high
quality, well, integrated person
centered care to achieve their
personally defined health and
wellness goals.
On slide 22. You can see some of
the new turquoise care benefits.
Uh, that some of them have
launched already are continuous
eligibility for Children zero to
age six, launched in January,
But some of these will be
launching with the the new
program in July. We are the ones
items with a star next to them
really do support the behavioral
health system. Um, we are
expanding, uh, service through
our supportive housing program,
expanding that capacity.
We're adding chiropractic
services. Um, which, um, also
support mental health and pain.
Management, Uh, say for
alternative for pain management
for a new Mexicans. We are going
to be expanding, Uh, programming
for home visiting for new moms.
Um, and we do know that maternal
mortality data indicate that
most maternal deaths occur
within the first year.
postpartum and most are related
to a behavioral, health or
substance use conditions. We
really think that intervention
and home visiting is very
important.
And we're really building out
some interventions to treat moms
who are most vulnerable during
that state. Um we at we have
added community health workers
as Medicaid providers. That was
a pretty heavy lift that just
rolled out. Um, I believe last
month um and then we are
increasing behavioral health
therapy, support and care
coordinations.
On slide 23. I just wanted to
call out uh, one initiative.
that's we're really excited
about. Um, we're gonna be really
in the first leading group of
states. Um, we expect federal
approval imminently any day now
on our Medicaid justice involved
reentry waiver. This is
something that the state has
been working on for years and we
are actually at the finish line,
So it's really excited. I think
we're about to get this, um,
literally momentarily. Uh, but
we are requesting
And will receive federal
approval to reinstate Medicaid
coverage for incarcerated
individuals, Um 30 to 90 days
prior to release um, that will
ensure that they have an
enhanced and seamless transition
out of incarceration, improved
access to services after release
and probably most important, the
co ordination of their
wraparound services prior to
their release, such as
transportation, food and
housing. I think it's really
hard to know what to do and how
to get your health care benefits
if you're hungry, or
We can't get where you need to
go. So we're really gonna be
wrapping around those supports
for folks who are transitioning
out of prison or jail. Two out
of three inmates do have a
substance use disorder and an
estimated 80% of individuals are
released from prison, um, that
are released from prison each
year have a substance use
disorder or a chronic medical or
psychiatric condition.
On slide. 24 just wanted to call
out a couple of the contract
improvements that we're making
in our turquoise care program,
Effective July 1st. I'm not
gonna read through this whole
slide, but I do wanna call out
the provider network changes in
particular because we are going
to be monitoring access to care
Very closely. Um, we are going
to be doing our own secret
shopper. Evaluations of patient
access. Um, and we have new
appointment availability
standards for behavioral health
in the contracts that require
behavioral health.
Within seven days of outreach,
uh, for folks who have indicated
the need follow up care within
seven days. Non urgent
outpatient care for behavioral
health within 30 days and crisis
service within 90 minutes.
Slide 25. We are headed toward,
uh, another exciting
implementation, which is the
implementation of, uh CCBH CS,
uh, that is coming in January of
2025 AC CBHC or a certified
community Behavioral health
clinic, Uh, provides a
comprehensive range of
outpatient mental health,
substance use disorder and
primary care screenings, all for
all ages, regardless of
diagnosis, regardless of
insurance, um, place of
residence or ability to pay so
It's gonna be a one stop shop
for folks who really need the
additional support. Um, in June,
uh, so. Just a few weeks ago,
New Mexico was announced as one
of 10 states that's included in
a national, um, CCBHC
demonstration project. Um, we
will be receiving 8.5%
additional in federal funding to
support uh, efforts for standing
up those CCBH CS and delivering
services, uh to new Mexicans,
and that implementation will
start in January.
Um, on slide 26. You can see
that we've already, uh, worked
with CYFD, uh to provisionally
certify 66 CCBHC, Uh, sites with
that will serve eight counties,
Uh, Bernalillo County, Eddy
County, Donny, Anna Santa Fe,
McKinley and Curry counties.
Um And then the last slide that
I have before I get back to our
patient story. Jenny, um, is
around the pathway to Medicaid
covered mobile crisis services.
Um, we're really excited about
building out this capacity and
and we are currently in the
process of certification of
those mobile crisis teams with
plan a planning for that
integration with the CCBHC is to
begin in January of 2025. So
before I wrap up, I'd like to
tell you what happened to Jenny.
Um and
She is a success story, and I
know not every story is, but
this is a really good
illustration of how the system
can work. Um, after seeking
help, Uh, Jenny entered a 30 day
residential treatment and detox
program in her community, she
continued on to a women's and
Children's 90 Day residential
treatment program in Santa Fe.
After exiting she, uh, moved to
a sober living program. And
while she was there she took
advantage of parenting classes
and domestic violence abuse
survivor classes.
Um, with the help help of
counseling, Jenny was able to
begin to rebuild the
relationship with her Children
and after completing treatment,
she returned home to her
community having secured
permanent housing, stable
employment, a lifetime
restraining order against her
abuser and most importantly,
reunification with her Children.
That Mister chair, I will stand
for questions.
Thank you for being succinct and
giving us time. Um, we're gonna
take up to 30 minutes now for,
uh, Committee C, and if we have
them
And I'm seeing show of hands
already, so
Uh, do hate and Cedillo Lopez.
I already had, Um,
representative Hon Ville and
representative Lou Han.
Chandler. All right.
Maybe.
ST
Um, I think I have her right.
Right given. We've got about
eight people who want to be
recognized. We have about 30
minutes, so I'm gonna recognize
each member for up to five
minutes. Most of you all were
here yesterday. But some of you
were not, uh, just so you know,
when I recognize you, I'm really
counting on you to take control
of the floor. At that point in
time. It's up to you to cut off
a question. Uh, if you if you
ask a five minute question,
you're gonna get your question
and that's about it. You have a
five minute statement, You'll
get that If you have a number of
questions, it's up to you
really, to ask the question
being answered, and then move on
to your next question.
So with that representative Hope
and the hill you've got five
minutes. It's 947.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Um, Secretary a mio for your
presentation. I will be as brief
and succinct as I can. Uh, Mr
Chair secretary. We've been
talking a lot over the last
couple of days about our need
and the state's need and
matching the need of those
services. Yet we're being
presented with information that
there are empty beds at some of
these facilities trying to drill
down on why that is. Can you
please opine?
Um, Mr Chair Representative. Can
I just clarify? Is your question
related to why there are empty
beds. Given the need that Mr
Chair, Madam Secretary? Yes. If
we have all this presentation,
these presentations that need is
increasing. Why are we also
getting information that there
are empty beds?
Um
Mr. Chair, Representative, I
think, um, we're talking about a
largely, you know, Voluntary
system of care in which the
people who need treatment don't
often seek it. We do have
capacity in the system to treat
more people. Um, As of this
morning, there are about 89 open
beds across New Mexico for
treating behavioral health. I
don't think it's necessarily
because there aren't efforts to
get folks to treatment. I think
it's um There's just additional
capacity and I think what we
wanted to do is
A little bit about what I have
heard, Um, is the counterpoint,
which is, uh, there's not enough
access to care. And I don't I
don't think the data show that
that's really the case. I think
we've really built a foundation.
Um, there are waiting lists in
some areas, but not long. Um,
and I do think there's
additional capacity to treat
folks. Uh, but it is a it is a
voluntary system of care, and
people can leave residential
treatment at any time. They're
not bound to that. And so, um,
that's really what we're talking
about. Is a system of care that
Additional capacity. But maybe,
um folks are not necessarily
compelled. We are waiting for
people in in large part to come
seek help, although we're
working with, uh through peer
support and other means to try
and get them, um, targeted to
the right door and point of
entry, But yeah, there is
additional capacity.
Thank you, Mr Chair and
Secretary Army. So are there.
Does your department have any
additional plans for
advertising of services? Or how
are we getting the word out to
folks who need this care?
Um, Mr Chair Representative
Ahmed V Hill. Yes. I mean, we're
absolutely working with folks.
We are boots on the ground. We
have peer support is one of the
most important things that we
can really offer because a lot
of people experiencing mental
illness do not trust the health
care system. And so we've really
built out, um, and trained peer
support workers to kind of try
to build that trust with
individuals. But I can tell you,
um, I received an email from a
mom. Probably, um, a couple
months.
Ago, basically asking for help
for her son. He's homeless. He
lives in his car. He has bipolar
disorder and schizophrenia will
not will not access the system.
We have tried lots of different
strategies, tried getting on
with the mom and the son, Um,
the care coordinator has tried
to build trust. Uh, peer support
has tried to build trust. Um,
but, you know, people
experiencing serious mental
illness. Um, they have some
skepticism about the system and
whether it work
And I think, um, so we're really
trying. And I think, um, you
know, it takes a suite of
strategies, uh, trying to get
people even to outpatient
treatment so they can start to
get some help. Um, is really
preferred to nothing. And so I
think we are in a system of
care, though. That doesn't
always work that way.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and thank
you. Um, I'm secretary for that
clarification That was really
helpful. One last question, um,
with regards to the expansion of
services and implementation of
those services. What is your
plan for staffing? Do you have
any concerns about staffing,
especially in the more rural
areas of the state?
Um, Mr Chair and representative.
Yeah. I mean, I think we're
always concerned about capacity
in the system. I would be lying
to you if I said it. I don't. I
think that there's just
automatically capacity when you
roll out, Um new services, and
that's why we're investing
heavily in the enhanced
reimbursement. Uh, we're really
trying to attract providers from
other states or make incentives
for providers to build that
capacity within their own
practice, So we've added that
additional reimbursement, Uh,
mechanism
Um, um, We also as I showed, um
have really increased capacity
in rural and frontier parts of
New Mexico. Um, I think I think
Provider capacity is always
gonna be a challenge. I don't
think it's ever going to be an
easy problem to solve. It
requires that full menu of
strategies. But when you put
energy, uh towards solving those
problems, it really does work.
And I think that's why you've
seen a doubling of the provider
network here in New Mexico.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and I will
speak with you offline. Madam
secretary about those specific
strategies. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, Representative Lujan.
You're next for five minutes.
You'll be followed by Senator de
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you. Uh, thank you, Uh,
Madam Secretary. I just first
want to start by saying thank
you for your service to New
Mexico and all that you've been
doing very diligently and
working with very
Um
Very, very important people that
are getting this job done with
you in this transition. I'm
gonna I don't I came in right
when you were talking about
2013 and how our behavioral
health system was completely
decimated. And I wanna thank you
for including that in one of
your slides because we need to.
We need to start the
conversation from there as I am,
always reminding everybody when
I have these conversations
about so we are in the process
of rebuilding our behavioral
health system where we from
Where we We don't have the
workforce. We don't have all the
answers and we don't
And it was due to these actions
and then 2020 came and then we
had a covid, which I didn't hear
too much mention of which really
brought forward the the
information where all those gaps
were were. We already knew it.
really, just, um, put us in a
position where we really had to
address them in an emergent way
and I. I believe we're doing
that. I like a lot of this pro
the programs and everything you
have my you know, you have my
silver approval for whatever
that means on a lot of the
things you're doing, But we're
here to talk about the just
This involved, um
Behavioral health issues in our
system in our state, So I'd like
to know a little bit. You have
one slide. Uh, slide 23 on this
and it shows here that you are
doing a lot of, uh, you're
looking to do a lot of things.
But those are
Is the lens of the federal
approval or federal funding. Can
you elaborate exactly like where
the funding is coming? Where
you're how you're going to
really kind of focus in here
with your entire plan? Because
everything else you know you're
putting into place, But this is
the area of concern because it's
been left out.
Mr Chair.
Mr. Chair, Representative Lujan.
Thank you for the question. Um,
so I think in terms of funding
I, I do wanna clarify so today,
uh, we are not allowed to pay
for anyone who's incarcerated.
Um, that becomes the obligation
of the state or the federal
prison system or whoever is
really considered, uh, The
guardian of those individuals,
But this allows us to leverage.
Uh, federal Medicaid
reimbursement for folks who are
incarcerated as they kind of
preparing to Trans
Out of that incarcerated
setting. Uh and so what we will
be doing is building out making
sure that um, we have a plan of
care in place, uh, sort of
transition plan for them, so
making sure that we're going in.
We're doing in reach into the
prisons and jails, making sure
that we understand what their
needs are, Um, the prisons and
jails have been taking care of
them, so we'll be working very
closely with corrections and
with the counties and we've been
doing this for a while, um
through the care coordinations
system with this allows us to do
is actually cover more of the
medical
Services. The prescription drugs
make sure people are leaving
with the supply that they need,
um, that we've established the
medical transportation. They may
need that we've kind of set up
those doctors appointments. Um,
if they need doctor's
appointments before they leave,
we can cover those, Um so really
kind of trying to re-establish
Maybe a physician relationship
for these folks. Um, so we'll
really be kind of it allows us
to do what we're doing today,
More and better, um, and cover
more services. Make sure for
example.
That folks who may be receiving,
um, support through medication
assisted treatment, for example,
we have an exit plan for them to
get that medication, assisted
treatment in the community and
that they're able to have those
appointments and we're setting
it up. So that's really what is
designed to do. Uh, New Mexico
is one of it. This was just
announced today. Actually, New
Mexico is one of I believe seven
states that was just picked for
a learning collaborative around
this particular growth. No state
has fully implemented this yet.
So it is going to
Some work and some collaboration
with other states to really
understand the best practices.
It is complicated. Um there's a
lot of federal requirements, but
there will be also the good news
is an evaluation, uh, to tell us
how successful it is so at the
end of our waiver period, we'll
have some more information about
how successful it is, um, and
whether the Medicaid program is
successfully, um, stepping in to
get people to the right point of
care when they need it. Thank
you. Mr Chair. Is it? Is it
correct to believe that through,
uh
These efforts and working with
Medicaid that we're gonna have
good, Uh, reliable data? Yes.
Um, Mr Chair Representative.
That's correct. We have a
required evaluation as part of
this federal approval.
Thank you. I appreciate that.
Uh, And within that you did
mention that you are working
with our local government and
And
Putting in these programs. We
have other diversion programs
and and those sorts of things.
How are you going to work with
them and facilitate with each
other to to elaborate on what
you're doing with this program,
Mr Chair?
Um, Mr Chair representative.
We've actually been working
closely particular with the
local governments for several
years. Um, we started care
coordinating in our jails and
prisons, but really through the
jails, Um, we started exchanging
data with them, probably in
2013 so that we could have a
more seamless exchange of data.
Uh, that allows us to reactivate
the Medicaid eligibility. For
example, before someone was
leaving so that they were ready
and covered before they left, So
we
They have really strong
relationships. I believe with
the counties, um and local
programs, um as well through
BHSD and through the work groups
that's occurred, so we'll be
building on that. Thank you, Mr
Chair and just is that five
minutes to move on. Thank you.
Just if you can identify any
gaps right now, Thank you.
Any gap. I'm sorry. Any gaps in
the work that you're doing and
working with these other
programs? Uh, that we're
missing. Mr. Chair
Representative. Um, I probably
would prefer to get that answer
from my team. If that's OK. Um
and get back to you on that I. I
think, um the folks doing the
work on the ground will be able
to tell me a little bit more, so
we'll get back to you on that.
Thank you, Senator de followed
by senators. It's uh 958. You've
got five minutes. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Thank you, Secretary. Uh,
Secretary. I was recently
talking to one of the discharge
coordinators at UN M, uh, psych
or UN MH Psych and he was saying
that if there was a way to fast
track Medicaid applications for
those patients because their
average stay is 3 to 10 days,
But when he
Usually, he said, if he really
pushes it, uh, he could get it
at 10 days at best. Um and that,
uh,
I guess. The second step is the
financial interview around 10
days, but
By then, a lot of those patients
are gone. So then they're not
getting the follow up treatment
that they need. Um as for
behavioral health and and also
for, uh, Suboxone treatment, So
is there a way to for those
inpatient folks, Uh, and there's
a cute setting and stuff. Fast
track, getting Medicaid to them
so that they are connected when
they get discharged. Mr. Chair,
Senator. Duh. Uh, great
question, Probably a little bit
of misinformation there. Um, I
would be happy to talk to that
person. It is really
complicated sometimes, but Medic
Application is pretty easy.
Actually, we have real time
eligibility through our
enrollment system, which means
that we often have no wait time
at all for Medicaid
applications. Um most of our
applications are really
processed within 48 hours. Um,
when we don't have a financial
interview at all and then
hospitals are allowed to do
presumptive eligibility, which
just turns eligibility on based
on, um, the application, so we
will work with that person to
make sure that they have all the
right things that they need to
do that fast tracking because
lots of tools there
Uh, for them, That's wonderful.
Thank you. Mr Secretary. I have
a a psychiatrist. Constituent.
Who? And I don't know if you're
the right person to ask this to
or if it would be DOH that he
was asking why the state doesn't
require, um New Mexico
Behavioral Health Institute to
accept DD waiver patients
requiring psychiatric admission
without court commitment.
And I don't know if you're the
right person to ask that Mr
Chair, Senator Dick, I don't
No, I I'm the right person.
Don't think so. You have BH, uh,
on the agenda for today. Um,
that doesn't seem like the right
person, either. We will get you
an answer. So the question is,
whether why they don't have to
accept patients. Is that right?
I guess I guess that they're AD
D patient with needing a
psychiatric admission, they're
requiring court commitment.
Um And so, Mr Chair Secretary
you mentioned supportive housing
and and I don't know if if this
would be under that, but I've
heard that there are concerns
about
Basically unlicensed group
homes. So when someone gets out
of UN MA UN MH psych, uh, they
go to this unlicensed group
home who, if they're getting any
benefits takes all their
benefits. Um, and then often
dumps them back at UN MH Psych,
uh, when they don't want to take
care of them and when they
become difficult, and and it is
not providing good care to these
folks, So what is being done to
to address those Mr Chair?
Senator, I think that's a that's
a really good question and a
very important one.
It is something that recently
I've learned about the division
of Health Improvement, actually,
uh, that's coming over to the
health care authority Oversees
the group home. Laser.
Um, that is coming over to our
agency. We've been having a lot
of discussions about what to do.
You may see that that becomes a
big priority for us during the
legislative session and in our
budget to support some
additional work around that. I
do think it's a a great risk for
vulnerable populations. Um, it
is challenging, and I'd be happy
to talk about why that is hard.
Um, it
Sort of it. Part of what makes
it difficult is that people can
choose to live together and may
not be like a group home
officially, uh and so it's
really challenging to figure out
what the right policy things are
to support. What would be good
care and safe care for
individuals versus just everyone
living together in what they're
calling a group home, which is
really not officially a group
home, So that is something we
are tackling. We are really
trying to figure out
Have concerned about that
vulnerable population as well.
So, um, I don't have, um, the
best answer for to you today,
But I do want you to know that
we're working on that. And that
is gonna be one of our top
priorities and for me as a
secret as we start to take DH.
I, um and work with them, Mr.
Chair. Feel free to cut me off
if I'm running out of time, But
one last question. Uh, I
understand that. So if you're
going if you're trying to get
your, uh L I ss W, uh, here in
New Mexico. You get your your
master's degree and
And we require 3600 hours of
work with a supervisor. Um
In order to get your LISW and
and social workers are are part
of the provider network that
that we need, and that is that's
higher than the vast majority of
other states. Um, now that's a a
number that we can reduce by by
rule. I mean, that's just set in
R, Uh and it would effectively
fast track a lot more social
workers getting out there to to
serve our community. Uh, is that
something that's being
considered or or is that
something you all are are
willing to to look into
A way to continue to build up
our provider network. Uh, Mr
Chair, Senator dig. I think
that's a great suggestion. I
I'll take it back. It wasn't
That's not something that was on
my radar. Um so I'll make sure
that I discuss that with Dr B.
Thank you, Senator C Lopez,
followed by representative an N.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
A lot of these programs are
brand new. So this may be, um,
unfair. But are you starting to
see improved outcomes in our
state? Are we beginning to move
the needle?
Uh, Mr Chair? Uh, Senator
Cedillo Lopez. I think it is.
really I think the other the
other issue is that a mental
health conditions are often
permanent. They're not going to
get better. And so really, the
the measure needs to be. You
know how many people are really
in stable, secure treatment
environments, But that treatment
could be lifelong. It may not
be, um, you know, thought of in
the same way as um other kinds
of health outcomes. So, um, we
do have on our
Performance work hard A lot of
the data that we collect related
to outcomes and utilization. Um,
but I don't know, I think you
know, especially with, you know,
substance use treatment and
mental health. You You can see a
lot of, um you know, permanent
treatment. Uh, for really the
lifespan needed so it it kind of
depends on what you mean by
approved outcomes, but I think
of it as employment and stable
situation. I'm glad you asked,
because that anticipated that it
was too early. Um, so how are
you going to measure the
Um, and that's and I've had this
discussion with before with
people when, um they were trying
to measure for example, the
successive behavioral of, uh,
batteries intervention programs
like whether that person ever
ever battered someone again,
which is a ridiculous measure.
Um, basically, what you need to
look at is whether the victim is
safe during that person's
participation in a betters
intervention program. And so
what kinds of because of course,
we're gonna be looking for
outcomes.
And I like to start thinking
about what outcomes we should be
thinking about.
Uh, Mr Chair or Madam chair.
Madam Chair. Uh, Senator Sedillo
Lopez. We actually do have
performance metrics, uh, in
particular for some of the for
the many of the outpatient
treatment, um, programs that we
have, and we have evaluation
criteria. Uh, for example for
the impatient, um, sorry
intensive outpatient program. We
have a performance measures
related to a client attendance
and adherence their their client
reading and the satisfactory,
satisfactory use of the system.
The successful
For to full outpatient
treatment, which is an indicator
that folks are getting better.
Um, their satisfaction with
those referral, Um, sources,
their client reported abstinence
from, uh, substances reduction
in symptoms program, completion
rates and dropout rates. So
those are some of the things
there's there's measures like
that across the system again. I
don't know if you mean by
outcomes, you know. Did someone
get better? But I think you
could infer that adherence to
the program moving to a low
Lower level of care is an
indication of progress. A
absolutely and I hope that the
outcomes and maybe we should use
the word outcomes. But the
measures that that we have about
those programs are are exactly
as you described, um, the
success story you described
about this. This individual who
lost her kids is just so
inspiring because when I worked
at, um with domestic violence,
survivors who were in
circumstance circumstances like
that A lot of times losing their
Children was
Really put them into a bad
spiral because they would were
motivated by getting their
Children back and the harder it
seemed to get their Children
back. The more um
Distress. They became, um,
Another kind of smaller question
is, um, the prevalence of mental
illness that your chart on page
11
21% does that include depression
and bipolar or
OK?
Because that seems a little low
to me. Um, if it includes all of
all of that, is it just
measuring people in on Medicaid
or or how? No. How did you get
that data? Uh, I just read
different different measures.
And, um, this one seemed low.
Uh, yeah, Mr Chair. I'm sorry.
I'm not chair. Senator C Lopez.
Um, you're right. I was actually
surprised by this data myself
given New Mexico's high poverty
rates, um, and some of the other
challenges of a R.
Uh, state. Um, it it really it
does include all of those. It's
from a national data source. Um,
you? Yeah, the source there is
at the bottom of the slide. Uh,
feel free to go take a look at
how num numerous maps. Maybe
it's all the sunshine. I don't
know, but, uh, we definitely are
not ranked toward the bottom,
and that is the best data source
that I have, Um, in terms of
prevalence, it's it's hard to
gauge the prevalence of mental
illness. Many people don't talk
about it. Don't access care.
You know, I'm guessing it's
probably an undercount, uh, in
some way, but, um, that is kind
of how we compare our rank
compared to other states based
on the indicators that they use.
Yeah, I'm I am interested in
following up. Thank you. Over my
five minutes. OK, that went by
fast. Thank you, OK?
Z. I
Thank you, madam Chair. Um,
thank you, Secretary Omeo for
being with us today. I apologize
for my lateness. So just let me
know if I ask you something that
you covered and I'll go back
over the materials, but, um, I
asked yesterday because we have
a lot of presentations in C CJ
and everybody has mentioned that
there is a need for service
providers in the state. Um, and
then all the policies that we're
discussing would require a ramp
up of those service providers.
So what I've seen in your
present
So far is that it looks like
there are a lot of positive
steps being taken toward
improving the availability of
service providers. But I was
wondering if you've mentioned
any specific steps that we need
to be taking as a state to get
those, uh, service provider
numbers to where we need them.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative,
Um
Uh, yes, I. I don't think I
don't think it would be honest
to say that there's enough
providers. I think New Mexico
I've never said I've never said
that sentence before, so I would
just say as a health care, Uh,
person. Uh uh, I. I don't think
there's ever quite enough. Uh
for the capacity there, There
are still some room in the
system to treat more people.
But, um, we also you can see
that, not everyone who needs
treatment is getting it. And so,
um, you know, part of that is
because it's a voluntary system,
part of it. Maybe because of
other blockers in the system for
them, Um
I. I think you know we are this
Legislature has partnered, Um,
with this administration to
really advance the policy goals
that I spoke about, Um, earlier
in the presentation. Um, I did
talk about that a little bit
early on. Um, we are getting
ready to infuse the system. The
paper all system with some
additional funding, um, really
billions of dollars in funding
through the Medicaid
reimbursement system. The
Legislature supported, um, the
executive budget to advance.
150% of Medicare as the
reimbursement floor for
behavioral health services.
That's more than double what it
was back in 2019. I think we
were at about 60% of Medicare
back then, um so lots of
investment and I think
Um, you know, we're still
working through the
administrative barriers. We We
recognize that the system of
care isn't easy. There's a lot
of requirements for providers,
so we're really trying to make
it a friendly state to do
business. There's a lot of work
going into that as well. But I
do think, um, we are going to
continue pushing on the
accelerator to try and do what
we need to do to attract
providers. And it's uh, your
suggestions things like that the
too many hours potentially, uh,
that's in regulation that we
really need to take a look.
What barriers we have created in
the system. And so we're doing
that as well.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Secretary for that answer,
That's that's really That's
really great. Um, so I heard
mention kind of right after I
sat down, um, that they're 89
beds currently available is that
spread throughout the state?
Or is that in one particular
location, Madam Chair
representative that's really
statewide and, um, that should
be an accurate reflection of
staffed beds, um, that they have
capacity for we do have a system
called open beds. Uh, that
allows us to track uh, open beds
as it's called, But, um, you
know, it's somewhat dependent on
providers keeping that up to
date, And so I just wanna put
that caveat out there. I think
we think that there's about open
5 to 90 beds.
Thank you. Um, Madam Chair
Secretary Miho, and then I was
wondering
Does that 89 bed number include
the new, UM, facility that was
behavioral mental health
facility that was open at UN M.
It was open just last week, so
if it's not been factored in,
that makes perfect sense. I was
just curious, um
Madam Chair representative. It
does not I. That's a good
question. Um Yeah, we'll be.
That's a really great question.
We'll make sure that we add that
data and work with you and M to
get that data into the system.
OK, great. And then the follow
up that I know now that you
couldn't possibly answer him
Just throwing the question out
there. I was wondering what they
What capacity they're operating
at right now. So that's just me
asking the ether If someone
knows so Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Secretary Mio that
was ahead.
Of thank you, Secretary for
coming and very much appreciate
the overview presentation that
you made.
One of the reasons I invited
you, it was
We've been talking a lot about
changing the laws in the state
that have the potential for
affecting our behavioral health
system, meaning increasing.
The need and the use of
providers and the question which
I think is a court question for
what we're talking about. Here
is
Are you working with?
The folks who are looking at the
laws to determine whether or not
we have we will have adequate
capacity and support. Should we
change the laws in such a way
that more people are subject to
civil commitment? More people
are subject to out outpatient
assisted outpatient treatment.
More people are involved in the
criminal competency. Um, what
people here I think are
skeptical that we have the
resources to address. So I'm
giving you this.
To help us understand why we
should not be concerned about
that. Um, Madam chair. I think
that you're right to be
skeptical, and you're right to
be concerned. Um, I have
discovered that without the
right, um, statutes and without
the right rules and without the
reimbursement system, the system
won't get built. And so if we
want to increase capacity, we
need sort of the policy changes
to do that.
Um and we will work with I You
know, we do work closely with
our providers and, you know,
have great relationships. I
think with, uh, most of the big
provider groups here in New
Mexico, and I'm eager to work
with them to understand the
barriers, um, that they see and
the concerns I think if you were
to send the system, you know,
5000 more patients tomorrow. I
don't know that it could be we
We have the adequate system for
that. But if you
You know if you sent the system,
uh more patients over time, and
we really are putting and
directing energy into the
reimbursement policies and, um,
the statutory framework that we
need to build up that system of
care. I think you would see that
system of care grow, and I think
that's what's happened here in
New Mexico over the past 5.5
years. I'm gonna would
anticipate that we would be able
to continue that work. Um and so
I do. I think that, um, there's
still there's some capacity and
I think
We can grow that capacity
further.
OK, so I, I guess what I think I
heard a little bit was. It's a
chicken and an egg kind of a
Issue so
We need to be hatching more
patients.
So that we will then start
receiving more providers. That's
kind of what I heard you say. Am
I incorrect in how I'm
interpreting your answer.
Um, Madam Chair, I think, um
I. I think that's partially
true, although there are times
when the system can't grow
without the without the policy
framework for it to do that, and
so we're kind of exercising the
tools that we have and
available to us, Uh, to do that,
and through the reimbursement
system, for example, um
I think, uh, that
Um there is more room to grow. I
think that there are patients
today experiencing mental
illness or substance Use
disorder. We cannot access the
system.
Um, and there's no navigation to
get them there. And so that's
our job to build that
navigation, and there are some
additional statutory frameworks
that could help with that as
well.
One last question. One of the
responses that I've heard when I
this issue about do we have
enough providers and so on and
so forth is what we're going to
make the MC OS provide them.
And you know, Of course, we're
all looking at that with a
little skepticism as well,
because you can put something in
a contract.
But there are a lot of steps
that go on on in between putting
something in a contract and
actually making something
happen. So how do you envision
that? Actually working, Madam
Secretary.
Uh, Madam Chair. There are a
number of new tools in the
contract to hold their feet to
the fire. I don't think it's
just words in a contract. There
are a number of penalties and
incentives that ensure their
compliance. Um, they get their
incentivized to improve the
delivery system. There are
rewards built in to, uh,
financially support. Um,
reinvestment and community
services, so that are kind of
new in this contract. Um, so
it's not just words in the
contract, but really, and we
have additional levers.
Can withhold capitation
payments, which total that
billions of dollars for their
failure to perform and we intend
to do a better job of monitoring
their compliance and, um,
enforcing those contract
provisions that may you know,
may not have been fully enforced
or that we didn't have the tools
to fully enforce prior to this
new contract.
Thank you. Um Madam Secretary,
uh Representative Romero.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Madam
Secretary. I'm setting a timer.
so we can say, um Page nine.
Let's just start there. We had
talked a little bit about
Medicaid dollars pouring in and
and how we're extending the
programs and one of the
questions that we get from
constituents is the lack of
affordability even if you have
insurance, so I'm trying to
understand the dynamic between
the fact that we're gonna be
serving 50% of the state of New
Mexico How many of those
patients are on Medicaid and
then for those that are on
Insurance. Can they afford the
services that are being
provided?
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Romero. Um, I think that there's
been a lot of work, so I just
wanna be clear in Medicaid.
There are no co-pays. No
premiums, no deductibles at all.
So that system of care does not
have cost as a blocker, Um, for
the rest of the system. Um, I
think that there's been a lot of
work going into ensuring that we
minimize Co-pays where we can,
uh, through the system does
have, uh, some copas for
behavioral health. Are you sure?
I'm not as familiar with the the
commer.
Market. I'll be looking very
closely at affordability for
state employees, because we'll
be, uh, sort of overseeing that
system of care for, folks. Um,
but I, I do think that there are
copas. There are parity rules
now that are in effect, though,
that cap those that can be no
higher than what you would
charge for a physical health
service. So, um, a lot of work
has gone into that. And
definitely, um, willing to kind
of take a closer look at that,
You know, affordability problem.
Uh, we also will be, uh, through
the healthcare affordability
fund trying to make
So coverage more affordable for
people at the lower end of the
spectrum, that income spectrum,
uh, to help them with their
premiums on the commercial
market, Um, and there's also
copay assistance, uh, for lower
income families, uh, through
that network of care, um, also
receiving services in the
commercial market. Thank you.
I'd really love to follow up
with with that question on
affordability. Um, and
connecting to our our current
structures, since the data is
about utilization across the
actual insure
Uh, insurance. Uh, holders, um
On page 11, and then I'll just
reiterate what I think, um,
chairwoman was saying about
connective tissue between our,
um, who's in need of these
services. Where are they coming
into the system? And where is
the disconnect between what
we're hearing from? I think
every presentation that we've
had here, um, in the interim, so
far about the fact that folks
are not receiving services that
they require, and most of that
is coming from law enforcement
and from those on the front
lines receiving folks.
And everything from, uh,
emergency rooms to, um, clinics
to wherever it may be. Where is
that disconnect and who is in
charge of of making that
connect? Um, and I think that's
really where for for us in
trying to build the system is
who actually needs the services?
Where do they get them? And why
Do we actually know the number
and again? If 5000 did really
need it, then we should be
building for that, And I think
that's part of where there's a
lot of question. Um, as to what
is the need that we're trying to
meet? And what is success look
like
Um, so I'd really love to to try
to connect the dots because when
we look at mental illness,
numbers and substance use
numbers
21% for me.
That are seeking mental health
supports versus the 7.7% that
are substance use. We constantly
loop those into the same
category. But you're telling us
that those are separate issues
that we need to be addressing.
Can you just speak to a little
bit of that, and perhaps the
correlation with crime that
We? We are supposed to be
addressing as a as a body. But
what are those numbers? Tell us
from your perspective between
the 21% and the 7% are those
nationally correlative or, you
know, are we on track for how
we're servicing this group so
far.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Ramirez. I hope I understood the
question First. I just wanna say
that we are doing a gap analysis
and they should have talked
about this earlier. We are in
the process of doing a
comprehensive gap analysis. Um,
we did this in 2020. It kind of
showed us where we needed to
invest. You can see that we've
made investments. We still need
to know where we are and where
we need to invest and where, um,
the most services are needed.
Now that we've kind of achieved
this programmatic growth, But I
can tell you
You that not every county has
enough providers. And so how
many providers do we need in
those communities? That is a
question that we will be looking
at through the lens of this gap
analysis that we're working on
today. Um, so I just wanted to
mention that and let you know
that that that work is
happening. Actively, um, in
terms of, um I'm sorry. The part
of your question, Can you just
just on the numbers of mental
illness with 21% and substance
use at 7.7%. We often lump those
two together. Um, Madam chair.
Representative a just want to
clarify that there is a lot of
overlap. Um, many people have co
occurring disorders, I, I would
say many, uh, I don't have that
information here. But I can pull
that for you. Uh, I have
behavioral health expertise in
the room.
We'll pull it. We'll pull that
data for you. Um, I. I
definitely did not mean to imply
that these are mutually
exclusive categories. There are
definitely probably is overlap.
um, and many people suffering
with mental illness, um, also
struggle with substance use
disorder and vice versa. So
those that's why they're often
lumped together. They're
separated for this particular.
Um, because they just skip that
question. You know how many
people have a mental illness?
How many people have, um, a
substance use disorder? What's
the
Once. What's the need? Um, and
so I would make an assumption or
an inference that there is a lot
of overlap between these two.
the people that are in both of
these categories.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I know
I'm what time Um I would love to
follow up also with the mobile
units and what 2.4 million will
not get us more than I
understand 1 to 2 units, so I'd
love to figure out what that
looks like, and then also kudos
on the reentry program. Thank
you, man. You're welcome.
Um, representative Laura Cadena.
I believe no, I cannot read
Senator Cervantes handwriting.
I think,
Yeah, it looks like OK, well was
anyone on the list whose name I
can't read? OK, so I think we
have concluded our questions.
Um, I want to thank you once
again, Secretary for making
yourself available and offering
some great information and we
really appreciate your
willingness to engage with us.
Thank you very much for having
me.
Next on our agenda is
Clinical services and competency
restoration at the New Mexico
Behavioral Health Institute at
Las Vegas, and we have, um Tim
Shiels Hospital administrator
here. Thank you very much for
coming, Mr Shields.
And I believe you have handouts
correct.
I
know you
OK?
He's more
And are we going to I? I assume
we're loading the, um,
presentation. Very good.
And
OK?
All right. So I think we're
ready, Mr Shields. Thank you
very much.
Thank you, madam Chair,
Representatives of the
committee. Thank you for giving
me the opportunity to come and
speak a little bit today. Um,
hopefully answer some questions
about what we do at, um, the
Mexico Behavioral Health
Institute and sort of why we
exist. Maybe preemptively, uh,
answer some questions that I
know some of you have, um, about
our services. So thank you. Um,
so we are operated within the
Department of Health and we do
kind of ascribe to the mission
and and goals of what we want to
do.
As the Department of Health.
So in Mexico Behavioral Health
Institute. We want to provide
services to all new Mexicans,
and I wanna kind of stress all
new Mexicans who need us, um at
the time that they need us, So
we are the highest level of care
in the state for behavioral
health. That's not unique to New
Mexico. That's the that's the
function and purpose of state
hospitals across the country.
This is there is a subgroup of
individuals who need the highest
level of care. And those are the
Individuals that we serve, and
that is why we exist. So we
exist for the most difficult new
Mexicans with the most difficult
To treat behavioral health
disorders.
Um
When people ask what we do, we
actually do five different
things, so I'll give a quick
kind of summary of what those
five different things are. Um,
we have an adult psychiatric
division, which has 100 and 12
beds.
That is essentially a civil
commitment side. It's an
inpatient psychiatric hospital,
and I'll get into more detail
about what we do there.
We have an adolescent unit that
we call the center for
adolescent relationship
exploration. It's a very
specified
Population that we serve there,
and it is adolescence with some
type of sexual harmful behavior.
They don't have to be
adjudicated. Sometimes they are
sometimes they're on probation.
But it's a very small group of
individuals. Um, who
Need to be out of their home for
a period of time so that we can
provide them services and that
has 10 beds.
We have an outpatient program
that we call the community based
services, and this is mostly our
biggest one is in Las Vegas, but
then we also have one in
Guadalupe County and one in
Pecos, and essentially, that's
to provide outpatient services
to individuals with serious and
persistent mental illness.
We have a forensic division,
which is, uh, who provides
services for the com Com Uh,
restoration to competency
population and then we also
provide services to people who
are not able to be restored to
competency. The statute is
references 1.5, So we just kind
of call them 1.5 to just kind of
quickly refer to those
individuals who are not
competent, not restorable. And
then finally we do have a long
term care skilled
Nursing facility called Meadows,
and that has 100 and 62 beds.
So of those five. I'm gonna
spend a little bit of time on
each one just to kind of answer
what we do and and how we do it,
so going back to our adult
psychiatric division.
So
This. These are individuals that
start on a civil commitment. So
this is the danger to self
danger to others, or what's
called grave passive neglect.
Most of the individuals that we
serve started in other
psychiatric hospitals such as
UN M or in jails, and they were
referred for a civil commitment
evaluation.
Those individuals come to us and
Mm.
Almost all of the time. We're
not be able to be treated in a
shorter hospitalization. They're
gonna require some expertise.
some longer levels of care, and
they're going to be individuals
that are particularly difficult
to treat so it could be an
individual with a developmental
delay, who also has a
psychiatric condition. Those are
difficult individuals to
stabilize sometimes and those
individuals would come up to us
and our multidisciplinary team
would treat them why they are on
a court order.
Essentially is because they are
sort of in that population that
that is difficult to treat, and
we want to make sure that we can
establish a really safe
discharge for them if they
didn't need to to be with us,
they wouldn't be with us.
There's a lot of other levels of
care where they could have
services provided so the DD
system has group homes and all
these different places where
these individuals could be if
they could be there if their
symptoms are too high, and they
can't be there, then they
To come to us once they come to
us. We wanna make sure that we
have a safe discharge for them,
So they are on a civil court
orders this no alleged crime.
They're not in the criminal
system at all. Is your civil
Orders to hold them there to
help us provide treatment and
then set up a safe discharge. So
in order to do that, we have a
fairly large treatment team
there.
Led by our psychiatrists or
psychologists. We have social
workers who work on connecting
the family resources, community
resources and discharges. We
have behavioral health
therapists. We have 24 hour
nursing, and we have our floor
staff who? We, um kind of call
psychiatric technicians, and
they're the ones that are there,
You know? Two in the morning on
Sunday, they're the ones there
making sure that our people are
being cared for.
Um, so that is a different
function than our forensic unit
that I'll get into. So I just
wanna make sure that we have
that distinction that we do
provide that services. It is
under a court order, but it is
under the civil law. It's not a
criminal.
Um, the adolescent program, so
it is a voluntary program and at
times it is you can be here. You
can be in detention, so it is
kind of a forced voluntary, but
it is voluntary. The the
adolescence we serve have to
wanna be there. We do a lot of
work with them on kind of what
their behaviors are, and usually
there's a lot of trauma and a
lot of family issues that we're
working with. We do family
therapy with them. We connect
with their, um
Probation officers with their
schools with whoever we need to
connect with, and we provide
services, usually about a year
long to make sure that they are
able to kind of go back into the
community. And then hopefully we
have, um stabilized their sexual
harmful behaviors that also has
kind of the same group of
individuals in terms of the
treatment team makeup, but it is
more heavily focused on therapy.
and when we're getting into the
adults, there's therapy that
occurs But it's more
psychiatric medications that
really help.
Stabilize them. But for these
adolescents, they they don't not
don't necessarily always even
need medication. It's a lot of
therapy. A lot of family work.
Um and just a lot of time spent
working with them.
Um, our community based services
or CBS. So in the previous
presentation they were talking
about CCBH CS certified
community behavioral health
centers. So we are not one. But
we are looking to become one.
Eventually. We would like to
participate in that so
What's true in New Mexico is
also true across the country. I
visited a number of state
psychiatric hospitals and were
all in a rural area. Where all
about two hours away from the
main metropolitan area. I don't
know why, and we all have a
really high number of
individuals with serious and
persistent mental illness in a
relatively small community, so
the San Miguel County has
somewhere around 15,000 people.
We shouldn't have
400 people with serious and
persistent mental illness that
we see weekly at our outpatient
program. Why do we have that?
Because for years we were
discharging into our community
to support the state hospital.
So
We still do that some because we
have some systems built up, But
now we do try to discharge back
to the county with which they
came from. But for years and
years and years, that didn't
happen. So the citizens who all
live in Las Vegas we all love
it. We see people with serious
and persistent mental illness
all the time. I sort of woven
into the fabric there. When I
moved there. I was so happy to
see how welcoming the community
was and how they didn't have
kind of the stigma and the fear
and it was great to see. But
because of that, we now have a
disproportionately
Number of individuals, so we do
provide services in an
outpatient setting, and that
could be medication management.
um kind of people who go into
the community and and find these
individuals and try to help them
make their appointments. Try to
make sure they stay on their
medication. Um, kind of whatever
they need. We do have day
treatment or individuals that
come in for most of the day, and
we will provide treatment to
them.
Um Meadows or long term care
facility.
So
We have to be careful because we
are licensed the same way as any
other long term care facility in
the state or in the country.
So with that we have to follow
all of the regulations and rules
that nursing homes provide,
However, we also employ a
psychologist and have some
psychiatric support. So we do
work with individuals who maybe
would be a little bit more
difficult to place at other
nursing homes in the state. So
again, we have a higher number
of individuals there that are on
antipsychotic medication, for
example, Um, roughly 30% of our
residents are on antipsychotic
medications.
They try to get that about 10%
at most nursing homes.
In our defense. I'll say that
they've. These are not
individuals who later in life
who develop dementia who are
given these medications. These
are individuals who are on the
medications, you know, for 20
years before they ever came to
us, and we're just stable,
keeping their behavioral health
conditions stabilized.
Um, so that's a newer facility.
It's one of the newest buildings
on campus. It is beautiful. If
you're ever in Las Vegas, I
would love to tour you. It's a
place that I wouldn't mind
living. You know, at some point
in my life, it is a really
beautiful, beautiful facility.
So thank you to everyone who can
help to fund that. And, um we
are honored and blessed to do
that.
And then finally as our forensic
division
This is where I'm anticipating
some questions. Um, so our
forensic division and we work
with individuals who are not
competent to stand trial. So
what does that mean? What does
that look like? So if if someone
is arrested in the community,
and they go and they meet with
their defense attorney and their
defense attorney says, you know,
do you want to plead guilty or
not guilty? And they say, Well,
I can't be guilty. I'm the king
of the United States. Defense
Attorney says, Well, we don't
have kings and no, you're not
And all of this, and they say
no, no.
I? There's no reason for me to
plead here. I'm the king. You
guys my rules. Your rules don't
apply to me.
And it gets to the point where
they can't. It's called the aid
and assist in their own defense,
And if they can't aid and assist
in their own defense, they're
eligible to come to us. In New
Mexico. There's a second step to
that, where it has to be a
felony charge, and there has to
be an assessment of
dangerousness.
And if someone is considered
dangerous and has a felony
charge that can be sent up to
us, um for up to nine months
where we provide treatment.
That treatment looks similar
actually, to our adult
psychiatric division treatment,
Although the goal is different,
so it's the same group of
multidisciplinary individuals.
We have psychiatrists. We have
psychologists we have
prescribing psychologists. We
have social workers. We have
behavioral health therapists,
but there we are doing a lot
more groups on courtroom
knowledge, symptom
identification, and our goal
really is to help them be
competent to go back and stand
trial.
I will say that the reason that
I kind of point out the
intensive treatment that we
provide there is is You can't
really get someone stable to go
back and go to trial if you
don't stabilize their behavioral
health symptoms, So some things
I hear sometimes as though you
don't really do treatment, you
just treat to competency. Well,
there's some truth in that that
yes, we do treat to competency,
but we also provide this really
comprehensive treatment to the
individual to make sure that
they're stabilized on their
medications. They know what
their medications are. They're
taking them and then they are no
longer
Um, demonstrating the same
behavioral health symptoms that
they were.
Uh, so I did provide some
Some, um, data for our forensic
division, so
Our average census is trending
up.
So
Currently today.
We are at 70 people on our
forensic unit. Um, if you look
over the course of a number of
years, we really haven't been
that high. So what I'll say to
that is is that this is not a
typical compared to national
trends. So we are part of a an
organization called the Western
Psychiatric State Hospital
Association or whips, whipsaw
and we compare data with all of
the state hospitals from sort of
North Dakota, South Dakota West
all the way, including Hawaii
and what we
Seen as the All of our forensic
populations are increasing
across the country. Uh so we're
kind of right in line with that
We're seeing an increased need
and we are able to meet that
need right now.
Um, our number of admissions are
also trending up this year does
not include this year yet this
month yet cuz we're still kind
of in the middle of you know,
fiscal year 24. So once this
fiscal year ends, we'll be able
to look at that, but we haven't
really seen an increase in
admissions that as as dramatic
as our average daily census, and
part of that is because
individuals are there a little
bit longer to treat the
competency and we are working
with the courts to make sure
that we can discharge them back
to the court system.
We've finished treatment so that
they can proceed with their, um,
legal charges.
Um And then people ask kind of
what is their success rate at
restoring to competency, So I
did break that out on the next
slide for kind of how we're
doing by month. Overall, we're
averaging in the last year
about, um 75 to 80% restoration
to competency rate.
Which, if you're wondering if
that's good, it is not. It is
actually really good. The team
there does a really good job.
The national average is about in
the sixties, so they are
actually doing a really good job
at, um helping individuals
restore the competency.
And then one final thing that I
would want to point on is is
that
There is
A lot of comments that are made
out there that we discharge
people back to the court system.
We say they're competent and
then we're immediately told. No,
they're not. So we looked. We
did the, uh, backward study and
it took kind of a lot of work
for the team. But they went and
they looked for a year and
looked at all of the people that
we opined competent and sent
back. How many times did the
court agree and of the people
that we could follow? The court
agreed with US, 100 and 12
Times.
The court disagreed with US four
times and challenged it Now, if
you think of the legal system
it's actually designed for
people to challenge our opinion.
They're not supposed to disagree
with us. So the fact that we
were only challenged four times,
I think speaks to the work that
the team does there. Now. Those
four are probably the people
that judges remember that
attorneys remember and they're
the ones that everyone wants to
kind of bring up. But you know
when you look globally at the
data, 100 and 12 out of 100 and
16 times
Our opinion wasn't even
challenged in court. They agreed
with our treatment team.
So I guess it's sort of quickly
what we do at, um an MBH. I and
I'm happy to answer any
questions Anyone has. Thank you
very much, Uh,
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um
And
Thank you for the the
information. Um, Mr Shields. Uh,
can you go with me to page two?
On the first slide.
Uh, you give you give a lot of
facts. A lot of stats. Um, can
you tell me what your current
vacancy rate is?
Madam chair personnel.
I. I just to clarify you're
asking vacancy of employees or
vacancy in beds Vacancy rate on
employees.
Yeah. So
Madam Chair, representative, Um
Right now.
Our vacancy rate ranges
somewhere around 30% plus or
minus a large number of those
positions are what we call our
direct care staff or psychiatric
technician, so that accounts for
a majority of those positions
and are you are you
supplementing that with with, uh
Traveling nurses.
How are you making up?
That deficit. Yeah, Madam Chair
Representative. Yes, not as many
as some places, so my goal.
Since I took this position about
3.5 years ago is we are gonna
treat our employees the best we
possibly can. And we are gonna
hire state employees because
that is the the best way to do
this financially. We do have
about
Uh,
Right around 12 nurses and right
around 12 direct care staff or
CNAS that we have contracted
with. Um and those are to fill
some of the gaps that we still
have. And do You know what the
what the contract cost is for
those 24.
Um, Madam Chair, representative
Total or per person total? Yeah,
we
Madam Chair representative for
fiscal year 24.
We just ran this data and
overall, we are gonna spend
approximately $1.5 million
Um and the next What is the
Yeah.
Rate beds versus patients.
Because, according to this
112
You're showing about.
Close to 500 beds.
Um, Madam Chair representative.
The total number of licensed
beds is in the three hundreds.
It's about 370.
When we're looking at our
vacancy rate, it really varies
dramatically by division. So if
you look at, for example, our
long term care facility
Airsense. This is runs about 84,
And we have 100 and 62 beds so
that one has a high number of
empty beds. If you look at our
forensic division our census
today is 70. We have
approximately 88 beds.
We can use
A number of those are on our
women's unit.
So, um
For whatever reason that I don't
know why fewer women get
referred for competence
restoration treatment likely
because they, um globally, do
not engage in the violent crimes
at the same rate that men do so
a number of those beds are on
our women's unit. So when you
look at how many
Of our male beds are filled at
our forensic division. It's
actually around 90%, which is
actually sort of what you want.
You don't want to be at 100% on
a forensic division. You don't
want every bed filled where you
can't move someone or, you know
the acuity goes through the roof
and then on our adult psych side
on our civil side, we actually
have cottages that we, um keep
open. Part of that is because of
the staff and part of it is
because
Things like what happened on
Friday night happened where unit
gets flooded and we're out there
shoveling water out till you
know midnight one in the
morning, and now we need a place
to move these patients and we
can't easily move them across
the state to some other place,
So we need a little bit of space
to be able to move them, Um, in
those scenarios, so that
accounts for most of the
vacancy, But when you look
globally again, I think that
long term care vacancy rate
accounts for most of it.
OK?
Thank you for that, madam chair.
On to Page four.
A quick question on there. This
the second slide, you say?
100% General fund cannot build
Medicaid. Why can't Medicaid be
billed?
Madam Chair, representative. I'm
not sure I'm following exactly
which slide But if you're
talking about the forensic
division, Yes. Yes, sir. Um,
that's the only division that we
cannot build Medicaid at all.
And the reason being is that
they are still considered under
the Department of Corrections
supervision. So, as was
discussed in the previous, um,
presentation, they can put them
on Medicaid for discharge. So
when they get released from jail
and because they're still
considered under Department of
Corrections supervision, even
though we are
As a hospital and providing
health care while they are with
us. We cannot build Medicaid.
Very good. Thank you, Madam
Chair. That's that's all I have.
Great. Thank you,
representative, Representative
Reed.
And thank you, Madam Chair Mr
Shields for being here. Um, my
questions are directed to the
forensic unit. So so I'm clear
that 88 beds dealing are dealing
with the restoration, economy
seat and the commitments of
people who are on those two year
reviews. Um
Every two years to see if they
retained competency in my
understanding that correct
Madam Chair, representative
Reed. Yes, that is correct. OK,
um, I? I had a question because
as you know what happens is you
have a local evaluation in the
community. Um, it tends to be a
lot by video, um, at least in
the rural areas. They're like an
hour hour and a half self
reported information. Um, they
come back, not competent. We
send them up for treatment, and
then they come back from the
unit sometimes really quickly
within 30 days and and I saw
your success rate and I see that
success rate as these
Are coming back. Can you tell me
or explain, do you When you're
getting these people from these
evaluations?
And I don't want you to be
critiquing the local evaluators
that that makes sense. But are
we having non thorough
evaluations where these people
are being said they're not
competent and then going up to
Las Vegas, and then it seemed
like it doesn't take you guys
long to figure out that they
understand the three comp C. You
know things that need to be, you
know, they understand their
charges. They can assist their
attorney. Whatever it is, and
then I see him come back in 30
to 60 days. We're in the very
past. Uh
Chair, Mr Shields, It seems
sometimes they were up on that
unit 789 months. You're watching
them interact with the inmate or
the other residents and we'd get
these long, detailed reports. So
is our problem on our local
evaluation side, which I know
that we're we don't have a lot
of evaluators one and two. Do
you think the video evaluations?
um, are effective? Especially
when they're you know that
short?
Um and does that that makes
sense kind of Madam chair like
it. They just come back so fast,
confident yet someone else is
saying they're not And I don't
wanna mix somebody up who really
isn't competent. Um
Or vice versa. Um and I see your
success rates and generally.
yeah, that's what happens. They
are found confident. That's not
really challenged. So could you
elaborate on that? A little
Madam Chair, Mr Shields, Madam
Chair representative, so right
above our restoration rate is
our average length of stay.
Um and
There are definitely times where
individuals come back very
quickly. Within that 30 days in
the state of New Mexico, we have
nine months and that does vary
from state to state. So we are,
um, when we look and compare
average length of stay for us
compared to other states. It's a
little bit difficult because
other states have 60 days. 90
days. We have nine months, so we
try not to compare length of
stay on a forensic unit. Um
regarding what you were kind of,
I think, asking about the
evaluations my personal
Opinion would be that
medications work extremely well
and extremely quickly and we can
force them in a way that most
jails cannot. We have to go to
court and get a treatment
guardian and we do it in an
ethical and humane way, of
course, and we make sure you
know we do it in in the most
trauma informed way possible,
but we can force medication and
on medication is initiated an
individual start to take it
under a structured, um,
environment in a hospital, which
we are with 24 hour nursing.
With a lot of care and a lot of
support. They can get better
quickly. So I guess my thought
would be that they probably were
not competent.
And they do respond quickly to
medication.
Madam chair and Mr Shields that
OK, I was wondering if that was
it. Do you have any opinion on?
Um just in your line of work and
what you see up there, Video?
Uh, evaluations on, um
Evaluators and I hear sometimes
even assistants meeting with, um
clients.
For an hour hour and a half, uh,
to get it cause I know the
judges of my district are
finding those not very reliable.
Um and so, I. I don't want to
put you in a rough spot by any
means, but I just didn't know if
you had any thoughts on video.
Madam Chair, Madam Chair
representative. I do think I'm
gonna pass on that question
because we do all of our work in
person during Covid. We were
there. We showed up every day.
We didn't You know, we never
went virtual. We never went to
zoom. My whole professional
career that I grew up in has
been in person, and I think that
video has provided some really
great services and availability
to the rural area so they don't
want to dismiss it. It's just
not my area that I've ever done.
No, no problem. I appreciate
your honesty. Thank you, Ma.
Sure, representative
representative Lujan.
Chair. Thank you, Director for
being here today with us, Um
I'm gonna I'm gonna address
Obviously the the forensic, Um
Issues we have in the
decentralized competency
evaluation system that we have
at hand. I think that's kind of
the crux of what we've been, uh,
talking about and and getting to
the source of the issues around
competency and and behavioral
health issues. Uh, through the
the justice system, so
Um, can you can you tell us?
what the, um who you have in
place as far as a forensic
mental health Director, is that
you, madam Chair?
Madam Chair, representative
Lujan.
I mean, I guess I'm in charge of
you know it ends with me
eventually, but we do have
division directors and I do have
a a clinical prescribing
psychologist who's the division
director of our forensic unit.
Thank you. And what are the what
is the scope of their work?
Madam Chair, representative. I'm
sorry. I didn't hear the
question. What is the scope of
their work? Madam Chair Madam
Chair representative Lu Han. He
has a licensed psychologist. Um
he is also in the state of New
Mexico. You can go to extra
schooling and become a
prescribing psychologist. He has
done that, so his job is to
oversee the, um, medications
that individuals are placed on.
He oversees the treatment. He
oversees the staffing. He
oversees the
Um, mail you environment he
oversees the social worker. He's
basically his scope of work is
to make sure that the treatment
provided
On our forensic unit is the best
that it can be.
Thank you, man. I appreciate
that. And and it's kind of broad
and vague. Um, some of the
issues that have been brought
out, um, under the forensic unit
and and the the work that they
need to, um, be a part of it
under the competency evaluation
or dealing with out a state
defendants with competency to
stand. Trial orders out of
custody defendants with CST
orders, So those are unhoused
new contact information, lack of
transportation, lack of
identified appropriate
evaluation.
Showing up to the evaluations,
either intoxicated under the
influence of substances
challenges with communication
regarding release from custody
to or detainment, lack of
consolidation of orders for same
for that same defendant lack of
communication across courts
related to the same to that same
defendant.
In fact, one defendant was
evaluated by two different
evaluated evaluators four days
apart with orders from different
courts, so
I could keep going on, Madam
chair. What I'm getting at in.
The crux of this is that we
don't have a, uh, a systematic
way of communication of dealing
with all these addi additional
issues. This is a non you This
isn't on all of us. This is what
we we're We are here in
discussing this issue. So, um,
intently. Uh, I think that we
need to look madam chair towards
how we are going to develop
more, Uh, better, systematic way
of communication with our our
forensics and those evaluations
and
Even to the to note your
information when you said you
had over 100 cases that the
courts agreed with you when,
when individuals were
rehabilitated or
Um and four of those four of
those decisions went against
you. I would, I would have to
ask.
Um do what I just mentioned in
all the minutiae of everything
that that everyone has to deal
with. With these, um
Clients. If you will, that we
don't have a systematic way of
Of engaging with the court
system, and there are a lot of
ways that even in our court
systems and those that that have
to then, uh,
Um, defend those clients of
theirs, and then they have to go
back to the courts, and they
have to interface with the
courts. So there are a lot of
disconnects man share is what
I'm getting at here, and I'd
like to to maybe get some, um
Point of reference from you
today as how we can better, um
Ha have better communications
and information that is
delivered to all parties
involved with those clients.
Madam Chair
Madam Chair, representative
Lujan.
You bring up good points that
that I I think I've been in
meetings and I'm trying to
assist. I will say that's a
little bit of a blind spot
because by the time they become
to VH, I That is not the case.
We are. It's much, much easier
for us to communicate with the
courts. They get their final
report seven days before we
discharge them. They have all of
the information. If any of them
have a question about our
Patients they call and we are
there and we answer. I think,
based on the examples that you
were saying those tend to happen
more in the community with the
community based evaluations, and
that's not something that we
oversee out of the New Mexico
Behavioral Health Institute. So
when all of those things happen,
and they go to court, and all of
those struggles are kind of
resolved, and the judge says
you're going to be a I. That's
that's the only time I would
even know that that person
exists, but I think that there's
a blind spot there of a lot of
that's happening. That's outside
of
My vision. Thank you, man. I
appreciate that. And then we
need to go on. But II I know
directly from from sources of
you know that that is part of
that is happening there as well.
From what we hear and what you
hear, And I'd just like to bring
that to light as to why we are
here and what we are discussing.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, representative. We have
representative brio Van Con and
then Senator Maestas.
Madam chair. Thank you for your
presentation. Um, I had the
pleasure of, um, touring the,
uh, mental health facility some
years ago. And what are the
questions A little just a little
bit confused about and I just
need clarification. So I
remember going into one
facility. That was, um
I guess it was monitored and it
was P prisoners that came from
Corrections Department and were
held that had some mental
illness. What Where does that
fall here?
Madam Chair representative.
That's the forensic unit. That's
the forensic unit. I wasn't sure
if that was forensic or the
adult.
So, Madam Chair representative
again. They they both are on
court orders, but the forensic
is through the civil side of the
court. I mean, the I'm sorry.
The criminal side of the court
and the adult psych or the A PD
is on the civil side of the law.
OK, and I You may not have this
information and probably, I
don't know if you guys track it,
but, um, for people that are, uh
rehabilitated and eventually
serve out their term or their
prison sentence, and
Maybe rehabilitated any idea of
how many people are
Released back into society that
sort of
Are successful.
Madam Chair representative.
In terms of the forensic unit.
Our job is to
Help this individual go stand
trial.
And that trial could be a
dismissal of charges. It could
be a sentence of years or
decades. It could be a number of
things that occur after our
treatment. So it is. You're
right. It is very, very hard for
us to monitor that. On the civil
side, we have things like
rehospitalization rates and
things like that that we can
monitor on the forensic side. We
don't know what's gonna happen
when we send them back to the
court. So on the forensic side,
our client is actually the
court. It's not the
So the court is sending them to
us, and we are sending them back
to the court. Now, with our
competence restoration rate,
What I could say is about 80% of
the time. Those people are
either gonna gonna come to a
plea agreement or they're gonna
go to trial, But whatever is
going on with their charges is
gonna get played out and
finished in the court system.
So, Madam Chair. Um and
gentlemen, is there any way of
knowing if those individuals
come back to you? I mean, do you
guys track any of that
information?
Madam Chair, representative, if
you're asking if they come back
to us
Over time. II. I can pull that
data. I don't have it today, but
I can get it and get it back to
you. Yes. OK, Thank you And
Madam chair. I've just mentioned
that if anybody, um has the time
to go and tour the facility, it
was quite an eye opener and
especially with the, um
Children.
And how you know some of the
mental illnesses that, um, I saw
with with the young people. Um,
it was it was an eye opener for
sure. So thank you for the work
that you do, because I know that
this is not easy work.
Thank you.
Thank you, representative,
Representative Oon. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you for coming up.
From LA anyway, So my big
question is being that you're in
Las Vegas, New Mexico.
How hard is it to recruit
qualified staff?
Madam Chair representative.
The short answer is hard, but
let me expand on that a little
bit.
Um, If you Google health care
shortage, you will find that we
have a health care shortage
across the country that is not
specific to New Mexico. It's not
specific to Las Vegas.
We have five psychiatrists
positions and we have five
filled
We have three medical provider
positions and we have three
filled. So what? We don't have a
problem with which surprises
Everyone is that level of
recruitment. We actually do
really well at the higher
providers, Um and don't have any
vacancy. Think we've done a
pretty good job of kind of
rolling out the red carpet and
treating them really well. What
we struggle with are those kind
of CN A or psychiatric
technicians.
Again. That's not necessarily
Specific to a rural community
that's everywhere or offering
people $17 an hour to work at 3
A.m. on Tuesday with some of the
most difficult, serious and
persistent mental ill population
in the state, it's difficult.
But I would my contention to
that is it's not necessarily the
rural ness of it. It's the
difficultness of the job and the
pay.
Oh, wow. I guess Madam chair
you're offering 17 bucks an
hour $17 an hour.
To work.
In the nursing field.
As AC N a right
My granddaughter came home from
college and is working as a
waitress.
One of the local restaurants and
grants.
And she's making $17 an hour
plus tips.
So you're telling me the salary
that, uh, we are paying these
employees is set by the state of
New Mexico.
Madam Chair, representative it
there's a pay band set by the
State personnel Office for these
positions. Yes, thank you, so I
can understand where the problem
would be.
I just, uh, OK, so I was just
curious about that part and then
T and, uh, I can hear you back
alive. Uh, just, uh, little
memories thing that I remember
hearing when I was a young man.
I was raised in Mora and, uh, it
was called La Casa de los Locos,
right?
And, uh, if you turn in one of
your neighbors or your one of
your friends because they were,
uh
Mentally unfit. I look
Uh, you get a $5 reward. So in
those days, I was when, uh, when
did the heart stay? Hospital? We
open up open their doors. I box
was a lot of money.
So
they didn't have a problem
Recruiting patients. Madam Chair
representative, I have heard
that, um and we did open our
doors in 1889. That's when the
state hospital was first
established here. And as you all
know, New Mexico became a state
in 1912. So the original name
was the, um, insane asylum for
the New Mexico territory. So,
yeah, I think there was a lot of
stigma there and I am
Happy to say it's better, but
but kind of to your point. I was
just watching the brand new
Ghostbusters movie and they're
talking about the place for the
criminally insane and said it,
you know, in this really spooky
way and I was with my 11 year
old son, and I kind of nudged
him and said, You know, you live
across the street from the place
in New Mexico of the criminally
insane. Um, so yeah, I think we
have some work to do on stigma,
but that Yeah, that's the
Thank you, representative. We
have Senator Maestas, then
representative Castano.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for that. I was just gonna
mention that that
That this was one of the
original territorial
institutions. New Mexico made a
commitment early on to treat
behavioral health and and
mentally ill. The, um the prison
was built in 1885.
And then on University of New
Mexico in 1889, And then as you
mentioned the territorial insane
asylum.
1889. So it's good that New
Mexico hasn't changed its
priorities in 150 years,
Building the prison first. Um
but, um, so the campus, uh
The campus there on hot Springs
is is the
Max All Behavioral Health
Institute.
Is there any
Locations outside of that, that
campus there in Vegas that are
under your hegemony. Madam
Chair, Senator Not impatient. So
again, the CBS, um, offices. We
have one in Las Vegas That's on
seventh Street in Las Vegas. And
then there's one in Guadalupe
County and one in Pecos. OK,
thank you. And, um and so, all
of this. This institution is
under the Department of Health.
Madam Chair, Senator. Yes. And
so you're supervisor is the
secretary of health and then the
governor.
Madam Chair, Senator Master
Right now there's in acting
director of all of the
facilities. So that's my
supervisor. Then Secretary
Allen, then the governor. I see.
So the madam chair, uh,
gentlemen, the the Department of
Health, uh, over has various
locations like three or four.
Similar type not similar, but
they have locations. And so that
person is in charge of all those
physical locations.
The vacancy that you mentioned
Madam Chair, Senator Master, if
you the Department of Health
oversees essentially seven what
we call facilities so I can go
through those if you would like,
OK? No, thank you for that. Do
you know if, um Madam chair if
other states
Have similar institutions or or
it's more of a network of
services.
Madam Chair Senator may ask this
Every state has a state
hospital.
Every state State hospital takes
civil commitments and takes
forensic commitments. The
balance between those is
different from state to state.
So, for example, Washington
State where I worked for a
number of years.
At one point was about 50% civil
50% competence, restoration
forensic and now it's more
closely to 80%. Oregon is almost
100%. Now, forensic that is the
direction that they're going,
but every state operates the
state hospital to provide that
service and my opinion is, you
would never want that to go
private because we deal with the
most difficult
Individuals and private
institutions would raise their
hand and tell you they could do
it, and then they wouldn't and
they would push it back in the
system. What we elect to do what
you all elect to do with the the
State of New Mexico elects to do
with some of those other
services and to provide some
general fund to support that.
Yeah, no, thank you. No, no
one's ever suggesting that that
this governmental function
should go private, but with
regards to let me see if I get
this straight, So if someone uh
say is
Charged with a double homicide.
Mm.
The maximum penalty is 30 years
they're deemed incompetent. You
cannot treat them to competency.
Then there's a dangerousness
hearing and then the judge if
deemed dangerous. The judge has
the legal authority to do a
civil commitment to the maximum.
They would they could be
sentenced to. So in that
scenario that I just gave the
the government could sentence
them to 60 years civil
commitment, correct.
Madam Chair, Senator Masters.
Yes. I mean, I I It's difficult
to differentiate that with a
civil commitment because it
would be on our forensic side
because they're still under the
purview of Department of
corrections, and they're on our
forensic unit. They wouldn't be
on our civil commitment unit. So
if they're on the 1.5 is the
statute. You know the NMC where
all of these fall 1.2 is
confidence rest. 1.6 is DD 1.5
is the individuals that you're
talking about? And that is
individuals who are not
competent.
And can't be restored to
competence. There's a select
number of, um, crimes that fall
under that statute where the
judge would have that
jurisdiction. Your example of a
double homicide would be one
that would fall under that, so
they would sentence that person
to
Our forensic unit, and you're
right for up to the total amount
of time Had they been convicted
of that crime. We still have to
do a check in with the court
every two years.
On those individuals, but we do
have people that are on that
order that are probably gonna be
there for life. OK, thank you.
That's interesting. So you don't
consider that a civil commitment
and it's not they don't go into
the civil commitment wing of the
institution.
Madam Chair center. That's
correct. OK, so it's considered
in in. You might not
Are we done? OK, great. Let's
work on the Medicaid
reimbursement because it's my
understanding. Madam Chair if
someone gets taken from the
prison to a hospital, your
Medicaid eligible, so let's
figure out how we can do that.
Thank you, Madam Chair. You're
welcome.
Representative Castano then will
go to Senator Cedillo Lopez and
then Senator duh.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, mister shills for being
here. Um, your comment earlier
that you turned that institute
around the last three years. The
morale has gone up, but I think
we hit a snag this year. Um, I
know we had some issues with our
budget and some of our nursing
staff, and we we fix the budget
issue, But the nursing staff
issue has not been solved. Um
Huntington nurses that we lost
In the last four or five months.
Madam Chair representative
Castellano seven.
And these nurses are residents
of Las Vegas, New Mexico
CORRECT.
Madam Chair, representative
Castano. I believe so. OK, So so
my point being is, you know our
town is struggling right now
with water issues. Um, we've had
a lot of issues. Um, we're not
keeping our residents
Employed locally. Now we are
bringing in agency nurses. I
believe, uh, every six weeks how
many agency nurses are you
bringing in every six weeks?
So Madam Chair representative.
the typical contract for an
agency employees 12 weeks and a
lot of times they will renew and
stay longer than that. But yeah,
it is a fast turnaround.
OK, and we are spending a little
more money. I, I guess.
I just need to put it out there.
We were in a deficit. We got the
money for our budget, Um
Department of health.
Did it, honor what we have
talked about. So some of our
nursing our nurses have left
from our community and we're
bringing in agency nurses, and
that's a concern to me,
especially in
A long term care because you
these nurses that are local
Form a bond with each patients
that are there that they're
caring for, and now you got
agency nurses that are coming in
and really don't
Here as much as a local nurse.
That's been there, 10.
15 years Correct.
So, Madam Chair representative
Castellana? Yes. So I just wanna
again. Thank you for helping us
Get that supplemental during the
session. I know there was a
little time there where we
didn't think we were gonna get
that supplemental And I know you
personally assisted with that.
So I do want to thank you again
for your help with that. Um,
yeah, I think if you're asking
what my belief in as a hospital
administrator, it's that we hire
state staff. We have nurses and
CNAS that know our patients that
treat them well and that are
committed to the community.
The patients. I think that's my
job is to stop us in that way.
Thank you. And
And I just wanna put it out
there that I think Tier C is
going to this kind of the same
issue that we're going through
and and I think that we need to
revamp Department of Health. Um,
our secretary.
I know we have an acting
director of the facilities. I
think there's something that
needs to be fixed. Because right
now there is a problem in and I
thank you for coming forward.
and and you're right. Our
community of Las Vegas. We
accept these people as one of
our own. Um, I tell the story
that my mom and dad opened a
boarding home back in 1980, the
first client we had was buck
from the New Mexico behavioral
health. He sat and ate dinner
with us at the table. A became
family. So you know, I really
thank our community for being
generous.
And taking these people in as
one of our own. And I thank you
for the work. You've done that
the last three years. Doctor
Shields. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, representative
Senator Cedillo Lopez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for everything you do. This
is I know this is really
difficult Work.
Back to the forensic unit. Um,
Senator by is just identified
that there are some individuals
who never be treated to
competency. Who will stay there?
Um
Maybe not for the rest of their
lives. But for the majority of
the
The time they would have served.
What other kinds of cases or
what kind? I shouldn't say cases
people. Could you, um, tell us a
little bit about more about the
folks that are in the forensic
unit.
Um, what kinds of crimes? Um, I
know because you what you gave
us is length of stay and
restoration rate.
So what? What does the the place
look like?
Yeah, Madam Chair, Senator.
So I guess to answer it looks it
looks like two different things.
The people on the 1.5 Z, I can
answer quickly. There's a very
small number of crimes that fit
that criteria. It's murder,
Attempted murder, rape, child
sexual penetration. It's a very
num very narrow number of crimes
that an individual could come
there. That's a smaller part of
our population right around.
maybe 15 to 20, typically, on
average, or on those 1.5
commitments. Those individuals
stay there a long time they're
there.
Um
We work with them and again. We
do every two years. We we check
them for them to be not
competent, not restorable means
that they have a pretty serious
mental illness. Our medications
have come a long way and if they
still are not able to be treated
that that means that they're
still pretty psychotic. They're
delusional. They're fixed. It's
really difficult to treat. So we
have that population. Um and
then the other population that
moves is much more quickly. Is
that competence restoration
population Now that could be an
individual who committed really
any felony.
There's not a specified, you
know, number of crimes, but it
does have to have that
dangerousness component. So
these people who, um have
alleged I should say, alleged
because it's free education, who
have alleged to have committed a
felony who, um
Are
Sometimes psychotic, sometimes
delusional. Sometimes, um,
there's a substance use issue
there, although typically
because they've been arrested
been in jail had a competence
restoration evaluation, and
that's fantastic. They've
typically had the drugs. Um they
out of their system by the time
they get
to us, so those are individuals
they they typically do have a
serious and persistent mental
illness. Um most common
diagnosis would probably be a
schizophrenia or bipolar. Um and
then the
Crimes that they've alleged to
commit really vary, but usually
there's some type of of
dangerousness assessment there.
So usually it's some type of an
assault. Attempted assaults. Um,
battery things like that, and
that's it.
That those are those are really
the two populations.
In that unit, Madam Chair
Senator Cil Lopez again if we're
talking at forensic alone. Yeah,
that's that's typically who's
there?
OK, and the every two years
check is that that's just for
competency, so they never really
get a hearing on whether they
did what they were alleged to
have done.
So, Madam Chair, Senator.
There's a lot to that statue in
regards to they have to be
pretty sure they did it. So it
is pre adjudication. I mean, I
think you have some attorneys in
here who might know, know it
better than I do. But, you know,
it's not an an allegation
without a ton of evidence that
you have to present some
evidence, and the judge has to
be pretty confident that they
committed that that particular
crime to place them on the 1.5.
Now in
In this country who are innocent
until proven guilty in a court
of law. So again, it is
predication, but there are I
think there are some. There are
some language in the statute to
protect for people being there
on alleged crimes that they
there's not a lot of evidence
that they didn't commit. OK,
What's the name of it? What's
the number of the statue? You
said 1.6. But what's the first
part 30?
Um, Madam Chair, Senator. My my
mind's going blank. It's 34
points. I will get it to you. So
I don't wanna I don't wanna send
you on a wild goose. I will. I
will get it to you.
I'll look for it. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator. I was reminded of
our really neat chart that our
staff did, and there are kind of
standards of proof. And so on in
in, you just sent it to me.
Um, Senator. Duh. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, Mr
Shields.
So
So putting aside Meadows and and
the care program
And am I right in hearing that
for any anyone who's been
admitted inpatient. It has to
come with a court. Order of
commitment. Is that correct?
Madam Chair, Senator Du Hague.
There is no stuttering on that
answer is technically someone
could voluntarily admit to the
state hospital.
There are I don't I can't
remember a case where someone
came in the front door on a
voluntary com Um, agreement to
go to the State hospital, and
that's again not unusual. That's
how it is in every state. They
come in on some type of court
order on the civil side if
someone agrees to go voluntary,
we could keep them on a
voluntary order and drop the
civil commitment and keep them
there voluntarily on the civil
side on the A PD side, we could
do that, But I think it's a
correct assumption to say 100%
of our people came in on a
Order.
But there's there's not
something that says on the a PD
side on the civil side that they
couldn't come in voluntarily.
OK And and Madam chair. Uh, Miss
Shields, so
Do you have the Capa? Uh, what
I'm hearing from providers in
the community is we want to
refer our patients there and
they won't take them.
Um do you guys have the capacity
to take, folks? Uh, I if there
is not a strict requirement that
there be a court order
accompanying them, do you have
the capacity to take folks who
just wanna be referred there by
their their provider, because
that's the level of care that
they require some
Madam Chair center to do I. I
think
If someone wants to come in,
wants to take their medication
once treatment, they probably
don't need our level of care. We
are a really high level of care.
and there are a lot of levels of
care beneath our level of care
that they could go to. I think
when you're talking about the
psychiatrist in the previous
presentation, they probably
don't feel like that person
could voluntarily do all of
those things or they would
discharge them to a community
provider. A community group
home, you know.
Um there's a lot of places they
could go if they were willing to
take their medication. They
weren't aggressive to people
They were gonna stay there. They
weren't going to use drugs if
they're willing to do all of
those things, it's unlikely they
need our level of care. Our
level of care really is for
people who don't want to do
those things, and we need to
step in and help them do those
things That makes sense. And
madam Chair Mr Shields
in a previous meeting when we
had the
The health care commissioners I.
I can't remember what what the
title was, Um, but but I had
heard And and I asked her, if if
if this was her experience as
well that oftentimes people will
get sent to you all and then
discharged like the next that
day or the next day that they
are. They are treated very, very
quickly. Why is that happening?
Madam Chair, Senator. Duh. I
started at an NBA I in November
of 2020.
And in that time we have never
discharged someone the day they
got there the day after. Not
once. I can't speak to what
happened before that, But not
once. Has it happened since I've
been there now. I think that
there I can present at length of
stay on our civil side again. I
think there's two different
lengths of stay. So on our civil
commitment side, we have
individuals that have some high
medical needs that are difficult
to care for in nursing homes,
and those individuals are there
for a few years. So if I tell
The average length of stay at
NMBA. I on our civil side is two
years. It's a little bit
misleading because we have a
group of people that are there
for 10 years.
OK, so let's take the people who
aren't there that long and
what's their average length of
stay, and their average length
of stay is about 90 days, and
it's actually increasing. So I
I've heard it in multiple
meetings. I've heard it from
attorneys say they're back in
court. Within a day. Within a
week. It simply doesn't happen
And I'm happy to present the
data and I. I get that a lot of
people out there think that it
just doesn't happen, though.
Ma'am, dear Mr Shields, I I'd
love to to find out why the
people who are
Working with these patients
think it's happening when when
that is not the isn't
very I think it's because time
goes by quickly, so you send
them to us thinking they're
gonna be there for that. Five
years or 10 years and we hold
them for 28 days, and then they
see him a month later and
because we don't have a lot of
forced
Treatment and other places. I
mean, there's some, there's some
ways to try to force outpatient
treatment, but that's that's
where there's some work to be
done. I think we could do a
little bit more there. So then
they see him 30 days after they
send them to us. If you
expectation, your mind is five
years and you see him a month
later, it's they came right
back.
Right, And I think that that's
part of the problem because the
data doesn't back it up, But I
don't want to dismiss their
experience their experiences.
Didn't I just do all this work
to send him to the State
hospital and now they're back.
30 days later. What What's going
on here? Um and I? I do think
that that does happen. And I
again I would
I'd be happy to pull our length
of stay into our men, Our max
and our mean and our median and
present all of that because the
men would have exactly what
you're talking about. What is
the this shortest number of
times someone spent at the State
hospital? I could pull that and
give that to you. J Shields?
Yes, yes, I would definitely
appreciate that. I think we're
gonna
that's all right. Thank you. Um,
well, thank you very much. Mr
Shi. I thought this was a very
informative um
Description of the work that you
do, which is super helpful for
me because I had almost no basis
or any understanding. And I
imagine there are a number of
people on the committee who have
about a tiny amount of
understanding, so I think this
gives us some good context. When
we talk about some of the
legislation that we've been
discussing, so really appreciate
your willingness to participate
and answer our questions.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you. Committee.
Next up is mental health
treatment, a civil rights
perspective.
Sure worked at that one.
Thank you for letting me know.
And while we're while we're
getting ready to get started,
Thank you very much. Um, we need
to approve the minutes from our
last meeting. If you would take
a moment, please, to look at
your older hold the minutes and
then the chair would entertain
emotion.
To approve the minutes.
So
Senator de Thank you. There's a
motion to approve the minutes
from our last meeting. Is there
any objection?
Seeing them. Please show, um
voting members present and the
affirmative. We've approved a
minute. Thank you.
Right. I'm told that we have a
number of handouts as part of
your presentation, so you'll
need to guide us through which
you want to rely upon. We're
still gonna try and keep our
Uh, 235 recess time. So, uh,
1235. I'm sorry. We've got about
an hour.
And I'll ask you all to
Make sure your presentation goes
no longer than about a half an
hour. So we have about a half an
hour for questions, all right?
Actually, Mr Chair. Um, sorry to
be correcting you, but it's
scheduled for an hour and a half
share. Chandler had agreed to
that and that's what's in the
agenda. So we beg your
indulgence. If we could have
that time, we'll leave as much
time as possible for committee
questions and discussion.
Well, um we'll see how it goes,
but we're scheduled to recess at
11 or 1235. So you may choose to
go beyond that. Um, but
You may not find a committee
here to listen.
Yeah.
Is it Lynch or
Mr Chair members of the
committee. My name is Denali
Wilson. I am a staff attorney
from um the AC LU of New Mexico
in our Las Cruces office. Um
I'm gonna start us off and then
we'll pass it to
To my colleague Elaine Ellen.
Um, I wanna start by thinking
everyone on this committee who
is, uh, given so much of your
time and energy and work to
trying to craft policy solutions
around some of the most
vulnerable members of our
community in New Mexico, and so
thank you so much for all of the
work that you do the AC L US
role in this is a little bit
unique. Of course. We're a civil
rights organization. Um and
Institutional law organization.
Um
We are not though behavioral
health specialists and not even
um, at the center of some of the
most important disability rights
work that is happening here in
our state, But we are committed
to, um
And dedicated to creating safe
communities of belonging and
helping the Legislature. Um,
create those realities for for
For people who are in need by,
um, making sure that everyone
has their basic needs met.
We do our work in coalition, Um
and and we're committed to that
process. Um, you may recognize
from the legislative session,
The work that we do through NM
safe, which is a coalition of of
partners. We also work, um, in
an MC and in other work with the
drug policy Alliance, the law
offices of the public defender
and M CD L, A and many others to
try and best inform our
positions on these important
issues, and we were invited by
The committee today to give a
presentation about civil rights
and some of the implications of
civil rights on mental health.
Um and that is an enormous
universe and so to be most
effective and useful to the
community, or our thought was
that we would work to address
and talk about, um, the
proposals that are before the
committee. That means that we're
pivoting a bit today, Um, just
as everybody on the committee
yesterday
Received new bills. We did two
and so we're gonna try as best
we can to look at, Um
What is before the committee now
and and what might be some of
those implications.
Um
First, uh, the the crisis that
we're facing is one that's
that's very real and comes from
Decades and and generations of
unmet needs in New Mexico. I've
heard many committee members, um
understanding the context of
really just a decimated
behavioral health system and and
how that's contributed to the
situation we're in. I would add
to that, you know, growing
unmet housing needs, Um and
other conditions that have just
led to a significant gap in
services and and care, um, and
widespread crisis. So that is
very real. Uh, New Mexico, of
course, is not alone in
Facing these challenges. Uh, the
rest of the country is is is
grappling with these same issues
and and we're all doing it in a
way and struggling, struggling
really, to craft
Solutions that reflect our
shared values. Um, as a
community and and are ones that
preserve the dignity and
humanity of of some of the most
vulnerable members of our
community.
Um, So we, of course, did not
reach this point in a matter of
days. We're not going to fix it
in a matter of days, but they
see you in in all of our
partners remain committed to, um
To working on long term
solutions.
I am learning just along with
everybody else. This is in no
way my area of expertise and
these are incredibly complicated
systems, um, with a lot of
moving parts, and also as we're
learning some moving targets. Um
But we have. I've tried to
provide some materials that
might help. Um, in the
discussion. It sounds like
committee staff have also been
trying to help us understand.
Um, these, uh, systems with
different handouts and things
So, really, they started just as
working documents for myself
trying to thread the needle with
all these systems, but perhaps
they may be of use to to the
committee and and Really, um,
what I'd like to do is for us to
be able to have a second to zoom
out just a minute again.
We zoom into the civil rights
issues because they really
Are important for understanding
all of the picture.
So I'll, um, the just to orient
you as as the chair asked me to
To the the handouts, there's a
flow chart, um of the behavioral
health system, and, uh, it's
intersections with the criminal
legal system. On the other side
is an analysis of what? Um what
What was until 48 hours ago? 24
hours ago. Some of the proposals
we were looking at, Um some of
that, you know, might not be
relevant now, but maybe back in,
uh, when we're back
In in January, Um, also a
systems glossary. It's It's
obviously very hard to have a
conversation. Um, when we don't
have shared understanding of
terminology, uh, there's a one
page explainer, also of, um
assisted outpatient treatment
based on those original proposed
expansions. Um, so that has
changed a little bit, but maybe
still relevant to our
conversation.
I'm gonna start us where a lot
of people sitting before the
committee have have started the
conversation and it's important
to continue to reiterate, and
that's the community care is
really the cornerstone of
effective behavioral health
systems.
And when individuals receive
support within the communities
where they live, um, where
they're basic needs are being
met. That is where we're going
to have the most effective
outcomes.
This means that
Um
That the most effective
interventions are those that
return people to the community.
um as early as possible or
prevent their removal at all.
And so that's reflected in in
the the illustration and and
graphic depiction here. So the
later in a criminal process at
the intervention occurs, the
more difficult it is for people
to engage or experience any kind
of positive outcomes. And so
those systems as you guys have
learned a lot about many
Uh, you know, are pre arrest and
pre prosecution diversion.
Law enforcement assisted
diversion. Those are the kinds
of models that create the the
speedy return to community that
is needed for effective, um,
treatment outcomes.
Another way to look at this is,
um around voluntariness, which,
of course, is something that the
committee is grappling with,
and, um, is
Uh, relevant in all of the
proposals before the committee.
Voluntariness from a perspective
of efficacy.
Is, um
Is it important for
understanding? Because, uh, we
know that, um, treatment
outcomes are most effective when
engagement is voluntary and non
punitive, and you've heard that
from from many different
stakeholders, um, but from a
constitutional lens. It's a
really important compass for us,
too, because, uh, the
involuntariness right a
deprivation of liberty when
somebody is confined or somebody
is, um, put into treatment
against their will, um, or their
wishes. That's the only time
where the Constitution
Is concerned, right? So if you
have a voluntary system, you
don't have to ask the AC LU to
come here. You're doing great.
Um, so for a compass, both in
efficacy, and when it turns in
terms of our constitutional
analysis, analysis,
voluntariness is is really the
gold standard.
Um
So I'm gonna try and reorient us
Now that we've kind of, um, set
the stage, um
To what the new proposals are.
So we know we we were looking at
a kind of big bite at the Apple
In terms of competency, it seems
like that is much much different
now. Um, and there are
Not direct, um, changes to the
assisted outpatient treatment
program, at least in in the
flavor that we were originally
looking at them, Um so we're
shifting a little bit. Um
One thing to start this
conversation because we were
prepared to come in and and talk
about assisted outpatient
treatment. Um, as you guys are
have been learning.
One important thing to note
about the bills that were
introduced yesterday is where
we're talking about. Now. Just
traditional impatient in
hospital. Um
Commitments. Right. This is this
is a very different world, and
it's one that is obviously less
voluntary, more coercive and for
our purposes, um, much more
liberty ridden, And so, um
In the in the proposals around a
OT. Um, dangerousness is really
the the the central piece in it.
It is here too again. These are
proposals we may see again in
January. For now, we'll keep put
them on hold.
But whether we're looking at
assisted outpatient treatment or
Inpatient.
Involuntary commitment.
Dangerousness is the key and
that's what we heard yesterday.
It's really where these changes
are are, um, being concentrated.
So this is, um, harm to self
right. The the harm to self harm
to others standard that exists
within involuntary civil
commitment. Um so
As just an orienting question.
We we wanna ask why Why are we
talking about dangerousness at
all right? Why does why does it
matter that that be the
standard?
And it's the
institutionalization through
inpatient in hospital
commitment is, um, a a pretty
significant deprivation of
liberty, right? We're talking
about actual confinement. Um and
and in those cases from a
constitutional lens. That's
something that must be justified
by a compelling
Non discriminatory.
Legitimate government interest.
And, uh, we we heard Mr Ben
Baker talk about this a little
bit in the context of the medium
safety bill, but whether it is
speech or bodily autonomy and
the right to make decisions
about your own medical care the
right to refuse treatment. Um
A deprivation of right by the
government has to be justified
by a compelling and legitimate
government interest.
And it play here. Um, that's
public safety right and across
the country and in
jurisdictions around involuntary
civil commitment, That's that's
the the state interest. That is,
uh
Is used to to uphold, um,
involuntary commitment in in
narrow circumstances, but we
don't get to just evoke that
reason there has to be a
connection, right? And so, um,
the the the Committee, um
Her, uh, the governor talk, uh,
the governor's office. Talk
about dangerousness. You may
also have heard, um and caught a
very generous statement that
states have extreme latitude
when defining dangerousness and
not just is not the case. Um,
there is an extreme latitude.
Hear it all. You know, we're
talking about strict
constitutional scrutiny, which
is the least amount of latitude
you could have. Um, and whatever
latitude there is in crafting a
definition, The constitutional
standard is danger
dangerousness, and so if your
definition creeps outside of
that, and exceeds that and
includes things that are not
related to dangerousness, it's
not one that is going to pass
Muster.
And so if we take a look at what
was, um, released yesterday as
part of this proposal, um we
have expanded dramatically the
definition of dangerousness.
In
Pretty much every way that, um
That you could
Create a parameter around that
definition. So what is the harm
itself that we're looking at?
Um, you know, we're seeing new
things like serious physical
debilitation, extreme
destruction of property. Um, the
likeliness of that harm, right?
That's another parameter that
indicia of the harm. Like, what
evidence? Are we gonna look at?
Um in the media of the harm, So,
um, likelihood, you know, we're
moving from more likely than not
to reasonably possible. Um
We're seeing in this initia. You
know, I. I know, Senator. Duh.
You had some good questions for
the office about? Um You know
what? What? These really broad
terms mean, when some when we're
looking for evidence that shows
behavior is grossly irrational
or grossly inappropriate. Um,
you know what? What is that
really going to mean? And is it
again for the constitutional
question? Is that actually tied
to dangerousness, right?
Immediacy or we're keeping near
future, but there's this new
introduction of relevant paths.
That's not really immediacy, but
it's another time Marker. Um,
that isn't that isn't defined
and creates this this Oh,
possibility of overbreadth or
overreach, which is really
where, um, where we're
concerned, Um and and where, you
know something like this could
invite significant litigation.
Um So, I, I wanna move us to the
competency piece. Uh, again, I
will just say we're chewing on
this at the same time. Everybody
is right. Um so, uh, bear with
me as I try to make sense of it,
Um, when II I see two really big
things happening with the
proposed changes. Um, one is the
removal of a lot of judicial and
prosecutorial discretion. And so
this these new proposals are
F the D A to commence, Um,
commitment proceedings in a
variety of new scenarios. Um,
where now It's discretionary and
judges are required to detain
where, um, detention would be
discretionary and just in
general, from a policy
perspective, discretion and
individual assessments is really
something that that we should
preserve in this process.
Um
Another note about, uh,
dangerousness and how these kind
of it looks like these are
playing together. Um, we've
learned And throughout this this
process, um in the interim, that
the dangerousness standard for
competency and the dangerousness
standard for civil commitment
are distinct standards, but one
of one of the scenarios in which
AD a is required under these
proposals to commence commitment
proceedings is when someone is
found Not dangerous, right? So
Not competent and not dangerous.
So we're saying you're not
dangerous and we're going to
commence this proceeding in
which dangerousness is the crux.
Um, it seems like an ineffective
use of our resources and because
detention is required, and we
already from from the point of
departure, um, are starting from
a place of knowing that someone
may likely not be be, um
Uh,
Uh, eligible for civil
commitment. Um
It it It's quite confusing. Um
Expansion.
Um and and I know that there
were questions from the
committee yesterday that I echo
to this question the the change
to the dangerousness.
Component of the competency
statute, which makes expressly
clear what what is already true
right that that dangerousness is
not a clinical standard, and
that's already known in
practice, but but because of, um
The way that it is written. The
the worry is that that may
discourage reliance on
professionals. Where, um, you
know, a judge may be on the
fence around dangerousness like
we want. We want judges to be
able to use as many tools as
they can, um, and to have
discretion to use them, and it
seems like these are
Are really the the crux of of
what we're looking at here now,
um as a proposal, so
Before I hand it off to Ellen.
Um, we I just want to say that
we recognize that the community
is in need of of significant
change, and I'll say again that
we're so grateful for the
committee's commitment to these
issues and to working to craft
effective policies and we know
that it's the intention of
people who are working very hard
to get this, right, um to help
people and not to violate their
civil rights. And we wanna be
good partners, um and not
adversaries in in this process.
Um, the governor's office has
been exceedingly generous in
their willingness to have
conversations and I expect that
door to remain open. Um, but our
concerns are are are
significant. And, um, we'll
we'll see where we go from here.
Thank you. Deli. Excuse me.
Thank you, Mr Chair, Madam chair
and members of the committee. My
name is Ellen Pines. Um and I'll
be working from I'm not going to
be projecting it, but I'll be
working from a handout that you
all should have that looks like
this, Um
And I want to start with a note
of sort of explanation and
apology the guidelines for
presenters for this committee
ask that materials be submitted
to the staff before the
committee begins and as a
compliant presenter. I sent in
my materials on Tuesday
afternoon to Nancy and then
yesterday morning, we all
learned I learned you all
learned that the governor was
taking a notably different
approach. So some of the
material in my presentation in
my, um
Power point has been overtaken
by events and I will modify as
appropriate, but be aware that
some of what is in here it's
still good information, but some
of it is no longer immediately
on the table. You were worried
that I wasn't going to give you
enough time for your
presentation. But we've
eliminated all the air you Mr
Chair. I will attempt to emulate
your efficiency, Mr. Chair, a
mole session coming up so
Um, I do want most of my
comments are going to focus on
assisted outpatient treatment.
The governor has initially that
was the focus her focus for the
special session. That is as of
yesterday, no longer the case.
She is proposing a change to a
OT the a OT statute, but it is
not as extensive as her earlier
proposal.
Which is why parts of this, um,
presentation are no longer
relevant because those things
are not currently on the table.
Um, they may very well be at a
not so far future date, but you
have heard a lot of discussion
about a OT at your previous
meetings. The interim yesterday
and I want to give you a fuller
picture of what a OT is what
it's about what the concerns are
about it and that is still
relevant because we still have
an a OT statute. It
Come up again for broader
revisions, and I want you to
have, um, an understanding of
our positions on it and the
bigger picture.
So, um, looking at page two, the
essence of a OT is that there is
a court order. These are court
proceedings and an order is
entered directing an individual
with mental illness to receive
specified treatments or
services. Um, it is not as
previous
Um
Uh, presenters have emphasized
it is not a criminal proceeding.
It's all civil. These are not
people who have been accused of
or convicted of a crime. Um
This statute was enacted in New
Mexico in 2016, but it had first
been introduced many years
before that. This process took
years. Um, before we actually
had a statute adopted and
enacted, um and that reflects
how complex these issues are and
how controversial and um
representative Casey has
referred to how difficult those
discussions were, Um, because,
unlike most of you, she was in
the Legislature during that.
Long debate and even though the
statute has been in place for
eight years, we only have one
functional program in New
Mexico. Um, that's one Dona
County, which I'll get back to
Albuquerque, the second judicial
district, and you heard from
them yesterday did briefly have
a a an a program. They had to
stop it, because, um, they
didn't have providers to provide
the services and they are about
to restart it next week. Um so
we will have two. But that's
still not much after eight
years.
Um
And as I said, we'll get back to
Duana County and talk a little
bit more about that. So what's
the argument for a OT? Why do we
need to do that? Um, the
proponents of a OT say that it's
needed because some people with
mental illness don't recognize
that they're sick and they have
to be forced into treatment
because they won't do it
voluntarily. There's also a
pretty, um and that thing about
they won't do it voluntarily is
really fraught and that's
another thing. I'll get back to,
um there is a pretty widespread
If that medication is the answer
for people with mental illness,
and we've all heard that
statement about
He's great when he he's on his
meds, and when he goes off his
meds, he just falls apart.
The issue of medication
psychotropic medications.
Is much, much more complicated.
These can be, um
Really difficult medications
they have. They can have very
bad side effects, and those side
effects can be physical. And
they can be mental. Um, there is
research showing that being on
psychotropic meds can actually
interfere with your recovery
Rather than assist it. They can
cause you to be more violent and
aggressive. They can cause your
functioning level to deteriorate
rather than improve. So the idea
that just keeping people on
their meds is the answer is
Wrong way to go, and there is
also a belief which you've heard
about in your recent hearings.
You heard about it yesterday
that what makes this effective
is that the court orders it.
This is referred to as the black
robe effect that we're all. Um
Scared of judges and will do
what they tell us to do. So if
you turn to page four, I'd like
to talk a moment about the myth
of the black robe effect.
Proponents of a O. As I said,
say, that's what makes the
difference. The court orders it
and we all respect judges, so
the person does it and I have a
quotation on this slide from a
very recent, UM, paper published
in a peer reviewed journal, Um
from April, So it's a current
assessment, while the black robe
effect is thought to be a part
of what makes a OT programs
effective, there is no existing
research that Imper examines
this phenomenon.
And not only is that a true
statement, Um it's also
noteworthy because the authors
of that article are affiliated
with the treatment advocacy
center. The T Wa was founded 20
years or so ago. I can't
remember when specifically to
promote a OT. They are the
primary promoters of a OT across
the country. Um, Judge
Brickhouse yesterday mentioned
working with the treatment
advocacy center. Their people
are saying, even though they
promote the idea that the black
robe effect is what
Is effective. Their people are
saying we haven't proved this by
research. We need to figure it
out.
Um, you've also heard material
information from Dona County
that undercuts that Jamie
Michael, who has been involved
with Dona's a OT program since
its inception and knows this
stuff backwards and forwards.
she told you that when they
evaluated their program, what
people who participated in that
program said they appreciated
was the judges caring and
supportive.
That's not about fear of the
judge. That's about somebody
supporting you carrying you and
connect caring for you and
connecting you with services.
Um, these are the Oh, and she
also said it takes a certain
kind of judge to do this Who has
those empathetic skills in the
communication skills to work
with this kind of of a
population? Um, not any judge
can do it or at least not do it.
Well, every judge in New Mexico
is authorized to do it and the
kinds of attributes she was
talking about.
Are not the ones we usually
select judges for. Um, so why do
we have judges doing this
instead of social workers or
peer support workers?
The black Rob effect does have
an impact on providers. As Jamie
said the judge makes sure that
the provider who's supposed to
be providing the services
doesn't wiggle out of them by
saying.
He didn't show up for his
appointment.
What are you doing to get him to
his appointment?
So what are our so the black
robe effect is really
overstated. And I am not saying
Please don't understand.
Misunderstand me. Um please do
understand me. Um, I am not
saying that there is no coercive
effect of a judge's order and
the black robe effect.
But
Our position is that that's not
what makes the difference. What
makes the difference is that
they connect people to services
and these people feel like
they're getting support and
somebody who cares about them.
That is not the black robe
effect. That's the effect of
having somebody come to you and
help you through the system.
So moving on to slide five.
What are the concerns about a
OT? These are not just our
concerns. These are widespread
concerns.
And, um Denali has talked about
some of this. The deprivation of
liberty. This is somebody who is
not been found incompetent to
make their lacking capacity. I
don't want to confuse you with
criminal competency. They have
not been found to lack capacity
to make their own health care or
other life decisions, but
they're being deprived of the
ability to do that. And that is
something that reflects our
biases about mental illness,
because if it if you have a
physical illness
Have the capacity to make health
care decisions. We let you do
it, regardless of what the
outcome is, if I have cancer,
and the doctor says we've got
great chemotherapy that can cure
that, and I say No, I don't want
that.
And if that means I die.
That's fine with me. I'm making
that call. We would never force
that chemotherapy on me because
it's a physical illness, And yet
we feel it's OK to do for mental
illnesses. Um, and I think that
that kind of disparate treatment
is a matter for concern.
Forced treatment is
traumatizing. Imagine yourself
being hauled into court. You
didn't file a petition to go in
and be in court. You're being
hauled into court. You're being
ordered into treatment. Um, it's
a traumatizing experience and
one of the problems with
traumatizing people is that it
interferes with the therapeutic
relationship it reduces trust.
It makes it less likely that you
can engage
Successfully in treatment, and
it makes it less likely that in
future you're going to engage
successfully in treatment, so
that's problematic. The A OT
statute authorizes an order that
exerts extensive control over a
person's life. The judge can
supervise your living
arrangements, they can order
specific dosages of medication
and specific medications,
regardless of whether it's right
for you or not, um, really
extensive control. There are
equity concerns in terms of
disparate
And who's brought in for a OT
orders. Um, And as I said, these
are people who have not been
convicted of crimes. My next
slide number six is on
constitutional and legal issues.
And Denali has really covered
this, so I'm not going to talk
much about it, but I do want to
call your attention to the last
bullet on the page, which is
about section 504 of the Rehab
Act. That's federal law barring
discrimination based on
disability, and there are new
rules, new regulations that were
just issued a
Months ago. Um, perhaps last
month by, um
Uh, the Department of Health and
Human Services on discrimination
based on disability in medical
treatment, and they specifically
recognized that involuntary
mental health treatment may
constitute the discrimination
that is being barred by section
504. So be aware that you have
this potential legal threat
hanging over a OT.
Um, the question of whether a OT
is effective. Um, studies do
show positive effects, such as
the evaluation of the Dona
County program, but it's not
clear in most cases what they're
measuring. Are they measuring
the impact of court involvement,
or are they measuring the impact
of actually getting me?
Mental health services. Um, and
would you do just as well or
even better to do that on a
voluntary basis rather than
through a court order, and, uh,
If you're measuring what
happened when somebody started
getting services? Yeah, if all
you're doing is looking at
individual a and how they did
before the A OT proceeding and
how they did after
They're getting services so they
probably are doing better. But
you're not measuring what the
impact of hauling them into
court. Was you. The gold
standard of research is that you
have a control group and an
experimental group. And if
you're just evaluating before
and after for the same
individual, you don't have that.
Um, under current law.
And this is slide. Eight.
The A O act requires that in
order to do an a OT order, you
have to have a demonstrated
history of non compliance with
treatment that has caused
certain things. The person is
unwilling or unlikely to engage
in treatment voluntarily. A OT
is the least restrictive
alternative. The person will
benefit and it's in that
person's best interest. And if
you turn to number nine slide
nine I want very briefly because
I know a lot of you liked the
Dona County, a OT program and
Um we kind of like the a OT
program and Dona County too,
because it's voluntary. Um, I
wanted to explain to you why the
Dona County program. We like it
because it's not a OT
understate statute.
What they do in almost all cases
in Dariana County, is they
engage the person voluntarily.
They go to the you know upon a
hospital discharge, for example.
And they say we can get you
connected with all these great
services. Would you like that?
And people say Yeah, I'm having
trouble getting services. I'd
like services. Jamie Michael
told you that Sometimes there's
resistance to services, but the
vast majority of their cases are
people who haven't been able to
get the services because they're
not available or it's too hard
to navigate the system to get
them.
But one of the criteria for an A
O order is the person is
unwilling or unlikely to enter
into treatment voluntarily and
if they're accepting services
voluntarily, they haven't met
that criteria. All these
petitions should be getting
dismissed in Don on a county and
they're not. Um, but they are
not a OT within the law.
So, um, keeping that in mind
that
We like it, and you liked it.
and Donna County likes it
primarily because it's voluntary
and not really a OT. Think about
that if you are in the future
making decisions relating to
changes to a OT now I'm going to
skip over slide 10 because that
is about the now superseded
governor's proposal. Um, that
was the one the latest one when
I was preparing these I do want
to if you'll turn to slide 11
very briefly Talk about one
provision of
Not about the provision of the
governor's bill, but the
requirement in the A OT law for
a memo of understanding between
local government a county or
municipality and the court to
cover the court's costs that
they had proposed to take that
out. We wanted it to stay, and
we're glad that it isn't
Because what that calls for is
an agreement for the locality to
pay court costs. Um and we don't
care about that if the court is
willing to cover the cost,
That's fine. Although you heard
yesterday from the second
judicial district, they still
having the the city cover it and
they wouldn't be doing it if the
city didn't cover the cost.
But
The other thing. That's
important there is that
Excuse me is that if you have
that agreement
It ensures there's a program in
the in place to provide the
services. We don't particularly
care about the court costs. If
they're going to pay them,
That's fine with us, but the
services have to be there and
having an MOU. That's what's
going on in Dona. That's what's
going on in Albuquerque. It
ensures that you've got somebody
to provide services that you're
ordering somebody, um into so
And they are still um, in in,
uh, the second district. They
are still, um, getting local
money to do it, and it's quite a
bit of money. Um, they're going.
They're planning to serve 40
people a year at a cost of close
to a million dollars a year, and
that's not for treatment costs.
So it's an expensive
proposition. We think if you
look at slide, 14 I'm skipping
over a couple on the superseded
proposal.
People should get the services
they're eligible for without a
court order.
We really appreciate the
governor's efforts and HSGS
efforts to build the behavioral
health provider workforce, but
everybody who has come in here
and talked to you about this had
said We have a shortage. We
don't have the providers we need
and that's a nationwide problem.
We can't just bring them here
from somewhere else because
there's a shortage everywhere
and we are working on growing
our own providers. Um, but that
takes time. It takes a long time
to train a behavioral health
provider.
So
That's we appreciate the efforts
and we recognize the progress,
but there's much more progress
to be made.
Um, turning to slide 15.
The thing I wanted to emphasize
here is that this special
session is supposed to be
focusing on public safety issues
and the governor's press release
that was issued after the, UM
regular session said that the
goal here is to quote to reduce
the danger and risk New Mexico
communities face every day and
make our state safer. End quote.
And yet the centerpiece of her
agenda for the special session
was changes to the A OT statute.
And although she has narrowed
down what she wants to do with
the a OT statute, she still
focusing on people with mental
illness for a large part of
what's going on here, which
simply perpetuates the myth that
people with mental illness are
dangerous and that who's
committing crimes? I'm not
saying people with mental
illness don't commit crimes, but
people with mental illness are
far more likely to be the
victims of
Crime than the perpetrators of
it. Um, and so she is
perpetuating that myth and
adding to the stigma associated
with mental illness and during
the regular session when we were
talking about criminal
competency and diversion and
people with mental illness and
their engagement in the criminal
justice system, most of what we
heard about was a nuisance
crimes and
You know that's important on
quality of life. I'm not
diminishing it, but we weren't
talking about people who were
seriously dangerous and it was
really hard to avoid the
perception that what was going
on was we want those people out
of sight. We want them off the
street. Um and
If you'll turn to slide 16. I
have a quotation from O'Connor B
Donaldson, which is a very
famous US Supreme Court case on
Um uh, committing people with
mental illness. May the state
fence in the harmless mentally
ill solely to save its citizens
from exposure to those whose
ways are different. One might as
well ask if the state to avoid
public unease could incarcerate
all who are physically
unattractive or socially
eccentric.
Mere public intolerance or
animosity cannot
constitutionally justify the
deprivation of a person's
physical liberty. And, uh, I
think those are wise words from
the Supreme Court, and I hope we
will all take them to heart. Um
If you look at slide, 17 you can
ignore the last bullet since, um
uh, AM T is mostly off the
table, but not entirely, but
just I know you all know this.
You'll have all have said it. I
just want to reinforce these
issues are complex in and of
themselves. How they
interrelate, Um, is very
complex. Um, There is no
consensus on the right road
here. Even the governor has
scaled back what she's planning
on doing. This is not ready for
a special se
And in three weeks, um and, uh
um, I hope that
Cooler heads will prevail. And
we will, um uh
Uh, defer this, um
I did include a slide on number
18 on what we propose. This was
in lieu of the A OT changes,
but, um, I'm not going to go
through all this other than to
say that we believe you should
emphasize voluntary services
Engaging people voluntarily, Um,
building the provider network. I
put some things that should be
in an a OT order if we continue
to use a OT, um and I do want to
mention this goes back to the
black robe effect.
And the court proceedings. Is
this the best use of judicial
resources?
You spend it? Well, Albuquerque,
the city of Albuquerque, is
going to spend close to a
million dollars covering the
cost of the court to do the
kinds of things that you could
get a peer support worker, a
mental health peer support
worker to do carry Armijo, Uh,
mentioned the peer support
workers earlier today.
I don't know exactly how much
certified peer support workers
get paid, but I am sure it is a
lot less than what a judge is
getting. And if the peer support
worker can do the same or an
even better job of engaging
people in treatment than the
judge? Why are we wasting the
judges time?
And, um, in closing. I'd like to
just say a few things about the
new bills that we were
introduced to yesterday. Um,
there is what I think Holly
Agajanian referred to as the
definitions Bill. Um, which
would make a change to the
definition of dangerousness.
That's not the term used in the
statute. It's harm to self or
others. Um, and those
definitional changes would apply
both to, um inpatient civil
commitment under the MH DD code
and
And, um as
Some of you, including Senator
Duh yesterday pointed out. Um
these are incredibly vague and
overbroad and would apply to
many of us. Um, I won't mention
life legislators in any context.
I'll leave that to you. Um, but,
you know provisions like unable
to exercise, self control,
judgment and discretion in the
conduct of the person's daily
activities. We all know people
like that We have been people
like
And we don't get locked up or
ordered into mental health
treatment, um, showing of
behavior that's grossly
irrational. Um, person can't
control their actions. I mean,
this stuff is vague and hugely
overbroad. There is a provision
that would add harm to property
within the definition of harm to
others. Now I recognize that
there can be harm to property
That is quite, um
Dangerous to people as well. But
what the heck is quote extreme
discretion, Destruction of
property? That's the kind of
thing that causes things to get
thrown out of court based on
vagueness and overbreadth, Um so
and in the, um, competency, I, I
think, actually, I'm not gonna
cover that. Um, because Denali
has done a nice job of doing
that. Um, so I think at this
point, we will stand for
questions. Thank you. So much
for your attention, and the time
madam.
Oh, thank you very much for your
presentation. We have
Representative Romero, Um
representative Hoffman, V Hill.
Anyone else? Um, I con.
One sec.
You can't turn slowly. Yes, I
have to move my whole body. So
body move. OK,
OK. I'm Lord I'm Lujan.
Sil Lopez. Anyone else? OK?
Um, let's trip 12346.
That's true. You get about six
minutes each for your questions
and let's go with Representative
Romero. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, both for your
comprehensive presentations and
preparation, um, with changing
motives, I think every day
really appreciate, um, the
discussion I. I think this is
probably directed toward Denali.
Um
On the new proposals on
competency. Um what I think
We're what I'm trying to wrestle
with is when we're looking at
dangerousness and the sort of
middle ground that we're
thinking between competency
versus civil commitment.
And I'm trying to create my
logic tree between like harm to
self and harm to others.
And harm to others. Is that
what's dangerous? Like Where
does I guess? In the purview of
Dangerousness. Do we draw the
line when we're talking about
intervention? That's medical,
right. So, in certain ways, I'm
seeing this check and balance of
of having at least a court
verified that they made a
decision for this to happen
protects that person. So when
we're thinking about what other
intervention that we're when
we're looking at someone who
cannot make that decision for
themselves by medical
practitioner or by judge Judge
Where does dangerousness go to
To interplay with that, madam.
Madam chair and representative
Romero. That's a really great
question, and it is a difficult
balance.
To start the conversation. One
thing that I'll note is
That this committee has heard a
number of different agencies and
stakeholders give presentations
about what is needed in the
behavioral health system and
points of change. What I? I
haven't heard.
You may unless I missed it. I
haven't heard anyone talk about
there being a need to expand
that there are people who are
not being committed that that
that is the tool that we're
applying, and they're not
committed because our definition
of dangerousness is too narrow.
Because this balancing was done
when this was originally
drafted. I'm sure with tedious
conversations about
constitutionality. How do we
narrowly tailor this to? Um the
state but not so narrowly that
we're not affecting anyone and,
uh, I? I haven't seen or heard
anyone say that that that our
statute as written is is not
effective at doing what it's
it's designed to do. Um,
certainly these changes would
would invite more. Um
Questions as to as to that
legitimacy. I'm not sure that
I'm I'm answering your question
about about dangerousness and
and how it plays in. Maybe
Ellen. You have something to to
to add. But, um
The purpose of
All of our interventions are to
keep people safe. Um, either.
Community members safe from harm
from others or individuals safe
from harm from themselves. Um
That that that is embodied in
the definition as it is, I'm I'm
not sure that I see it as as a
point that needs to move and how
I see these two things interact
in the logic model that we're
all trying to to figure out is
it seems like we have an
intention to greatly expand the
community of people who would be
eligible for involuntary
commitment. Um
And also a OT.
Um and in the competency the way
that we're creating this cross
pollination with competency is
That, um
That in comp that were then
going to require where there is
now discretion judges to detain
someone for a purposes of
preparing a petition for civil
commitment, involuntary civil
commitment, and we're going to
require the DAS to do it.
In a variety of different cases.
And so we're creating AAA new
possibility of prolonged
detention for a A huge number of
people. Um, and I'm not sure
that we have heard from the very
carefully curated agendas that
this committee has made around
stakeholder engagement. And and
what is actually, I'm not sure
that we've heard that That's the
problem. Yeah.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I think
this is the the the question for
me because we're we've heard a
lot about the resource
intensiveness of certain folks
who don't get treatment that
they need and that there's
million dollar people in every
community. Perhaps that are
Dream, perhaps those that are
trying to support them right?
The emergency rooms. The first
responders, the folks that see
these individuals, um perhaps
are not a threat, so if our
priority is safety, I guess how
do we wrestle with the civil
rights of that individual while
also figuring out how to best
treat the community's need to
lessen that interaction? Perhaps
that's so resource intensive.
What is the middle ground for
not a criminal not
Competent but also perhaps not
in a place that is getting the
services that they need. And I
think that's where we cannot
pull them into the dangerous
pool. But where, Where does that
go? And I think that's the
question that I would love to
continue to to figure out with
you all. Thank you, ma'am chair.
Thank you, Um, representative
Representative Hoffman V. Hi.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Ms Pines and Ms Wilson for
being here today and helping us
continue this conversation. Um,
I don't really have a question,
Madam chair, just a quick remark
to piggyback on what your Romero
just posed. Um, and sitting
through these discussions today,
and after hearing your
presentation, I'm kind of sort
of putting something together
that I haven't put together
before, Madam Chair and I think
you know, I. I keep asking the
question. How can we have
Increasing needs for mental
behavioral health services in
our community, Yet we have empty
beds for treatment. And I think
I'm starting to figure this out.
I think that we have a large
community of people, some who I
interact with, uh, on a daily
basis in my law practice who
have these needs But don't trust
the system.
And don't want to be pulled into
a situation where they go in
seeking help and find themselves
trapped in a manner that they
can't get out. And so when we're
talking about competency, and
we're examining a OT, for
instance, um, that it becomes
even more clear to me and that
we are. What's the problem we're
trying to solve here. We we have
large amounts of poverty,
cyclical, generational trauma,
and, um, we have
That need help.
But we also have this co
occurring, um, you know, desire
to maintain their liberty and so
In talking about these statutes.
We have to thread a very thin
needle here, which is how do we
Get people.
Access to the resources they
need, but without restricting
their liberty unnecessarily, and
I think that lies in
Resources that are effective.
What are we doing to ensure that
we have efficacy in the system
that we do have? It's not just
about a access. It's about
efficacy, and it's about
creating
Treatment scenarios that draw
people in
Instead of
Making them fear they'll never
get out.
So I really appreciate your
presentation.
Um, I know I have more questions
and answers. I think a lot of us
do, but I think maybe
At the very least, I learned a
lot today.
So thank you.
Representative Al
You, Madam Chair.
I just wanna go back to your
example of being able to refuse
treatment. Uh,
If you are medically ill.
What if what if you're
considered, uh
The, uh, mentally incompetent
Can you refuse treatment for
medical problems?
Um Madam Chair and
representative, Al Con, um, good
point.
If you have the capacity to make
health care decisions, you can
make that decision even if it
results in your death if you
don't have capacity, then a
surrogate decision maker has to
step in to make a decision for
you. The doctor doesn't make the
decision for you, certainly in
the vast majority of cases,
courts are not involved making
that decision for you. If you
have the capacity, you get to
make the call, um and what we're
talking about, because sometimes
there
This confusion about competency
Competency is always tied to
competency. To do what we've
been talking about a lot a lot
about competency in the context
of competency to stand trial.
That's not the same. You may be
incompetent to stand trial but
have the capacity IE be
competent to make your own
health care decisions and there
is no requirement that you lack
the capacity to make a health
care decision to be dragged into
court and subjected to an
Order, and that's the
distinction being made.
That makes sense.
So if you are, uh
If you are, if you consider
yourself, madam chair of the
president of the United States
and you're physically ill. You
can make a decision. Uh,
As to whether they can treat you
for whatever treatment you're
looking for medically.
Um Madam Chair and represent
Falcon. If I'm understanding
what you're saying, Yes, you get
to make the decision.
OK, Thank you. I just wondering
about that, because, uh,
Uh, a lot of long, long time ago
when I was a judge, the courts
can do the people would ask me,
uh
They'd have a relative that was
Really?
Not able to care for themselves,
or you know they were basically
mentally unstable.
And they would ask. Where can we
go? Where can we send somebody
that we know?
It cannot take care of
themselves. But yet, uh we
cannot, uh
Well, what do we do with this
person? How How do we get them
treatment?
Madam Chair and representative,
if you are, if you are
determined to lack capacity to
make a health care decision, and
you don't have a surrogate to
act on your behalf in as those
decisions are being made, the
court can order a guardianship.
They can order a treatment
guardian. If the issue is mental
health, there are ways to deal
with that in our existing law.
Um, but those are extreme cases.
And as I said, I really want to
emphasize
People who are being pulled in
and subjected to these orders
have not been found to lack
capacity to make health care
decisions and the fact that you
may have, um a mental
instability doesn't mean that
you lack that capacity. You
know, I spent um quite a long
period of time as a member of
the ethics committee at Saint
Vincent Hospital here in Santa
Fe, and we dealt with this
question a lot. I was one of the
people who wrote the, Um uh,
hospital's policy on, um,
capacity to make health care
decisions.
And the example that I like to
use, which is drawn from a a
bioethics, Um, book textbook. I
think it was and I have on a
Nancy Dor. I think, um, who died
recently and was an ethicist in,
uh, at one of the New York
hospitals. She used the example
of
A man who thinks he's Napoleon.
He's absolutely convinced he
Singaporean does he have the
capacity to decide whether to
undergo surgery for a medical
condition?
Um
Maybe. Yes. Maybe. No, the fact
that he thinks he's Napoleon
doesn't necessarily mean he
likes that capacity.
If he thinks he's Napoleon, but
he understands what the surgery
is about and what's likely to
happen to him. He has that
capacity.
If he thinks he's going to be
undergoing battlefield surgery
under 1812 conditions probably
doesn't have that capacity. But
the mere fact that he thinks
he's Napoleon, which is clearly
delusional does not mean he
lacks the capacity to make
health care decisions.
So And and Madam chair, I. I
just don't want to go on and on.
But I mean it because what the
the more you explain, the more
confusing it gets. I'm sorry,
madam Chair representative. One
of the things Madam chair and
quit. It is, uh, when I was
sitting as a magistrate, judge,
people would ask me and I tell
them the only way I could ever
have any control over anybody is
that they come to the criminal
side. The court
They get they commit a crime.
They come before me. Then at
that time, I can find a way to
get some treatment. But
otherwise I had no other option.
No other way to go.
So and and that's where I'm
struggling even in today's
world. Uh, this is, uh
All along the way 16 years ago
and I left the court and, uh, I
still struggle with that problem
throughout the community.
So I'll leave it at that madam
chair.
Thank you, representative. We
have representative Lord and
then representative Lujan.
Sorry. Thank you, Madam Chair a
little closer. Uh, thank you,
experts. So I don't know if I
question I might form it as I go
along, but I think the main
thing that all of us need to
understand is this is extremely
complex and not something that
we should just flippantly say.
Well, we're gonna pass this bill
to see what happens to me. This
is something so complex I need
to see
More discussion like this should
be a whole summer. But more than
that, it should be. There should
be events where we're going to
where we're learning from
experts from law enforcement
from therapists from people
boots on the ground from
opposing opinions. Um,
psychiatrists, there should be a
ton of stakeholders and agencies
because we're about to make
decisions that are going to
affect people's lives and in the
utmost seriousness we need. I
need all the facts and I know
all the stats and I Yesterday I
had some concern over why we're
changing the
And we're trying to get answers
in five minutes, and that's not
enough to make decisions on
people's lives. I think this
needs a lot more, uh, study by
us as legislators to make these
very important decisions because
you know, we've we've thought
we've done things right before
and like, pass the car act, and
it's not working, and now we
have to go back and fix it. And
I don't want to see that happen.
So for me, this is far too
complex to be dealt with in a
special session. As far as I'm
concerned, it needs a lot more
vetting by us. We need to look
at this and vet it.
Not just by the people that are
here that have become as experts
but more people like 51, C,
threes and people that are
really dealing with these people
and more judges and more law
enforcement so we can see the
bigger picture of the things
we're gonna pass and how they're
going to be affected. I'm not
saying it's not an urgent
situation. I'm just saying this
needs a lot more vetting and is
far more complex.
Um
I'm also looking at, uh,
balance right? Because we need
to make sure I had one of my
constituents call me one of the
most horrific things She called
me, she said. I just saw a woman
raped in the middle of central
in the center divider. She's
passed out in homeless people.
Sorry people that were there on
the streets, jumped on her and
were raping her in the middle of
the street.
We have a moral obligation to
protect that woman.
And what is the care that needed
to protect her? Was it drug
addiction? Is it mental illness?
Is it better to leave her on the
street and be vulnerable? Or is
it better to put her in a place
where she can be safe? Get the
medication. Get her started on
her pro, uh, on on recovery If
there is recovery, also a
gentleman who lives down the
street from me who's extremely
violent who is schizophrenic.
and one day is my neighbor came
over and he said, I need your
help.
He'd been strangled. He almost
killed him. So I mean, we have
to figure out where is this
balance of the people that do
need some committed health and
people who just need communal
health.
Um, I look at other states,
Wisconsin, New Jersey, Rhode
Island. They have way better
mental health. What are they
doing there? That's working that
we're not doing.
Um there's other states that are
handling the homeless issue
better than are that cause that
all ties in right all this stuff
ties in together and it's again.
It's not something we should
say. Oh, we need to make a
special session scramble and
pass bills that are going to
have a negative effect on on
people that live in our
communities.
Uh, I go back to what I said.
That's exactly what I said.
Yesterday. Do do do do do do
go back to what I said
yesterday. I think if we're
gonna be serious about this
special session, it should be
things like pre child detention,
bail reform, fentanyl issues,
more drug hab, uh, rehab that we
need and the FBI came out and
talked about how crimes
increasing because of our
border, So there's other things
that we could be focused on not
to diminish this at all. I just
think this is far too complex to
just rush to make decisions, so
I didn't come up with a
question. I just had commentary
to make.
Thank you. Uh, thank you,
Representative. So we have
representative Lujan and then
Senator Cedillo Lopez, and then
we're done.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um I try
to be pointed, but II, I would
elaborate, Um, on all the things
that have been discussed, and
and why we're here and having
this discussion is to discuss
the intersection between
behavioral health, mental health
and the justice system.
Where we encounter individuals
with mental health and or
substance, use disorders and
making the best decisions we can
within within those, uh, the
parameters that we have, which
are statutes.
And we know that sorry.
For you. We know that, um
The Intersectionality where we
we find, um
In these individuals in our
court systems have not has not
been addressed.
Um
Your information is is point on,
uh, the biggest issue we we face
regarding behavioral, health and
mental health is is debunking in
in addressing
The stigma around behavioral
health and mental health, and
that's exactly what you're
illustrating in. Defining here
in your presentation, So thank
you.
The fact of the matter, though,
that we're here today is to to
really work together to try to
to figure out what are those
definitions within statutes that
we are creating.
We are not all experts. We do
not have PHD S, not a single one
of us has a PHD.
In in psychology. So, uh,
It's difficult for us and
putting and putting all these.
um these issues together.
Especially when we do what you
do have before you.
As a body in which I'm sure of
is that we are compassionate
about this issue, and we are
looking for the best, uh,
solutions.
Who statue and these are laws
that we have not addressed since
so very long and we're getting,
you know, And we can see that
through, Um what is happening
with the governor's office and
you know, providing
In a short amount of time what
they feel they need to bring
forward because
What I really wanna say. Madam
Chair is we are in crisis. The
crisis is a behavioral health
crisis and substance use
disorder crisis.
We need to bring the types of
laws that we are looking at
through that lens.
And making those best decisions.
My question. I guess if I have
one a couple maybe where else in
the United States do we are we
modelling? An A OT type? Um
Program that we see in Las
Cruces where you say it is on a
voluntary basis under the
constructs of the laws that we
have enacted in in our state. Do
you see that model anywhere else
where we can get better
information and data, Madam
Chair.
Ah, madam Chair and represent,
um I have, unfortunately, not
delved into the specifics of
programs in other states. Most
states. Not all but most states
do have a OT statutes. Um, and
although they follow some of the
basics
Of the the model. Um they are
not all the same.
Um, in the provisions vary
across the country. I cannot
tell you to what extent they
rely more on voluntary as
opposed to the strictly
unwilling and unlikely standard.
That's part of the that is one
of the core concepts of if I can
call it traditional A OT. Um
Here. What's the point I was
going to make and I'm sorry it
flew right out of my head.
Madam Chair representative Lu
Han. Um it's a great question
and I I, too, don't have a
specific answer of where it's
modeled. I just know that the
the committee the last time um,
that Joanna was here was on the
eve of their launch of a
competency pilot. Um, that's
another model that now is
underway. Um, and what's
interesting in piecing all these
things together and
understanding that some of the
the the
The best parts of what was
happening. What is happening in
Jana County through a OT is that
it's um
Maybe a departure from what's
written in statute in that that
it is relatively voluntary, and
people are seeking services. Um,
in that way, now that we have
what is
Blatantly a a voluntary program,
a diversion program that's
earlier in the criminal legal
system in DNA. I'd be curious to
see in a couple of years. Like
what the interaction is, because
if we're able to divert people,
um, there they have forensic
navigators in the jails and and
evaluation happens within 48
hours of rest if we're able to
divert people at that point, are
we even in Dan County, using the
A OT model.
Later on, and it may be that
both still are are necessary.
Um, but
The point I'm making And I think
that you all are grappling with
is where do we make this
intervention point and if we can
do it earlier on and invest in
community than these downstream
responses are are no longer
needed because people are
receiving the care that they
need.
Thank you for this. Those
answers and I I and I I follow
along in and agree with you. But
In that preventative work that's
at hand that is not in place and
barely getting into place. We
have a crisis in front of us
that we have to address.
And so we'll say it's a smaller
part. It's a small population. I
say it's it's an unmeasured
population.
But these are the This is the
population that is interfacing
with our courts and due to
injustice systems, and we need
to have some. We need to have
some
Policies in place that are going
to
Instantly, if not for lack of a
better word right now, but
really address the emergency
around what is going on and how
that is in those populations are
interfacing with our communities
and the safety of our
communities and and how we as
community members when we were
on the when we were engaging
with our communities, how we
interface with that population
as well. That is the question at
hand and we don't have, uh, we
have have information of
You know best practices which I
fully support. And you, Alan,
You've known that about me for a
very long time as I've delved
into behavioral health and
substance use disorder. Um, I
think we need to be here. But I
just feel like this is an
opportunity and I appreciate the
time but this is what we're
doing. We're having these
conversations and we're not
fully engaging in these
conversations as we need to, and
that's this opportunity today,
Madam Chair and I do appreciate
the
But
It's very, very complicated. We
do have limited amount of time.
And even if we do have a special
session, we get something out of
what we are. What the governor
is trying to do. I appreciate
these conversations, but we are
in crisis. Thank you.
Senator Cillo Lopez.
Thank you. I was going over
these these stats and, um
Or the the governor statutes or
proposals and, um, I was struck.
By a lot of things, but I I'm
standing between us in the way
of lunch, so I'm just gonna ask
what? Um, would it taking away
the discretion from the judges
What you mentioned and I was I
looked at the language. The
court shall advise the district
attorney to consider initiation
of proceedings and may order
adult.
So
My question is, and I always
think about this when we're
passing legislation is what is
the problem? We're trying to
solve our judges not asking the
D a to consider proceedings And
how would this be enforceable?
How could How could any? I don't
know.
Do you have any thoughts on
that?
Um, Madam Chair and Senator. Um,
I find that was provisions.
I withdrew from the state bar
years ago. I'm no longer
actively practicing. Um, but
Part of it was my recovering
attorney side that responded to
that that they're saying you,
the judge will tell the D a. You
shall file this proceeding.
If there aren't grounds under
the M HDD code, they still have
to file it. I mean, uh, you
don't wanna S AD a to file a
frivolous petition, so I find
that really troublesome and it
goes back to the point. I was
making that
You know, the governor has made
clear We don't have enough
people being forced into
treatment. We have to force more
people into treatment. I
personally and I know many
others share this. Including
many of you this perception. We
need to get people treatment. We
don't need to be locking them up
just to get them off the street.
The the, um
What we're hearing from the
Governor's office. As I said, is
stigmatizing its, um,
promulgating promulgating, um
perpetuating bias. Um, we need
to get real about how we treat,
um, mental illness by connecting
people with services. There are
some people who will not accept
services. It's not the answer
for everybody. I'm not saying
that. Um, but most people
They want the services, you
know, like when we were first
debating the A
The statute. The case that was
constantly mentioned was John
Hyde, who shot two police
officers who came to pick him up
for an evaluation under the MH
DD code.
John Hyde was actively trying to
get services and was denied by
his insurer. He could not get
those services. He was turned
away from them.
Even John Hyde, who was the
poster boy for a OT for years,
wanted those services most
people can be engaged
voluntarily in services, Jamie
Michael said. Most people
They wanted these services. They
weren't available to them. They
couldn't. It's hard to navigate
the system. It's hard for me and
I'm a healthcare expert. I've
been doing health policy. Wonky
root wonky for years. Um, and
it's hard for me. It's hard for
these people. Um, most people we
can deal with voluntarily if we
engage them and help them
navigate the system, and we
provide the support of housing
in the other services. It's not
just I mean, if you revisit a OT
and
That may happen in the next
session. One of the things I
hope you'll look at is making
sure that the full array of
services that people need can be
included in these cases because
we have a better understanding
than we did eight years ago of
what people need and maybe some
things need to be added to that
service array. Maybe some things
need to be taken up. But
overall, I would really
encourage you to reduce your
dependency on a OT. There is a
less expensive, more effective,
less traumatizing way to get
people into behavior.
Health treatment and Madam
Chair, Senator if I can really
quickly on the provision that
you asked about, Let's try to
keep it relatively brief. You
know, I wanna I wanna make sure
that Senator you have an answer
to to your question. Um, because
I I have the same one
So in this provision that you're
reading from the court shall
advise the district attorney to
consider to consider initiating
proceedings. But then the judge
is required in these certain if
if it's a certain case right,
including
Serious violence offense or or
any felony involving the use of
a firearm. They are required to,
uh
Detain the individual for seven
days in order to have the
petition written. But if the
If the D a decides not to what?
I don't I don't know whether
that compels the filing of the
petition. I think it's a big
question. Um, There are a number
of other places where both
judicial and D a discretion are
removed. And and that's really,
um without understanding the
motivation. And if it's a
problem, I think, uh, it it's
it's quite concerning.
Uh, yes, I. I didn't understand
the problem that was gonna be
solved. And then practically how
would you enforce it? Who's
going to appeal the judge's
decision not to
Ask the D a to consider
initiation. So it it just seemed
a little odd. Thank you, madam
Chair.
Represent in a very briefly,
you'll notice half more than
half of the committee has left
for lunch. Madam chair. I try to
keep my comments down. Um, I
think you know one of the things
that I think about A lot is
about human dignity and every
human being has the right to
have human dignity. And I think
that this, uh begs the question
of what does that mean? Exactly,
Um, you know when we start
breaking down
The whole issue of mental
health. We have so many
different conditions, and we're
all we're sort of lumping them
all together as Oh, we are gonna
deal with the homeless and, um
you know, because I mean, when
you start breaking it down to
bipolar and
You know all these different
conditions that people are
dealing with alcoholism and and,
um
Madam chair, Um, drug addiction
and and there. There's just so
many things that are lumped
together in that one definition
of homelessness, which really
concerns me greatly. Um and I
start thinking Madam chair about
points of reference points of
reference of, um
Capacity and
A person having the ability to
make decisions for themselves.
And for those of us who have
lived with people that are, uh,
mentally ill or have dealt with
people that are mentally ill.
There are times in and this was
brought up earlier when they can
make a decision very logically.
And then
A point of reference where they
can't make that decision. Um
Of reference. The second point
of reference is when they are
involved in the court system.
and when they can make those
logical decisions, and sometimes
they can't because they're off
their meds. Um
So I just I just
Feel very cautious about
This whole issue. I think that
and I'm not gonna repeat what
some of the other legislators
have, Um
Sort of
Alluded to is that these are not
decisions that we can make
easily and quickly.
Um, because
You know, people do have that
human dignity and we have to
respect whether they're mentally
ill or not,
And at some level we're probably
all a little mentally, you know?
I mean, if you think about it,
um
There are certain human rights
involved here, and those human
rights are things that we need
Have probably had friends or
family members or people that
we've had to deal with.
I mean, just think about like
that our our alcoholic uncle,
you know, at some point
There was a time when
You were like, no, don't drive
or whatever the case may be or
don't you know, abuse that
family member or whatever the
case may be, but I think that at
some level everyone has a human
dignity. Right? So I just needed
to make that point. Madam chair.
Thank you. Thank you,
Representative. And I thank you,
Presenters. Um
We appreciated your insights
into the various
Um, issues that have been
present are being presented and
maybe even more issues that may
be presented. But I'm appreciate
it. We're gonna break now for
lunch and thank you, Madam
chair, giving us the time.
Let's come back at 22. All
right, and, um and we'll have
the next round of presentation.
Thank you.
