The floor is yours, and please
introduce yourselves as you move
forward.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Committee members, um, thank you
for having us back as Madam
Chair mentioned, we were here
last month uh to share the key
findings, the key data findings
from the work of the New Mexico
justice reinvestment Working
Group, and now we are here to
share part two of that effort,
uh, which is the policy
recommendations. I'm Colleen
Baganovich, senior policy senior
policy specialist at the Crime
and Justice Institute, and I'm
joined this time by our working
group chair, Captain Kevin.
s from San Juan County Sheriff's
Department, or sheriff's office,
sorry, different in every state
and my colleague CGI is director
of policy and campaigns, Len
Engle.
Um, I'll start, I'll try to keep
it brief, but uh just to start
by sharing a little bit of
background on the justice
reinvestment initiative, uh,
also known as JRI. Um,
basically, state leaders work
with experts to conduct
multi-agency data analysis, uh,
develop and implement data
driven, uh, tailored solutions
to address complicated criminal
justice challenges, and then
maximize resources to achieve
stronger and safer
communities.RI is funded by the
US Department of
Justice's Office of Justice
Programs, Bureau of Justice
Assistance.
And utilizes the crime and
Justice Institute to provide
technical assistance to state
partners interested in using
data to analyze and improve
their justice systems.
And on slide 3, again, the main
goals of JRI are to reduce the
number of people who are cycling
through the criminal justice
system in a state shift
resources and cost savings in
order to prioritize and improve
public safety.
And on side 4 is just a map.
There are 45 states so far in
the United States who have
engaged in JRI, uh, currently
CJI is working in two active
states, um, in a phase one
effort, which is one of them is
New Mexico and the other is
North Dakota.
On slide 5, there are two main
phases of the justice
reinvestment initiative. The
first phase of the project,
which is what we are in right
now in New Mexico, uh.
We work with this committee that
oversees the effort and carries
out the effort, uh, which is the
working group, uh, consists of
bipartisan multi-sector group of
policymakers and experts, uh,
from a variety of state and
local agencies in order to
collect data from across the
state.
Uh, to highlight the most
pressing trends and drivers of
crime, recidivism, and costs. We
meet with a range of
stakeholders, uh, in addition to
committee members, we assess
statutes, policies, current
practices, both in state and
from other states.
And then we deliver the findings
and policy options, uh, to that
working group.
Um, in actual presentations and
then that serves as a foundation
for policy changes.
Then there is a second phase,
um, that involves assistance
with implementing those
policies.
On slide 6, just briefly, um,
just a little overview of our
technical assistance thus far
for this particular effort, um,
since last September, so for
about a year or over a year,
actually, I keep forgetting it's
October. Uh, CJI has been
facilitating the working group
phase one process in New Mexico.
During this time, we've provided
uh that multi-agency data
analysis.
Of which we presented the key
findings to the committee last
time, um, up in Espanola as well
as conducted a qualitative
examination of New Mexico's
justice system. We also held
round tables and focus groups
across the state.
We uh conducted individual
interviews all over the state
and then presented these
comprehensive findings to the
working group over the course of
3 data presentations.
Uh, from May to July. In August
and September, the working group
members met two separate times
in area specific subcommittees
to take a deeper dive into
specific policy options that
would be best for New Mexico
based on the findings that they
were presented.
And then our team provided
relevant state program and
practice examples.
So that the working group could
develop uh recommendations.
And throughout this process,
it's important to note that
CJI's role has always remained
the same. We are the technical
assistance provider. We do not
make any recommendations that
responsibility always falls
squarely to the working group
members.
So the remainder of this
presentation,
will be given by Captain Burns,
and he will walk you through the
recommendations that they have
determined.
Madam Chair, committee members.
Thank you so much for your time
today. Uh, if you'll just, uh,
go to slide 8, the, the gap in
behavioral health services has
necessitated public safety
resources to be the primary and
sometimes sole responder to
mental health issues. That is
not something new to New Mexico.
The one thing that I will ask
you to remember as we move
through this is that although
we've heard from uh an agency
that is fully staffed that is
not, that is an anomaly in the
state of New Mexico, so I ask
that you take into consideration
as we move through.
This staffing challenges that
have been pointed out, as we
point out these recommendations.
Uh, on slide 9, the goals of
this, uh, by the working group
has been determined to
strengthen and prioritize public
safety and public health
responses traditionally law
enforcement has been the default
provider for mental health. Our
jail systems have been mental
health default providers and as
a result it is overburdened law
enforcement law enforcement, and
it is going to be increasingly
more important for us to find
upstream avenues in which to
prevent folks that have mental
health issues.
And substance abuse issues from
getting into the system if we're
going to ever stop uh the issues
that we have in New Mexico, uh,
focused prison resources on
serious violent offenders. Uh,
those individuals that fit in
that box, uh, I think those are
very, very obvious. It's those
that we are, that are, that are
in the early stages of their uh
substance abuse and possible
mental health issues that we
would, we hope to show better
options for them so that they
don't end up being recycled
through the system. Prioritize
resources for high cost, high
need individuals.
Each of our uh communities are
fairly familiar with those that
take up most of our resources
and uh we need to do a better
job of applying uh resources to
them.
Reinvest savings and ensure
sustainability for
interventions. Obviously there's
going to take some investment on
the front side to reveal and uh
see those opportunities on the
backside, and that's what we
hope to show you today.
Summary 10.
or page 10, uh,
We go on to page 11. So this is,
this is one of the things that
is striking in the state of New
Mexico, uh, as you saw from
Chief Story that fentanyl and
meth, this is something that we
know is an issue in, in the
state of New Mexico. Our
proximity to the border, uh, the
issues that are there, and it,
it is, it is by far an epidemic.
Uh, New Mexico's ranked 3rd in
the nation for pubs and pub
persons with substance abuse
disorder, and the percentage of
persons with any mental illness
is.
1% higher than the national
average. So, so what that means
is that uh these individuals, if
we do not have processes in
place to prevent them from being
incorporated into the criminal
justice system is that judges in
some communities that don't have
opportunities to divert them,
they end up in our prison system
and once they get into that
prison system, it's incredibly
hard to recover them.
In April of 24, New Mexico's
crisis line increased calls
answered by, by 47
have increased by 47% since July
of 22. So this is an entire
spectrum of, of mental health
issues from people in crisis to
those that have uh diagnosed
mental health issues. And again,
law enforcement is the primary
responder uh to crime, but in
many areas without alternative
response options, we are also
primary behavioral health
responders. And so this is not
new information uh to, to this
group or the state of New
Mexico, uh, what, what is
important is the
The fact that we are
experiencing staffing issues
across the state, and we are
going to get what we have always
done and got if we don't figure
out and invest some money to
avert uh mental people with
mental health and substance
abuse issues before they start
catching felonies. So the
recommendations, if you'll see
over on the right-hand side of,
of slide 11 is established
statewide crisis response system
that is available 24/7. So what
this looks like is obviously
we've got some very small remote
areas in New Mexico that aren't
going to have the resources that
Donana County.
Uh, uh, Burnlio County and even
San Juan County are going to
have. We've got some very, very
remote, uh, issues with very
remote communities that are,
that still experience mental
health issues and so, um, you
know, this is where our mobile
crisis teams, crisis triage
centers that are intermediaries,
uh, that are going to be huge
for, for, for these, uh,
especially for the areas that
can afford them, uh, through
hopefully some state funding is
to assist with the the crisis
triage center. The crisis triage
center, uh,
was, was put forth last year and
is a great option, but it was
not a funded mandate. And so,
uh, you will be hearing uh other
entities and that will be
included in some of their
requests uh later on uh in some
of the hearings that you, that
you are at for uh gap funding
for us to be able to put these
things in place because a lot of
these communities, they only
have the ER. They just, they're
the only place that we can take
somebody is the ER. And when we
take him to the ER they receive
enough medication to where
they're not a danger to
themselves anymore and
And they get released.
Expand collaboration between law
enforcement and behavioral
health providers to ensure calls
involving behavior driven by
unmet behavioral health needs
are diverted to appropriate
treatment. So this is not, this
is nothing new. We just need to
put money behind it to make it
come to fruition. Uh, law
enforcement has shouldered the
responsibility of crisis
intervention to try to meet
that, to be better and learn
more about responding to mental
health needs and persons that
may not be committing a criminal
act and the different
between somebody that is
actively and intently refusing
commands as opposed to somebody
that's in psychosis. So mental,
so I believe that law
enforcement does a very good job
of that, but if we do not have
crisis response teams, if we do
not have triage centers, if we
do not have virtual
opportunities. These folks are
going to end up either at the ER
or in some of these places that
don't have a psychiatric trained
uh medical professional in our
part of the world, they get
flown to Santa Teresa.
So they're down here for 7 to 10
days and then they end up having
to get flown back for treatment.
That, that's not conducive to
our communities. Established
intensive case management model
for law enforcement to deflect
individuals from justice
involved and case managers to
provide wraparound services and
a continuum of care. These,
these folks need help. They
need, they need lockstep
participation by case managers,
behavioral health, uh, personnel
to help them make it through
these situations because it is.
It is a challenge to stay on
your medications and if you
don't have food, water, shelter,
those kinds of things, you end
up getting off your medications
without somebody checking in on
you and then they become a
problem for law enforcement
again.
Slide 12.
Pre-prosecution diversion
program requires its uh we found
that it's standardized across
districts, but discretion
regarding who is eligible to
participate in what cases cases
and offenses consider considered
varies by district. So what
happens is, is in these
particular situations we are
somewhat stuck in the mindset
that if there is a victim that
they are ineligible for these
cases. And so I think uh being
able to open these up to some
victim cases depending on what
the case is. And with
Authorization and participation
with the victim and with their
approval on top of drug cases,
possession cases, where they
have not, uh, where they're not
a lifelong criminal. I think
there's some opportunities we
are, our results show that
there's some opportunities
there, uh, to maybe get divert
folks from uh being incarcerated
for a long period of time just
based on possession.
Or co-occurring disorder type
situation.
As stated previously, New
Mexico's violent crime rate, 69%
higher than the national rate at
749 per 10 100,000. Uh, you
know, that's, that's, it's very
hard to attract business. It's
hard to attract uh resources to
the state when that is what
dominates every media report as
it relates to New Mexico and,
and, and clearly the Rio Grande
corridor.
Uh, reporting under the state
statute bars.
Reporting for rural agencies
that was previously addressed.
We need other agencies to step
up and, and, uh, get on board
with, uh, you know, the, the
transition from UCR to, to, to
neighbors, uh, that's something
that needs to happen so that
we're all on the same board on
the same page so that we're
gathering the same data, create
statewide access to crime
mapping uh to inform problem
analysis sampling across state
and deploy targeted violence
intervention strategies. At some
point, you will hear the term,
you will hear the software
company.
Peregrine and intelligence-led
policing from from DPS. That is
something that is very important
as it relates to uh dealing with
the supply of narcotics that are
coming in and dealing with
violence is our ability to share
data within law enforcement. DPS
is currently uh presenting uh
tomorrow.
Peregrine and intelligence-led
policing, data sharing because
as stated previously, uh,
Albuquerque's bad guys are Las
Cruces' bad guys and vice versa,
we get Albuquerque's bad guys as
well. Our systems do not talk
this system that uh DPS is
presenting will allow our
systems to talk and that will
make our police officers
smarter. It will make our police
officers better and it will make
them safer. This is, this is an
opportunity for us to maximize
our efforts as through
technology.
In addition, this further, uh,
this further leads to required
statewide crime data reporting
and established establish a
public crime data dashboard. The
goal would be is to get all
police agencies over time onto
this so that we can all see the
same things, look at trends,
identify clusters,
concentrations, and hot spots of
crime that that occurred in our
particular areas and share those
names that pop up. If somebody
has moved from one community to
another, we would be able to see
that as opposed to them
operating for 6 months to a
year.
Before we start to develop
within that jurisdiction a
tracking record.
Slide 14, actually slip onto to
slide 15. Uh, our data revealed
that 4, 4th degree felonies, uh,
which is our lowest, uh,
designation uh has ended up
ended up being the, the, the
catch all in the primary driver
of arrests, court filings,
prison admissions, and
revocations to to prison for a
decade and, and this is, this is
where uh there has been uh
discussion outside the realm of
JRI as it relates to uh
revealing and reviewing.
The sentencing structure and the
categories that felonies are
broke into now. Uh, we did not
delve into that based on the
fact that we did not want to,
uh,
Redo work that was already being
done.
So the recommendation is to
address wide range of conduct
included lowest felony class by
separating serious and violent
conduct from nonviolent,
non-person conduct, uh, the, the
4th degree felony again has
everything from uh uh aga salt
to property crimes to uh
embezzlement. So that, that
there's some room to work there
where is somebody that's
involved in substance abuse, uh,
could be possibly uh
recategorized and uh be
leveraged to participate.
treatment and avoid catching,
catching that felony.
Slide 16, uh, conditional
discharge can only be used once
in reserved for first-time
nonviolent offenders, only 11%
of the district criminal cases
were shown to be disposed of and
resolved as a, as a result of
conditional discharge, um, you
know, obviously there would have
to be vetted appropriately so
that we're not allowing
individuals to slip through the
cracks, but this is another
opportunity to use those low
level offenders that appear to
be uh substance abuse involved
in substance.
abuse and and hopefully divert
them from uh being involved in
the criminal justice system long
term. Most treatment programs
require guilty plea to
participate in eligibility is
restricted to to first-time
nonviolent offenders. In 2023,
nearly half of all drug cases
resulted in felony conviction.
So as we've stated and you've
heard previously, uh, we, we,
you know, substance abuse is a
big deal. Our proximity to the
border is a big deal. Fentanyl
and meth are huge issues.
Fentanyl especially is a huge
issue for us in
The state of New Mexico to
improve outcomes for individuals
with behavioral needs by
authorizing case dismissals and
charge reductions upon
successful completion of of of
uh program requirements. So
again, uh this, this basically
says that folks are more
successful when they have these
situations where they're
leveraged. They're, you know,
the citizens will say, uh, go
seek treatment, and it is, it is
incredibly difficult. It is, it
is, it is leveraging through
court sanctions that
people get better. People get
fixed at a higher rate.
Uh, slide 17, possession of a
controlled substance was the
most common 4th degree offense
across
all intercepts, uh, from case
filing to parole and, and uh
Violation of mission.
In 2023 individuals had, uh, who
had been remitted, readmitted to
prison within the last 10 years
we're more likely to have
admitted on a drug offense than
individuals who were being
admitted on uh for the first
time. So again, we, this is what
this is gonna where uh we need,
you know, more accountability
for these folks to help them be
successful to prevent, prevent
re-entry, so create more
accountability for individuals
charged with possession by
creating a tear defense uh
structure.
Slide 18, let's go to slide 19.
Behavioral needs, drive,
supervision violations.
From 2014 to 2022, nearly 80% of
individuals with supervision
violations had at least one
violation pertaining to a
substance-related condition of
supervision that further speaks
to the difficulties in
overcoming substance abuse. The
average number of probation and
parole violations per person
increased uh 78% and 23%
respectively. Again, this, this
indicates how difficult it is
to, uh, without some sort of
assistance and help and
oversight uh to, to get
away from narcotics use.
The percentage of parole
violation admissions.
Where the violation was due to
new charge increased by 24% from
2018 to 20.
2024
So the recommendations require
conditions of probation and uh
to be tailored to the individual
risk and, and needs, uh,
establish.
Standardized and timely
responses to hold individuals
accountable for supervision and
violations. And so, again,
that's gonna take uh substantial
manpower uh and, and funding to
help make that happen.
Slide 20 over 1/3 of the prison
admissions in 2023 were uh
parole violation admissions, uh,
the percentage of individuals
who entered prison, uh prior to
completing their probation term
increased since has increased
since 2014. Substance abuse
disorder is prevalent among uh
supervised population, leading
to high volume and prevalence of
substance-based violations.
There's no standardized guidance
on how the state can best
support successful reentry for
these individuals.
recommendations on the
right-hand side of the page,
request the Sentencing
commission work with members to
develop re-entry standards for
county and state facilities.
There are programs out there
such as Rise, Reach uh
intervene, support, and engage
that that have been shown to
support successful reentry for
individuals being released from
detention facilities.
Required detention facilities
and provisions and prisons to
provide access to medically or
medication-assisted treatment.
Uh,
When clinically indicated and
expand the continuum of care as
individuals return to the
community.
21
Reinvest savings and ensure
sustainability of interventions.
So challenges
Requiring investment,
infrastructural support.
Reliable funding streams.
Intergovernable
intergovernmental collaboration.
The working group recommends 5
steps to support and sustain.
viability of the previous 14
recommendations.
On slide 23, you will see the
final 5 recommendations.
Select a single electronic
medical record system. Systems
are very disjointed to use in
all detention facilities and
prisons.
And develop an implementation
plan.
A state certification for
detention officers to create
consistency under state
authority with state funding to
utilize existing uh trainings
when feasible and appropriate.
Obviously improve employee
recruitment and enhanced
compensation among criminal
justice and behavioral health
partners by leveraging state
funding to establish incentive
programs, increased funding for
the Department of Public Safety
laboratory to reduce delays and
increase efficiency. This is
directly related to to the
criminal aspect of what we do
and how long it takes to get
something, uh, criminal cases.
I, I, I think you all probably
heard about that, uh, developed
behavioral health training
standards for judges and court
personnel under uh AOC and
continuing education on
substance abuse, disorder,
mental health conditions, and
co-occurring disorders.
And with that, I will pass it
off to Colleen for conclusion.
Madam Chair, committee members,
uh, thank you, Captain. Um, as I
mentioned at the beginning, uh,
these recommendations, um, I
actually don't know if I
mentioned this, but I cause I
breezed through it for time, um,
but I think we're doing it on
time. So these recommendations
will be included in the final
report, which is being finalized
as we speak, um, in, in the next
few weeks, um, we will release
that report to the signatories
of the letter that requested the
JRI process be brought into New
Mexico, um, and it will include
the recommendations.
For consideration for the
legislative session. So those
are sort of the next steps of
this process. Um, and with that,
we will take any questions that
the committee has. Thank you.
Thank you. I appreciate it. Um,
questions, members? Oh, Senator
Duhig and and oh so and.
Senator Doha and then
Representative Chasey.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
just wanted to, to thank uh the.
These folks, uh, we have before
us, I, I was, uh, lucky to be
able to get to be part of the,
the working group, uh, during
this interim and have been
really impressed with the the
work that, that has been done
and the uh
The the how thoughtful, uh, the
policy development has been, so
I just wanted to thank you all
and.
Uh, especially our, our chair.
Thanks.
Representative Chasey.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
want to thank you also. Um, I, I
guess what I've been impressed
with is the way they um your
group.
The justice reinvestment
initiative has gotten everybody
involved.
Geographically and from various
kinds of various disciplines and
uh I just hope that we can um
get a lot of these things.
Enacted because this, the whole
point is to make it work better.
Have everything be more
effective, save money and make
the community safer, safer,
excuse me. So, um, I, I
appreciate all of the local
partners that you engaged and,
and all of the work that you've
done, I don't really have
questions. I just wanna be sure
that um I know we've talked to
Senator Maestass isn't here and
I'm glad Senator Dewick is and
and um they've both been kind of
Um,
Following your work or intend to
carry some of this forward, but
I think there's
In view of the fact that we keep
saying we need more.
Data we need more information. I
mean, you've been a good um
source of that for us and I
thank you. That's our manager.
Thank you. um, Senator Worth.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. Just
question about the timing you
mentioned you're going to be
working on legislation.
Uh, I just would encourage you
to really move quickly.
Uh, and to the extent we could,
it would be great to see it in
this committee.
Just because again, we're gonna
be putting something together
and.
Knowing how long it takes to get
things drafted and get them out.
I'm really gonna push to do
something in this 8 week session
that's an accelerated time frame
on a public safety package and
just has been said, the buy-in
on this and the fact that you've
had this collaborative approach.
I just don't want to make sure.
You know, that things aren't
coming in at the last minute, so
that we really get a chance to
mix them in, so I just.
Timing wise, I mean, are you
guys at a point where you're,
how close are you to kind of
putting things together and
getting Cha Chandler to open a
bunch of files to get bills
drafted.
Thanks.
Madam Chair, uh, Senator, thank
you for the question. Uh, we are
working very quickly. We will be
ready.
Absolutely, thank you for that.
Good, and I just would encourage
you to work any legislator can
open a file without committing
to carry the bill, but you
should really take that step so
that the coun because the
council service is just gonna
get swamped with a 60 day
session and so just get these in
front so we actually have a
product coming out the other
end. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, anyone else?
Uh
Oh, Representative Paul, sorry,
you're so far away. I miss you
sometimes. Just a quick question
for clarification on slide 20,
point number 14.
Um, you're required detention
facilities and prisons to
provide this medically assisted
treatment.
Does that mean after they
Leave that would be an
opportunity for them to go back
there to get meds.
Is that what that means, and
maybe I'm misreading it.
Madam Chair, representative,
that's a great question. Thank
you for that, uh, to clarify,
that would be while they are um
incarcerated either in a
detention facility or in prison,
but the recommendation is also
stipulates to um add in language
for a bat induction. So right
now the statue um only includes
for folks that are already
receiving MAT services to
benefit from, from mat treatment
while they are in a facility.
The working group was very
explicit that they would like to
add in language, um, to the
existing uh requirements to
provide MAT services that folks
should be given the opportunity,
if clinically indicated that
they would be able to receive
it, that they would be allowed
to.
Be induced onto Mat treatment.
And thank you, and that would be
funded by the state, this
continuum.
Um
Madam Chair, representative,
yes.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
Anyone else?
Um, I have a couple questions.
Um, on page 12.
You're talking about this
pre-prosecution diversion and we
have a statute that allows for
pre, I think it's
pre-prosecution to version and
One of the issues, and I maybe
this is a polite way of saying
it. The DAs decide whether
somebody gets is eligible,
right? And I, I, you know, this
was nicely worded and there is
no consistency, um, that's
because some DAs really believe
in it and some DAs don't. Is
that a fair a kind of a crasser
but probably fairly accurate way
to put it. Go ahead, sorry, sir.
Madam Chair, thank you for the
question. It is at the
discretion of the DA, but it is
also
A lot of times they will uh get
input from the victim or if it's
uh depending on what kind of a
crime it is, uh, you know, that
will be input, but typically,
yes, it is at the discretion of
the district attorney.
Yeah, and um so knowing that,
how could we improve the law.
I mean, I've pondered, I've been
thinking about this because we
know that pre-prosecution
diversion is more successful. I
mean, it's a good way to try to
deal with some of these issues
and if it's not being used, so
the, so the defense has no way
to try to initiate it other than
to go talk to the DA and say,
wouldn't you please do this for
me. Um, is there a way, could we
change a lot of petition so that
they could petition the court to
not just allow the DA to make
that call to.
Have another avenue where the
defense attorney, uh, what are
you gonna suggest, guys?
You know, tell me, I mean,
what's the answer? So Madam
Chair, again, thank you, thank
you for the question. I think,
uh, broadening, you know, the
scope.
Of what the capabilities are is
is an option. uh making it more
accessible and then comparing it
to other states to see what
other states are doing, uh,
maybe something that, that we're
able to do. Some of these are
broad overarching points that,
uh, you know, we, we were, we're
kind of still in the evaluation
phase of some of these, but
that's a great question.
Yeah, I mean, uh because we were
working on competency and all
these, they're all interrelated,
right, you know, um, I was
thinking about this and raised
the possibility of having not
just the DA being in the posit
in the driver's seat that at
least if you could go to a court
if it were the defense, um, at
least try to make your case. I'm
just floating that as an idea
and do other states have that
kind of a mechanism?
Madam Chair, members, um, yes,
other states do. Other states
have uh uh diversion process
that can be initiated by the
court, in addition to the
district attorney. OK, so this
is as much about for the
district attorneys who are who
are encouraged to use this,
broadening discretion,
broadening, um, the, the cases
that they can file, but there's
additional steps that can be
taken that broaden that that
allows the judge to, to, uh.
Trigger
diversion.
OK.
Um,
And second question, probably my
last question is, um,
So we're also again talking
about competency and maybe AOT
moving in in the next session
assisted outpatient treatment.
Um, so a mechanism where someone
who is in the criminal system.
But we believe there may be a
competency issue or um mental
health issue. Is there a way we
could create a system where
those folks are diverted into
some sort of program and, and
with the inducement, you know,
your charges would be dismissed
if you complete the, you know,
treatment program. Is that what
you're kind of thinking about
here?
Uh, for competency cases? Well,
it's a, so think about it, OK,
competencies raised in a
misdemeanor case, right? Well,
we know what happens. Nothing.
You know, basically it's gonna
get the case is gonna get
dismissed. We know that. I mean.
Unless the person's deemed.
Competent
Right.
So what if there was a program
put together and said, OK, um,
competencies being raised.
We'll divert you into some kind
of outpatient treatment program.
Are there models like that out
there?
And if you complete it, the case
is dismissed.
Yeah, uh, Chairman, a good
question. Uh, we'd have to look
more closely at how other states
handle competency. I think that
New Mexico has a bit of a
different system, but I think
there's, there are examples
where
On competency is raised that the
even before there's an
evaluation of of for competency
that there are interventions
that occur right after it's
raised in order to get the
person competent in order to
determine whether there's
something to evaluate. I think
that the question of, of
inducing
Um, incentivizing.
Participation in that by
addressing whether this is going
to be a felony versus a
misdemeanor or whether it's
going to be dismissed or not. I
think those things are really
important for uh defense counsel
to consider, um, and I think
that, I think you'll get more
participants if there's that
type of a uh of an outcome
possible by participation.
OK.
Any, um, Senator, of course,
Senator Stewart.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, I
just want to reiterate the
importance of this group. Uh, if
you just look again at page 2.
This is a group funded by the
Department of Justice.
Uh, and working in other states,
so we didn't make this up.
Uh, this is in other states.
This is the work that other
states are doing, and I just
want you to read this last
bullet there, cause then I'll
have a question through this
justice reinvestment initiative,
states have have averted cost or
saved more than 3.2 billion
cumulatively. So, you know, it's
not all about saving money, but
that's a good thing. Um, it's
about doing a better job, better
collaboration so that the public
needs are.
Answered, but my question to you
is, can you tell us, uh, which
part of these recommendations or
the suggestions or the changes
that other states have done have
netted 3.2 billion cumulatively,
or is that too hard a question?
Chairwoman, Senator, um,
It's not too hard a question,
um.
A lot of states early on in the
JRI process, going back to 2010,
their, their, um their primary
motivation for entering into
this type of an of an effort was
to reduce the projected growth
of their prison population. So,
We've worked in a lot of states
where the population had risen
significantly over 40 years, and
we, we've seen those graphs, um,
and then it was going to
continue to, to climb, and they
couldn't afford it, so they
already had on, on deck, we have
to build another prison. We have
to build 2 more prisons. Let's
try something different. They
invite this process in so those
averted costs are part of this.
The biggest changes came from
sentencing and release
decisions. Decisions to divert
people uh
Primarily low level offenders
who who cycle in and out and in
and out, uh, drug possession,
low-level possession with
intent, um, property offenses
largely driven by
Substance abuse, largely
different by co-occurring
disorders, unmet behavioral
health needs.
Get, allow those people to be
diverted.
And so these states, these are
not states that typically take
took sort of reform minded
approaches. South Carolina,
Georgia, Mississippi, they,
their response was, yes, we're
gonna divert, we're going to use
sentencing policy to address the
people we're afraid of, not
necessarily the people we're mad
at, but we're also going to
provide services. We're going to
provide better supervision and
provide a series of sanctions
when they violate in the
community, things that, that are
somewhat recommended here.
Um, so the goal was a
comprehensive response.
criminal behavior and the
behavioral health gaps. And I
think that those are the things
that really at the outset, the
1st 5 or 6 years of this effort
were largely um
responsible for those states not
Building prisons. In some cases,
South Carolina closed, I
believe, 8.
Corrections facility, some of
them fairly small, but they were
projected to to add another
facility. They were growing at
an unsustainable rate. They
ended up making significant
sentencing changes and ended up
not building that prison and
Closing small facilities, um,
because they didn't need them
anymore. So that's where the,
the biggest savings came. We're
now entering in a period and I
think, you know, New Mexico's
prison population has largely
stabilized.
But
How you're managing.
The
Needs of the pop of the people
that are, that are churning in
the, in, in, in your system,
jails and prisons to, to move
them off.
Out of the just the justice
system and into the public
health system rather than a
public safety response, there's
more of a need for a public
public health response.
Oh, thank you for that, Madam
Che I remember in espanola, what
you said was that the this churn
that we have, these thousands
and thousands of cases are
mostly a petty misdemeanors,
misdemeanors, 4th degree
felonies, just the stuff that
bugs all of us, uh, but there
are not violent crimes, but
that's really the churn in our
system. Um, and, and I think
You also or the idea of if we
could just let the police take
care of the violent crimes, and
we create a diversion a
behavioral health treatment, a
substance abuse treatment system
to get those 6000 people out of
the churn, we will have gone a
long way towards improving our
system, is that correct?
Chairwoman Center, yes, that's
correct. All right, thank you
very much, and Madam Chair, I
just wanted to say this because
I was part of the signatory to
to have this happen and so I've
heard a little bit more from
them, um, and so I'm really
looking forward to those bills,
uh, and yeah, and chop chop. We
are running out of time. Thank
you.
Thank you, Senator. Uh, anyone
else with a question or comment?
OK. Um, thank you very much and
um you heard the senator chop
chop.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Committee members, thank you so
so much.
OK.
Next on the agenda is um
competency, diversion, pilot
project, 3rd judicial district.
Um
And just to kind of set the
scene, you'll remember.
As we were working on um
The special we were getting
ready for the special. We are
also hearing a lot about other
things, including this diversion
pilot project that
I think the court brought in to
play around June or so and um
which we very much appreciate
and this is a way for us just to
get an understanding of how
things are going and how
implementation is and so on
because maybe it's gonna be
something we could model
legislation on, for example, so
thank you very much. Welcome,
please introduce yourselves and
you have a floor.
What
Yeah
Oh yeah.
Oh, there we go. That worked
better. Thank you. Appreciate
it. Uh, good morning, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
I'm Judge Alexander Rosario of
the Donana County Magistrate
Court.
I'm also the lead judge on the
3rd Judicial District's
competency diversion pilot
project. Um, thank you for
having us here today.
And good afternoon, my name is
Jamie Michael. I serve as the
director for Donana County's
Health and Human Services
Department and then the judge's
partner in this project. So a
little bit of background on the
project just to make sure that
you all are able to kind of
connect the dots and the work
that you've done in the past
several years ago, the you all
created the New Mexico, um, the
competency commission, the, um,
mental health and Competency
Commission, which is under the
New Mexico Supreme Court and
by the administrative office of
the court. So this was one of
the first projects developed um
through the work of that
statewide commission. um, the
policies and procedures.
For the pilot project were
developed with support from the
substance abuse and mental
Health Services Administration.
Um, they worked with New Mexico
and the administrative office of
the court to create a kind of a
policy work group and the 3rd
judicial district is one of 4
pilot sites in New Mexico. We
were the first to kick off. We
kicked off in June of this year,
but the other um pilot sites
have also the other, I think two
other pilot sites have kicked
off, so there are 3 programs.
Um, 3 districts piloting this uh
program in New Mexico and
there's 4 primary goals for the
the project, but really it boils
down, um, to trying to mitigate
the impact that the criminal
justice system has on people
with mental illness using the
criminal justice system as a way
to connect or reconnect people
to a behavioral health services,
a better use of resources, a
better return on investment and
And looking across all the the
folks that come in contact with
the criminal justice system who
have a mental illness and really
looking at how do we support
equity, um, in that group and
making sure people again are
able to connect to the services
and resources that they need.
Um, it is part of the sequential
intercept model. So the, the
diagram that you have there on
slide 4, I'm sure most of you
have seen that before this um
pilot project is right there in
intercept 2, so it happens at
the initial detention and the
initial court hearing. Again,
remember all of those intercepts
are opportunities within the
justice system to connect or
reconnect someone to behavioral
health services.
in their community, and this one
I think is one of the more
complex points within that um
intercept model once the courts
are involved, it does get a
little more complicated. That's
why this is a pilot project, so
we can learn, uh, learn the, the
process and now hand it over to
the judge to talk a little bit
about who the program is
serving.
So just jumping off of the
intercept model, so just to kind
of give you folks an idea of
where we're picking them up.
We're picking them up at
intercept 2 at at their initial
hearing, uh, their initial
detention or first hearing
before the court.
So these are individuals that
are charged with uh minor
misdemeanor offenses, not
necessarily DWIs. Uh, in fact,
DWIs are excluded.
Uh, but the usual offenses we
see are the minor shopliftings,
the, the petty misdemeanor
offenses, the criminal
trespasses, uh, there are
domestic offenses that are
included as well because we see
a lot of those where individuals
that are suffering from some
sort of mental illness or, or
taking it out on their uh family
members, and we see a lot of
those types of offenses.
Um, in the future, we are going
to be looking at, uh, hopefully
in the near future some uh
lesser uh nonviolent felony
offenses to include pro most
likely the uh the simple
possessions of um controlled
substances, those kinds of
individuals, because a lot of
those.
We see the co-occurring
disorders, people living with
mental illness or
self-medicating, uh, so that's
where we see a lot of those
simple possessions.
But that's again, uh, probably
going to be in the near future
or is going to be in the near
future. Right now again we're
looking at those misdemeanants.
Uh, they're individuals that
have, uh, that are identified as
having some sort of severe
mental illness, as I said, uh,
so living with some sort of
mental illness, they are
screened at the jail.
Uh, using a brief jail mental
health screen.
Uh, which is confirmed.
Uh, they can either be, uh,
qualified for the program
through that brief jail mental
health screening or
Uh, they can have a history of
incompetency. Uh, now,
I think most of you are aware
because I heard the discussion
that was going on beforehand.
Uh, it's not necessarily that
competency must be found. It's
the competency had to have been
raised at some point in the
past. So if they have a history
of competency having been
raised, if they have a history
of uh of competency cases or a
case being brought up through
the system, whether they are
found competent or not, they
would qualify for the program at
that point.
Um, so once we have screened
them and determined that they
that the population um is who we
have determined, and this does,
I should go back and and
clarify. We are screening
everyone that comes into the
jail here. Um, so everyone that
comes in, we are determining how
many of these people qualify
based on these factors that I've
just outlined for you here.
So
On the next slide, um, we have
our current model which as I
know, I feel like we're kind of
covering some of the same ground
you guys just covered a little
while ago. Uh, but Madam Chair,
I know you've, uh, succinctly
put it, the way it is now is
someone gets arrested, uh,
competency is raised. They are
found incompetent and the case
gets dismissed and that's it, it
just goes away and it's over.
Um, so what we are doing now,
uh, is, as I said, we are
intercepting them there at the
uh at the jail once they are
first arrested.
Um, we have forensic navigators.
There are two professionals that
are um uh
Trained in this sort of work as
mental health professionals with
uh
One of our navigators actually
has a peer support
certification. So she has lived
experience.
Um, she, uh, and our other
navigator are there at the jail
to uh speak with the individuals
to encourage them. That's why we
call them navigators to.
Um, encourage them.
To go forward in the program.
And
What's important to point out
here, I think.
Is that
Absolutely.
It has to be voluntary. In other
words, uh, at this point, we
cannot order or the court cannot
order any individual into
services.
Um, because they're incompetent,
they will never be adjudicated,
and if they're not adjudicated,
they can't be ordered into
treatment because we can't order
them into treatment. We have to
have them cooperate.
They have to be constitutionally
we have to have them agree to
it.
All right.
So
That's what the navigators are
for.
Um,
And
I can see some trepidation on
your part, so don't worry,
we're, we're gonna get there.
Uh, just stay with me.
Yeah, this this interests me
because people are looking at me
to help fix this, so,
so.
Once we get them to agree with
the navigator there at the jail,
then their public defender is
advised there at the jail, the
public defender speaks with the
individual and makes sure to
confirm with them that they
agree. The prosecutor who's
there at the uh part of the in
jail arraignment, uh, agrees,
once all the parties agree, they
inform the judge. The judge then
suspends the proceedings for
that individual in that
individual's case.
Whether it be the shoplifting
the criminal trespass, whatever
it is, OK.
The proceedings are suspended
for up to 6 months and that
person is diverted from that
point forward into services.
The navigator guides them
through uh their initial intake,
uh, with one of our community
partners, uh, right now we're uh
mostly relying on peak
behavioral, who's providing us
with most of our services. We've
also, we've got some work with
other community partners like La
Clinica.
Um, but, uh, a lot of people
have opened their doors to us
and have a lot of services
available to us.
Um,
But that's the gist of it.
They're diverted and they're,
uh, and we've had some success,
some more than others.
Um, so from there,
Is the next slide the
She screening. OK, so that's,
it's a little bit of a small
slide, so I'm not gonna expect
you to actually see what it is,
but it is the brief jail mental
health screening. It's just a
series of very straightforward
questions to determine whether
the individual has some sort of
history of, of uh mental illness
or not to determine whether they
should qualify or not. There are
a series of yes or no questions,
very basic, uh, because we
can't.
Expect a whole lot of an
individual who we expect to be
incompetent, so.
Uh, based on, and actually I'm
gonna let Jamie speak a little
more on the mental health
screening because she probably
knows more about it than I do.
Actually, uh, you described it
very well. I think the.
The most important thing about
implementing this in our county
jail is it's a universal
screening. So whether we are
screening to move someone into
this competency program or to
AOT or to something else this um
is the best way to gather the
data and then to create that
pathway for the individual into
a treatment, uh, program. So
again, it's just an example of a
universal screening that can
help us with a lot of different
diversion programs. I, I wanted
to go back and touch a little
bit on
What the judge was saying about
this being a voluntary program,
and I know that sometimes
voluntary programs may have less
teeth in them and so we assume
that there may be less
willingness or um I guess
willingness to engage and
participate, but I think what's
unique about this program is it
includes those peer support
workers or peer navigators, and
it is proven and we've seen it,
um, if I ask someone, hey, do
you want to participate in this
program?
They probably are gonna say no,
but if a peer support worker,
someone who can empathize with
them, explains the program to
them, explains what's going to
happen and really spends time
doing that engagement, then
people are much more likely to
willingly say yes, I want to
participate. So I think the two
things that make this unique is
it's serving a population of
people with serious mental
illness. It's not for uh a
different population of folks,
and it includes peer support
workers who
primary job and training is to
engage people in services and
they do it very well. So even
though it's voluntary, um, we
really are able to to connect
with people and encourage their
participation.
And let me backtrack a little
bit, sorry, cause uh one thing I
did
Leave out. You did say.
Previously, uh, Madam Chair,
that, you know, one thing that
happens in these competency
cases, they're found
incompetent. The case gets
dismissed. Largely the same
thing happens here.
The carrot, for lack of a better
term, here is we're giving them
an option.
Um, the option is very simply
is, do you want to keep going
through the system the same way
you have been over and over
again.
Or do you want to get out of it?
And try something new.
And maybe get some help.
And we've gotten some
Reception to that.
Oddly enough.
Which has been encouraging. So,
um,
Do we want to go through the
uniqueness of the program.
Before we get to the
Um, all right, so as far as the
uniqueness of the program, it's
not treatment court. It's, and,
and I can tell you that because
I'm actually the presiding judge
over uh the DWI treatment court
out of my court as well.
Um, it's not treatment court
because treatment court is a
post adjudication, uh, option,
that's what we do here. It's not
probation again, it's post
adjudication. It's not pre-trial
supervision because pretrial
supervision are for individuals
that are competent and can make
it to court on time, can uh call
into their pre-trial supervision
officer and check in with him.
Um, it's not involuntary
treatment because again, as we
said, we can't involuntarily
commit individuals who have not
who have not been convicted of
anything. Uh, it's
unconstitutional to do so.
Um, competency version does not
require any sort of mandatory
drug and alcohol testing or
negative outcomes for the
participant. I'm gonna let you
handle those.
OK.
Essentially, you don't get
kicked out of the program for a
dirty UA. It's not that type of,
of project. We know that people
have needs and we know that this
is a group of folks that it is
essential to engage, so we don't
want barriers, we don't want
reasons to kick people out of
the program. So.
If all I'm doing is helping you
find a home, a safe place to
stay. That's great. Stay in the
program. It's a real harm
reduction uh approach, and we
look for small successes in the,
the work that we're doing
because again, something is
better than nothing and if you
look at the other path, there
were no services, no, no
treatment, which means very
little option for changing
behavior, so the there's not a
punitive approach to this. This,
this competency program does
And use navigators and it is
best if they are peer navigators
to help with engagement and the
care coordination. It better
aligns resources with needs if
someone has an illness, they
need a medical provider they
don't need a detention center
officer. That's not going to
help with any of our other
illnesses. It's not going to
help with uh mental illness
either, so it does a much better
job of aligning resources with
needs, um, and what we've seen
here
is it does a great job of
bringing together the courts,
the behavioral health providers,
and other service agencies. So
every two weeks, Judge Rosario
um participates in a meeting
with our behavioral health
providers are um housing
navigators, or peer support
navigators, and they all talk
about the individual's progress
and needs. So it's a great way
for the two fields to learn
about each other. They all sat
down in a room together and
learned about trauma in the
justice system, so they were
learning, um.
About trauma, but they were
sitting in the room with
behavioral health providers and
court folks, so there was a lot
of great um exchange of, of
information and just building
those, those relationships
between the justice system and
the behavioral health system,
which sometimes are, are at odds
but need to work together. So
that's uh kind of the uniqueness
of this program, and I think
why.
What we pulled from other
programs and why we created the
um the process the way we did.
And
Before we get to the next slide,
just, you know, part of how we
created the process.
Uh, you know, there was a lot of
work. It, it, we didn't just
Come up with it out of the air
there was about 3 years of work
on the commission, uh, again, is
Jamie pointed out that you all,
you folks all helped create the
commission on Mental Health and
competency, we worked for about
3 years speaking with other
jurisdictions, uh, we had a lot
of partners nationwide, uh, that
have been doing this kind of
work ahead of time for a number
of years and had a lot of good
input and a lot of good data in
how to make this successful. Um,
so, you know, we, we had a lot
of good
Framework in terms of how to
make this work before we um can,
you know, came at this uh with
our own program.
So, uh, the next slide is, is
our graph regarding the
participants in the program. So
I'm gonna start on the um
On the top left side, the uh the
pipe part showing 12.9% of
individuals or the 9 people, so
we have 70 total individuals
that have been screened and
that's as, this is as of last
week.
Uh, the 9 individuals you see on
the top left, uh, those are
individuals that did have a
history of competency issues,
but we're charged with felony
offenses. So because of those
felony offenses, they were not
eligible for the program.
Uh, underneath that uh pie piece
on the, uh, again, left hand
side, the, the larger portion of
theirs is in color? Oh, good.
OK, good. So the uh the larger
uh blue portion, the 26
individuals.
Uh, those are individuals that
have a history of competency,
but uh they were either charged
with some sort of traffic
offense, or it was a municipal
court case. So it was a case
that wasn't running through the
magistrate court, unfortunately,
I don't have jurisdiction over
them, so I can't see them.
And the traffic case is just,
they're traffic cases they don't
qualify for competency diversion
because it's a traffic case,
it's probably gonna be in front
of me for about 30 days, so.
Um, next to that, uh, on the
bottom right portion in the
yellow uh.
High piece is uh we have 15
individuals that met criteria
but declined participation.
Again, it is a voluntary
process, uh, constitutionally,
we cannot force them into
treatment because it is
pre-adjudication. So, uh, while
they were given the option, they
did decline. So there's those
cases will go through the normal
uh trial docket. Uh, they will
go forward, uh, most of them
most likely their defense
attorneys will raise competency.
They will have a competency or
forensic evaluation done.
And if they are found
incompetent, then their cases
will most likely get dismissed,
as was brought up earlier.
Um, above that, there's a small
sliver of orange, uh, those are
two individuals that were uh
started out in the process, but
withdrew voluntarily. Again, we
can't keep them in if they don't
wish to be there.
Finally, uh, the top uh purple
portion on the top right are,
are 18 active participants. So
out of 70 individuals screened.
We have a 25% of them that are
actively in the program.
Um, and I'm, I'm actually glad
to say that as of today that 18
is actually up to 22.
Um,
So these are individuals that
are in different stages of the
program, either they've uh
they've agreed to participate in
the program and they're awaiting
their initial intake.
Uh, with their treatment
provider. Uh, they've already
had their intake and they've got
a treatment plan. Um, they're
Going through their services,
some are actively in the
currently in the ACT program,
which is the um assertive
community treatment program. Um,
some are in medication
management, um,
We have a couple of individuals
that are currently in inpatient
rehabilitation, one of them is
at our brand new La Las Cruces
recovery Center was just opened
last week.
Right? Last week, so one of our
individuals got her bed there
yesterday as a matter of fact.
Um, we have a couple of folks
that are in custody on on felony
charges for other matters, but
they are waiting beds um at
inpatient treatment in other um
locations throughout the state.
So there are different levels,
um, some more successful than
others. I have status
conferences every 30 days, um,
actually twice a month, but
they're, uh, these individuals
are scheduled 30 days out. I had
my status conferences just this
morning.
Um, for 5 of these individuals,
2 of them were already an
inpatient. Two of them were um
in the midst of getting
treatment, two of them are still
out there, but uh have not
picked up any new cases and our
navigators are out there trying
to find them.
Um, success depends on a lot of
things. Success depends on.
If they have family involved in
the community, uh, that helps a
lot.
If they have housing.
That helps a lot.
If they are unhoused, that makes
it a lot more difficult,
frankly.
Um,
But again, there, there are
varying levels of success, but
what we've seen and what I've
been encouraged by.
Personally, is that I've seen
people that
There's, there's a small
reduction in the number of
people that we see coming
through on a weekly basis. And
there's a small increase in
people that are going to get
some help.
Instead of going to keep
Doing the same thing they always
do and getting in trouble for
it.
So it's incremental.
Um, but it's a step in the right
direction.
And
Um, like I said, as of today,
we're at 22 individuals, we, uh,
with our two forensic
navigators, they can each carry
a caseload of 15.
Um,
Once we, once they get to 15,
I've asked them to reassess to
see if they believe they can
carry more, but it's more about
quality than quantity.
Um, the other thing I'm happy to
say is, um, the third is just
posted for a program manager
position for the forensic
navigators, so we're gonna have
a manager, a program manager,
and then once we get a program
manager we're gonna hire
another, uh, I foresee hiring
another navigator, so we'll
actually have 3 individuals
we'll be able to we'll be able
to increase that case load to I
suspect maybe 45, 50 people.
Um,
But again, it's, it's a step in
the right direction and
The last thing I'll say, folks,
just
More so, you know, about where I
come from on this. I was a
prosecutor before I was a judge.
I was a
Big advocate of putting people
in jail and in prison and there
were several people I did.
Um,
I have changed my mind on a lot
of this, uh, prison is not for
everyone.
There's some people that just
need some help.
And um we're finding a way to do
it.
So
Do you want anything you wanted
to add? All right. Any
questions?
I'm sure there are. I have
Senator Stewart, um, Nibert.
Econ
Anyone else? OK. Um, Senator
Stewart.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. So,
This is just so exciting. I just
sort of seems to me.
What we all want and you've at
least started it.
Um, so I do have a couple of
questions. The first is on that.
Brief, jail, mental health
screen. We just read us a couple
of the questions which we cannot
read. Sure.
Let me see if I can.
Are you able to, Jane?
I'm not able to read it, but I
know a few of those questions.
Sorry. It's just a proposal.
Same time, yeah.
Um, it, it is a very simple
question, so it's not a clinical
tool, it's designed and has been
um vetted through the process of
detention center officers or lay
people asking these questions
and it's, have you ever had a
mental illness? Um, have you had
a significant change in your
weight in the last 30 days? Do
you take medication? Do you hear
um people talking to you that
aren't there, they're very
simple questions that a
detention center officer can
answer and there's
It's set up with a kind of an
algorithm. So if you answer yes
to 3 or more questions then it's
considered a positive screen,
um, and I can share, I just
wanted, we put this in here just
so you would know that there is
a formal standardized tool being
used, but I'm happy to share
this with you. It came from the
um SASA, the substance abuse and
Mental Health Services
Administration, and it would be
nice if this was a universal
tool across more than just our,
our detention center. So I'm
happy to share it, but those are
the type of questions.
Very simple.
Uh, so thank you for that. Um,
Madam Chair, so
So you're not, it's not
questioning competency at all.
On any of these, it's really
mental health, uh, history,
background, what's your sort of
current, current status. I'm
just, I'm just trying to
understand this, you know, I'm
not an attorney, haven't uh
haven't been in law enforcement,
um, so.
So would you, is this in a
assisted outpatient treatment?
Is this an AOT? No. Um, uh,
chair, uh.
Senator, this is not uh assisted
outpatient treatment because
there is no assisted outpatient
treatment is a civil process, so
there is a court order that says
you will do this for this
program, um, we have treatment
providers and peer support
specialist that says we would
like for you to do this, and we
will help you do this. So there
is no, no mandate. There are no
sanctions, um, it is purely
voluntary.
So it has nothing to do then
with determining competency or
anything.
I mean, the, the people that
you're looking at are you can
probably say some of them are
clearly incompetent when it
comes to understanding what
they've done and whether or not
they can help uh an attorney to
uh for their case, whether it's
right or wrong, so.
Clearly these are in that group
of people that we're all worried
about that aren't competent.
Would you agree with that? Yes,
um, Madam Chair and Senator,
there's
There kind of there's two levels
of screening. So this says, do
you
Could you possibly have a mental
illness? If yes, you're going to
be screened positive and then
the navigators are going to look
at your criminal history to see
if there has been competency um
cases in the past to see what
type of charges you have. So it
it does address that population
and it does a really good job of
stopping the process before you
get into that competency process
that takes a lot of resources
and a lot of time. And again,
little.
Return on investment. So before
ideally before that whole
competency process is even
kicked off, we would divert
someone into this program and
not have to go through that,
which can re-traumatize the
individual. And again, is a lot
of resources that are
unnecessary. Do you have
something to, to add, Judge?
Um,
Just kind of going back to what
you what you were saying, uh,
Madam Chair and senator, the, so
the reason is not AOT is exactly
as Jamie said, it's.
AOT is a civil process.
The reason these individuals
come to us is because they've
ended up in the criminal justice
system.
And they will most likely end up
in a competency proceeding of
some sort.
OK. Um, and we're trying to not
circumvent that, but we're
trying to get them.
The help that they need. So
through the criminal justice
system.
That's
We're what we're trying to use
to get them to help while
they're with us.
Cause I'm gonna see him anyway.
So while they're with me,
Let's try and figure out a
better way.
That's, does that help answer
your question? Madam Chair, it
does. I just, you know, we've,
we've had AOT civil competency
and the criminal competency, and
now we've got this, uh, we've
got another one going up in the
north. I'm just trying to figure
out, you know, what this all
mean and so that we know what to
focus on. So it doesn't seem as
though you need any additional
legislation to do what you're
doing.
Is that correct?
Do you just decided to do it and
there you're doing it, is that
right?
Well, uh, I didn't decide it, to
be fair, uh, this was, uh, I
believe it started with Justice
Samoa.
And then, uh, and then the, the
uh commission on Mental Health
incompetency.
Um, from there, and then, uh,
once I was
Asked if I would like the
opportunity presented itself,
and I jumped at it.
So, Madam chair, so that
But the mental health commission
from the Supreme Court. So
they're they're setting in place
these pilots, but and they don't
need any change in statue.
I don't want to speak for them,
Madam Chair and senator. I'll
move, I'll move away from that.
Um, I just have one more
question and you're probably not
the people that well, so you're
calling this an ACT.
assertive community treatment
that your term for it? Uh, it's
uh sort of community treatment,
yes, that community treatment so
this isn't an AOT, this is an
ACT ACT is one, program, uh,
that, that is available to
individuals. Yes, that is
correct, um, and do you want to
talk more about A. So let me
just clarify because it is
awkward cause it's A O T ACT, so
AOT is a civil commitment
process.
is one of the things that
creates the pathway to get
someone into treatment.
A CT or act is a type of
treatment. So some people go to
inpatient treatment. Some people
go to outpatient treatment. Some
people need more intense
outpatient treatment and A is
just a type of treatment that's
available in a community. So if
you were gonna ask me for what
resources do we need to help
support programs like this, I
would say more resources for A
teams or that type of
outpatient.
Behavioral health treatment
services in a community.
So Madam Chair, you're talking
experts behavioral health
counselors, um, those kind of
folks that really understand
that.
Yeah, all right, I have another
question. You probably can't
answer it, so I'm not gonna ask
it. Now, give up my time.
But, but if, if I can just uh
really quick, just add on to
that. It's, it's not just
behavioral services as well that
we're we're trying to help them
with. We're trying to help them
with housing, food insecurity,
if they just need a doctor, a
dentist, you know, basic needs
as well, because a lot of these
people need a lot of those
services as well.
Well, Madam Chan, are you,
you're keeping good data because
you know, I, I, I really think
root causes is housing.
is one of the main ones, and I
think if you've got, if you've
got someplace where you can.
Be safe.
Take care of your basic needs.
You've got a much better chance
of.
figuring out all the rest of the
stuff, but if you don't even
have that, you don't even start
on anyway, all right, thank you
so much. Thank you, Madam Chair
and Senator, I agree.
Thank you, Senator. It, we have
Senator Never and then
Representative Al Khn.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
What is the incentive, uh, Madam
Chair and Judge for someone to
voluntary voluntarily uh enter
the program because if they're
Incompetent.
As I see it, there's
They get let out and they're on
their own, uh, so what is the
incentive for them to be, be a
participant in the program. So
it's a good question because
it's when I get asked a lot. So
there's
So first thing we need to think
about is there's a difference
between being incompetent and
having the capacity to agree to
getting services.
They're two different things,
OK? So they can have the
capacity to say, yes, I need a
doctor.
And still be incompetent.
OK.
The, the incentive or the carrot
as, as I like to call it, it,
it's, it's not much of one. I'll
be honest with you. Um, these
are individuals that go through
the system over and over again,
and all we're offering them is,
is something different.
It's literally it.
Do you want to keep going
through the system over and over
again? Do you want to keep
seeing the judge every week? Do
you want to keep getting
arrested? Do you want to keep
getting thrown in jail?
Do you want to keep going
through this over and over and
over again.
Or do you want to try a
different option with us?
And see, and see if this will
work.
That's, that's, that's the
incentive.
And so, Madam Chair, I, I would
suggest to my colleagues that
that that is where we may need
some legislative action because
normally you have two paths. You
founding confident.
You go to a facility.
In New Mexico.
We lack facilities. They're not
going anywhere but back out on
the street, yeah, so if we want
to really.
Uh, address the situation where
that's.
Where I see the legislative in
needs to to focus. We have to
have.
Someplace where these people can
get the help, get the treatment
that they need, and you have to,
you, you know, they voluntarily
enter a program locally or.
They have to have some place to
get treatment and, and it's
their choice, but they're not
back out on the street, seeing
the judge over and over and over
again, so that that may be where
the legislative action needs to
needs to be focused and Senator,
thank you for that. I, I
appreciate that and I agree with
you.
Um, and yes, so, I think that
was something many of us were
saying.
When the governor's package came
forward, we've got the cart
before the horse maybe a little
bit. We need more obviously need
more treatment facilities and
very good point, Senator.
Representative Alcon.
Thank you, ma'am. Uh, thank you,
Madam Chair.
I could judge.
Welcome.
I just wanted to ask, uh, who
does, who funds your program?
It, it was initially funded by
the administrative Office of the
courts, and it has since been
taken over by the 3rd Judicial
District.
The um the treatment piece of
this, most people who are in the
program, their, their treatment
is covered by Medicaid, so there
are options for, uh, there's
funding for the treatment piece
of this, the peer support
workers, um, those two new
positions were funded by state
funds through the administrative
office of the court, and now,
um, the local judicial district.
So, thank you, that's, that's
good to know. Anyway, you still
have to have some kind of a cost
and all kinds of different stuff
that you got to cover. But
anyway, I, I, I've done that
before. Uh, so my question is,
uh,
With this juvenile.
Does anybody know?
If there is any state in the
United States that again
Uh, sentence a juvenile that
considered incompetent.
Did anybody found a law like
that?
Yeah, I'm looking for all the
legal beagles.
Senator, not, not that I'm aware
of. It's not out there, OK?
There's just no way you can, uh,
legally sentence a person that
is incompetent whether they're a
juvenile or not.
The one question that I do have
though is uh this child the Juy
has a parent, uh, are they
brought into the program?
Right? If you're asking if it's,
Madam Chair and senator, you're
asking if a juvenile is
qualified for the program right
now a juvenile will not qualify
for the program because we don't
have any juvenile misdemeanors
running through our magistrate
court.
Those all go through the
district court. OK. So,
Madam Chair, so you're telling
me and, and I'm correct, I mean,
unless there was traffic, the
only time I heard a juvenile uh
case was as a magistrate judge,
of course.
They never came to the court. So
therefore your program should be
running through the municipal
court or the district court.
Am I right?
No, it's for adults, sir.
Yes.
That's where I was lost, sorry.
My, my apologies, Madam Chair
and Senator. Yes, it's, it's for
adult misdemeanants at this
point.
Now I understand where you're
at. I, I don't disagree that
addressing juveniles.
would be
That that's, that's, it's a
whole Pandora's box right there,
but yeah, I think.
We need to start with.
Juveniles
To really start fixing problems.
If, if that's the question
you're asking on a much broader
scale, Madam Chair and senator,
I agree with you completely.
That's a different program
though, yeah, and I'm a
representative.
I'm sorry, representative, my
apologies, Madam Chair and
representative.
How can you degrade me?
Thank you. It's, it's my first
time doing this.
You know, I was listening to uh
uh Madam Leader and her
questions and she was asking,
how can you just do something
like this. I've done something
like this. All you got to do is
find somebody to find me some
office space and uh uh a little
bit of help and uh
You can get any program going
you still in New Mexico, you
don't need the whole state of
New Mexico to get it done.
I did a program where I had a uh
basically a
DWI drug intervention program,
had no money from the state of
New Mexico, and it wasn't just
DWIs.
We guarantee you there was more
than DWIs in that program and we
were handling people that
couldn't normally gone to jail.
We were just putting him through
this program and keeping them
there and keeping them out of
jail.
And keeping them productive.
That was the biggest thing.
Here's the thing that uh where
you, where you need to go is
where, where are you? What are
you gonna do with them after you
work with your program? You
gotta find a way to move these
people to to production
somewhere.
Oh.
The good thing is, is once their
case is done with us, as I said,
the case gets dismissed
regardless whether
You know,
They're with us or not. If
they're found incompetent, the
case ends up getting dismissed.
They can continue going on in
their services, whatever
treatment they're getting, our
providers have told us just
because their case is done with
us, it doesn't mean that they're
services in.
They can continue getting
whatever treatment and services
they need, whatever program
they're in, I've been assured
from our providers that they can
keep getting
Whatever treatment they want to
keep getting it.
Whatever program they're in. So
the, the good thing is,
It doesn't end with us.
Luckily,
And just a comment, Madam Chair,
when I was uh sitting in the
chair like the one the judge is
sitting in. My first question
when I made uh with uh say 28
and under, uh, juvenile 28 and
under and uh I could see in
their eyes when they were at
first appearance that they were
really hurting on for some
drugs. The first question was,
what is your drug of choice?
Uh, I mean, even before I
Give them the rights. What was
it? What is your drug of choice?
And of course,
I'm the boss anyway.
And they tell me right away.
And I'd ask him if I can help
you get off of these drugs.
Will you work with me?
At that time, um, 70-80% of them
did. I mean they.
Especially as bad as they were
hurting and just spending a
weekend or a few days in jail
and uh
we got to get quite a few of
those young men out of there for
just one simple question.
Well just one little question
that the judge has asked, What
is your choice.
So you think about that when
you're sentencing people and
you're reading them, it makes a
big difference in a person's
life. Thank you, Madam Chair.
You represented by Senator Worth
and then Representative Laura
Kadena.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for the presentation,
um, certainly the work being
done in the 3rd is.
Kind of been leadership in both
this front and on AOT, and I
just was thinking is the
President Pro Tem was talking
about.
All these different programs,
the answer is we really need all
of the above. Each one of these
makes a difference, and I
couldn't, you know, when Chief
Story was here, he had a slide
and he talked about, you know,
prolific recidivism in Las
Cruces in 2023, the over 10
arrests, 21.
Well, my goodness, if you can
impact and if you can get.
5 of those, 10 of those into
your system all of a sudden his.
Numbers start looking much
better. And so just for the
committee, this, you know,
really what CCJ did in the
hearings that we had leading up
to the session led me to reach
out to the first judicial
district court to see if they
were interested in doing both an
AOT and a criminal diversion
pilot and when I got a positive
response. We had a very good
meeting with the executive with
the Chief Justice, with all the
counties in the first.
And they're moving forward and I
just wanted to just reiterate
that one of the good things that
came out of the special session
was the $300 appropriation.
And that's money that needs to
be used in FY 25, so it needs to
be used now, and I would just
really encourage you to make
sure you're asking uh
administrative office of the
courts for whatever you need,
including expansion.
Because again, what we were
trying to do is put in place
these programs.
So that
We've created the
infrastructure.
Because we, we realize you can't
pass a whole bunch of bills when
there's no infrastructure there
and so I I'm just encouraged
again, and I want you all to
know that what you've done in
the 3rd is really was the
genesis of of what what's
happened and now there's, we put
money in to do this, and I think
coming back in January, we can
continue to make this funding.
Permanent and expand on it so
that you really do have the
tools so that you've got the,
the resources when, when folks,
as Judge Al K, I'll call him
Judge Al Con is, you know, when
he gets someone willing to to do
the diversion when you get
someone willing to do the, we
make sure that the support
network is there to make it work
and not all of a sudden oh we
can't find somebody or we need
another navigator. We've heard a
lot about navigators, not enough
navigators, you know, we gotta
make sure we get those
resources. So I just wanted to
flag that and again, come
you judge for taking this on on
top of all the other things you
do, but I think what we've heard
from the members of the band who
deal with this, including, you
know, Justice Amoro has talked
about it's incredibly, and I
can't imagine how frustrating it
is to just see the same over and
over and over again, and you
can't do anything.
But divert them, and now there's
a choice and so.
I mean, boy, if 70% would be
willing to consider it.
And those are the numbers coming
from the former magistrate judge
down there, but I'm sure it's
not that high, but again, just,
just looking at the recidivism
and numbers in Las Cruces. I
just feel like these are the
types of things that we need to
really get up and running in all
the districts across the state,
and then we'll start to see.
Solutions, so.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Now I have a
longer list. Representative
Cadena, Representative Delgado
and um Representative Chasey, so
please be mindful of time. Thank
you, um.
So I've done that to you before.
It's because I know someone by
that name.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I thank
you both for your presentation
today. As it happened, we all
remember um the press releases
and news and announcements about
your about your competency
diversion pilot project came out
as we were in the summer of the
special session and so of course
there was many communities and
cohorts and groups of people who
are actively in these
conversations and watching what
was happening here in the 3rd,
um, I remember this summer that
when this announcement went out.
Some of the criminal defense
attorneys I'm in conversation
with had very clearly turned
around and quickly, um,
including Megan that works for
our house with a lot of skill to
ask the AOC or and Supreme Court
for the rules on this, like to
make sure they understood as
criminal defense attorneys, what
was going to happen so that they
could best represent their
clients in these cases. So can
you confirm and clarify for us
and the listening audience
today, um, going to, to your
last slide, the 7.
cases green to date. Looking
first at the two participants
that have withdrawn. When they
withdrawn from when they
withdraw from this diversion
project, that means that they
step back into the criminal
legal proceedings and can raise
competency.
As if they had never spent some
time in your diversion project.
Yes, and.
There's actually a a a subpart
to that question, Madam Chair
and representative. Um, so just
to be clear, they can actually
go through a forensic evaluation
even while they're in the
competency diversion program.
If
The defense attorney and they
believe it is appropriate to do
so. We're not going to restrict
them from doing so.
They absolutely have the right
to do so, you know, it's.
This is just a personal view I
have. It's, it's, it can be
traumatizing.
To go through that.
Um,
But no, they are this program
and a and a forensic evaluation
are not exclusive of each other.
Thank you. I appreciate that
clarification and confirmation,
um, and
So
Might you be able to share? I'm
not sure if this is appropriate
or if there's confidentiality
concerns.
Did the two participants that
withdrew.
Eventually raise competency.
Frankly, I don't know.
I, if it happened before or
after is what I don't know, uh,
but to answer your question,
Madam Chair and representative,
the
Once they are either, once they
are withdrawn from the program,
if, if they choose to do so or
if, you know, or if, if they.
are removed from the program,
then they placed back on the
trial docket.
Um, if they or their defense
attorney or if the party
stipulate to a forensic
evaluation at that point, then
sure, it would just go through
the normal they removed from the
program so far you all have not
removed anyone from the program.
I have not voluntarily
withdrawn.
The only withdrawals thus far
are two individuals that chose
to remove themselves, yeah.
Have you had participants in
that um
bucket of the
Active, the purple active
participants that have also
elected to seek the forensic
evaluation while they are
participating in this diversion
program. Yes.
OK.
And then finally, I do
appreciate the data, Madam
Chair, on um the gender
breakdown. I know we've had long
conversations about how data
matters and in New Mexico, um,
we can't act if any of, we can't
act like any of this is neutral
on poverty or race or gender or
pieces like that, so I would
appreciate moving forward,
especially as you have more room
to collect and appreciate what
you're doing and the impact it's
having breakdowns, um, not just
on the active participants, but
who was screened out, who
elected not to.
Participate, who withdrew um by
gender but also by other
identifying demographics, um, in
the ways that you are collecting
them. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Thank you,
Representative, um,
representative Barrego and then
Representative Chasey and be
mindful of time.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, and
I apologize for being late, but
I had some other business this
morning to take care of, um,
representative from Albuquerque,
Northwest Mesa, um, also former
city councilor, um, and thank
you for your presentation. I,
um, I was here.
To listen to it and I was
thinking about, you know, the
other programs that um Senator
Stewart mentioned, and, you
know, one of the things that I
think about is the similar
threads that all of these
programs have had in um just,
you know, somebody who's in
trouble with the court or has uh
trouble, um, behavioral issues,
um, maybe
Mental or physical or both.
Um, and really, I, I look at it
a little more, a little
differently, Madam Chair, um,
because I, I also think that,
you know, the low self-esteem
that these individuals probably
have because of the troubles
that they've experienced and,
you know, I, I tend to be a
little bit more of an empath and
um I look at it very
empathetically. Um, is that
these
People are all human beings.
They were born, they're gonna
die. I mean, they're very much,
very much a part of who we are
and the fabric of our society,
Madam Chair, and, and, and
unfortunately, for whatever
reasons they have fallen into a
very vicious cycle.
And we all have them in our
families, you know, whether it
be our uncle or our cousin or
our family or somebody, a
friend, uh, we've all dealt with
it and we know that there are
periods, Madam Chair, when they
are competent.
I mean, there are those periods
when you can talk to them, but I
think, uh, Madam Chair,
When I heard some of the
comments earlier, um, I think
the true benefit is that we have
a healthy society, and that
we're trying to get them on that
pathway to really, um, I mean, I
think for those of us who have
dealt with um addicts.
They get there has to be a
period where they are tired of
being sick and tired.
And they have to make that
choice. And I think what's
really important in these
programs, Madam Chair, is that
there is a choice, and, and I
think that when they're in that
vicious cycle that I, I
mentioned, um,
You know, there is a time and
I've, I've seen this.
With some of the individuals who
I've tried to get help for um is
that they really are at that
point where they're tired of
being sick and tired.
And I, I applaud what you guys
are doing, um, I hope that when
we're looking at these programs
if, if, if there is in fact any
legislation that we look at sort
of those threads of all of these
programs and what makes the most
sense for and and sometimes it's
not one size fits all for New
Mexico. Sometimes we need to
have different types of programs
in different areas because
sometimes there are different
needs and I, you know, I keep
thinking.
That we need as a state really
to assess our state.
In the rural areas, in the
cities, and because there are
really different influences in
all of these areas. So I just
wanted to make that point, Madam
Chair, because I, I, you know, I
think about this kind of stuff a
lot and um
I just applaud you guys for what
you're doing.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative.
Representative Chasey.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, and I, I really want to
thank you for your work. I think
when we heard from you earlier
in the summer, we, um, you gave
us hope that we might be able to
come up with something we could
do in a 3 day special session
that would be something we could
use in what was contemplated
initially that we would have
pilot projects for AOT and then
it was that was taken off the
agenda and we were still trying
to resurrect something.
That would be helpful. So I
think you, you gave us hope and
we learned from the AOC as
Senator Cervantes likes to
remind us all that we didn't
need to amend the law just to,
just to begin, so that we could
start gathering the information.
So following up on Senator
Wirth's questions and then
represented Cardenas's
questions, how um
Are you going to or will you be
able to maybe with additional
resources for next year to
evaluate this program so that we
can see how it can be extended.
Um, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative.
The evaluation of
We built an evaluation plan at
the beginning of our program
here, so we knew what we wanted
to look at and what we wanted to
measure through the process. Um,
since then, the administrative
office of the court is looking
to contract with an evaluator
and I believe they're going to
work with um UNM to once they
have some data to put some data
together. So in in addition to
the kind of the pie chart there
we'll be able to get some
additional information such as
other demographics and why
people are successful, why
people are
aren't successful and other
evaluation measures. Um, so
evaluation um is built in to, to
the pilot project, so we can
expand it beyond the pilot
sites.
Thank you so much for that. And
Madam Chair, that just makes me
think, uh, really what
Representative Cadena was asking
and I know when I used to do
evaluation on federal grants
from the US Department of
Education. A lot of it seemed to
focus on gathering data, but my
evaluation consultant also like
to get qualitative data, and
that's it's more costly to
conduct, but you're talking to.
People and they're telling you
why they couldn't do it. And,
and that I think.
Those interviews are gonna be
priceless too, to help us
diversify what we can offer. So
thank you. Absolutely, uh, Madam
Chair, representative, one thing
that I would ask as legislators
is that you always ask for
evaluation, um, if there's
funding attached to to a
project, make sure that
evaluation is also funded, um,
process evaluation is just as
important as the system that we
set up. Are we really going
steps 123, or have we missed
something, um.
In there, so the outcome
evaluation, the process
evaluation, and then looking at
those quality measures as well.
I absolutely agree and
appreciate the support for
evaluation. Thank you. Oh, thank
you. Um, I wanna float this idea
about how one could connect.
The issue of raising competency.
To AOT and I already know one
civil and one's criminal, so we
don't need to go there. I get
that, but that doesn't mean that
you can't talk to each other and
they can't be intertwined in a
way, so let's, let's just lay
that out there. So I mean there
is, you know, and just when I
was reading the literature that
was uh there's an abundance of
out there about trying to get
more use
AOT utilized more and nationally
there is a
Movement to do so. I'm sure you,
you guys are in this, you know,
probably know way more about it
than I do, but could there be a
way to connect us this when
someone raises competency in the
criminal context to to.
Not to say, wouldn't you like to
have a more directive way and if
it's unconstitutional, I want to
understand why because I'm not
sure because we're not
committing them.
We're not, we're not prosecuting
them. We're not, you get where
I'm going, it's, we're not.
So I wanna just float that and
if if you guys have any thoughts
on that.
Either one of you or both. I, I
can start with you,
um, Madam Chair, you're
absolutely correct. So when I
look at the sequential intercept
model and you look from 0 to 5
legislation policies, rules,
regulations, they create the
triggers to move people out of
the system and into the
treatment system, so that's
squarely within this this
committee what policies,
regulations, legislation is
needed for that, that movement.
AOT is
One of the triggers, one way
that you can move someone,
someone out. So if right now
when the judge sees someone and
says, would you like to enter
into this program and they say
yes or no, um, or if someone has
gone through the competency
process and they've been found
not competent, and the court
walks away at either of those
points if we could build in a
trigger that the judge could
petition AOT. That would be
fantastic or it's automatic.
Someone's found not competent,
the, the, the
The law says you automatically
move into the civil AOT process
and then there's a hearing. It's
still adjudicated through it's
called adjudication even civil.
It's still adjudicated in a
civil process, but there's no
trigger to make that happen. We
could also back up even more and
not even involve the judges. If
law enforcement picks someone up
for a type of crime and law
enforcement has a pretty good
indication that it's motivated
by an untreated mental illness,
and I don't know if Chief Story
is still here, but I'm stealing
his words.
Um, they have the authority to
take someone into custody,
protective custody. Why can't
they be a petitioner into AOT
and at that moment trigger that
civil AOT process. It's not
contingent or connected to their
criminal charges, but it's a way
to, uh, uh, I guess an even more
encouraging way to involuntarily
connect them to to treatment.
Yeah, Madam Chair, the only
barrier right now is, is, is the
petitioner for AOT. That's
really it.
Uh, because what I envision and,
and actually, you know, we've,
we've talked about this for some
time, actually, so you took the
thought right out of our heads.
Um,
I, I see people going through
the diversion program straight
into AOT. I don't see why they
couldn't.
You know, um, except for it's
who's petitioning them in AOT.
Well, um,
Thank you, because you know
we're moving it towards the
session and we want to be
thinking about ways to address
some of these things, uh, in a
meaningful way, and, uh, you
know, I think I'm speaking for
just about everybody on this
committee when I say this is not
about
From my perspective, penalizing
people who have mental illness,
but it's, you know, an effort
when you guys are right in the
middle of an effort to get
treatment for folks who need
treatment and um I appreciate
your thoughts and I may follow
up with you if you don't mind
because I really want to
understand better how we might,
you, you are on the ground and I
want to understand how we could
work with competency and AOT and
and see if there's a way to
improve on that as well. So, um,
anytime. OK, well I
So yeah, I may come down and
visit with you for a morning and
I know you're busy, so I'll
definitely schedule something to
to do that, um, anyone else? OK,
thanks so much. I'll appreciate
the work you're doing and really
appreciate it. Thank you. Thank
you to you and to the members of
the committee, Madam Chair.
So there's sugar over here if
you're looking for a sugar fix,
um, and it looks really good, so
feel free to help yourself.
Yeah, I'm trying not to look at
it cause it's no, no, thank you.
Um, next and last item on our
substantive item on our agenda
is housing and public safety
solutions, so, um, we have heard
from a number of our presenters
that the lack of housing is
certainly something that
aggravates, you know, um, some
of the conditions that we have
on the ground these days. And so
I'm looking forward to this
presentation.
Um, we have Rachel Biggs and
Nicole Martinez, so, um, the
floor is yours and you might
want to explain who you all are
and what you're doing.
Good afternoon, chair, vice
chair and members of the
committee. My name is Rachel
Biggs. I'm the chief strategy
officer at Albuquerque Health
Care for the Homeless, and I'm
joined by my colleague.
Good afternoon, Madam Ki.
Members of the committee, my
name is Nicole Martinez. I'm the
director of the Messa Valley
Community of Hope located here
in Las Cruces.
We really appreciate your time
today, especially at the end of
a very long day. We will fly
through some of these slides
because we really want to hear
your questions and comments and
have some time for discussion
and we can get to any of the
data if you have questions. We
won't dwell too much on it, but
today we're hoping to share a
little bit about our two
organizations. I know you've
heard a lot about housing and
we're going to be speaking from
the perspective of two homeless
service providers, health care
for the home is providing health
care and housing, and Mesa
Valley Community of Hope,
providing a lot of housing
service, a lot of other social.
Services, so a little bit of a
different perspective on the
housing crisis and our solutions
and some of the barriers and
challenges. So we'll get right
into it.
Start with Albuquerque
Healthcare for the homeless.
We've been around for about 40
years where a federally
qualified health center
operating in Bernalio County. It
means we provide integrated
health to people experiencing
homelessness, and that includes
primary care, dental, behavioral
health, psychiatry, uh, social
services, housing, and we have
an art program Art Street as
well. We do benefit from federal
funding through the the health
center program at the federal
level and then also state
funding.
Through the rural primary Health
Care Act under the Department of
Health, where you have also been
a contracted harm reduction
provider through the Department
of Health since the Act was
passed in 1998.
Um, at Healthcare for the
homeless, we have about 100
staff. We serve about 5000
people a year, and we provide
all of our services just north
of downtown Albuquerque, but we
take everything that we do out
on street outreach. So we have
mobile units, we have street
medicine, integrated health
outreach, our healthcare
providers go out on the
streets and find people where
they are and can deliver our
array of integrated health
services, meeting people where
they are in an encampment at a
shelter, a food site, um, our,
our funding allows us to be
really flexible and nimble with
our services to meet people's
needs across the county. I'll
hand it over to Nicole.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee at the Messa Valley
Community of where local
nonprofit serving our unhoused
population with a variety of
services extending all the way
from day shelter services to
overnight shelter all the way to
housing services, uh, day labor,
income support, social security
support services, uh,
specifically for our unhoused
and newly housed veterans, and
we also have outreach programs
um going out to people who are
unhoused in encampments
throughout the city of Las
Cruces. Um, we also
Sit on City of Las Cruces
property and have several other
agencies that are our partners
all are addressing issues of
poverty, people with
disabilities, people
experiencing homelessness we're
all co-located. Um, so we have a
healthcare clinic, we have food
security programs. We have
educational programs for
children, uh, daycare center
located at the Mesa Valley
Community of Hope. We also
provide several different types
of housing programs. We own our
own homes. We partner with over
100 landlords.
throughout the city of Las
Cruces and Donana County. We
have worked on some other
partnerships with the Messa
Valley Public Housing Authority
on a complex that houses 22
formerly homeless veterans and a
permanent supportive housing
project called Desert Hope
that's been open for a few years
now. We're also working on a new
property that will be located on
the Mesa Valley community of
Hope campus. We are calling it
Amador Crossing. We've had
amazing support from our
legislature through capital
outlay efforts to the
governor's.
Of, um, and through the city of
Las Cruces to help bring this to
fruition. Uh, it will be 50
units of supportive housing. Uh,
we plan to have two Community of
Hope staff on site there at
Amador Crossing again, right
located on the campus, so it'll
have wraparound services in
addition to the two staff
located on site there.
At Albuquerque Healthcare for
the homeless. Um, we take a
little bit of a different
approach to the housing that we
provide. We leverage our
services as as a federally
qualified health center to
provide services in housing
development and so we've just
partnered with Blue Line
Development and Desert Home in
Albuquerque on a new project
that will be open in 2025. What
will be the service provider on
site for permanent supportive
housing. And then we also do
provide housing vouchers on a
scattered site model where we
support our clients throughout
the community and finding
housing with a voucher and
provide
wraparound supportive services
to help them keep them housed.
I'm gonna turn your attention to
slide number 7 to set the stage.
Um, I know you've heard a lot
about our housing crisis in the
state, but I want to focus in on
our rental housing crisis
specifically. So this slide
looks at the cost burden of our
renters in the state. We have
about 67,000 households in New
Mexico that are extremely cost
burden. That means it's a family
of 4 living at about $20,000 a
year or less. And if you look at
these graphs here with the the
picture.
shows you is that our extremely
low income families and
households are the ones that are
experiencing the most cost
burden. So when we're looking at
housing instability and people
falling into homelessness we're
really concerned with this
group, and it's a large group of
our renters in the state of New
Mexico. We have a high
percentage of renters that are
paying way too much of their
income towards rent and are very
vulnerable to homelessness.
We also know we've we've had
some advances in our minimum
wage were at $12 an hour at the
state localities have different
minimum wages, but the actual
housing wage in the state is
calculated at um $21 an hour. So
that means you have to be
earning $21 an hour to afford a
modest two-bedroom unit in the
state.
Moving ahead, we've all seen the
headlines of our increases in
homelessness, um, in Albuquerque
from the last point in time
count we saw our homeless number
at the point in time count at
2740 and so that number as we
know, is just the number of
people we can count on a single
night, um, estimates look at
multiplying that number by at
least 2, but sometimes up to 10
to really get at the true number
of people experiencing
homelessness in Albuquerque, we
expect that the number of people
experiencing homelessness is
about 16,000 people.
And that's because homelessness
is an experience that people go
through, so it's not something
that you're, you're in maybe for
a very long time you move in and
out of it, so, um, we are also
seeing homelessness increase
across the state as well. New
Mexico had the 2nd highest
percentage increase in
homelessness in the country
between 2022 and 2023.
Um, and we have a shortage of
about 45,000 affordable and
available rental units in the
state, and that's just for
people living at low incomes.
We wanted to share a little bit
about some of the trends that
we're seeing as providers in
this space, um, one of the more
9 is our, our proportion of
seniors that are falling into
homelessness. We know because of
demographics, baby boomers,
people are going to be in larger
numbers in general and so that
will have some impact on the
numbers of people that we're
serving, but we're also
concerned that New Mexico has a
higher rate of low income senior
housing senior households than
the rest of the country, the
national average, and um we do
have a higher rate of of just
households with seniors in New
Mexico as well, so particularly
interested here in New Mexico.
In our demographics, what we can
be doing to get ahead of this
looming crisis of seniors
falling into homelessness later
in life. We know that people
aren't necessarily living longer
in homelessness because of the
health impacts, um, from
experiencing homelessness, but
people are in fact falling into
homelessness later in life.
We're seeing this in in both of
our organizations as well. The
next chart comparing notes with
Nicole, she has a very similar
chart where we're seeing the
same, same trends, but in just a
healthcare for the homeless and
our small patient population
that we see, we've seen a 67%
increase since 2008 of the
population of people aged 50 and
older, and that's troubling to
us because before 2008, this
population stayed pretty
relatively small. It stayed
pretty stable. Um, of course,
you can imagine this has
implications.
For the housing options that we
have available and the services
and the policy recommendations
that are important to us. And so
this is something that we're
really acutely aware of and
planning for, um, and are
worried about as the crisis
unfolds. Nationally, the
proportion of our elders living
in homelessness is expected to
triple by 2030, so it's rapidly
increasing.
OK.
Thank you. I would, yeah, I
would just add that uh I got my
slide in late for this one, but,
um, yes, our chart also shows
that we've had a huge increase
in serving seniors who are
experiencing homelessness, so
much so that it was almost at
30% in 2022 and now close to 60%
over age 50 that we're trying to
serve that are uh unhoused and
elderly.
You'll note we use the age 50 as
our definition of elderly in the
homeless population, that's
through the housing and Urban
development definition looking
at people experiencing
homelessness typically, um,
someone will be aged beyond
their years if you've
experienced homelessness and so
we're we're concerned, um, by
that 50 year mark, so I, I know
that might be different when we
talk about 65 versus 50, but it
does have real implications on
the healthcare needs and what
we're seeing typically you see
someone maybe that's 40 years
old, they might look like
they're 60 because of the
experience.
of homelessness and the trauma
and the health impacts of of
going through that experience.
Moving on to slide 11.
We're talking a lot about
housing because we know that
homelessness primarily is a
housing problem and so all of
our solutions today and all of
our policy priorities that we're
interested in are focused on, on
housing solutions and decreasing
the barriers to getting into
housing. Um, there was a report
through the USGAO that showed
that every $100 increase in rent
equated to about a 9% increase
in homelessness. This other
chart on the right hand side is
from the Pew Memorial Trust
looking at cities that had high
increases in rent
And what that meant for
increases in homelessness and
that cities that did not have
high increases in rent actually
had some decreases in
homelessness. You can look at
some of those numbers.
We also know that um the
experience of homelessness is
very traumatic, and we are
worried about the safety of
people living on the street.
There's a national healthcare
for the Homeless Council study
that came out that showed that
someone experiencing
homelessness is 25 times more
likely to experience violent
victimization than someone that
is housed. And we see that in
our healthcare clinic. We see
high rates of violent
victimization, high rates of
trauma, accident injuries,
living on the street is a very
unhealthy.
and traumatic experience.
And the most severe data that we
have to point to this is
homeless mortality data, and
that's on slide 13, just a brief
look at some of the data that we
have been working with the
Office of the Medical
Investigator here in New Mexico
to look at cases of homeless
mortality. We've seen 128%
increase in homeless mortality
cases in the past 5 years. We
also see um pretty startling
disparities, although not
surprising, and who is dying too
early, who was dying from
preventable death.
Due to homelessness. Um, you'll
see in this data set, so this is
solely the office of the medical
investigator data set so certain
set of um deaths that are
investigated, but the mean age
or the average age of death
ranges from about 35 to 45
depending on the demographic.
What's interesting is that women
are dying younger than men in
this data set, which is the
inverse of what we see in the
general population, um, but we
are seeing a disparity in life
between 30 and 40 years of
someone that's homeless and
that's someone that has housed.
So what are we doing about it?
We'll talk a little bit about
some of the interventions and
solutions. Um, we're going to
skip ahead to slide 15. We do
have some local data, um, this
data is from a pilot program
that Albuquerque Health Care for
the Homeless participated in,
um, it's now dated, but it's
still really relevant
information and still services
that we are providing. It was
funded through SASA at the
federal level and did have a
nice independent evaluation
component to that so we were
able to really look at our
impact data. Um, this.
pilot program was looking at the
re-entry population, so the
population of people exiting
jail that had an opioid use
disorder. And so we developed a
pilot program with our community
partners that we would attach
housing vouchers, medication
assisted treatment, and our, our
social services, our wraparound
social services to see if we
could have an impact on drug
use, arrests, um, and housing,
those are some of the key
indicators that we are looking
at. We did see that we, we were
able to have
Positive impact on injection
drug use. It fell over 50% at 6
months.
We saw that um the clients that
we were able to get into
housing, we had a 90% retention
rate, so keeping people housed
after 12 months. Um, and we see
that largely with a lot of our
permanent supportive housing
programs are our average runs
about 85 to 90% success rate of
keeping someone housed at 12
months, so that housing first
model showing the success of
that model. And that we had a 67
76% of program completers had 0
new arrests in the 12-month
pilot program. So we did have an
impact on arrests.
Well. We bring up some of this
because um especially for this
committee, we know that there is
a bidirectional relationship
between homelessness and
incarceration. Um, if you are
homeless, living on the street,
you're more likely to be um
picked up for daily, you know,
offenses, crimes of survival,
um, you're more likely to be
incarcerated. We also know that
if you're incarcerated, you're
10 times more likely to
experience homelessness because
of incarceration. And the, the
large majority of people that
are revolving through the
criminal justice system.
Um, the more they experience
homelessness, the more likely
they are to be part of those
revolving door numbers and the
more likely they are to be
homeless when they come out, so
it has that compounding effect
every time someone is
incarcerated on how hard it is
for them to exit homelessness on
release.
We also have the benefit of
heading home cost study in
Albuquerque that looked at cost
savings around housing first and
permanent supportive housing
models. Um, some of the study
looked at jail costs and the
reduction on jail costs for
participants in the program. We
did see reductions in costs. We
did see reductions in the amount
of times that those members were
arrested.
And we saw an overall cost
savings by putting funding into
permanent supportive housing. We
saw a positive return on
investment.
We know we have research that
shows it's not surprising that
it costs a lot more to
criminalize someone experiencing
homelessness than it does to
provide the housing services. So
on average it's about $31,000 a
year to have someone cycle in
and out of the criminal justice
system that's experiencing
homelessness and on the reverse
it's about $14,000 a year to
provide permanent supportive
housing.
Just to the north of us at
Denver, they have some great
data published by the Urban
Institute looking at a very
similar program, more recent.
their social impact bond program
in Denver looking at permanent
supportive housing, very similar
kind of program to what we just
described at Albuquerque
Healthcare for the homeless, um,
looking at permanent supportive
housing and providing those
wrap-around services, same
results, seeing a decrease or
decrease and they also looked at
shelter utilization, jail days,
police contacts, arrests, and
detox visits and saw decreases.
Um, across all of those
categories.
If you have time and want to
look into that urban Institute
study, um, what's really
interesting about that study, it
looks at the amount of people
that were offered housing
vouchers in the pilot program
and only 2 people declined a
voucher out of their 200
participants in that that first
pilot program. They've since
expanded this program, and I
think that really points to some
of the misconceptions that
people choose to be homeless. I
think when we have services
provided and we're able to offer
housing that is low barrier and
easy to enter.
Most people are really excited
to take advantage of those
opportunities and and work
through those systems.
All right, now we're going to
talk a little bit about the
barriers because I do want to
leave some time for questions.
So what we're seeing in the
housing market right now, you
are all not surprised that it's
a tight housing market and it's
hard to access housing resources
right now, especially for our
clients. So if we're looking at
the population of people with
justice involvement, people with
criminal records, it's very,
very difficult to find housing
options. It's one of the biggest
barriers or criminal background
checks on housing applications.
Other places have looked at a
similar kind of ban the box that
we have for him.
here ban the box for rental
history as an option. Um, the
other things that we're seeing
are excessive fees in housing
and so when we have really
intense rental markets, really
high competition for scarce
resources, we do see an increase
in the cost associated with
that. And some of that is what
the market can bear. We're going
to see increases in rental
costs. We're not talking about
controlling rental costs, but
really looking at the price to
access housing, that initial
cost upfront to get into
housing.
And of particular concern for
Nicole and I and the work that
we do. If we have someone with a
housing voucher and we're ready
to get them housed, we have
everything ready to go. The
resources are there on the
table. We might come up against
a move in cost of anywhere from
2000 to $5500 including the
first month's rent and the
deposits. And so this is some
data that Carmichael consultants
put together. They did a kind of
secret shoppers approach to
calling rental properties
throughout Albuquerque.
and looked at almost 30 rental
properties to try to come up
with. What is the extent of
these fees and what are the fees
and what do they look like and
what are some of the barriers
for someone to go through an
application process. Um, so the
slide at page 19 list out some
of those average costs from that
study, what we're looking at,
and this is where we come up
with that 2000 to 5500 average
cost for for fees. Um, so you'll
see there's administrative fees,
account managing fees, often a
lease change fees
parking fees and then
application fees and those
application fees are not just
for the one person, oftentimes
renting the unit will be for
every single person in their
household having to pay an
application fee, so per
applicant.
And a lot of times our um our
renters are looking at a
co-signer as well because
they're not gonna, they're not
gonna have the credit history.
Um, I know when I was just
getting out of college, right,
you needed your parent to help
you co-sign a lease. There's
fees associated with that as
well. Um, we're also seeing
renters' insurance and it's not
just the typical renters'
insurance that you have to
provide for your, your property
within your rental unit. Um
there's renters' insurance,
personal liability insurance,
and legal liability insurance
that are being charged.
And then deposits apartment
holding deposits, a pet deposit,
and pet rent that's ongoing and
initial security deposits.
Security deposits can vary, so,
um, oftentimes, uh, a landlord
or a property management company
will run a background check or
what they're calling a renter's
score, um, and the renter score,
the applicant doesn't often know
what they're being judged
against, so there's not a lot of
transparency as they're applying
to understand, you know, what
they're being graded on and
renter score is too low. The
security deposit might be
higher. It might be a couple
more months. So there's added
costs if you are, for example,
just coming out of incarceration
and you have no credit history
or you have a criminal
background.
On slide 20 again, this was
through Carmichael Consultants.
They put together, um, uh, cost
analysis looking at different
household arrangements. So
anywhere from 3700 to the
highest one they have here is
about $5000 for a three bedroom
unit with 4 adults, 2 cars, and
a dog, and these are all the
moving costs associated.
And then I hand it over to
Nicole to speak to Oscars.
Thank you. I'll give you a sort
of a local picture here of what
we're seeing here, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, um, on
this slide 21, is an example of
a business that we've been
working with, it was, uh,
formerly a different apartment
complex owns several 100 units
in Las Cruces, and we
Uh, ended homelessness for many
people, hundreds of people with
our landlord, and they were
bought out by another company
and that happens, we understand
that. Um, but what also happened
is that then we started to see a
lot of additional fees. Now,
unlike some other properties,
these are very transparent, so
we're fortunate that we can at
least see what these upfront
costs would look like, um, but
the barriers remain the same. So
just this week alone we have 6
residents that we had moved into
one of the apartment complexes,
um, who are
Unable to pay that renter's
insurance fee that's required to
live there. And what a travesty
to have somebody exit back to
homelessness if they can't
afford a renter's fee, um,
that's required. And so we're
obviously working with those
clients to make sure that that
doesn't happen. But those are
just some of the fees that
aren't covered by housing
vouchers, so there are several
of these are not covered by our
housing voucher, so it limits us
even more in the people that
we're trying to get off the
streets. It's taking longer to
house people. It's harder to
find units that will be
Appropriate. Um, sometimes there
are hidden fees, but these
really do add up very quickly
for people who might not have
income when they're first moved
into their apartment, so, um,
these are the things that we're
starting to, to really examine
and look at it also, you know,
we see so many people on fixed
incomes. We've seen such huge
increases in rent that um I, I
don't think that it's any
coincidence that we're seeing,
you know, seniors are um aging
into homelessness at the rate
that they are just because of
rents being too high.
application fees, all those
upfront costs are just too
expensive, keeping our seniors
on the streets for a lot longer.
Um, we've also had some of the,
I'm not saying this particular
company, but another company
that um
was demanding that we paid um
higher security deposits for
only community of hope tenants,
um, so we're just starting to
see a lot of additional fees and
barriers to housing as we're
trying to get people quickly off
the streets into their own
units.
So moving on, we want to wrap up
with our policy solutions and
what we are proposing. There are
other states that have passed
legislation addressing excessive
rental fees and looking at fees
and they, the legislation ranges
from just looking at security
deposits to application fees to
only cover the cost of actually
processing an application to um
looking at how many
fees you can tack on to looking
at fees that are ongoing within
a rental history. Um, so there's
a lot of different options
involved in that and we can
speak to some of those as well.
We are advocating for an
increase in permanent supportive
housing resources. There has
been some infusion of funding
with the opiates opioid
settlement funds, um, rightly
so, we're really excited that
some of that funding has been
directed to housing. We need
even larger increases around
housing. None of the programs
that we have heard about today
or heard about around the
reentry
Space work if we don't have
housing resources. Um,
oftentimes, you know, we're
really excited about diversion
programs and if we don't have
housing, we're diverting people
to nowhere sometimes, and it's
really heartbreaking to be a
case manager working at um a
case that you're working really
hard to get people into housing
and all these barriers stack up,
we're losing case managers
because it's such a high stress
job, um trying to house a family
right now.
So we're also interested in
eviction prevention funding. We
know that we had high impact
with eviction prevention funds,
keeping people housed. We want
to make sure we don't have
people falling into homelessness
in the first place, increase
investment in our housing
resources as well. So we've had
some increases in the housing
trust fund, the enterprise
Opportunity Act. I was part of
the housing Investment council,
making some of those
recommendations to look at
increases in housing and we saw
some historic increases last
session in the regular session,
so thank you for everyone that's
Supported those increases and we
still need more unfortunately,
our housing crisis has just
grown far outside of the current
resources that we have
available.
Flexible funding for supportive
housing services, so we know
that the the housing first model
is housing first, right? You get
someone into housing and then
everything comes after. It's not
housing only and those
supportive services are really
important and to have flexible
funding through the state is
essential. Guaranteed basic
income, people really are just
not making enough to afford
their housing. We have a lot of
clients that are working and
they're not getting paid enough
to be able to afford the housing
options that are available, um,
so having more steady streams of
income for our clients,
including all.
benefits that are available to
them and then source of income
discrimination legislation we've
seen um City of Albuquerque,
Bernelio County, Las Cruces, and
Santa Fe all past source of
income protections. It's time
for the state to jump in and
follow suit and have a cohesive
state source of income
protection.
Join the 23 other states that
have that.
We do have some information from
the National Low Income Housing
Coalition looking at trends
around the country. This is not
unique to New Mexico, the, the
excessive fees that we are
seeing and some of the solutions
and the disproportionate impact
that some of these barriers have
on our renters of color, so we
know that renters of color are
more likely to pay higher
meetingn application fees.
They're more likely to submit
more rental applications which
come with all of those fees
times 4 or 5 at that point, um,
and we know that it is having a
disproportionate impact.
On people staying in
homelessness longer.
Looking at slide 25, there are
some model legislation. Colorado
was the first state to pass
guidelines around allowable
rental fees, Connecticut, just
passed a bill that regulates
application fees, security
deposit fees, tenant screening
fees, and late payment fees, and
then Rhode Island also just
passed a bill focused solely on
rental fees. Um, some of these
pieces of legislation are
looking at things like if a
tenant has already done a
background check, then there's
no cost to run it again for
another.
Application, right? So they can
bring that that background check
with them, that credit check
with them, and then not have to
incur multiple costs every time
they put in an application, so
some of that is in legislation.
Um, there are about 13 states
now that have passed this type
of legislation.
We're seeing the same trend with
source of income discrimination
legislation, and both of the
local and state level, it's
increasing, um, eventually the
federal government will pass it,
and I think it's it's coming, so
it's nice for the state to have
an opportunity to decide what
that looks like here in New
Mexico and design legislation
that really works here in New
Mexico and this is really
another barrier that we see for
our folks with vouchers or
living on supplemental security
income, Social Security, that
are being denied even an
application able to put in an
application in some places
without these protections.
And with that, we'd like to wrap
it up so that we can answer your
questions. We're here to speak
to any of this, but also just
what we're seeing in our work
and address any of the questions
or concerns you might have, we
really thank you very much for
your time this afternoon. Thank
you.
Great, thank you. I have
Representative Chasey, anyone
else?
OK. Representative Chase. Thank
you, Madam Chair, and let me ask
you first of all, I am afraid I
didn't hear what you were
referring to when you said $21
an hour. What was that?
That's the housing wage, so the
National Low Income Housing
Coalition calculates what it
costs.
What you need to be making to
afford a fair market unit in
your community. So in New
Mexico, that means someone would
have to be making $21 an hour to
afford uh fair market rent
two-bedroom apartment.
That one individual. So it's a
two-bedroom unit, so sometimes
it'll be.
Usually there's 11 person in
that household, the one bedroom
rate is a little bit lower at
$19 an hour, I want to say.
Um, so that I don't think we
have a lot of people who are
needing homes who are making
that much money. I think that's
part of an issue. I'm clearly
speculating here, Madam Chair.
Um, I, during the pandemic, I,
I, I have great concerns. I, I
talked to him retired nurse RN,
and she had been, she was
retired from UNMH and she was
in.
Uh
An apartment that had some tax,
it was a break for her to be in
this apartment. But as a result,
the landlord was being very um.
Uncooperative, not fixing things
and, and so forth. And I
realized how
Here's a professional person
who's retired and they're the
incidentally, the nurses and I
don't know about doctors, are
not on the, on the ER on the
educational retirement system
at, um, if they were at Berlin.
At, at the hospital.
They have a different system
than the other like the faculty
at UNM Medical School, which I
didn't know and, and it seems
that that's a disadvantage to to
them financially, but, um, on
page 24 when you were talking
about the lack of transparency.
For the uh tenants.
It would seem to me that that
lack of transparency would
backfire on the landlord,
because the landlord's going to
have a turnover that makes
His or her um
Profit
Less stable except that maybe
they're making more on turning
them over and that, that's kind
of inhumane.
So, um, but it, it doesn't seem
that
Um,
It should
It, it really seems that we
should be requiring the kind of
transparency that would
safeguard people from being
evicted.
And, and we don't do that now.
We don't require that. OK. Um,
I think you're compelling
information is that it's cheaper
to provide housing than to
start.
Um,
Causing people to come get
involved in criminal justice
system because they're unhoused.
Some, something we ought to be
looking, looking at. One of the
barriers I've learned of
recently.
Is that the um permitting
process for building afford any
large project is so cumbersome,
cumbersome that even when we um
Appropriate quite a bit of money
this last session where several
years away from the actual
breaking ground and there are
some states that have
streamlined.
Who's
Pardon me, who still have good
environmental laws. I think we
should be looking at that.
And the, the last thing I wanna
um
Say, Madam Chair, with regard to
public safety, there was a big
story in The New York Times.
Pardon me,
about how, how, oh good, I need
a cough drop, but I really wanna
give you this quote.
You want to go to somebody else.
I'm drinking water. I've got it
here.
Um
Oh, Representative Barrega.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
would be remiss if I didn't say
something because I've worked
with Rachel and I know what
they've done and I just wanted
to ask you, Rachel, um, and I
just wanted to also mention that
the city does supplement some of
the funding that goes to their
program and also the voucher
systems um that are in place,
which is not enough money
because there's only so many
vouchers that are available, um,
but I wanted to
Ask you, um, about the, the
facility that you guys built on
a 2nd and between 2nd and 4th
and how that functions. I've
toured it and I've toured the
housing, uh, or the meal site,
but I don't know much about the
upstairs part of it, and I think
you guys house people there as
well.
Madam Chair and representative,
nice to see you again. It was
nice working with you on City
Council. That's actually
Hopeworks, um, so a different
nonprofit, but we do partner
with them and we do provide
healthcare and Hope Village, so
the property that you're
referring to is very similar to
what Nicole was speaking to in
some of their housing
development projects, permanent
supportive housing, single site,
there's about 42 units for
people that are not able quite
to live. They can live
independently but need that
extra level of services on site.
So a housing voucher scattered
site in the community.
Wouldn't be the best option for
them, and we do partner with
Hopeworks to provide our
integrated health outreach at
Hope Village, even though it's
just a few streets over, we take
our our mobile teams over there
to provide care and and our
community health workers are
there. Madam Chair, I was just
going to mention um the people
that are actually out on the
field doing the, the outreach,
um, I mean they are really to be
commended, um, and I know that,
how, how do you guys partner
with the cities' uh community
safety department.
Also, that was my other
question.
Madam Chair and Representative,
great question. We partner very
closely with the community
safety department. We were
really excited to have a third
response in the community, um,
and they do a lot of their
contacts are with people
experiencing homelessness and
they're doing kind of the acute
immediate needs, referrals we
can go and follow up with long
term primary care medication
assisted treatment, connection
to housing, um, hopefully
getting them connected to a
primary care home. If it's not
us, then another primary care
provider in the community, so we
do part.
our, um, and really appreciate
having that 24/7 capacity. We
are an outpatient clinic, so
we're not 24/7. Our outreach
teams do a lot throughout the
normal business hours, but
having that extra capacity is,
is huge and so we have a good
partnership. We actually
participate in their training
academies and make sure that new
staff come through healthcare
for the homeless and see our
services. Um, and I, I will just
add to your point about um the
staff that are doing this, this
work, I think oftentimes we're
not looking at we're we're
looking at public
Safety proposals that involve
behavioral health therapists and
our caseworkers and the folks on
the ground doing this work and
they cannot afford their housing
right now and that's a real
issue. And so when we talk about
workforce, we really should be
looking at affordable housing as
essential infrastructure in all
of our funding plans so that our
essential workers are able to
afford their housing as well.
And finally, Madam Chair, um,
just, um,
Thank you guys for the work that
you do. I, I mean, I drive
through 2nd and 4th all the time
and I know it's really tough. I
mean, it's really tough work and
it's tough to keep people
employed in those jobs and you
really have to have a passion
for that, so, um, you know, I
just wanted to mention that
because those people are really
the link that connects and just
one last question, Madam Chair,
um,
Why do you think that our
homeless population has
increased so much? Is it because
of New Mexico weather or is
there just, I mean, what is
Madam Chair, great question.
We're lucky to have some really
good research and data to show
why we have increases in
homelessness, and it, it's
largely the same across the
country and so some research
came out a book called
Homelessness is a Housing
Problem and really looked at
across the country if people are
moving to certain places because
of weather.
Because of good services,
because of maybe lax policies
and all of those theories were
disproven in the research. Um,
what it really came back to is
that people can't afford their
housing and so going back to
some of the data we presented,
every increase in rent increases
homelessness and put simply, the
best solution to that is
providing housing. That that's
really the only thing that's
going to end homelessness. Of
course all of the other things
are important, all of the
supportive services and the work
that we do is really essential,
but if we don't have the
housing, you will still be
homeless, and we will not end
your homelessness and it is the
driver of homelessness. We did
have some of the highest
increases in rent in
Albuquerque, at least, and so we
did see increases in
homelessness and we were not
surprised by that. If, if wages
aren't keeping up, then we'll
continue to see those increases
and thank you for your examples
of other states. That's really
important. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Representative
Chasey, thank you for letting me
finish, Madam Chair, and I'm
sorry, but we've had a lot of
discussion on the, the issue of,
um, drugs and especially
fentanyl. And the New York Times
had a huge um section one day on
homelessness and housing issues
and that had a quote from a Dr.
Margo Kuschel, who's a general
internist and director of a
homelessness and housing
initiative in San Francisco.
And this really struck me, and
she said, there's no medication
as powerful as housing.
There's no amount of fancy
healthcare that I can provide
for someone that can really do
much if they are still homeless.
So
Thank you, Representative.
Anyone else?
OK. Well, I, I thank you for
presenting and appreciate the
information you have very much.
So thank you for your good work
in the community as well.
Thank you all very much for your
time and the great questions.
Thank you. Thank you.
OK
I think we're a little ahead,
which is nice, um, committee
discussion.
And I know, I think Senator
Svantes wanted to raise some
things, but in the interim.
Um,
Anyone wish to talk about
anything we talked about today
or going forward or thoughts on
issues that relate at least to
our committee business, we will
on next month if people have
bills they want us to look at.
Either for endorsement or
otherwise, we need to have
those, and I think I sent out an
email or Nancy on my behalf gave
a deadline because we need to
have copies made, etc. etc. So,
um, Representative Al Kohn.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I'm
sorry. I don't know. I don't, I
don't know if this will come
through our committee, but the
uh constitutional amendments if
they pass on November 5th, uh, I
have to present them then to
Veterans Affairs Committee for
endorsement and then they will
probably be enabling legislation
will probably have to end up
over here just to make sure we
understand that.
That's all I have I got it. I, I
see. If you don't have a bill
ready, you could at least talk
about what concept, what might
be needed to implement those um
constitutional amendments
represented. I hear what you're
saying. Like the disability one
and how would that be
implemented and so on. That's
what you're talking, that's what
you're talking about. That's
exactly it, Madam Chair, exactly
what steps we have to follow
in order to uh neighborhood
constitution.
And tells us to know how to do,
yeah, and add some clarity so
that everybody's implementing it
in the same way, OK, all right,
uh, thank you, representative
for that and um Representative
Jay.
Then I'm sure I'm wondering if
we could add if maybe one of our
staff attorneys could research
for us. I know.
Representative Cadena and I
would like to know if there are
any other departments in state
government who are um
Exempt from the rulemaking.
Um,
Obligation.
Besides corrections. Yeah,
OK, um.
Could we ask one of our staff on
legislative council to look into
that. OK, great. Thank you,
Simon.
Anyone else, uh, Senator
Cervantes, you know you're gonna
get something from me, don't
you? Well, you told me you had
something. I did. Thank you. I
want to alert members to a, a
new lawsuit that's been filed
that I think will interest the
committee. I've had a chance to
talk to the chair a little bit
about it, Peter Worth and I have
been talking about it quite a
bit of late, uh, along with the
president of the Senate. The
administrative office of the
courts, AOC has sued DFA um over
an issue relating to personal
time off, sick leave.
etc.
The, um, I think it interests
us, it interests me because it
presents some very novel
constitutional separation of
powers issues.
Effectively, the, we have in
place state statutes that limit
the amount of time that a state
agency, the executive branch, or
others can buy back unused sick
sick time or unused, uh, uh,
annual leave, etc. and there's
limitations and, and maximums
and so forth. And, and evidently
the courts have, um,
Come up with a policy that
seemingly avoids that statute by
changing the definitions from
annual leave and sick leave to
calling it personal time off and
so they're not um would not be
subject to that. The um
evidently the DFA was, was
paying out uh these, these large
sums upon separation. That's
when somebody retires and so
forth, and then, um, evidently
of late, the DFA asked for an
attorney General's opinion. So
we have an attorney General's
opinion that says that's not
law.
uh, as a result of that, the DFA
cut off that source of funding
to the courts and the courts
have now sued DFA.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, well, that's
what, that's part of what
interests me is, uh, yeah, the
court is the plaintiff,
litigant, and of course the
court is the decider of the law,
as the Supreme Court, the
ultimate authority. So you can
see where that kind of has me
scratching my head a little bit.
The founders of our great
democracy had some very great
checks and balances in place for
all of us, us included, the
governor vetoes us. We have a
check on her. We can override
her veto, etc. but um, I haven't
been able to figure out.
Really what the check is and
balance is for the court. And,
and this is an interesting
question I just hear because
we're seeing this at the
national level. We're seeing the
US Supreme Court that uh does
not want to have ethics laws in
place, does not want to be
subject to uh taking money on
the side or having donors.
Pay for their kids' college or
taking them on cruises and so
forth and and they yeah they
they yeah they they consider
themselves above any nastiness
like ethics laws and so forth.
And so our, our, we should be
thinking a little bit that I
don't, I don't know if there's a
solution. We don't have it at
the national level. I don't know
if we have the state level, but,
but there should be a check on
the courts and we're the
committee that's responsible for
the courts, right? I see Senator
Ebert's pointing at us. You're
right. So I, I do like this
discussion.
opportunity for us to think deep
thoughts. That's, that's kind of
my goal of of of this time, and
I hope you will give this some
deep thoughts. The the only
check that I'm aware of is the
budget, um, and the purse, and
of course that comes with its
own challenges because, uh,
cutting back on the courts to
have them recede from
overstepping their authority,
then creates other issues for us
that we may not want to see or
or unintended. So be, be aware
of the lawsuit. I'm happy to
share
With all of you, the um the
attorney General's opinion and
the complaint that was filed by
the courts, the deadline, and
today was met by the DFA filing
its response. So these are
briefs that have been filed here
and they're, and just for the
members, there has been some
discussion hope Peter, you don't
mind me talking about the fact
that there has been discussion
about the legislature trying to
intervene, uh, maybe not the
legislature as a body but
perhaps individual members
intervene to for us to be heard
because the, the one of the
arguments I think that's
compelling for me is the
Legislature should be the ones
to be deciding these things. In
other words, we have enacted a
statute that says, here's how
this is supposed to work, here's
how we want it to work. Here's
the limitations on what we want
you to be able to do and, um,
and if the courts or anyone can
avoid our enactments by
redefining things from sick
leave and annual leave to
accommodate personal time off
and say, well, we're not subject
to all those limitations, then
we, we quickly devolve into
potentially chaos.
The, the good example that I've
had in my discussions with Peter
when we're both together
thinking deep thoughts is um
what happens if we have an
executive branch? Let me just
give you a hypothetical. Let's
say we have a Republican
governor, God forbid someday,
um, the, uh,
if we were to have a Republican
governor, a Republican governor
say we don't really like what
you, the legislature have
enacted in your statutes for
leave, we're gonna uh redefine
it. We're not gonna call it
annually or sick leave, we're
gonna call it paid time off and
we're going to decide what our
our
Um, our employees in the
executive branch can do so there
has been some concern about how
far reaching this could be if
the executive branch could do
the same or any state agencies
could begin to do the same, and
the fiscal implications of that,
and, and they, they could be
very significant. So I wanted to
alert you all to this issue,
this case, um, and, and you've
got a a question, do you want me
to go to my other topics or you
want to have a question on this.
I want to talk about this. Yeah,
so we should maybe stay on this
for a few minutes more, Madam,
so I'm happy to so our court in
Employees, not state employees.
Yes. So they're state employees,
they're not court employee. I'm
just.
Trying to talk about our possi
why we should be thinking about
they're state employees, they're
not court employees. So why
should they have different, that
this is my, I guess I'm arguing
our case. How's it? Why should
they have different rules and
not be subject to the personnel
rules when in there I bet
they're so they get the same
pension benefits that everybody
seems to like who are state
employees and so on, right? So
it seems, I mean that might be a
way to be talking about this.
Why does the court get to decide
rule
For state employees, they're not
court employees, they're state
employees that they should be
subject to the same rules as all
other state employees like, like
from the executive branch and I
don't frankly know how we do
with it, you know, so I guess I.
I, I better be careful because I
might get us into a little
corner, but you see where I'm
going with this, if you're a
state employee, shouldn't you be
treated essentially the same or
does our personnel rule say,
well, there's executive branch
and state employees their court
branch, state and employees.
They're legislative branch state
employees. I don't know the
answer to that. I'd like to
know, um, sorry if I this sounds
stupid, but I, um, it just seems
strange to me that that someone
that the court could create a
different rule.
for state employees, I, I don't
know.
Yeah, I, I mean, I'm sure about
me, uh, it's interesting.
When you do this long enough, I,
I formally represented the town
of Massa. This is you all know
Massa here in town. And Massa's
got a municipal court and had a
municipal judge and it had a a
five-member board, uh,
Michaela's dad was the mayor
there for a long time, so she
knows this very well and, and
there was a period of time when
the court and the and the board
didn't get along and the mayor
didn't get along. And so the
board tried to curtail the
court's hiring. In other words,
the court was hiring and giving
salaries that were much higher
than the regular personnel and
they were concerned it was
creating a morale issue and
And uh the board tried to step
in on that as the funding
appropriating part of the town
government and the court
essentially said this little
municipal judge said, I'm an
independent separate branch of
government. You have no
authority over me and, and we
see this even here she's not
here any longer, but the sheriff
here has had a long standing
clash with the county government
over the same thing, the county
commissioners wanted to control
some of her hiring and funding
and personnel salaries, and the
sheriff essentially said, I'm an
elected official, just like you
county commission.
are you have no greater
authority than I do as an
elected official, um, and so, so
this separation of powers, uh,
issue is a really interesting
one to me, but, but I'm not
gonna go back to the town of
Messia years ago or to uh uh
Sheriff Stewart, uh, with her
hiring you could when she when
she was talking about her good
hiring practices that we were
all impressed and I'm encouraged
and excited by it, but it did
lead to some conflict between
her and the board of
commissioners over over her
enacting her own policies and
taking the position.
She was no, no less an elected
official than the board was, and
she was not subject to their
authority. So we're dealing with
this now here in front of us,
and I think it matters to this
committee and um and there's a
precedent that's the word that I
think uh Peter has has
emphasized in my conversations
with him quite a bit, so. Do you
have something and then I think
you yeah madam chair, I think
the court in the recent case
that Senator Cervantes and
several others brought on.
The appropriation of the ARPA
money made it very clear that
the legislature is the
appropriating body.
Uh, I think another issue here
that we need to be aware of is
that my understanding is that
the money the court is using to
pay this paid time out is
vacancy savings, so we
appropriated money for positions
that are not filled and in
visiting with the chair of
Senate Finance and LFC Senator
Munoz.
Uh, that's my understanding of
the source of the funding, and
again, the precedent of allowing
state agencies.
Whatever branch, once we
appropriate the money for a
specific purpose to go
reallocate that.
And in this case, actually.
Spend it for a new.
redefined program, I think also
is something that I'm just
concerned. I mean this is, it's
something we do need to be aware
of and
And figure out
Kind of how we navigate through
this. I will say that there is a
check, uh, the, the US Congress
is the check on the Supreme
Court. They could pass an
ethics. They could change the
makeup of the court. They could
pass an ethics, and they just
don't do it. We also are a Czech
in the sense that we're going to
be back in session in January,
and it's not just the power of
the purse. We can also go in and
redefine statutes and
Direct what's gonna happen. I
just really hope that there's an
effort to figure out a way out
of this because again, I think
it's, it's moving in a direction
that's, that's got the potential
to set precedents that I think
go way beyond just this little
discussion between the courts
and the DFA.
Representative, um, all right,
Representative Jay, sorry,
sorry, Senator Nibert, I was
looking this way.
Sorry, I like looking to the
left.
So
I'm told by a former employee of
the courts that the judicial
branch has its own personnel
policy based on separation of
powers, and I said, don't they
all have their own retirement
system, and yes, they do. Now,
we are the appropriating
authority and um at the same
time, I love what Senator Wirth
said about, um, you know, we, we
can make an ethics, um, we can,
Congress can pass pass ethics
reform for the Supreme Court and
can change composition of the
court.
Because there, that's, that's
not in the Constitution. So, um,
we, I think we, it is an
interesting um
interesting question, but that's
what, that's what, that's the
way the courts are operating
now. Thank you.
Senator Niber.
If there was an attorney general
opinion, the Attorney General
was giving an opinion on an
existing law, and if we agree
with his interpretation of the
law, then it would be
appropriate for us to do
something
and if it's an ambiguity in the
law where the court
And the attorney General just,
uh, you know, maybe reached
other conclusions. We need to
decide what.
Is a public policy.
And clarify.
The ambiguity in the law. So, so
I think you have the opportunity
coming up and maybe ought to
look at that sooner than later,
so you have something teed up,
uh, because the courts, and
let's say.
Fast track this if they take
their normal course, it'll be a
while before this issue gets
decided in the courts. You guys
can decide it.
Within the next 6 months.
So I would suggest uh you look
at it and decide which way we
need to go and and get a bill
teed up and, and
Instituted uh in the 60 day
session.
Just madam chair, I don't you
like to do on that point, but I
would just note that was my
initial reaction as well, and I
remember distinctly, uh, my
first year as majority leader in
2017. Sorry to bring back some
post-traumatic stress for me
certainly, but probably others,
but we had a veto of the
legislative branch and the whole
higher ed departments, and we as
a legislature really
unprecedented for the whole
legislature, went to the court,
asked them to step in.
They basically stepped back and
said, go to session and fix it.
And so I thought exactly the
same thing. I think the
challenge here is this is on
apparently it's on an expedited
briefing schedule and so I think
that would be a great solution
is to just slow things down, let
us
Take a look at this and try and
fix it.
If we have that opportunity. So
I agree with you completely. We
should look at this and if
there's ambiguity there and the
courts see it one way and the AG
sees it another way, we should
clean that up.
Well, I mean if it's on the fast
track.
That's why I suggest something
fairly quickly that we get
drafted and and get out there
because uh uh if we have
something that may send a signal
to the courts, do they really
want to go through with this and
have the battle?
Ma'am I'm sure I'll just have
one more thing. I, I, I do want
to acknowledge and appreciate
very much the Chief Justice,
Dave Thompson, him and I spoke
earlier today. We've been having
the opportunity to exchange
things. Normally it would be
improper for me to communicate
with a judge on an open case.
He's recused himself from that
case as has uh uh Justice Bacon,
and I think Justice Samoa, so 3
of the 5 have recused
themselves, they've already
impaneled three other judges to
sit in their stead. Uh, two of
them are former.
Supreme Court justices, and you,
you're looking puzzled, uh,
Senator Nibert, because I've
asked the judge the same thing.
How can 3 of them have a
conflict or need to recuse and
two of them not, that doesn't
make entirely a lot of sense to
me, but
um I'm, uh, Justice Thompson has
been really great about being
candid with me. I've been candid
with him, and I just want to let
all of you know that we both
were very cognizant that there
are limitations that I should
not be talking to a justice
about an open case, but we're
good there, number one, number
2, he, um, at my invitation.
I asked him, would he be willing
to come to this committee at our
next meeting with the DFA uh
representation. I've I've, uh,
Wayne Pros has spoken with me,
uh, George and I have spoken,
Peter and George have spoken.
There's a lot of stuff going on
again, I spent some time with
the the chair Chandler I know
Peter's spoken with the speaker.
There are a lot of discussions
going on about this. All of it
comes down to us assuring that
we maintain our responsibility
and our oath as a separate
branch, but um I just, I thought
it was.
Madam Chair, important for you
all to know this going on and
maybe, maybe we have time in our
next meeting, um, the chair will
entertain the idea of maybe
having them come explain this a
little bit more in anticipation
of the session.
So not to throw a wrinkle in
this, but um,
I have been thinking about how
different, uh.
Uh, different parts of
government uh treat this
particular issue because this
started because uh I think
there's people that are going to
retire and so is this a, is this
a retirement issue where they
want to get funding for annual
leave they haven't taken and
sick leave. Am I correct about
that?
No.
So.
Well, if I understand your
question, this does seem to be
uh
The attention seems to be those
who are leaving, retiring, and,
and, and paying and paying off
or paying back unused, uh,
essentially cashing out it's
been called golden parachute,
whatever you want to call it,
uh, but uh it it is buying back
or paying people for this, and,
and I'll just tell you all that
one of the points that Justice
made is that he wants to make
sure the courts are being
treated the same as everybody
else because one perspective is
that our let's say if council
does this already that uh some
of the.
And retirees and legislative
council have had a golden
parachute at the end, um, I've
there's been some suggestion
that other parts of the
executive branch do this
already, have done this, the
paid family leave, medical
leave, all these things have
been thrown into the whole
discussion, all this, and I know
that's of great interest to you,
Senator Stewart, so you, you're,
your interest is mine. This is
not an area that I would say I
have an expertise in, but, but
any time the court shows up as a
litigant in a lawsuit, I think
it's important for
This committee to be aware of it
and and be thinking about it.
Well, Madam Chair, what I'm
trying to say is that um.
The way we, we treat retirees is
totally different all over the
state, uh, Pra retirees or at
least the municipal because you
know Parot has got tons of
different uh programs within
PERA. So Para within the cities
you get your unpaid sick leave,
you get your unused annual leave
and you can buy it out at at.
The
And
teachers get nothing.
None of that.
No sick leave buyout, no, well,
there's more annual leave and
the teachers than anybody else,
probably why they get nothing.
So we treat people differently
on this issue, you know,
all the legislature that creates
it in this case, the court is
trying is creating it, that
that's what, that's the that's
how the difference we have
created all those differences,
we have not created that issue
for teachers. I don't think.
That's in statute. I think
that's policy. I'm pretty sure
the pair of buyouts is policy,
not statute. I could be wrong
about that, but.
We don't create all of these.
They're created by the
individual entities.
So, you know, it, it's much more
complicated than what it was
laid out to be is what I think,
um because uh we treat different
people differently with
retirements with buyouts, with
sick leave, etc. all over the
state. There's nothing I I doubt
there's not one statute that
covers it all. It's either in
policy, um, there might be some
statutory languages, but it's,
and yeah, legislative co.
So, uh, has create and and we
don't, uh, decide on these
golden parachutes, the little
golden parachutes are created by
those individual legislative
agencies, LFC.
LESC legislative council we're
trying to get those policies all
be the same, so we've had to
rein in LFC mainly, uh, uh puff
up LESE to match, uh, so we're
trying to regularize that, but
that's what we're in control of.
I'm just throwing this out
because I don't, I don't buy the
argument that uh they're
creating their own
System when we all create our
own systems. That's what it
looks like to me, but again, I'm
not an attorney on that.
That's interesting. I, you know,
you make an interesting point,
yeah, yeah.
Anyone else? Go ahead. It may be
contractual with the
particular group that that's how
their retirement system was set
up and so they've, they, they
have the contract we, we've.
Funded, but they, they could be
different. That's certainly the
difference between teachers and
and regular state employees, um,
I don't know about the rest, but
this sounds like it goes to the
heart of some language in a
statue because we wouldn't have
the, we wouldn't have the
attorney General's opinion
unless it involved a statute and
a.
Meaning of a word or words.
Represented Brego. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, you know, a
while back, the city of
Albuquerque had a similar issue.
And um there was a policy that
was created that you can only
cash out so much there's a cap
that's set for all city
employees, and you can only uh
cash out so much of your um sick
leave and the rest basically you
lose it. So that was, that's the
way that we handled it in the
city of Albuquerque, um, you,
you can only
Accumulate so much and after
that.
You know, you, you cannot cash
the rest of it out.
Well.
Just um since we're continuing
to talk about this, um, Simon
brought over the statute about
accumulated sick leave and it um
prior to retirement.
Payment of certain excess
amounts.
Immediately prior to retirement
from state service,
and employee of the state, and I
think we're, we're thinking that
the courts are employees are
employees of the state, um, who
has accumulated 600 hours of
unused sick leave shall be
entitled to be paid for.
For additional unused sick leave
at a rate equal to 50% of his
hourly wage multiplied by the
number of hours of unused sick
leave over 600 hours, not to
exceed 400 hours of such sick
leave. Now, I'm not sure I
understand that.
It's, looks like something we'd
have to parse out to try to
figure out the formula, but.
Um, I would just suggest let's
get the AG, I hear you I hear
you. OK, OK, I mean I think it's
spell it out, we should all look
at it we really ought to, so,
um, thank you for that, Simon.
Appreciate it,
and I'm really wanna admit I'm
sure I have the chair but I
still I still do just a few
other topics I want to touch on
real quick. We, I appreciate
good questions on felon in
possession. I think it probably
makes sense for us just remember
that that that was a piece of
legislation that was in the 30
day.
session we candidly held it in
Senate Judiciary Committee. I've
told you I'll own it when when
we do stuff and I.
You know, need to get
criticized. I'm gonna tell you
I, I deserve the blame for that
one. I held it for the reasons
you're beginning to hear and
many of you all heard about as
we got to the special session,
but it's the last version that
still has taken away any uh good
time, and I heard the secretary
say very clearly she thinks it's
useful. That's what I've heard
consistently over the years I've
been hearing people are
knowledgeable, so I hope we'll,
we'll be aware of that. Um, the,
um,
Las Cruces police officer case
study like juvenile, shocking
and horrifying to me. I've been
doing that with this committee
at every one of our meetings.
I'm sorry to not have a
presentation for you here today
because Brandon's been gone.
Phillips here now, but, but
every time we see one of these
high profile cases, uh, we do
what we've been doing in
judiciary for a long time. We go
back and look at the criminal
history of the person who's
accused, and we did that. You
may remember an Espanola with a
Best Buy killer and the Sonic
Killer, and now the chief was
giving us just a horrific
history of this.
Juvenile, all manner of grum gun
crimes and violence crimes, and
he's on the street.
Right, um, and, and we know
where this story is gonna end,
um, God forbid it's, it's
somebody who who's killed
tragically, but it, but if it
happens, we shouldn't be
surprised when when that
happens. And so we've, we've got
to continue to look at these
case studies and I think the
value in that is understanding
where the breakdown in the
system happens.
Uh, the chief said something I
hope we all gathered. I made a
careful note of it. He said the
problem is not with our statue.
Did you catch that? He said, our
problem is not with our statue.
Which is what this committee and
we've been saying for
all of this year and so for
several months now, we don't
have a problem with our
statutes, we have a problem with
the system, the resources, the
enforcement, all those things
that we know it to be it's
rarely charged, even I think he
said it's rarely charged. What I
think he said is he gave us the
numbers. It's not that it's
rarely charged, it's rarely
pursued. So, so the charge is
brought and it's done for lever.
It's done for leverage. It's,
it's done for leverage to get a
plea deal and so.
The governor's approach by
taking away good time and adding
years and all that gives a
greater lever to the prosecutors
to leverage a plea deal, right?
And uh he gave us the numbers.
It's charged all the time and
it's never ever actually
prosecuted. Uh, so that's what's
going on there and we ought to
be straight about what that's
about, and then, and then just
last thing, um.
The, the DA's, I, I think I do
think we need to be thinking a
little bit about the fact that
In terms of accountability and
so forth. The DAs really have uh
their accountabilities only to
the voters and
they didn't, they didn't say it,
but they sort of did, uh.
You know, there, there's been a
problem with the DA here, um,
between the sheriff, the DA
Mella and she knows this whole
issue. It's in our papers all
the time, um, and so I don't, I
would venture to say the DA
doesn't talk to the sheriff
here.
Um, and I know the DA doesn't
speak to the manager or the
former manager, and they were
suing each other and they, they
were having press conferences
against each other, right? So
we're trying to figure out
what's going on with crime, it's
important for everybody to
understand what's going on here
and I'm looking at my city
councilor colleague back over
here too, you know, be careful
that you all don't ever get into
that situation where you're
fighting with yourselves because
then you stop talking and then
everything goes to hell, um,
and, and, and, and if we don't
talk about
The fact that that's what's
going on. We ought to talk about
the fact that we're not talking
to the governor, right? The
governor's not talking to us,
um, and the governor didn't talk
to the last Chief Justice for
years.
Right, and I don't think the
government talks to this Chief
Justice of the Supreme Court
either. So let me be the bad guy
and just tell everybody what's
going on here, right? Uh,
everybody whispers, everybody
wants to talk about this in the
dark corners and resources of
our government, but nobody is
talking to each other and, and
nobody wants to talk to each
other and everybody's got
themselves backed into corners
and this is not leadership,
right? This is not, and so let's
do it. Let's, let's try and be
the leaders who will talk about
things that nobody else wants.
Talk about and, and the real,
the real truths of our criminal
justice system where it's
breaking down and we can talk
about new laws all day long, but
it ain't gonna do anything. I,
I, uh, I'm looking over here,
the folks who did the last
presentation, I don't mean to
put you on the spot. If this may
be true, this may be false, and
if it's false.
You all correct me and and I'll
take a lashing later, but we had
a big debate with our city
council, uh, Ben Como was here.
We had a big debate here for
weeks and weeks about a new city
ordinance to criminalize uh
removing shopping carts from uh
properties where shopping carts
are being used, right? And this
is not novel to Las Cruces.
Other places have done it. So if
you're, if you're at Best Buy or
whatever else, you take a
shopping cart, it's a crime for
Best Buy to let that happen. Now
they were going to make
exceptions and yeah, yeah, they
just.
Yeah, with both sides, the
person who takes it's a
criminal, but the store is a
criminal, right, for, for
letting, for letting him do
that. And of course, that seems
a little, seems a little odd
because you're the victim of the
crime, but you're a criminal for
being a victim of the crime. You
can see where this is a little
twisted. I know the council
would love to come up here and
debate me on this. But here's
the beauty, here's what I'm
getting to, cause you may have a
different spin on it, but, but
that's, that's the way it is.
That's what it is. And so it was
very debated, very contentious.
I went to your city council
meeting. I spoke against that
ordinance because I thought it
was, it was half baked.
Um, and here's the funny thing
about it. So the, the council
and the mayor passed it anyway.
So we, so we've got an ordinance
that makes it a crime. If you
take a uh for a shopping cart
and the and the business is
criminal for for letting you
have it, but here's the beauty
of the whole thing. Here's my
point, is not, not a week, not a
week after that happened, I
believe that the local advocacy
groups for the homeless,
including counselor, all due
respect to you too, I, I thought
it was brilliant. They began a
drive to purchase shopping carts
for uh the.
the homeless population to give
them away. Yeah, if I got that
essentially right, and I think
it's brilliant. I, yeah, look at
him, thumbs up from the
audience, right? I, that's
exactly what they did. And I
thought, wow, that's brilliant,
right? because then everybody
makes out. It's, it's not a
it's not a crime, it's not a
crime because those stores are
having their shopping carts
taken and um and so, and they're
not a criminal, it's great. What
a brilliant idea. And then I
realized that I think we can
probably give Cape Ali to you
all for doing this, right? Yeah,
so we can give
politely to your, to your
advocacy groups to buy shopping
carts for the shopping cart
committee and then in the end,
the city is still going to be
left with shopping carts all
over town and, and everybody
upset about their shopping
carts, and I'm just thinking,
God bless you people for being
brilliant because human beings
are incredible things. When you,
when you try and screw with our
mission. If you don't, if you
don't, if you don't capture our
minds, and if you don't capture
our hearts and if you don't
collaborate and bring us all
together, we're gonna find a way
to get around your bullshit,
right? It's what it what.
comes down to, um, and so that's
kind of what the court's doing
here with DFA and AOC and that's
kind of what the homeless
community did around here and
they said, you see the council,
yeah, you ran over us and we'll
run right back over you, uh, and
so, how much fun it is to be
alive and to be in government. I
just say thank you all for
giving me a great entertainment
in my life, but let's also solve
some problems along the way for
folks. So thank you, Madam
Chair. I hope you found the
story interesting. That was,
that was great. I love that
story.
um.
since you're a resident, go for
it.
You need to weigh in on this
feels especially offensive to
this funny story is that.
In the end, as we see this play
out through the courts, it also
comes with the $500 fine for the
person that possesses the
shopping cart. So there's
actually no connection to
whether or not they removed it
from the property, but being in
possession of a shopping cart
could come eventually with a
$500 fine, and we know the cycle
that that can create, so yeah,
here we are increases these
days. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, if I may, with a
free form. So here's the beauty
of that is you find a person on
the street that the chief of the
police here finds somebody on
the street with a shopping cart.
That's a crime. They
Pull them over that they dump
out the contents of the shopping
cart to confiscate the shopping
cart or whatever it may be, and
I'm looking at my counselors
because you all are in the,
you're in the middle of the
fight, right? You're in the
middle of the ground. So they
dump all that stuff and then
they're gonna cite the person
who probably doesn't have
identification, doesn't have a
permanent address, so we're
going to mail the notice of the
hearing and the citation to no
place, right? And we don't know
what the person's name is, and
they won't show up, so we'll
have police reports, citations,
courts, hearings
it for him already? How do you
tell it?
This is, this is just insanity,
really. This is just insane. Uh,
I, I, I know you didn't vote for
it. I'm not looking at you. I'm
and I, and I urge you not to
vote for it only because I don't
like seeing shopping carts
around town either, uh, and, and
on my property, but, but this
is, this is an insane response
to to that problem, right? It's
not very thoughtful, so I, I
came up short. Well, did anyone
think about a technological
solution because there are
places that.
make it such that you cannot
remove the shopping cart from
the area and they, it's done
electronically. I don't know
the, the wheels lock if it goes
beyond a certain point, duh, why
not if that's what you know, you
know, really, has anyone, we
were in Newfoundland, which is a
remote area of Canada, although
it's a beautiful city, um, Saint
John's, if you're interested.
And that's what they had. They
had these shopping carts and you
couldn't move them outside of
the parking lot. That's the end.
There we go.
That's in their,
that should take care of that
they get a reprieve if they've
enacted something like an
electronic shopping cart fence
and all that or or even better,
the, the other solution they
allow in the ordinance is for
some employee of the store to
escort you in your shopping cart
off the property, and any of you
who want to go buy a razor at
Walgreens and don't want to
spend 30 minutes waiting for the
person to come help you unlock
the case. Uh, that's essentially
what you're gonna get. You're
gonna have people waiting for
store employees to escort you
out in your shopping cart to the
deal we're just, this is just
Madness, folks. So yeah, just
one interesting thing though I
think is in there though it's a
$500 fine or treatment.
0, 40 days.
But there's a, there's language
I mean you you're the counselor,
but I, I thought I saw it again.
I'm pretty familiar because
Santa Fe has certainly looked at
this too. I thought there was
language and the reason I
brought that up is that's one of
the things we're talking about
is basically having a treatment
alternative.
To potential incarceration, so
someone can go have that choice,
not that that's appropriate
here. I'm not suggesting that
for a minute. And as far as we
can tell, the treatment
providers have not been engaged
in this conversation I'm not, I
don't,
I'm just part of the
collaboration not ready or
resourced to provide this
treatment that potentially we
have other avenues to get people
into regardless, especially with
our pilot programs.
Well, I, if it's a May, then
that's fine because in Los
Alamos we don't have a lot of
homeless, but we have students
and postdocs who don't have
cars, so they take, you know,
they go shopping at the local
grocery store and they move
their cart to the apartment
where they're bringing their
stuff. Sometimes they bring it
back, but you know, so there is
some of this that goes on that
is not tied to, you know, drug
addiction, homelessness, or, you
know, mental health issues, um,
unless you count being a postdoc
in physics.
Oh yeah, OK. Any, any other
topic we wish to oh, Senator
Servant, you're on a roll,
Senator Cervan. Well, Madam
Chair, I do want to thank you
and the committee for, um,
allowing us to continue what I
started last year, which is this
free form discussion, uh, and
not on the agenda for us just
talk and get to know each other
and, and to raise issues and I I
find it very helpful and I
realize that sometimes I have a
few issues that are kind of
considered and grenades, uh, to
the committee, but I hope that
you all find some value in
Me sharing these things and
these experiences, and I hope
you'll share the same with with
you and we all learn from those
too. Uh, last thing, Madam
Chair, is we're happy to have
everyone enjoy Las Cruces. You
got here a little bit after the
chilly season, unfortunately,
when I, when I try and schedule
this committee, I try and
schedule it around the green
chili roasting, and I, in years
past, I sent folks home with
green chili, um, yeah, so I, so
I, so I, so I don't do anything
right. I can't I picked the
wrong season, no,
actually, the, the.
The temperatures are bearable
right now, so you, you did good.
Uh, this is a great beautiful
setting. It's we're lovely to
have this in all of you. My
house is, um, you don't even
have to go through a traffic
light to get to my house. And so
if you have a good Google
mapping system, and I hope we're
offline now, but I know we're
not. Uh, so, so yeah, I wouldn't
put your people need the
address, Nancy can give it to
them. Yeah, Nancy can give you
the, please come directly from
here because we want to uh get
you fed and, and, and have some
camaraderie and then
A brief that's due tonight, so
I'm gonna kick you the hell out
of my house by, you know, 83
o'clock, but you'll get it
please come for the sunset.
Please come have uh an
exceptionally good old fashioned
and I will, will tell you the
top secret location, but it's
very short from here. I hope you
all can join us.
Right
Um, one last item we have public
comment. I'm not aware of anyone
who signed up in the, in the
human life person. Is there
someone who wants to speak in
the, OK, come on up, counselor.
Um, 2 minutes.
Yeah, 2 minutes.
Well, uh, oh yeah, that what the
chair of your council does, huh?
Um,
Hi, thank you so much for
inviting me for having public
comment. My name is Joanna
Bencommo. I'm the mayor of
Protem for the city of Las
Cruces. Thank you so much for
being here and for engaging in
this conversation. Gosh, so much
to share. I think just on the
point that Senator Cervantes
made about those two ordinances
that I did not support, um, is
that I think it really shows a
picture of what happens when we
only try to address some of
these issues through a law
enforcement lens is we end up
with some of these policies that
Perhaps create more problems
than we, we intended to.
Um, you heard a lot of
information here today, and I
want to thank you for always
reaching out to experts like
Chief Story and Nicole Martinez,
who frankly, I go to quite often
for information.
Um, so thank you for inviting
them. Um, you heard a lot of
scary stuff that's happening in
Las Cruces, unprecedented
perhaps, but we're also not
sitting around just, you know,
sitting on our hands doing
nothing. I think we've done a
lot of incredible work in Las
Cruces. One of those things was
creating an outreach core
through municipal court much
like Santa Fe has, much like
Albuquerque has with the case
manager who really the intent is
really to interrupt the, the
cycles of violence that so many
of our folks are in and stuck in
the criminal justice system. We
have an incredible.
Well court judge, Judge Flosa,
um, who has been really open to
working with us on some of those
alternative strategies. We're
also really focused on two
metropolitan redevelopment areas
really investing in areas in our
community that have been
historically neglected and
blighted and um really
reinvesting resources back into
these areas through capital
investments, um,
entrepreneurship support and
certainly affordable housing, as
you've heard today, I think that
is one of the biggest pieces.
We actually have right now about
30, 344 units that will be under
construction in the next year.
Affordable housing units, one of
them specifically for seniors
and 250 in the pipeline, um, we
are incredibly grateful for the
support the legislature has
given, um, for like Amateur
crossing crossings, for example,
it's a 50 unit uh that will be
right on the community of Hope
campus. If you've never come to
Community of Hope before. I
don't mean to volun tell Nicole,
but I know that she would.
be happy to have you if you
stick around and maybe wanna go
visit, um, it's such a bright
light for our community and um
we want to continue, of course,
protecting it, but if you also,
um, we'd love to talk to you
about the funding gap that we
still need for Amador crossings
if you can help us secure a
little bit more funding and
maybe reach out to the governor
and break the ice, if you will,
with her, um, that could be a
good, that could be a good place
to start.
Yeah, totally. I think that
could be a good place to start,
um, but we are really looking
for a little bit more funding
for that project that I think
that I think will be
transformational for uh for our
community. We've of course
funded um a, a, um, through the
police department, I'm, it is
escaping what it's, it's called
now, but, um, you know, I don't
agree with Chief on a lot of
things, but we actually have a
very good relationship and so I
want to, um, just like, you
know, to affirm you there,
Senator Cervantes, that we do
have a very good
An open relationship with with
Chief Story. Um, we're working
on a lot of other things and you
know, I'm, I'm really grateful
for Senator Cervantes and um
Representative Laura Cadena for
always being accessible to speak
to us and I just really wanted
to to name the the positive
things as well that we are
working every single day to, to
try to combat some of the issues
in our community, so thank you.
You very welcome and thanks for,
I know you, you partic you were
sitting in the audience for a
long time. We're happy to have
you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Before you go, if I, I
I hope you did hear my comments,
uh, how proud I am of you in our
city council and our county
commission, our local
government, our sheriff, it's
really great to bring my
colleagues here and be
impressed. I think they're
impressed. Peter, all day long
was in in my the president's
Senate they're all nodding their
head for those of you listening
at home, they're all nodding
there's
Senator Wirths was sitting here
going, the room was full of
people all day long and we're
not used to that, uh, and he's
like, who, who are all these
people? Why are they here? There
must be, must be doing something
wrong, uh, but, but it's a
community that has a lot of
pride.
Um, I, I've, uh, I've got two
law partners, we have 3
attorneys in our law firm, and
two of the two of them men are
in our El Paso office and I, I'm
always asking them and my
friends in El Paso that we do
business. Why does El Paso not
have the crime problem that
Albuquerque does almost very
comparable populations and, and
the arguments the border, Alburi
is much further, farther,
farther from the border than El
Paso. That can't explain it
either. And I, I always ask them
why, what is it? Is it laws? I
don't think so. Um, you're,
you're asking.
What is it? We should keep
asking that question. I don't
know what it is. I, I really
don't. I asked them, and one of
the things that my partners
believe is they say they believe
it's a sense of community.
That and I think they may have
be on to something, the downtown
El Paso is beautiful. I go
there, you go there, the
restaurants are great, the
theater is great. There's a
beautiful plaza. People are
there on the streets. It's and
they've and they've changed all
that. It wasn't like that 10
years ago. They've gone in there
and they've completely
transformed the downtown.
They've made it a very special
city, um, and their community is
very, very cohesive and, and
that's, that's their observation
from Texans. Now again, Texans
get a lot of things wrong, but
they, but their observation is
they have a very cohesive un.
community and I, I use that as
an example because when we talk
about the safest communities,
I'm always bragging about the
fact that I represent two of the
10 safest communities in the
state, Anthony, and Sunland
Park. Sunland Park is on the
border with Mexico.
There's some places there's a
wall
between Mexico and South Park,
but some places you just walk
around the wall, uh, so there's
not really a wall, uh, but, but
any argument that it's a
proximity to the border doesn't
explain the fact Sunland Park is
one of the 10 safest com cities
in the state by FBI data and the
reason for this is because it's
a community. Everybody knows
everybody's related, right?
Everybody knows everybody's Tia
and, and you don't step out of
line without somebody hauling
you over to take care of the
family business, not necessarily
relying on the courts and the
criminal justice.
The system, so we can do that
as, as elected officials and you
do that, bring, bring the
community together and make us a
unified place. We're not done
with public comment.
That's OK. We have electric, we
have electric, we have two
electronic participants um
who've signed up. Connie V.
Hill, Connie.
Is, is there a way to plug her
in Connie? OK, can you hear me
now? Yes, we can hear you and
you have 2 minutes.
OK, I'll talk very fast. I've
sat through this entire
committee meeting uh from my
kitchen in Albuquerque. I want
to thank uh Chairman Chandler
and Vice Chair Cervantes, and
the discussion that happened
today, I want to thank the uh
your best chief story to telling
you about the crime heat map
that overdose drugs is
completely associated with
crime. I want to thank whoever
asked for the money from DOJ to
get the crime
Justice Institute to do yet
another study, but in the end I
really want to thank 3
representatives, Senator
Cervantes, for talking about
solutions, being able to talk to
the governor, because in the end
we know she, she runs pretty
much the bills and the funding.
I want to acknowledge
representative Al Khn for also
talking about solutions and
Senator Katie Duhick, who
brought up Minnesota. I'm not
gonna stop talking about
Miami-Dade.
And the next training is gonna
be December 5th and 6th, but I
also want to bring up three
requests for 3 bills. Senate
Bill 149, Senate Bill 23, last
year went through full Senate
approval in health, I apologize.
I did not present it to this
committee because in talking
about changing statutes, I agree
with Cervantes and all of you.
It's not just about the
statutes, but it's also about
building infrastructure and
facilities and staffing those
facilities. So I'm
in for doing regional treatment
again and supporting our
communities with dollars, real
dollars to build the treatment
facilities and staff them. I
also want to acknowledge Senator
Cervantes, who I just met at
your meeting when you were at
UNM.
He mentioned things that are
very important, which is we need
to sit down and really discuss
the competency issue because
it's not the only thing we need
to look at. We also need to talk
about how come Senate uh
Representative Herndon's bill
for holding parents accountable
for juvenile crime was never
discussed because to the best of
my knowledge, that bill passed
when a middle schooler was shot
in Albuquerque, and why aren't
we holding parents accountable
Miss Fi Hill.
Time is up. So thank you for
joining us today. Um thank you
for cutting me off once again.
Have a good day. Thank you. um.
Now
Napp Dean.
Um, thank you. Uh, Madam Chair,
uh, Mr. Vice Chair, members of
the committee, can someone just
say something so I know you I'm
sorry, we hear you now. Thank
you.
Thank you very much. Um,
I missed a little bit of this
afternoon because I had a, a
client emergency, but just right
now, I have 4 cases of justice
involved individuals with repeat
charges, all have been
determined to be incompetent, so
they cannot pursue with uh the
charges sticking, but their
history is that it is wash,
rinse and repeat, and the
barriers that often end up
existing becomes a distrust of
the air quotes systems.
That becomes the barrier for
these individuals to try
anything and everything that
trust barrier takes time and
effort to finding ways to
address how we build up that
trust. They have such a distrust
that they will not even keep uh
a consistent mailing address to
receive mail because they begin
to feel if I try, why bother?
Nothing will ever work for me.
Those barriers are so much more
about their past experience.
But don't necessarily need to be
about their future experience.
These complex cases require very
complex trainings for peer
support workers, and we really
can do more to lift up this
effort, and I think that this
committee is very aware of that
and I want to do anything I can
to help lift up this awareness
to place these resources into
programming.
Because each individual resource
requires almost an individual
complex application and to get
through those applications, we
need their trust, and we need
their trust because that's how
we build their patients, and
when we build their patients,
they begin to feel successful,
and that's how I think we build
on improving people's lives.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
Mr. Vice Chair, members of the
committee.
Thank you now.
Just
Tomorrow we meet at 9 o'clock,
so 9 o'clock,
different, not, no, we, we.
No.
Yeah, 9 o'clock.
Not 8:30. That was an
intermediate.
Agenda that we adjusted because
I know how you all like your
beauty sleep, and I did not want
to impose a too early start
time.
How's that?
Thank you. So we are.
