You know, a, a, a period where
we'll, um, we're gonna have some
recognition on a retiring
members and we'll have lunch.
Represent a Berego, are you?
We have some time at the end
because.
I hate to do this to um our
staff, but we had a staff
presentation which we could, you
know, move or shorten or
whatever so that we can give you
time representative at about 4
o'clock, about a half an hour,
which was originally on the
front end of the of the agenda
put you there madam, the only
thing is that sheriff uh John
Allen is planning to be here at
11:30.
For my presentation.
So that would be the only, and
he's here.
Well, he's also going to be here
for the 3:15 presentation on the
on the um
Can I get back? Let me go see if
I can get, well, you know, we
don't have a lot of choices, so
just be aware because we have
the Secretary of State coming at
one and she's an outside agency
and we are here, so it makes
sense for the people who are
here to wait to the end. We have
um the Bernal Leo County
District, the district attorney,
he's coming in for Eer. I do not
want to move them way out when
they have planned to be here at
a specific time. So the choices
are limited,
and Sheriff Allen is gonna be
here for the, for the uh
whatever the
privacy one at, at 3:50. Well,
understood, but I just want to
make sure that he's able to
stay.
So, can I talk with him then
he's planning on being here at
3:15, so.
OK.
Um, Senator, you have before.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Honorable members, appreciate
the time. Uh, we're gonna be
presenting a Senate Bill 98, uh,
from last year and may have the
same number this year, but it's
regarding counseling.
It's regarding uh counseling,
which
New Mexicans truly, truly need
um trauma focused therapies,
couples counseling, domestic
violence counseling, substance
abuse counseling, autism,
informed care, grief counseling,
anger management, the counseling
community nationally has formed
a counseling compact.
A counseling compact, which is
an agreement amongst the states
to allow a licensed counselor to
practice in those other states.
It's now up to 38.
The counseling occurs where the
patient is sitting
geographically.
And so, uh, we're going to be
asking, uh, the legislature to
consider New Mexico joining the
counseling compact this next
year.
And I don't have my lineup
sheet, but I'm joined by two
experts that are uh that are on
Zoom, they're here to answer any
and all questions, and sitting
to my left, uh, so joining us on
Zoom, Madam Chair, is April
Woodson, who's the program
manager, ethics of the American
Counseling Association
nationally.
Also, a hail Calfas, who's the
legal counsel of the counseling
compact.
Uh, which is, uh, its own
entity.
And then it's my pleasure to
introduce Jeanie Montoya, the
gentle lady to my left. She is
the government relations chair
of the New Mexico.
Counseling association, so we'll
be presenting for about 5, 10, 8
minutes, and then we'll have a
hopefully open up for Q&A for
the next 20. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you. Welcome.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee for
having me today. Um,
I would like to move straight
into the counseling compact. If
we could post it on the TV.
The PowerPoint presentation.
Apparently have hard copy, so it
looks like this, folks.
Right.
And if I may, Madam Chair, for
the folks listening on webcast,
the uh
The PowerPoint is on the
webcast. You can click it, um,
but it will not be part of the,
the Zoom presentation. Thank
you. Thank you.
OK, without further ado, I
introduce to you the counseling
compact.
On the agenda is what is the
counseling compact.
What level of licensure is
required? How does the compact
work? What are the benefits of
the compact, and I will show you
the current standings on the
compact map, and then we will
turn it over to our experts for
questions and answers.
What is the counseling compact.
The counseling compact is an
interstate compact or a contract
among states.
Allowing professional counselors
licensed and residing in a
compact member state to practice
in other compact member states
without need for multiple
licenses.
Uh, the next slide, please. What
it, what is an interstate
compact, uh, what it does is
legislatively it's enacted, it's
an enacted agreement among
states. They cooperatively
address shared problems,
preserved state sovereignty over
issues belonging to states, and
it is applicable across policy
areas including licensure.
What level is
I'm sorry, excuse me, what level
of licensure is required. You
must be a professional counselor
licensed by a member state,
regardless of the title used by
that state to independently
assess, diagnose and treat
behavioral health conditions or
the state of the of New Mexico,
the independent licensure is
known as LPCC.
How does the compact work?
Professional counselors who meet
uniformed licensure requirements
are able to quickly obtain a
privilege to practice, which is
equivalent to a license and
practicing counseling and other
in another state. The compact
creates a shared interstate
licensure data system, allowing
for near instant verification of
licensure status through the
data system of privilege to
practice can be obtained in a
matter of minutes. The data
system also enhances public
protection by ensuring that
member states share
investigative and disciplinary
information with one another.
So essentially how it works is a
state joins the compact by
adopting the model legislation.
The model legislation includes
both state and individual
requirements. The compact
legislation pre-negotiates the
recognition of an out of state
license through a compact
privilege to practice.
A counselor who is licensed and
lives in a compact member state
may apply for a privilege to
practice in another compact
member state through the
compact.
There are many benefits to the
counseling compact. A few of
them are listed here.
Increase access to specialized
services to rural and
underserved areas.
Insurers maintainable continuity
and quality of care when
counselors or clients relocate
or travel out of state.
Significantly reduce weight
weight this times for clients or
patients needing emergent
services and general mental
health services.
It enhances public safety.
Through comprehensive
authenticated interstate
licensure and discipline
database.
It supports relocating military
spouses and families.
Preserving and strengthening the
current system of state
licensure while offering
offering a unified system.
So on this next slide, you will
see the counseling compact map.
All the dark blue or 3037 states
that have enacted the counseling
compact.
The light blue is one state.
Um, that has filed legislation
as well as uh DC.
DC is already in the process of
enacting it.
And we have 12 states, the gray
area that have not.
had any active legislation.
In closing, I am sure you would
agree that our common goal is to
improve the well-being of our
New Mexico residents and enhance
the standard of living in our
state. Yet too often we find New
Mexico on the bottom section of
various lists. In this case, the
counseling compact has benefits
that could advance our state.
And help sustain the providers
we still have, while increasing
providers to serve New Mexico to
meet the high demand for
behavioral health needs and
reduced wait lists.
It is clear that this is one of
the lists we should be on and
catch up with the 37 states that
have already enacted the
Counseling Compact.
With less than.
2,060,050 licensed professional
clinical mental health
counselors serving the state of
New Mexico, which has over 2.1
million residents.
We are not nearly equipped with
enough therapists to meet the
need, our residents deserve.
In your packet, you will see 53
support letters from those whom
the counseling compact would
directly affect. LPCCs with
additional support from
counseling, professional
organizations to include NMRLD
counseling therapy practice
board, colleges and universities
around the state. We also have
letters from other supporting
behavioral health community
members, educators, private
practitioners, and clinics that
consist of substance abuse
counselor's licensed marriage
and family therapists, clinical
mental health counselors.
psychologists, medical doctors,
as well as military families.
Uh, next slide, please.
For more information, you can go
to counselingcompact.org.
They have an overview of the
compact and many uh FAQ sheets,
fact sheets, uh, counseling
compact map and the model
legislation, which is the
language for the compact
agreement. For more information,
you can contact them directly
and their information is listed
in your presentation and with
further ado, I turn it back to
Senator Antonio Mo Maestas.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and if
you could maybe text or email
the
Experts, they may not be online
as of now, but um, as mentioned,
uh, Madam Chair, members, in
order to join the compact, we
would have to uh pass model
legislation, um, in other words,
kind of a boilerplate bill.
I know that that's not normally
done, uh, but we used to do it
all the time with regards to the
uniform law commission, the
uniform law commission.
As you know, is a national
organization that does uh
statewide bills that are not
appropriate for Congress but
have the states adopt the same
bill, the most famous is the the
the UCC uniform commercial.
A code. Um, so there are some,
uh, so Senate Bill 98 was
introduced last year, did not
receive a message. So New Mexico
actually should be baby blue in
that map, um, uh, so I can, I'll
be working with ledge council
and uh and the judicial staff
of, of the respective uh
chambers to see how we can uh
make it uniform to the compact
and not and and comport with our
uh.
Stylistic norms of ledge
council. So thank you so much,
Madam Chair. I appreciate
squeezing us in and uh look
forward to the dialogue today
and, and in January. absolute
Senate. So are people available
now to answer questions.
I don't know.
But we'll do the best we can.
OK. Well what we need to start
because, yes, you know, madam
chair, I'll get to that right
away, um.
They were advised that we were
starting at 10:45, so I'm not
sure what happened between now
and then, but I will get on it
right away.
This legislative time, so we're
actually pretty much on time um
based on legislative time, so
sorry, senator pulling your like
No, we'll stand for, OK, um, OK,
we have Senator Doig, we have
Senator,
uh, let's go with Di cause do he
is obviously busy. Uh
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Yeah,
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator and
presenters. Um, so I would urge
you to look back at some of the
Senate Judiciary hearings that
have happened on other compacts,
because the reason that we don't
tend to pass compacts here is,
is some stuff that I'm seeing in
this bill.
Um, immunity.
That's in here. Uh, it says that
any rule made by the compact has
the force of law in New Mexico,
uh, which is, I think,
Undermines our authority as
legislators when, when a compact
can essentially become the
lawmakers, uh, for our state.
Um, it says that unlimited
assessments. There's no limit to
the assessments that the, the
compact can put on the state or
fees,
it requires if we have a, a
lawsuit, it requires the venue
be wherever the compact is. Not
so, it's not about what, what,
what works for New Mexico, but
what is convenient for.
Compact, and if we want to
appeal, we would have to do so
in the DC uh circuit court, and
so I
All of the things, all of the
things that come up in the
compact hearings that every
single one that I've sat
through.
are in this. And so I think you,
you can anticipate that those
will be issues again and, and
every time we're told we can't
change it. We can't change it,
we can't change it. You gotta
take it or or leave it because
other states, uh, are, are
involved and I think the, the
one compact that we did pass
that nursing compact, I think we
did change it. And the, and we,
and the world has the the sky
has not fallen, so I would urge
the folks.
Uh, because, and, and I
understand the problem you are
looking to solve with this bill.
I, I have no disagreement with
that, but
All those things that are fatal
to every other compact that
comes in front of us are going
to be fatal to this one as well,
unless there's either a
willingness to let those things
go, uh, or a different approach
taken.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
You're welcome, Senator. Uh,
Senator Sadia Lopez.
Thank you. Um,
That's, those are important
points, but I also, I think that
the problem we're trying to
solve is a really serious one,
and I wanted to share with you
that when um
And I don't even know if it's a
workaround, but the telehealth
one bill that I'm bringing
forward is an amendment to the
telehealth Act to ensure that
Masters of Social work, well, so
it came from Masters of Social
Work who can provide counseling
in this state. They were
excluded from the telehealth
Act, so it's to amend it to
include them. Um, so,
My question is, is
is if that was broad enough to
include counseling so that the
telehealth Act would apply,
would that solve the problem, at
least in part.
Madam Chair, you can, you can
think about it. Thank you, Madam
Chair Lopez. I, I don't know
because I'm not, I'm not privy.
To, to what that legislation
says, I think um I think it may
solve it statewide. I don't know
if it would solve it nationally,
um,
But it wouldn't allow us to be a
member of the compact. I don't
believe. Yeah, no, it, it
wouldn't solve everything. I
said my question is in part, and
of course you can think about
it, you can look at my, at the
telehealth Act, um, because the
other thing that the telehealth
Act seeks to do is to deal with
the medical boards uh
interpretation of the telehealth
Act, which didn't allow people
to get a second opinion, um, we
talked about this extensively in
LHS in legislative Health and
Human Services, um, because
Their interpretation didn't
allow people to get a second
opinion and UCLA actually has us
on their website has somebody
that UCLA will not give second
opinions to because of
Our medical board's
interpretation of our telehealth
Act.
Um, and so one of the things I'm
trying to do is clarify that as
well, but um,
I mean, I think this is
important, and I think, you
know, if you can get it through
judiciary with the, with the
concerns they have. I think
that's important because the
problem we're trying to solve is
a very serious one.
And I was doing it with a
telehealth Act, trying to do
some of that. It's not the same.
I recognize that it doesn't
address all of the issues, but I
think it'd be great for us to
talk a little bit about that.
And you can review it and think
about whether
I, I'm sure it doesn't go far
enough, but whether it helps a
little bit with, with the issue
of not having sufficient people
here for all of the behavioral
health needs that we have in
this state.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator Senator Cervantes.
Uh, thank you. And I, I do wanna
uh re-emphasize some of the
points made by Ser Du. These are
always challenging.
To the judiciary Committee for,
for the reasons that she
articulated because it's true
with the uniform laws too
oftentimes they'll say, well,
the reason, the reason it's
uniform is because all the
states are going to have the
same laws, so otherwise it's not
a compact and it's not uniform,
but then we begin to recognize
that some of the things in these
laws are inconsistent with our
already existing law, and how
will a court resolve the
inconsistency between what we
adopted in the compact and in
that existing law, and we get
into rules of statutory
construction. I'm looking at my
law school, uh, colleague over
here, uh.
Uh, represent Pajon, who's, I
think the first year or so.
Right, so good. So this law
school training, I guess, right?
So how do we, what are the rules
of construction? How do you
resolve a later adopted statute
in that's interrogation of an
existing law, right? So it, it
all becomes a a big, a big
problem for us in the committee
and so Sergio's right, we always
just change it. We just do it
the way we think it should be,
and it oftentimes means taking,
uh, in this case, a 30 page or
something compact down to about
5 pages, oftentimes, um, but the
one thing that that she didn't
bring up and you'll see it from
the very beginning, this has a
purpose.
section, we never have purpose
sections, etc. I, I know you
know all this already, Senator.
Um, but the, but the one thing
that's interesting about these
to me too, that she didn't bring
up, and I look at these a lot
is, this is also big business.
Let me explain. Uh, these
commissions, these compacts get
created, and if you look at it,
they established if we started
on on the line 19, the compact
members, that's compact member
states, shall establish a joint
public agency known as the
Counseling Compact Commission,
and it goes on for several pages
about how that commission
operates, right? And they tax
the states, they, they make the
states pay into this, and they
get to set their salaries and
get to hire employees, they get
to open offices. They describe
how they can be sued or not be
sued, they oftentimes tell you
how you can get in and how you
can get out and.
How you cannot get out, uh, once
you're in the compact. So we're,
it's business, um, and they also
sometimes prescribe what it
takes to license people, you
have to take their tests, you
have to go to their programs,
you have to do their renewal
processes and so forth, it's
very clever, and I'm not saying
that's what this is about,
certainly, I know that's not
your motivation, and there are
some good things to be here,
but, but do be looking for that.
Look for those cause we see
these oftentimes in these
compacts is an entire
organization that very
creatively uh creates themselves
and as a nonprofit.
or corporation of some kind, and
they, and they find a way to
fund themselves and they make
the states pay for it. And
oftentimes these things say
states can't not pay right once
you get in, you're kind of, you,
you must pay, um, and to
participate and so forth and
we're gonna get to, to uh hire
people and, and have staff and
salaries and do those kind of
things too. So it's a, it's a
business. Um, uh, of some of
these, some of these compacts
and these commissions too, so be
wary of that too when you're
looking out for that. And that's
not to say that's a bad thing,
uh, but, but it is um something
that we're going to look at,
always very skeptically in, in
the community.
that I've been with. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you. Thank you.
Um
Senator, I actually have some
questions about some of your
slide, uh.
Whatever this one benefits of
the compact. I don't see enough.
Yeah, on this.
Benefits of the compact there's
a section says increase access
to specialized services to rural
and underserved areas. I'm
trying to understand how that I
hear a lot of claims about the
magic of compacts, and I want to
really understand how you can
make that, that statement. Thank
you, Madam Chair, I'll take a
stab and give it to me, Miss
Montoya. Well, one is it would
allow anyone in the city of
Mexico, including those rural
areas, to have access to
counselors who live nationwide.
There may be a specialist in a
particular area of PTSD for a
particular horrific event that
happens in a person's life, it
would, you would not just have a
pool of local counselors, uh,
via telehealth, you'd have a, a
pool of counselors in 37 other
states.
What's ironic is in in
reciprocity, Madam Chair with
lawyers, lawyers resist resisted
reciprocity because it, it
implies competition and some out
of state firm will put up all
these billboards, the counseling
community here in New Mexico is,
uh, is begging for for this
compact to take place, so, so
anyway, thank you. Well, help me
understand that.
They someone who's a member of
the compact. Let's talk about
the mechanics of this. We don't
never talk about the mechanics,
we just talk about the magic of
the compact, um, so the mechanic
is if you're a member of the
compact and you're a counselor,
you come to New Mexico and you
say what I want privileges
through the compact, is that
right?
Correct. OK, so somebody in Mass
living in Massachusetts isn't
going to be coming here.
Essentially, how it works is
that there's 37 states that are
part of the compact, and if they
go to other states, uh, yes,
they can be they can
participate. However, the other
benefit is that if you have a
client that moves, you can
essentially still practice in
that state.
Even though they're in a
different video
by
video, correct. The other
benefit would be if you have,
uh, let's say a provider that
works half the time a year and
um Arizona, and half the time in
New Mexico in person or in
telehealth, they could
essentially be part of the
compact and help both states,
but they have to pick one home
state. Yes, ma'am, correct. OK.
So we might have a unique
situation where we have some.
somebody who's has offices in
Texas and in New Mexico.
And the opposite is true. We
might have a home like, you
know, a home counselor here who
thinks, oh, great, I'm gonna
spend now I used to spend all my
time in New Mexico, but I live
in Clovis, and now I can also
work in Texas, so I'm working
half time in New Mexico now, and
I'm working half time in Texas.
That's a net negative for uh.
Uh, New Mexico resident who
needs a counselor.
Not essentially because if, if
you have a provider that is
doing workshops or other things
remote, they can be in another
state and still practice and
serve New Mexico.
And, and Madam Chair.
Rosen Chandler under that
specific example, yeah, that
would be a net zero, but what's
a more net zero is a counselor
leaving the state entirely. If
under this compact, if a
counselor chose to leave the
state because of military spouse
or whatever reason, they could
still maintain their
Their patience here on their
patients would not lose those
services. So yeah, there may be
individual situations, but, but,
uh, but all in all, I think it
would provide more access.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, the other, the other
positive would be, uh, for
myself, for instance, I'm, I'm
from a small rural town, Las
Vegas, New Mexico. I could
essentially provide services and
support there and even from the
fires and things like that.
Uh, community has undergone, and
so I don't necessarily have to
be there, um, but, well,
I guess what I'm saying is it
wouldn't call for me actually
because I live in New Mexico,
but other providers can reach
out to
Um
Help in provide specialties,
especially because there's not a
lot of specialty areas, uh, that
we have out here, given our
shortage of therapists. So we
have a Texas counselor. They
still have to get qualified
through the compact to practice
here.
Correct.
And, and so then you're saying,
well, electronically,
telephonically or what, you
know, video wise, they can still
do the work here. They can then
do the work here.
Well, they can do that now
because we have a telemedicine,
um, statute that allows
providers, they have to, I
think, register and there is
some, some, some level of
You know, administrative things
that they have to do, but they
can still do that, right? But we
could also add more providers to
the state and also make it
easier for military families.
Uh, moving, uh-huh, well keeping
their license. We have done
military special things, so
that's something we can do.
that make it easier for members
of the military to get license.
We've done that.
As a specialty bill, not as
something that's a member of the
compact.
And I still don't see how we're
getting more people here.
Because what you're saying is,
if you're a Texas provider, and
you know, and this is not
necessarily all that
hypothetical because we are
surrounded, you know, on a
couple borders by Texas, they're
not gonna come and move here.
They're just gonna
maybe provide services
telephonically or video-wise, if
they had a pre-existing client
or it's some special train you
see where I'm going with this? I
don't see why they would move
here and the moment they move
here and make it a home.
Home practicing area, they have
to get a license through us.
They don't get to keep the
compact privileged license, the
moment they become a resident,
and this is their home license,
they have to go through our
licensure process. Is that not
right?
Correct, and uh correct, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee, and also it's, it's
in addition to our state already
has in terms of licensing, so
it's an added benefit of being
able to apply for this compact
and work across state lines, but
it.
Like, like, uh, Senator Maestas
was mentioning the other states
that are involved in the compact
can also participate and provide
services to New Mexico. I get
that, and it will be likely
telephonically because they're
not gonna come and move here in
the moment they move here, they
have to have our license.
It's kind of like you, you know,
I've heard this analogy. It's
like a driver's license, and in
a way it is because, yes, we
honor Massachusetts driver
license, but if you're here as a
resident, you have to get our
license.
Right.
Right? So I, and I'm bringing
this up because I've heard it in
this context, every compact, and
there's 8 of them now that
people are getting all excited
about. Make the contention, it's
gonna increase the number of
providers in the state, and I
have yet to really get my head
around how that actually is
gonna happen.
And if you can show me data that
says all these other states that
are part of the compact saw an
increase in providers. I like to
see it because this is a
zero-sum game. There are 10
number of providers. So when one
state loses a provider, a live
provider, another one's losing
them.
Under this compact, and we have
the potential for losing
providers, uh, especially on the
borders where maybe it pays
better in Arizona. Maybe it pays
better in Colorado. I wouldn't
be surprised if it did.
So just be aware, that's my
concern. I have similar concerns
to what Senator Du had talked
about, but I think there's an
overpromise in these kinds of
statements. And unless you can
back them up, I really am
uncomfortable with relying on
these very broad statements that
this is a panacea to our
shortage of counselors, doctors,
nurses, PTs, let's go down the
list. So.
And Madam Chair, respectfully,
uh, do you know if our panel is
on Zoom yet?
To answer these questions I
don't know. It's council,
and Doctor Woodson. OK, and what
are they, uh uh assigned to the
compact committee commission
that there OK, so it's a state
council of governments as well
as the compact and they're legal
attorney and uh Doctor Woodson
is American Counseling
Association programs, ethics
chair. You see where I'm going
with this, thank you, thank you,
Madam Chair, Chandler. I, I
totally see where you're getting
at. So I'm committed over the
next
couple of months to learn as
much as I can, bring those
concerns back to the, to the
legislature, um, I think it's
just a question of competition.
It is a zero sum if the
counseling community remains
stagnant, but if more people
join uh this profession, if more
people have more economic
opportunities if being a part of
this profession, I, I say let's
compete and let's bring the best
and the brightest. We do know
that the day we enter this
compact, New Mexicans will have
access to counselors nationwide.
Thank you.
I caution you sound
nationwide, I, you know, that
that's a pretty big problem.
You're correct, 37 of the 50
states, right.
Yeah, sort of. OK. Um, anyone
else?
OK, in the house.
Thanks a lot. Um, appreciate,
uh, your interest in this matter
and thank you for joining us and
folks, we're gonna move to our
next agenda item, which is.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. Of
course.
So our next agenda item, uh, I
think I mentioned it to some,
but maybe not everyone was in
the room. We're gonna move um
representative Barrego's item to
about 4 o'clock today.
And now I'd like to move on to
um recognition of legislative
members.
OK. So, I just wanna say it's
been a privilege to chair this
committee this year and to work
with so many fine legislators,
many of whom are long-standing
members of this committee and
Some of whom are long-standing
members of the legislature.
Um, and I felt it appropriate
for us to acknowledge their
service.
I'll just list the the members
who are retiring or, or
otherwise leaving the um
Legislature this year. We have
who have served on this
committee, um, some of whom have
served for long periods of time.
Senator Greg Baca is leaving
Representative Gayle Chasey is
leaving.
Senator Greg Nebert is leaving
us Senator Bill O'Neill has been
a longtime member as well, um,
representative Bill Ream is, is
unfortunately retiring and has
shown a great deal of service to
this committee, Representative
Ambrose Castellano.
Senator Daniel Iy Soto.
Representative Willie Madrid.
And Senator Cliff Perle, and I
hope I haven't missed anyone.
Um, and I just wanna say to all
of you, we very much appreciate
the um work that you've done
with us, you've all made very
important contributions to the
committee.
And to the state of the Mexico
and the people of New Mexico and
you've all worked very hard um
to support the work we've been
doing and I'm gonna, if, if
you'll indulge me, I'm gonna
have a special call out to a
couple members that I've worked
closely with on House Judiciary,
and I'll open the floor up to
others as well, of course, is
um, you know, Senator, uh,
Representative Gail Chasey
leader Chasey has been the chair
of House Judiciary and I
certainly viewed her as a
mentor, but as a new member of
that.
committee and I learned so much
from her as a chair of that
committee and in terms of how to
comport oneself, how to give
someone a fair hearing, how to
listen to other sides of uh of
an issue.
Um, how to treat people fairly,
all of those things are
tremendous things that I've
admired, um.
And, and Representative Chasey
and on so many levels and
And um Representative Rehm, I
was also on house judiciary and
also a longtime member of House
Judiciary, and
And I just love working with
them. I mean, we, we obviously
have different political
perspectives on a lot of issues,
but in my short tenure as as
House Judiciary here. We, we
work together and we try to come
to to solutions on bills, we
would consult and schedule bills
together so that I felt like I
was getting a perspective from
the minority on the committees
to make sure that they were
having their voice heard, and he
was a gentleman and the pleasure
and sometimes I can just, could
just look him in the eye and say
it's not.
happen Bill, so move on. And he,
he, he would take it with good
grace and, and we, you know,
he's he's, he's a pleasure and
I, and as well as I want to also
mention Senator Nebert who was a
longtime member in the house and
serve um in on our House
Judiciary Committee and great
lawyer, you know, really great
lawyer and brought his attention
to detail of the bills which we
really needed, um, to the
forefront and wouldn't.
want to get, let us get away
with.
You know, overlooking something,
and he would sit there and make
us listen to him and go through
stuff that was very important.
Yeah, sometimes I don't like it,
especially when he was dragging
his feet so he could slow our
damn hearings down, we wouldn't
get this stuff we wanted to get
to, but that's part of the game
and we would play that game and
he was a lot. He's a gentleman.
Everybody was so gracious on
this committee, you and, and
Bill Ream and of course, um
Representative Chasey. So I just
want to acknowledge you. We do
have lunch that available, and
we, I, I did buy some cakes, you
know, as sort of a sy so
we're gonna have a little cake
thing in the in the
back room, but anyone else who
wishes to acknowledge members,
I'm happy to um recognize them.
Go for it. I just wanna, um,
again, it's hard because you
want to talk about everybody on
there, but it's not really
possible, of course, with the
time, but I, I do want to
acknowledge uh in his absence,
Senator O'Neill, who served with
us in the house uh for many
years and then came over with us
together to the Senate. There's
a pattern here you may see,
uh, center, uh, Senator Stewart
and I and others, uh, to her
great credit, though I do want
to especially recognize um
representative Chasey who didn't
uh follow that path over into
the Senate, um.
Exercising some discretion
perhaps and wisdom. Um, Gayle
was the chair of the House
Judiciary, of course, for many
years at the same time that I
was cheering.
Senate Judiciary Committee and
we had a wonderful working
relationship, uh, our staff is
here, Philip and Brandon and
others and our staffs, you,
you'd be surprised how much gets
done with our staffs working
together when you're on the
judiciary Committee, and of
course, Madam Chair, you know
that now, but that's, that's for
the members, there's a
tremendous amount of work that
gets done by them, those
amendments, the issue spotting
resolutions, um, meeting with
people and so I'm glad uh our
Senate Judiciary staff is here,
but you always had an incredible
facility.
Um, represent Chasey to have
your staff working with ours and
you and I working well together,
and we did it many times in the
interim as well too, putting
agendas together and so you and
I had a, a great working
relationship and you and I came
up in the days of Kenny Martinez
and Al Park and Dan Foley and
we've had a lot of really great
experiences over the years. We
um missed your husband Dave, uh,
who was, of course, an icon to
those of us in the Democratic
Party for many years too, so
we're gonna miss you a great
deal and I hope you have a great
retirement.
Representative Jay you want to
say something.
Um, I would like to say
something. Thank you, Madam
Chair and Mr. Vice Chair, I
appreciate that. Um, this
committee was started when I was
a freshman. And so I first, my
first interim was in 1997 and um
we were in Santa Rosa in this
group called the Coalition to
Repeal the Death Penalty
presented at that meeting, and I
said, well, you know, my
grandmother lived to be 100, so
I can probably carry this bill.
Because it's gonna take a really
long time, but um, you know,
that was when we started working
on this and uh on that
particular effort, but I wanted
to say how much I appreciated um
my colleagues and from the other
side of the aisle,
Representative Raymond,
Representative Neber has
Representative Raymond, I have
gone round and round and I'm
sort of his second wife Nag. I'm
his work wife.
And um but we, we've hardly ever
agreed on anything, but when we
carry a bill together, you guys
should have listened to it more
seriously. So, um, I really
appreciated him and with uh
representative when
Representative Neibert was the
representative and him um
representative McQueen would
make sure that nothing got out
of that committee without their
checking every comma and period
and but with both.
of these gentlemen, I could take
their word to the bank and it
wasn't always what I wanted to
hear, but I, I really, uh, uh
respected their um authenticity
and their uh their honesty,
which was really, really good.
And it um this particular
committee and the judiciary
Committee are the ones where my
heart is, and that's how I ended
up going to law school. Funny,
uh, Senator Du Hi and Carl
suck and I were in the same
class, and so it was interesting
to have Carl here and, and, uh,
and Katie
and me listening to this um
presentation this morning, um,
but thank you very much, Madam
Chair. It's been a great
experience and I will miss some
things, not everything, but, but
probably um this work most of
all.
Thank you. Thank you, Leader
Tracy. Senator Neibert.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I'd
like to echo your thoughts on
Representative Chasey.
When I was first elected, she
really took me under a wing in
judiciary and, and uh was very
kind, even though obviously uh
saw things through a different
prism representing my district,
uh, she was always so kind even
when we disagreed and she made
it very comfortable for me to uh
have some input into, into the
process made me feel comfortable
doing so and, and Madam Chair.
would comment that you're
ascension to the chair and
judiciary likewise, uh, you,
you've been
Wonderful to work with and uh
even though uh we have our
differences. You were always
kind, you're always attentive,
listening to uh representative
Ream and myself, uh, tell you
all the things why we opposed
whatever uh you, you at least
listen and, and from the
minority perspective that, that
is really all that uh all that
we
We can ask, is that, uh, you
know, you listen, take, take
whatever ideas we have and, and
uh allow us to have our input
into, into the process, and I
appreciate that. My one regret
in in not coming back is not
being able to work with the
Chairman Cervantes and, and the
Senate Judiciary. I was really
looking forward to that and uh
it's just not gonna happen, but
I appreciate this group, the
state's in good hands and, you
know, I know the collective
wisdom of, uh, particularly the
judiciary committees will, will
serve the state well in years to
come. So thank you. It's been an
honor and a privilege to serve
with all of you.
Thank you, Senator. Um, so I
have Senator Lopez then rep then
um representative Chasey and
then we'll end with you, um,
Representative Free.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
I want to say thank you to
Senator Nibert, Representative
Chasey and Representative Rehm,
and the others who were
mentioned that are not here with
us today also for your
tenacity energy and patience
because this job is a whole
bunch of everything, but it also
requires us to have a certain
level of patience.
To be able to sit through all
the different hearings and uh I
too have been a member of this
committee for all these years,
um.
And Representative Chasey, I
remember we all have all have
many stories to talk about, um,
with the endurance that we have
been on this committee over the
years.
Um, I think each one of you
represent and representative
still Senator Neibert, um, you
know, for you being in front of
the judiciary at the several
times that you were in front of
our committee was very
informative and enlightening,
and also seeing the way that
that both you and Senator Ibioto
would work together, um, when
you were in the other chamber of
the anticipation of you working
um and clarifying. I see, I
think it's important points for
us to to review and look at is
always important, um, a very
good perspective.
And Representative Rehm, of
course, um,
Maybe not seeing eye to eye in a
lot of different um factors, of
course, but always appreciative
to have the other side of an
issue brought forward and, and
Madam Chair, as you know too,
this is the art of compromise
and coming to agreement on, on
uh.
Different pieces of legislation,
which is important, um, and I
appreciate that, um, I know you
and I have been able to sit
down, Representative Reh and,
and actually have a conversation
and always appreciate your
support of Lorenzo, over the
years too. I mean, we, we have
stories on that.
Um, but Representative Chay
floor leader Chasey, um,
You're gonna be missed.
Your leadership will be missed.
I know you're not like leaving.
We still have you on fast dial
and other things, but um.
I think in in in Spanish we have
a word that's called encia.
And what that means, it's
securing love.
For New Mexico.
our people.
our community, and you have
exemplified that over all these
years from the first time I
walked into your, your living
room at your home when we first
met after we were both elected.
It, uh
You haven't lost
The vision you haven't lost and
you haven't, in other words, the
trail has been straight for you.
And I want to say thank you for
your guidance and your counsel
over the years too, because um.
Sometimes just listening to
frustration also helps, so I
want to say thank you for your
counseling too, but I know Madam
Chair and your other journeys
that you had working with
special ed.
As a teacher and all the other
experiences that you've brought
to the table, I think has been
very important over the years,
and I've learned a lot.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Chasey and then
Representative Brego and then
Representative Freme and then
we'll break for lunch. Now I'm
sure I forgot to reference um
acknowledged Senator O'Neill
because um he, um, in my very
first term, he was on the board
of Diss House, and he brought
the issue to me of
A supportive and safe exit from
prison.
And that's where I, um, focused
a lot of energy and we got some
funding for Dis House at that
time. And then, and then
They became a representative
after a couple of tries, at
least one election where he
wasn't elected and he tried
again, so I, he's my example now
to people who came really close
this time, but didn't quite make
it. Um, and he, uh, turns out he
had the same football coach as
my brother in the Ivy League.
And um, so I, it's hard to think
of, uh, Senator O'Neill as a
football player because he's not
a big person, but he was a
running back at Cornell and my
brother had played for the same
coach at Dartmouth and so we had
this strange connection in the
background, but his, his poetry
and uh his creativity and his
commitment to um to those who
were formerly incarcerated, it
has been legendary.
and um so he's a voice that will
be missed as well. Thank you,
Ma. Representative Brego.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
well, I'm probably one of the
newest members here and I just
want to acknowledge it, a couple
of people that I that I have had
the opportunity to work with,
um, floor leader uh Chasey, of
course, you know, she has a
certain grace to her that she
doesn't even realize, I think
sometimes under pressure, and I
watched her on the floor, and I
mean, there's a lot to learn
from that, you know, it's how,
how you deal with that, that
tension and
that, and, and I, and she
doesn't even realize that she
has that grace and that style. I
love to watch her every day
because every day she had on a
new outfit and I was like, OK,
how do we compete with that? But
yeah, I, I mean, that's, that's
a part of her style, though,
it's a part of her grace, and um
I learned a lot from you, or
leader.
Um, the other person is um
Uh, Senator Neibert, who I'm
gonna miss because he was always
so kind and he and I joked about
starting a um uh caucus, which
now I'm really gonna miss
because we wanted to start a
caucus of um legislators that
have served in government from
before and how we view things
sometimes a little differently,
and so maybe I'll look to Alan
Martinez now is taking his
place.
Um, and then Bill Ream, um,
coming from APD and having a
whole different perspective, you
know, I, he and I serve together
in government and um that
publics, you know, that true
public service, um, always comes
out in your bills and your
passion for the bills that I saw
last year on the floor that you
testified, and some of them were
defeated and you walked away and
you were, OK, I'll come back
next year.
And um hopefully, we can pick
some of that up for you. Um, and
then finally, I have to
acknowledge my good friend, um,
Willie Madrid, who, you know,
Willie, I sat next to Willie and
I turned to him and I'd say,
Willie, what do you think of
this? And what do you think of
that? And like he always gave me
a different insight, um, you
know, Willie is a true leader in
that.
He taught me, he grew up in
foster homes, probably a lot of
us didn't even know that, but
look at what he's done in his
life, and I just want to
acknowledge that because that to
me is the true.
Sort of
Engulfment of someone who has
risen through the ranks of life
in general, and has made it to
the point that he has, and thank
you, Madam Chair, I just wanted
to acknowledge those people that
I worked closely with. Thank
you, thank you, Representative
Rehm.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
want to begin with when I first
came up to the legislature, uh,
Senator Cervantes was the vice
chair of House Judiciary.
And so we began there and then
all of a sudden there was
Little Katie over here was our
analyst
and, you know, but everyone at
the legislature has been
Very cordial, easy to work with.
I mean, we have different ideas
and different opinions.
And, you know, Madam Chair and
Madame Chair.
I mean, we had controversial
bills that we got together with.
And figured out how we're gonna
proceed forward.
In an orderly manner.
You know, the, you know, to make
sure that
You know, the public comment was
gonna be
was gonna be cordial. Let me
just say it that way, you know,
and, and not out of hand, um,
you know, you look at the, the
House Judiciary Committee was
Momaestus, uh, Bill O'Neill, I
mean, Bill O'Neill and I have
carried legislation together and
You know, just been really
enjoyable now.
I'm looking forward to
retirement.
Uh, and I'm gonna miss people
individually, you know, um, and
I miss people from my previous
work that way as well, but
Uh, come the middle of January,
I don't know what's gonna
happen. My car might just start
driving.
So you gotta go north. But uh
no, it's been a real honor and a
really enjoyable and thank you
very much.
Thank you, son. We are truly
gonna miss all of our retiring
members, and I say that with
great sincerity. Um, so, uh,
just want to acknowledge we have
lunch ready to go in the back
room here. And if I could just
point out JD Bullington, Deborah
Conda, Voices for Children,
Bianca Gutierrez and Juliana
Coup as our lunch hosts, um,
really appreciate it. So we'll
get back here about one o'clock.
We've got an agenda item.
That one.
