that I'm seeing maybe more who
are new faces to the legislature
and to the interim process,
would you just please uh give us
a brief history of what is Kevin
asked, what is the process, who
are the code neutrals? What is
the arbitration, all of the
efforts that have been made to
try and address CAD at the
legislative level.
through the courts.
Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman,
members of the committee, um,
I, uh, as a member or as
somebody involved with the Law
Center. I have personally
represented over 100 kids in
CYFD custody. We focus um at the
Law Center on representing
Native American kids and um
custody to ensure that their um
their needs are met both as
children in custody, but also
their cultural and traditional
um needs are also considered and
meant by the, um, by the
department. Um, the Kevin S
lawsuit resulted from
um a long, uh, history of
frustration, um, and the, and
the inability to access
appropriate services for these
children, both Native American
children and children across the
state. So the Kevinness lawsuit
resulted um from um identifying
the systemic issues, the lack of
community-based mental health
services, the lack of family
placements, um, things that are
required both under the Medicaid
Act from what's now the
healthcare Authority, but also
from
CYFD and so the, the case was
brought by a number of
individual children, as I said,
one of our clients was a named
plaintiff, um, the Law Center
Disability Rights New Mexico and
Pegasus Legal Services for
Children. Um, when the lawsuit
was filed, um, we had begun the
litigation process and um the
state very quickly, um,
expressed interest in developing
a settlement agreement. The
settlement
agreement was developed over
several months. Um, it was um
very intentional in the way it
developed step by step by step
process for addressing the
systemic issues that we're
facing the children and
families, um, who were involved
with both the Medicaid program
and CYFD.
It also had very specific
timelines, and there were, um,
there, there was a focus on
developing foundational pieces
and then having outcomes. And it
was a very sequential process.
The settlement agreement was
finalized in March of 2020. Um,
that a lot of the timelines were
extended by 6 months because of
the COVID situation that was,
that we all were facing.
The role of the co-neutrals was
very specific to assess the um
the progress that the state was
making. The, the con neutrals
were selected specifically
because of their experience in
child welfare reform in
different jurisdictions across
the state.
They were there to evaluate the
progress that the state was
making and to make
recommendations to improve that
progress. They are not there for
as an enforcement mechanism.
I'm just a lawyer.
I've lived in San Juan County
for over 30 years. I've worked
on the Navajo Nation since 1993.
I'm, I'm just a lawyer. I don't
do data
I don't know systems reformed
the way these folks do.
Judy Meltzer and Kevin Ryan are
national experts. They have the
people in place who can assess
the data, who can assess what is
actually happening on the ground
and they're talking to people on
the ground. They're talking to
foster parents, they're talking
to CYFD workers. They know what
is happening in this state. They
have been making recommendations
to the state.
As a party to the case, we have
engaged in mediation several
times with the state to try and
move.
The needle to try and get the
change that we were all hoping
for when we entered into the
agreement in 2020. We
unfortunately have not seen that
change.
Which resulted in arbitration
last fall on a very specific
focused elements of the
settlement agreement.
We engaged in arbitration for 3
weeks.
Um, the arbiter.
was very careful as Charles
Piper Pifer, for those of you
who know him, he's very, he was
a mutually agreed upon arbiter.
He was very careful. He created
an issued a very detailed
decision, which we are now
actively trying to um both
comply with and make sure that
it's enforced. All of this was
set up in the settlement
agreement.
There was a process for
enforcing the settlement
agreement and we are engaged in
that process currently. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman, members of
the committee.
We start with uh, get an idea of
looking around the room to see
who we have, we have questions
and I'll start trying to keep
list beginning with anyone who
raises their hand, he
rips and lords.
Um, as this.
Anyone else?
Chavez.
You want Senator Brantley.
All right, we'll start there.
Uh, we've got time to recognize
everybody for up to 4 minutes be
keeping track of that time.
Represent.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I'll
be brief because I know there's
a lot of people here and this is
a very important topic. I really
don't have any questions for you
guys right now. I might as I go
along, but I wanted to address
the governor's letter that she I
find extremely insulting. Um,
she actually came out and
cornered me in the hallway, uh,
John, represented John Block and
I in the hallway and started
yelling at us about CYFD, which
I thought was completely
inappropriate. Uh, and she was
pissed about this, she was upset
about this bill being passed.
And um
My reply to her was, well,
you're basically the overhead of
CYFD. Why don't you fix it?
You've been here for 5 years.
I find it insulting. I don't
think anybody here Republican or
Democrat, was gleefully.
Condemning CFD.
I've called CFD a dumpster fire
numerous times, and I mean that
from the bottom of my heart
because
In the 5 years I've been here,
I've brought forward about 20
different bills that are
science-based and data driven,
and none of them got through
when I finally realized I can't
get anything through because my
name's on it, which is
unfortunate.
What I would like to see moving
forward.
Especially after, and then she's
The governor talks about, I hope
she's listening right now cause
I'm still mad about about that
discussion in the hallway.
Um
I tried to give $20 million to
CFD.
And that got denied. I, I've
tried to give him money. I've
tried to bring forward bills,
and I think everybody here, I
don't think there's a single.
Darn person here that does not
care about the disastrous CFD. I
think everybody here wants to
fix it, and I just specifically
want to call it the governor
since she called us out saying
we're gleefully condemning CFD.
I don't think anybody's
gleefully. I think everybody
here is heartbroken, I would
hope.
Because we've heard stories and
stories and stories and we read
it in the news about these kids
that are being hurt and abused,
and I think at the end everybody
wants the same thing, right?
Everybody wants to make sure
these kids are put forward and
that their best interests are
there, and I think we have to
stop the political BS.
And just sit down and say what
in the hell is going on with CFD
and how do we fix it?
And how do we make this happen
bipartisan.
Um
The, the letter is so insulting
with the posturing and the
grandstanding and her basically
calling us, every one of us,
Republican and Democrat,
horrible people on the House
side is absolutely ridiculous.
What she should have said is if
she really cared about CYFD, she
would have come down and said,
you know what, these are all the
things we really need to do or
we'd all got together and had a
think tank, we would have all
figured this out, but getting
this letter that is so
disgusting and abhorrent, and
then the discussion I had with
her in the hallway about her
being upset about this bill, it
just.
So egregious. I can't hardly
contain my emotions right now,
because this is a serious damn
topic with serious kids who are
having serious issues or getting
abused and sleeping in offices,
and I cannot bring forward any
more science-based data-driven
bills because mine just
continually get shot down, so
I'm hoping Democrats will pick
up the gauntlet and fix this
issue and get it fixed and keep
the kids in mind and the
governor can just never mind.
Thank you. That's all I have.
myosis, you're recognized for 4
minutes.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Thank you presenters. um.
Let me kind of
First of all, thank you for all
the work, particularly those
last 3 or 4 days, uh, I want to
thank the the speaker's staff,
Ms. Dudley and
And the thought process that
went into those last 34 days, I
know we're trying to folks were
trying to avoid a
Um
Conference committee, but you
know, that didn't pan out, but I
want to make a point with
regards to administratively
attached agency. I think it's
key because we really haven't
had administratively attached
agencies for quite some time.
The former chief executive was
on a shrink government agenda,
so it's been a while, um, but
there's a section of law, you
know, 9-1-7, which deals with
the executive reorganization
and, and, and spells out what
that means, you know.
That that the independent
agency, uh,
exercises functions
independently of the department
and without approval or control
of the department, submits its
budget through the department,
submits reports through the
department.
Um
And then, uh, and then, you
know, in other words, it's, it's
administratively attached, but
it's, it's not part of that
department. It's not a division.
But what we do is we try to make
it better and so the current law
says, you know, that the Office
of Child Advocate has created an
administratively attached.
To the office of Attorney
General pursuant to law.
And then we should stop at the
period. We should stop.
But we write more words and so I
don't think these words are
problematic, but I just want to
make the point, we write the
Office shall maintain autonomy.
Over the office's budget and any
decisions the office may take.
Well, that's a given, that,
that's how we structure it. But
the reason I bring up this
point, Mr. Chairman, is we try
to uh add.
Words
Uh, we added words to law with
regards to the certification
board.
Which we administratively
attached to the Department of
Public Safety, um,
And so when we wrote that
statute, we said the
certification board is created
and administratively attached.
Uh, to the law enforcement.
academy, we actually attested to
a division within DPS.
Of the law enforcement academy
of the Department of Public
Safety, and we should have put a
period, boom, stop.
Instead, we're trying to like.
helped the executive and we put
in which shall provide staff
support for the council. So we
have a situation in DPS in which
the Secretary of DPS and the
Department.
Have interpreted that statute
and
Correctly or incorrectly, that
the staff of the certification
board belongs to DPS.
And somehow the CEO of the
certification board is like
floating, but
Isn't the boss of the staff.
That oversees policing in the
state.
So anyway, with regards to this,
there's no budget for the
office. And so I want to thank
the Attorney General and the
leadership of the
Department of Justice. So are
you essentially Mr. Department
of Justice is gonna loan
employees to this office.
Until we
Lawmakers budget appropriately.
How do you foresee the
relationship between the
attorney generals, the uh
Department of Justice and the,
and the Independent Office. Mr.
Chair, members of the committee,
I mean, I think our intention is
really to, to maintain the
independence, right? And my
understanding and talking with
our finance staff is that there
was 650,000 that was not vetoed
and is available for this
purpose. So I think that sets us
on a pretty good entry point,
um, from, from a purely
administrative standpoint. We
can provide staff to assist,
whether that's paralegal.
s or clerical staff, HR staff,
right? But I think at the end of
the day, we want to make sure
that that office maintains the
independence that they hire
their own paralegals and staff
over time and that they have
decision making abilities in
their office.
Thank you for that. I think, uh,
I think it's commendable that
you would loan staff for loan
support, and that may be
necessary over the next.
You know, 1416 months, but
certainly in the next fiscal
year we need to budget
appropriately and draw a clear
line or or not or make it a
division or whatever we want to
do, but when we do these
administratively attached
agencies, we got.
We got to just reference the the
statute 9-1-7, and then just
leave it at that. Thank you, Mr.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I had
a couple of questions in terms
of the um staff.
Also, um, that Mr. Chair, the,
uh, Department of Justice is
going to be hiring.
Is there
Is there going to be some
conversation in terms of uh the
need, for example, to hire
someone who the the the head,
the office, I mean the child
advocate, that person in terms
of the kind of expertise they
have with regard to child
welfare, child abuse, and as
along with that also um is there
conversation about hiring
licensed social workers in that
office, so that they also have
the ability to, um, you know,
assess.
cases that are covered.
Mr. Chair Representative, uh,
our intent is really to allow
the child advocate to get into
the office first and allowed
them to make those decisions
about who should have the right
qualifications for the staff
members in that particular
office. If there's things we can
assist with, we'll obviously do
that, but really, we wanna leave
that up to the child advocate to
create the organizational
structure, and decide what
qualifications the staff members
should have. OK. And thank you,
Mr. Chair. And so in terms of
the of the child advocate, um, I
don't and I
don't know if there are
qualifications that are assigned
to that person, are there?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative,
you, you're speaking to the
child advocate. Yes, they, they
have certain qualifications, um.
It's 5 years of documented
professional experience working
in child protective or juvenile
justice services and be licensed
in good standing as an attorney,
a psychologist, or social
worker. OK, thank you, thank you
for that. Um, and then my other
question, um,
Or maybe it's not a question,
it's with regard to the
Kevinness settlement. I know
that it was signed in 2020, so
we're what, maybe 5 years in,
um, Mr. Chair and part of the
reason that you took the state
to or CYFD uh into the
arbitration was because things
weren't getting better, they
were getting worse.
Uh, and I think that just in
terms of having conversations
with some staff with some
families um that have been
impacted and and staff who
continue or try to continue to
work at CYFD. One of the issues
that really hasn't been
addressed is the fact that the
department continues to not hire
licensed social workers, so that
you have workers with the
expertise uh in child welfare,
the ability to um assess
families as they come in and
provide the kinds of services
that they.
need
I also think, Mr. Chair, that
the other pieces that we don't
have, and, and I'm, I'm one of
the people that maybe the
governor's talking about because
I've been very critical of the
secretary.
I believe that we need a
secretary who has experience in
child welfare, um, and that we
need staff who's experience in
child welfare, and they've got
to be licensed. Mr. Chair, I'm
not sure why we don't, um,
Think about that when we're, um,
you know, going into, you know,
having some of these
conversations.
Um, and so, you know, there was
a day when there was a time when
CYSD did well.
Uh, there was a time when CYFD
did hire licensed social workers
and really was looked to um as a
model for the country, and I'm
hoping that we can get back to
that.
Um, I'm hoping that somehow we
can create a working conditions
where people are not afraid to
work and where they only last
for, you know, maybe months,
sometimes we get a weeks at a
time. Um, I heard a couple of
weeks ago that 4 workers in the
Albuquerque office had quit and
uh the Santa Fe office did not
have any permanency planning
staff.
And that creates
The caseloads that creates
situations where kids are not
seen, where kids don't get um a
home visit for months and months
and months, the very reason that
the Kevin has settlement came to
be.
And so when we think about what
CYFD needs, I think we need to
think about it globally. I think
we need to think about um
experience at the top.
Uh, and I think we need to think
about, um, not having a
situation where we have a new
secretary every year, every
couple of years, um, you know,
every time we get a new
governor, we get a new secretary
and sometimes under the same
governor, we get lots of
different secretaries. So that's
part of the problem. There are
so many kids waiting for
adoption right now, um, that
they're gonna end up aging out.
They're not going to get there
forever family.
They're gonna sit there in
language.
Again, one of the reasons why
the Kevana settlement came to
be.
So I'd like to ask everybody to
think about that.
Um, and to really consider what
the structural needs of the
department are, and
Continuing to add on extra
duties or extra things that the
department has to do isn't
helpful either.
So thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Thank
you all for being here today.
First of all, I would just want
to thank representative Abeta
and the speaker for getting this
across legislators tried to do
for, for many, many years. They
really champion this and I
recognize that it didn't end in
the way that they would have
liked it, the final draft of
what got across the finish line,
but the important part, I'm very
proud of the entire legislature
who really prioritized doing
something for CYFD this session.
It's um heartbreaking to see
that the govern.
wasn't on the same page when it
came to vetoing the
appropriation that went with it.
I do want to follow up on a
comment you made to Senator
Maestas, and that was $650,000
in the budget. I'm unaware of
that appropriation. Can you just
briefly tell us where that is in
the budget?
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator, thank
you for that. I, I, I'd have to
go back and I, I can go back and
figure out where our budget
staff.
found those monies out. And so I
just want to be sure cause I'm,
I'm not sure myself. I just
followed up with our
administrative services to
division and that's what they
had told me. But even to the
extent that we don't have those
monies available. I think the
attorney General's intent is to
make sure that this office gets
off to the right start, and if
we have to provide supplemental
funding of our own to make it
work. That's what we're prepared
to do to make sure the child
advocate gets off on the right,
right steps. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, and that's important.
I think that this legislator is
well funded.
YFD for many years, we've seen
the increase of their budget,
and we know that money isn't
fixing the problem and it isn't
saving kids, it's gonna take a
commitment to prioritize the
well-being of these children
first. Um, in fact, one of the
main problems we have with COISD
is not what they're doing but
not is is also what they're not
doing, just not showing up for
children. I want to note that
they're not here for this
conversation to show up for
legislators when we all once
again come to the table and
trying to identify how we
prioritize our
most vulnerable population.
Thank you for being here. Thank
you for taking this on. Very
briefly, I have a lot of
questions of what July 1st looks
like. So where is this very
specific hiring process right
now.
Are there resumes on the desk,
when did the interview begin,
what is that administrative
assistance look like on the
first. I expect, I myself
probably receive about 3 or 4
phone calls, 2 of them since
legislative session that are
horrific cases and I sadly have
to say I'm a legislator. I
suggest you call a lawyer. I
don't even know where to direct
them, and that is why this
office is so important is to to
have somewhere to
funnel those, those cases and
concerns.
On July 1, I expect that you
will be inundated with phone
calls. How does this position do
anything other than really be a
receptionist with what I expect
the, the volume of cases and
concerns that come to them. What
does it look like? Walk us
through day one and and what,
what you need and what we can
help with before the legislative
session begins next year.
Mr. Chair, Sunder, and just to
be clear, there still has to
this process of a selection
committee has to come together
immediately and make sure that
there are nominations to, to,
um, select and refer up to the
governor. And again, and at that
point there's got to be a, uh,
you know, the governor can
appoint somebody with advice and
consent of the Senate. So
there's still a little bit of
process that has to take place
before that individual can just
get started day one.
Just uh I just want to make sure
it's my understanding that
nominations have gone forward,
correct, though for the
selection committee.
Uh
Mr. Chair, Senator, I'm not
aware of the, the doings of the
selection committee. Apologies
for that. OK. I, I, I know at
least some of them have, um,
Well then if you can't help us
with that, we'll kind of get
back with our our parties and
those who can appoint those
positions. It is my
understanding that that those
names have gone up and so when
is there a deadline on when the
selection committee needs to be
in place.
Mr. Chair, Senator, no, it just
said that the committee had to
come together before September
1st of 2025. And, and Mr.
Chairman, are you then working
on any proposals or requests for
very specific to legislators as
we convene for the 30 day
session, um, that, that we can
help with? Is it just budget
requests that you're looking at
or will you get with this?
Position, Mr. Chair, uh,
Senator, yes, that's, that's our
understanding is that we'd like
to get together with the, the
child advocate and understand
what their potential budget
needs would be just to help them
and assist them with the budget
proposal. And so to the extent
we can do that with somebody who
is selected, that's what we
would, we try to endeavor. If
not, I mean, I, I'm sure we
would just try to have a good
understanding of what it would
cost to hire a basic staff of,
you know, 5 to 10 people and try
to make those budget proposals
up for them if no child advocate
is selected.
At that time. OK, thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I, I think that maybe
our conversation here today was
a little premature because not a
lot is done since session has
has uh convened, but I, I just
hope you know how appreciative
we are and that you were
supported and so, so is this
entire process. So I look
forward to having another
committee hearing before we meet
for session or at least seeing
you in some other committees,
um, as we, as we work our way
through this process and
actually get someone in that
position. Thank you gentlemen.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Sure, I'm looking at the
physical impact report, the last
updated, um, in regards to the
amendments that were made in
this bill.
And I'm just wondering if
there's any feedback, um, in
regards to the second page, um,
I'll read out the amendments.
Remove subpoena power from the
office of the Child Advocate and
removes language that would have
granted the office of the child
advocate. The authority to
determine if the children, youth
and families department.
Or an employee of CYFD violated
child's rights, operated with
disregard.
For the health and safety of the
child or repeatedly violated law
in first refer such instances to
the Attorney General. The
amendment removes requirements
that CYFD notify the Office of
the child advocate if a child in
the department's custody has
been at significant risk of a
physical injury.
And the amendment adds a section
that explicitly states New
Mexico Attorney General shall
develop implement procedures to
prevent the conflicts of
interest, and then further down,
um, the second to last
paragraph, the amendment removes
the governor's authority to
remove the child advocate.
In places this authority with
the Attorney General and removes
a section of the bill that would
have allowed the child advocate
to decide to to decide whether
to refer a complaint to another
agency or investigate. So,
To me, there's
We took care to try to
To not have.
Inconsistencies, but I'm
wondering if there is any in in
these amendments.
That there is any kind of
inconsistency that would um
inhibit the work of the Attorney
General because now the child
advocacy does not have the
subpoena power and now it goes
to you and I know that in this
amendment you're going to
develop and implement procedures
to prevent conflicts of
interest, but everything will be
referred to you when there needs
to be a subpoena, and then the
governor's office isn't CYFD
isn't required to even.
Support certain.
Incidents, um, can you respond
to that, Mr. Chair.
Sure, sure, Mr. Chair, uh
representative, and I can also
have, uh, see if my colleague
Sean Sullivan has anything to
add, but I think first, with
respect to the conflicts of
interest. Obviously, if there's
something that's referred to the
Mexico Department of Justice,
then we have an obligation to
make sure there's not a conflict
of interest, be it in the form
of granting special commissions,
using outside counsel, things
that we can do to make sure that
we don't have those inherent
conflicts where it seems like
we're working both sides of of
the coin. Um, I think as it
pertains to
the subpoena powers and and
things of that nature. We always
want to have the greatest
stability to.
Get into investigations or in
this case, the child advocate
would want to have the ability
to, to investigate these, these
things that are happening to
children and CYD custody.
Mm
I, I think our goal is just to
work within the bounds of what
the what the spirit of the law
is and try to make sure that we
can get to the bottom of these
investigations once they come to
our, our um agency and Yeah,
sure, Mr. Chair, uh,
representative, um, I won't
posit an opinion about the lack
of subpoena power. What I will
say is I think consistent with
what Senator Brantly said, my
sense and my hope is that come
July 1st and continuing
thereafter, um, that we'll get a
lot of individuals that are
reaching out, um,
With problems that they're
seeing on the ground, and of
course, uh we will use all of
the tools at our disposal, the
fact that there's no subpoena
power does not obviate the
ability for us to pursue legal
and equitable remedies that are
already at our disposal, and so
we'll certainly use those when
we feel, um, like, uh, children
are being endangered, and so,
uh, yes, that particular tool
was taken out, but it doesn't
remove the rest of the tools in
our toolbox and we'll continue
to use those to protect
children.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. So I, I,
my next question is that is um
So
Complaints can be made to this,
the, the, the child's advocacy,
um, office child abuse, um, but
can independent cases be brought
to you as well in your new role,
Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair Representative, uh,
there's nothing in HB 5, as I
understand it, that prevents a
citizen, for example, of only
using the Office of the Child
Advocate as a conduit. Um, there
have been historically, and I
suspect there will continue to
be complaints that are made
directly to the Office of the
Attorney General. We will review
those, uh, again, we will use
the tools at our disposal, um,
however, we will now obviously
utilize the Office of the Child
Advocate if in fact they refer
pursuant to this law. And so I
See this as a value added, um,
tool as opposed to a
substitution for the attorney.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. You have a
lot of work in front of you, um,
and it's like you're, you're
going to, uh, um.
delineate what your your roles
are, if they're, you know, any
conflicts, Mr. Chair, um, and
the last thing I just wanted to
say, um, again, sitting on house
appropriations, uh, is the
budget issue, um, and I'm sure
you're going to come to us with
the with your needs during the
interim, and I'll I'll look
forward to that, but I'd also be
interested in that $650,000 that
seems to be um available to you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
review.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for being here. It's
good to see you, Deputy. Um, we
worked together on, um, some
other issues in the past. Um, I
am really feeling, um, Mr.
Chairman, that
CYFD not being here cause
they're really the crux of what
the information that we need to
have. Um, I appreciate hearing
what the what the child
advocate's gonna do, and I'm
grateful to the, to the
legislators who move this
forward. My frustration with the
bill on the Senate floor was
that there hadn't been
collaboration, and this
legislature had systematically
over the course of 4 years, and
I had the numbers, I presented
the numbers, had systematically
unfunded.
The substitute care advisory
council, which is required to do
exactly what it says on page 9
of the bill that we have analyze
and monitor the development and
implementation of federal,
state, and local laws,
regulations and policies
relating to child and family
welfare and recommend changes
when appropriate.
They had gone from 450 or
$500,000 under the prior
administration down to $33,000
during this administration.
The remainder of the money had
been had been given to the
office of the um administrative
office of the courts. They
weren't there. They were at RLD.
And so every year the governor
had to veto that money for ALC
because it couldn't just be
transferred to RLD and RLD had
to try to struggle with $33,000
to have an oversight committee
looking at what was happening
and try to monitor those
policies. That was my
frustration.
Um, that said, I think it's
important that we recognize, and
I'm an attorney, not a data
person either, but I do
recognize that the Kevin S
settlement has a lot to do with
data.
And at this moment, um,
We don't even know that the
tracking and reporting system
isn't even up and running.
And it's been in the process for
years. Um, I think somewhere in
the neighborhood of 6 years.
And it's still not functional.
And so I'm hoping that, you
know, there'll be some, uh, look
at how do we move that forward.
Again, I know that's a CYFD
issue, but the reality is, is
that it's causing challenges for
those who collect data to
actually know exactly what's
happening so that we can report
what's working, what's not
working.
Um, I am curious about how
Medicaid and what we're gonna
have to do to try to supplement.
That's another committee, um,
we'll be looking at that, but I
am concerned about that.
I, it's already been said, but I
just want to point it out that I
find it interesting that we put
qualification in the law, and
the authorizing statute for CY.
And I think we need to look at
that. I mean, I think that's
something that we as a body
should be definitely looking at
that if we have an oversight
committee that has
qualifications in the area of
social work or, you know, the
the the secretary should be
patient. Um, we're in the, I
haven't heard where we're at on
the family's first plan. But
again, um, many states are, are
moving into their second round
of funding and approved yet.
And so I'm curious again,
because that's part of how we
ensure that and that families
are getting those wraparound
services that they really, we
have a responsibility to
provide.
So anyway, I, I, I do think that
having the conversation without
the child advocate is a little
bit premature. Um, I look
forward to future conversations
about that and um I'm hoping Mr.
did. And the last thing I will
say, I don't know if I'm at 4
minutes, but um, it did get
struck working in collaboration
with the relevant parties to
strengthen the department's
services for children and
families. I don't think it
needed to be said. I'm not sure
why it got struck, but obviously
the
Child advocate can work. And I
would just ask that they um they
really try to focus in on trying
to collaborate with the
substitute care advisory
council. Um, I tried in
judiciary to get them moved over
to the child advocate. I would
love to have that car. I have
two oversight entities, one at
the regulation and licensing
department, which really isn't.
It.
I say that broadly for that's
not the job. That's not the
water agency. Um, it's really
not a good place for the
substitute advisory council, um,
uh, I was able to on the Senate
floor, get the Senate Finance
chairman to commit to moving
$400,000. That was a win. That
was a big win. And so, um, I
will continue trying to advocate
for them, but I'm hoping that
the child
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um,
Well, I
For those of you who don't know
me, I, I was an administrator of
um and uh so I look at things a
little differently, um, in terms
of when we're managing a
department, and I think that
this bill, and I commend the um
sponsors.
For bringing this bill forward,
I think we've all heard enough
in the news.
And I think that um
There's a lot of blame to go
around, and I think we need to
turn that blame into an
opportunity because frankly, I
don't like to sit here and
listen to blame.
Um, for anybody. I mean, I think
that everybody probably has the
right intentions for our New
Mexico children, and that is
their safety.
Number one
And, and, and I appreciate the
attorneys bringing these cases
forward because that that sort
of bubbled everything to the
top, Mr. Chair, of what, you
know, a, a problem that is um
quite evident with um things
that have occurred, um, and
Things that are not pretty.
Um, things that, you know, are
very disturbing as a matter of
fact, um, but with that legal
Um
And, and no offense to any of
the attorneys in this room, but
um there are also, there's a lot
of documents on my desk here,
but I don't see.
Sort of an organizational.
Management plan for how we
attack those legal legalese.
Um, they have been had the have
floated to the surface.
And it's really disturbing to me
as a former manager that I don't
see, you know, I see sort of
There's a goal of safety for the
children. There's a goal of
getting those children into the
right environments.
What are the objectives? How do
we do that?
How do we move that forward, and
that's the piece that I see
that's missing here, Mr. Chair,
is that, um, you know, what are
those points of responsibility.
And how do we hire the right
people, and what are the right
people? What, what are the
qualifications of those people,
and how do we move that forward
and get rid of this blame game
that's going around, and leave
that at the door.
And let's get to business here,
guys, because that is also going
to affect the legislator, the
legislature in terms of as we
move forward and what is the
budget that's needed to correct,
and that's where I, Mr. Chair, I
really kind of a little bit
frustrated because
I would have expected.
You know, I think we adjourned
what March 15th or 17th or I
can't remember the exact date.
But we've already had, I mean,
we're May.
You know, we're in the middle of
May, that's 2 months, and I
don't see any of that here, and
I'm not saying toward you all.
Who is the responsible party for
bringing that forward to to this
committee and to the oversight
committee that's in this bill,
there's pieces missing here.
And it's, it's, um,
It's not in the best interest
for our um
You know
For our New Mexico, uh, for the
people of New Mexico and more
importantly for the the children
of New Mexico. I would also
expect Mr. Chair to see some
short term, um,
An immediate
Um, goals.
And those objectives.
For both short term and the
long term fixes. So, Mr. Chair,
I, I just feel like there's a
piece, a big piece that's
missing, and I would hope that
in the next meeting that we have
with all of you that
Some of those pieces are brought
forward. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, good morning.
Um,
As I'm taking on CYFD, it's,
it's a huge organization.
And I think uh Senator Maestta
said something that, that really
struck with me.
The accountability, are, are we
making sure that we're not
getting too big is CY CYFD
growing so much.
That
It's hard to manage from the
outside, and it's hard for them
to manage on the inside.
Because we have thrown money at
it, the numbers aren't coming
down.
And
Um, I appreciate this
legislation. I appreciate you
gentlemen. We
We've got to do something.
You know, there's, there's a
rule in San Juan County.
You make sure old people are
fed.
And you take care of children.
And those are two very, very
important things.
And so
I want to make sure that we're
taking care of children by
throwing money at it, sometimes
we just create another problem.
So, you know, as a committee, to
me it's very important, the
accountability to CYFD the
accountability to be able to
manage them.
It's not just a hiring process.
You know, we, we create a
committee for it.
That's OK, but we got to hold
that committee.
their feet to the fire and make
sure that they're doing their
job.
With the oversight with
everything else.
So, so that would just be my
comment.
Mr. Chair, I do, I do have a
question, Teresa. Um,
Because we, we have the Navajo
Nation right there.
It does the Navajo Nation get
treated
Do their children get treated
the same as say Berlio County or
Donana County or Santa Fe
County.
Is it, is it one process for all
children, even though they are
in the Navo nation.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Senator.
Um, there are, there's a
jurisdictional difference. So if
a child, if a native child is
domiciled within uh tribal
pueblo community then that.
For instance, the Navajo Nation
has jurisdiction over, um,
taking care of that child for
the children who are off the
reservation for the children who
live in Farmington, you know,
Bloomfield, um, um, those
children are then taken into
state custody, um.
When
You say, or when you ask, are
the children treated the same.
They are treated the same, um,
the Navajo Nation is involved in
that treatment under both the
Indian Child Welfare Act and the
state IFA, the Indian Family
Preservation Act that this
legislature passed, um, and so
they have those additional legal
protections. They are treated
the same, um, in the sense that
they have the similar challenges
of
Finding family placements,
finding community-based
services, um, making sure that
um they uh that they're
traditional and cultural needs
are met. I do have to say that
the office of tribal affairs
within CYFD has um developed
very well over the last several
years and has done a lot to meet
the needs of Native American
children, um, but the, the
systemic challenges that are
facing native children in CYFD.
are similar to the challenges
facing all children. Um, thank
you, Mr. Chair. I, I, I,
Senator, I hope I answered your
question. Yes, Mr. Chair, thank
you very much, and it does. And
I, I do want to let this
committee know how hard you work
and, and how much work you do,
do up there. I, I do want to
give you a, a pat on the back
for that. Um, just one other
question I had, um, and this is,
I think for Sean Sullivan,
right?
Um
If there's an incident, say at a
tribal house.
So if we have a tribal house off
of the reservation, and
something happens, can the
Department of Justice step in
with that?
Or is there other, do they have
to go through the Navajo Nation
first to the process become very
bureaucratic.
Mr. Chair, Senator, thank you
for that question, and, and I'll
actually, um, ask Teresa to
assist me with that. But what I
can say, um, is it depends in
part on whether or not the issue
is criminal or civil in nature
if it is criminal in nature, um,
the federal government does have
certain, um, right of first
refusal is, is the wrong way to
put it, but essentially they
have the authority to prosecute
some of those, those crimes on
Indian country, civil litigation
is a little bit of a different
ballgame. Um, certainly the
Attorney General has authority
in
that area, but we do, um, take
it seriously to work, uh, in
partnership with our tribal
partners, and so it's not one of
those situations, uh, where we
are setting forth an edict and
expecting them to follow it's
more of a collaboration. And so,
um, I would just make that
distinction between criminal
prosecution and civil
litigation,
um, anything else that Theresa
might have, I think would, would
help you further, Senator. Thank
you.
Without turning this into an
Indian law seminar, I believe
Mr. Sullivan summarized it well.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
That's all I had. Thank both all
of you for being here
I'm sorry.
I don't want the demotion.
Mr. Chair
um two things. One, I, I noticed
there was some back and forth
and maybe a little lack of
clarity in terms of the budget
issue associated with the office
and I know that we have Rachel
from LFC in the audience, I
don't know if it's appropriate,
Mr. Chair, obviously it's your
discretion. She could come up
and help us clarify that
particular point. I, I think
maybe.
Some of the members might
appreciate that.
Is, is that OK?
Uh, Rachel Garcia from LFC and
the CYFD analyst, um, there were
5 line item appropriations
related to the creation of the
office of the Child Advocate,
and this is probably why it's a
little bit complicated that
spanned two different fiscal
years. So, uh, for fiscal year
26, there were three line items.
One was the $1 million for
startup costs. The language of
that line item appropriation
mentioned things like IT.
and the the phone system that
was line item vetoed.
Uh, there were 650,000 to the
office of the Attorney General
for operational costs related to
the office of the Child Advocate
for FY 26. That was not vetoed,
so that is the the appropriation
remained I believe it's on page
255 of House Bill 2. then there
was $300,000 appropriated to
CYFD or personnel to be
positioned to respond to
inquiries from the office of the
Child Advocate. That was
in the FIR, not just this year,
but in prior fiscal years. CYFD
said essentially we will need
capacity to be able to respond.
That 300,000 for FY 26 was not
vetoed.
FY 27, this these were
appropriations in section 9 in
the grow. There was 650,000 for
the office of the Attorney
General for the Office of the
Child Advocate Operations. That
was the operating money that was
vetoed. So essentially the
operating money for the office
in FY 26 was not vetoed, but for
27 was vetoed and then there was
again 300,000 for CYFD for for
uh personnel to respond to
inquiries FY 27.
That money was not vetoed. So
essentially CYFD has operating
money in FY 27, though the
office of the Attorney General
does not.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. And just
one comment. I, it's a little
bit of a follow up, Mr. Chair,
from what representative Luhan
was mentioning, um, the floor
amendments in the Senate, I find
disappointing and I think people
need to be illuminated as to
what those were, um, at least a
few of them. So we've already
mentioned, uh, there's no
subpoena power anymore.
So it's gonna be a little more
difficult, maybe a lot more
difficult to pursue.
Issues without that um legal
authority.
Um, it also, uh, remove the
requirement that the CYFD notify
the Office of the Child
Advocate. If a child in the
department's custody has um been
at significant risk of physical
injury, and I know how much all
of us have been concerned about
the issues associated with um
children, um, being severely
injured, um, while in custody
and not well cared for.
That's been hobbled.
And, you know, there's other
authorities as well in terms of
the ability of the office um to
determine if CYFD has violated
certain laws and provisions
protective and and fail to meet
their responsibility and
protecting children in their um
custody and um control and I'm
hopeful that we can get back to
some of those provisions moving
forward, Mr. Chair. Um,
made a first step, but um I
think it's disappointing that
the bill um did not get passed
in a stronger format. Um, I
understand people don't like
oversight and so I totally
understand the governor. I don't
like it probably myself if I
were in their position. They,
they don't want to be called
out, uh, the governor's bill
that she was promoting was much
weaker.
For obvious reasons, um, and I
hope that the bill, House Bill 5
that did get passed, we might be
able to improve upon in the
future, we will eventually have
an uh a child advocate in place,
and we will have the ability,
Mr. Chair, to work with that
individual as they, um, you
know, adopt their role. So if
there are um is continued need
for strengthening the office,
um, which I anticipate there
will be that we are all come
together.
Um, both chambers, um, in a
fashion that is um intended to
relate to really add some meat
to the statute. So I just wanna
um thank you for the opportunity
to address that point, Mr.
Chair.
You
I, yep, we've got time for 4
more minutes. You, you go.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I'm
really glad that this bill
passed and also that it's not
precluding anyone from working
with any other departments or
agencies, um, but given what
Rachel, um, just let us know
from the LFC about the financial
piece.
I wanted to ask your opinion,
knowing that we haven't hired uh
the person who will be in charge
of running this office. Um, do
you believe that it's enough to
stand up this program, and I
asked this because um I know as
we were even just trying to get
money to set up the sexual
assault hotline in particular
that in and of itself was about
250K and so uh I'm thinking
about that and all of the
additional responsibilities. Um,
do we believe that it's enough?
to set up this office.
Mr. Chair Representative, um,
you know, 650,000 I think is
enough to get the child advocate
office up and running, right?
But I think, um, in light of the
information about fiscal year
2027, there is going to be a
need to work closely with the
office of the Child Advocate and
make sure that they have the
right budget, you know, it
depends on how many staff
members that person decides they
need, maybe high level staff
members, investigators,
paralegals, but I, I would
expect that.
that we can sit, uh, with the
child advocate and make sure
they have what they need and so
there'll be a need to come,
definitely come back before, um,
the legislature to get money for
that purpose, if that makes
sense. Thank you and thank you,
Mr. Chair. I ask this
specifically because as we're
starting something new, I want
to be sure that we're not
underfunding it, um, the reason
being, I think we often go into
things and we underfund and then
we expect really amazing
results. And so I don't want us
to be in a
situation where we're setting a
new office up for failure. So
thank you, Mr. Chair.
All right. Uh, thank you
committee members. I have some
last comments are mostly
directed to my colleagues. Uh,
there was a comment made earlier
that this hearing on this topic
may be premature, and let me,
uh, suggest to you all, there's
a reason I put it up as the
first item up.
Um, on our interim work because
I, I disagree with that, that we
could never be premature on this
topic, uh, since our session, we
lost a 14 year old to suicide in
our state custody. Um, I'm well
informed, uh, but do not, I
cannot go into detail that we
have another suicide of a young
woman who was pregnant at the
time in our state custody. We,
we can't continue to, to hear
these stories without, at least
in my mind, making them our
greatest priority on this I'll
agree with the governor's
executive.
Me, she quotes in the first
paragraph, ensuring the safety
and well-being of New Mexico's
children is one of our most
sacred responsibilities. I can't
think of a more sacred
responsibility.
Then ensuring the safety and
well-being of our children,
particularly when we're taking
custody of them ourselves.
Um, and, and so I think it is
our most sacred responsibility.
I, I put this on the first item
up and I will continue to do so.
I won't let it go. Some of this
is because of um, I described it
earlier as Catholic guilt, um,
uh, for years, uh, efforts to
try and create oversight and
ombudsman and so forth have come
to the legislature and I've
stalled those efforts in the
role that I could play because
it didn't make any sense to me
to take what the governor
describes as a dysfunctional
agency and to create more
government to tell us how
dysfunctional it is.
rather than committing the
resources and time and energy to
fixing the agency rather than
creating another layer of
government, never made any sense
to me and I, it still really
doesn't to me, but after years
of not seeing that as a viable
solution, I finally relented
this uh last year and, and got
on board with this effort
because we needed to do
something.
Uh, for the newer members and
others, Kevin S has been in
litigation for 20 years. It's a
disappointment to me with all
respect to the people that are
working hard at it because we,
we do, we do a a lawsuit and
then we settle it by coming to
an agreement that we're going to
have co-neutrals national
experts come in and evaluate,
and we did that. And then, uh,
their report and I really ask
members of the committee to read
that report of the contrals, um,
because the con neutrals then
give us a report that we're
failing worse than ever, um,
we're not making any progress.
We're going backwards.
And so then the the remedy under
the Ketun is to go to an
arbitrator, so we have, would
you say 3 weeks of arbitration
before probably one of the most
respected lawyers in the state,
Chuck Pfeiffer, uh, to hear a
testimony and and read his
report, uh, and it's damning,
uh, both his report and his
assessment and the corals is
damning, we're getting worse and
worse all the time.
Um, and, and so I, I not really
uh encouraged that Kevin S is
going to be the ultimate
solution because we create
creating process, we're creating
process and process co-neutrals
and arbitrators, and we're not.
Saving lives. We have children
who are dying on, on our, on our
watch.
Um, and so, um, I, I wish that I
knew the young man who killed
himself. I wish I knew his name.
But I, I don't, and, and I wish
I knew something about him, and
I don't, and I don't think I can
learn about that because we
protect confidentiality for
reasons that that makes sense to
me, but I don't think I can do
my job well without knowing what
his name is.
Our knowing his story or knowing
how many times CYFD was called
and had the opportunity to
intervene and didn't or where we
broke down.
Um, I've, I've proposed and
tried to pass subpoena authority
to the legislature, uh, it
failed, um, because I think we
don't want accountability, we
don't want responsibility. So if
we can't, if we don't know this
young man's name and we don't
know how many times CYFD may
have failed him or this young
woman, uh, then we're not
responsible, we're not
accountable, and I, I think
that's a, that's a deplorable.
Uh, the executive message refers
and takes some um some criticism
of the Attorney General, uh,
says the Attorney General
weaponized the Attorney general,
um, it was not designed to
protect children lobbied for
legal authority to curry favor
with the legislature offering to
sue overworked and underpaid
employees. I just want to take
this opportunity to tell all of
you, I was never lobbied by the
Attorney General in connection
with this bill. The Attorney
general never came to me as
chair of the judiciary and said,
I want this authority, I want to
be able to sue, I want to be.
Authority. Never once did the
Attorney general come and say, I
want this, and so that any
notion that the governor or
anyone has, this was initiative
of the attorney General is just
as far as my role was concerned
was completely wrong. And I, and
I appreciate the Attorney
general essentially taking a
thankless, perhaps job that
everyone else before him has
failed in, um, and, um, so I
appreciate that. I think it's
unfair to, to be critical of uh
of his office or any of you all
who are willing to do something
more. I appreciate that.
Um, the, uh,
I agree with my colleague, uh
Representative Chandler. I think
the Senate's uh work on the
floor weakened the oversight,
um, and, and I think we all know
why and how that happened and um
I, I think that's regrettable as
well too, in the, in the
governor's state of the state,
she, she said that the COFFD was
underfunded, um, and that puts
the responsibility on us as the
legislature. Uh, again, I think
we're gonna have to learn more
about that, particularly those
of you with background in
finance to know why we, why are
we hearing uh from the executive
that the
is underfunding the needs of
CYFD and then we're hearing
about vetoes of funding when we
do make it, um, something's not
connecting for me well here too,
um, and so I, um, I, I have in
the past,
Uh, year been very critical of
the current um leadership at
CYFD, the, the characterization
that that there's some gleeful
condemnation, uh, on my part or
anyone else, or it's an insult
to social workers. I, I reject
that, um, I, I certainly don't
mean any disrespect, but I can
understand those who feel that
any criticism or any hearings we
have here are going to make
things worse. I understand that.
And, and that diminishes morale,
and I, I want to take the
opportunity to commend the
secretary who has come to these
meetings before, um, and
sometimes been courageous and
stood in the, in the uh firing
line. So I think we need to
recognize that she was not
invited today, not to exclude
her, and I will look for any
opportunity I can to involve her
in a constructive dialogue, but
she's been courageous about
coming before and I've, I've
pointedly said that I think
she's failing in her job
responsibilities and there's no
other way to read a code
neutrals report.
Uh, or the, um, facilitators,
the arbitrators report and not
see that, that the leadership
right now is failing, uh,
miserably at E CYFD. So I, I,
uh, I, I want to make sure that
I, I give her that recognition,
but there's no glee in, in
reading a story about a 14 year
old who kills himself, um, on
our watch.
Uh, or maybe learning about
others, and we know they're
sleeping under desks today, we
know they're being abused. And,
and when we, I hope we'll
recognize one thing. If we had
more data and we had subpoena
authority, and we really wanted
to embrace our authority. We
would know a couple of things
which I, I'm told anecdotally,
so many of these children that
are in our custody and care when
they're not treated well and
when they're not cared for, they
become criminals.
Um, and they're exposed to the
criminal element early on. And
so we want to really talk about
crime and tackling crime, we
ought to recognize we're, we're
perpetrating some of that
ourselves. We're, we're
producing that by putting
children in these environments,
um, and, and we ought to have
that data. We have to know what
that is. Um, but I, um, I
certainly hope the committee
understands that I, I, I made
this the first issue for a
reason, and I'm not gonna let
go.
Um, and, and I'm gonna hold onto
this every chance I get,
this center because I agree with
the governor, this is our most
important sacred responsibility,
so.
Committee members, thank you for
allowing me to comment and if
you have ideas and suggestions,
let's use this interim to solve,
uh, some of these problems.
Thank you.
Thank you, Presentative, uh,
presenters, all of you and Mr.
Chairman, if I may just before
we break, um, this has been
publicly reported, but I think
it's important for this
committee to know. Jayden Garcia
was that young man's name, um, I
just wanted to share with the
committee that from what we've
heard, he's a very kind, he's
very kind, sensitive young man
who loved to wear basketball
shorts, um, and he did take his
life far too soon and so we're
going to continue to fight for
that young man, but Jayden
Garcia is his name, Mr. Chair.
Thank you.
All right. Uh, thank you all for
the presentation.
Jayden's case and his story
again a reminder for me to make
this a priority for us. Um, the,
uh, the second item for work,
uh, we've got an hour and we're
on schedule. Uh, thank you all
for staying within the time
limitations. Uh, there was a
recent story in the press about
the rape, uh, kit backlog about
some individuals who work with
that issue to be here today with
us to present with us the
efforts they're making to try
and make up.
Ground with the um with the rape
kit backlog to explain that
history. My understanding is
that we've put a great deal of
effort in appropriation into lab
work and others to try and make
some progress here and so I'd
like to get an idea that we're
getting somewhere, so.
Uh, thank you all for being here
and we've got your names in a
particular order on the agenda.
Um, let's see.
Mhm
OK. All right.
Yeah
Uh, let's, let's start with um
from uh advice. Miss Babcock,
let's start with you and uh talk
a little bit about the role of
the forensic lab, and then we'll
come to the specific uh law
enforcement officers. Do we have
You step back here, no?
Oh, OK, I'm looking around.
Yes.
All right. Do you have anybody
from the forensic lab here?
No. All right, then let's just
go back to our agenda. We've got
uh representatives of the 2nd
district we've got represented
the the 1st district.
And then we have uh uh the
director for the solace sexual
assault. So let's do it in that
order. Let's hear from the 2nd
district first of all, you all
will take 5 or 10 minutes to
tell us what you're doing to
make up the backlog. Thank you.
Oh, I apologize. It's my first
time here. Um, I do have a
handout for the, for the
committee that sort of outlines
some of the, um, uh, basics of
the, the, the, the, I'm gonna
call it the, the old backlog
cause I believe that there are,
in effect, two different
backlogs that we may be dealing
with now. Um, the old backlog
was the um the backlog cases of
untested, uh, sexual assault
kids that were identified in the
audit of 2016 and um I believe
that was
The new laws that are in place,
there may be an on an ongoing
backlog of of new cases.
Um, so I'll just be addressing
you for just a moment, please?
I'm, I'm sorry to take you off
your presentation, but we have
some new members and we have
some who are maybe not as
familiar with the issue, you
just tell us what the rape kit
is, with the with the backlog
is, why, why do we have it?
What, what is the purpose of the
rape kit? Absolutely. uh, thank
you very much, uh, cheers Fante,
um, the, the, uh, um, it was
through, through a state audit,
um, there was, uh, um, in 2000
that was completed in 2016,
there was a
identified, uh, sexual assault
kits that are basically, um, a
part of, um, when someone is,
uh, sexually assaulted, they
would go into a hospital, um,
and then once the sexual assault
nurse examiners became a group
they um, they would, they would
do the, um, the exact kits, um,
uh, they would, they would be in
charge of collecting the, the
kits of those investigations,
um, they would do swabs of the
um various areas that they
believe that there may be.
evidence to collect while
delivering medical treatment as
well. Um, those kids had
remained and, and, and there are
a significant number of kids in
Burley County and across the
state that we're not, they were
never tested, so they were
identified as untested kits.
Um, and, and that's what what
refer to in terms of a sexual
assault care, the rape kit
backlog, and um there were
approximately, um there were
over 4000 kids in almost 5000
kids that would be identified in
Bernelou County that were not
tested, um.
Prior to 2016 and through the
work of, um, the law enforcement
agencies in the city, um, there
were, uh, there was an
initiative to have them all
tested. And so they were
predominantly outsourced to
different labs, um, uh, uh, two
labs in particular, Soren't sent
out of Utah and Bodie out of um
Virginia that assisted us in, in
making sure all those kits were
tested, and then those, those
results of the kids of the tests
were then sent back to
um, the local lab, which is
peerheaded by APD's lab and um
upload it into the, the CODIS,
the state and federal databases
to see if there was any
identification of the offenders
um that were previously
unidentified. And so once that,
once that happened, then cases
were then referred to our office
for um possible prosecution.
Is that, does that explain what
you're
Want me to Santes.
Um
You're taking the data collected
from a rape victim and running
against a database that's kept
for DNA, is that right? Correct,
correct. Try to solve the crime.
Exactly, that that that that is
what we what we intend to do and
what we hope to do, um, there
has been significant
advancements in DNA testing that
is also uh assisted us that is
available only through outsource
testing outsource laboratories
that's currently not um in use
in local laboratories,
unfortunately, um, but, uh, as
part of what I think we should
be doing is maybe looking at um
Assisting uh the local
laboratories and advancing their
techniques, so we can identify
more current and old and older
cases that um have unidentified
offenders.
Um, when, when, when the, when
the original kits were
identified, we opened
approximately 4200 kits in the
district attorney's office.
Um, for, uh, to, for our office
to investigate and screen for
viability. Um, I included a
graph that sort of gives some
proportionality of of the reason
that kits have been closed.
Um, or cases have been closed, I
should say, um,
And the majority of those are
because the statute of
limitation issues because they
were old, the kids dated back
into the um into the 80s and we
and and some even into the 70s,
where the statue of mutation no
longer um and then also we have
a uh um
Trying to find the blue, um, you
know, certain, certain issues
of, of evidence that was either
lost or or not uh collected at
the time that prohibited us from
also and some of the kids there
was not evidence on them for us
to to use our offender.
We, we have closed a significant
number of those through the
pre-screening process and
through the advanced screening
process in our office.
We were, we were able to, um, to
date, um charge 82 individual
cases that have resulted in 52
convictions. Um, there were 5
acquittals and 1 dismissal, and
there's the remaining 24 cases
are still pending in the system.
We have about 149 cases that are
still left to be screened for
viability.
The
We are a small unit in our
office, we consist of two
special agents that are
certified law enforcement
officers, two victim advocates
to assist, um, the victims in
terms of going through the
process and offer resources,
para illegals, and then one
other staff attorney myself,
plus two contract attorneys that
work extensively with their
office in terms of the screening
and also active litigation
cases.
Um, since, uh, January, we were
able to um
Uh, in terms of successes, uh,
convict 23 separate individuals,
um, and, um, those were 33 cases
that were able to be solved or
the individuals serial rapists,
what we found through the
through the audit and through
our investigations is that we
there were significant number of
of serial offenders that were
not identified, um, but we were
able to um
Go forward and bring some sense
of justice to to those cases as
well. Um.
And a lot of that is because of
the, the advancements in DNA
testing and um that are
available um through other labs,
not in the state, um, those,
those, I would, I like to focus
on two of those in terms of
probabilistic genotyping, and
what's called forensic
investigative genetic genealogy,
probilistic genotyping is, um,
it's a basically a mathematical
computer algorithm that helps
analyze um
Complex mixtures, like if you
have more than one contributor
to a to a specific
Um
Sample of DNA that, that has
very small amounts of a
potential offender. And this,
uh, these programs that are out
there, the, the FBI has been
using it since 2015. They use a
program called Star Mix, which
uh, um, and there's other out
there like bulletproof.
Which is now called Century
Trulio. There's many programs
out there that can assist in
analyze these small amounts of
DNA data, but also comparing it
to the potential known offender
to see if there is a, see if
there is a match. Um, I, I want
to highlight two cases that we
had and actually
Both of them were, were, um, uh,
where I tried with co-counsel
this month, um, that we're, uh,
some of the first cases I think
in New Mexico that have gone to
trial using probity genotyping.
One is, is a Darryl Castillo,
he's the third person listed to
progress and success on the the
handout, um, he had sexually
assaulted a 17 year old girl.
Um, he was identified at that
time cause it was her, um, it
was, uh,
Um,
The, the victim was his
girlfriend's was his the
boyfriend of uh
I'm not saying that right, but I
think you understand what I'm
saying. He was the boyfriend of
her mother. And um through
traditional DNA testing, they
were only able to, in terms of
corroborate her, her testimony,
able to give us a 1 in 80
chance, um, of that it's either
him or uh a male relative of
his, but through probabilistic
genotype and they were able to
give a much stronger
identification and became um one
in 140 million chance. Um,
another case, um, that we tried
after that this month was a 200.
case of a 53 year old old woman,
and we lost uh through the
appellate courts, the sexual
assault kits. So all we had were
equivalent of 5 cells.
Um, of, of DNA that had 3
different individuals mixed in,
um, through probably genotyping.
They're able to go from an
inconclusive result to 1 in 30.4
billion chance it is somebody
else. And um uh we're able to
get his identification because
she could not identify him, and
it was just a spot, a little
tiny cutting from her jeans, um,
the inner thigh. Unfortunately
we were able to get convictions
in both of those cases.
The, the um, the newer
technology is growing into this
identification of people that
were not in the system, that
you're not going to get a CODIS
hit from, and that's forensic
investigative genealog genetic
genealogy.
And in those um
What that does is it allows, if
there's significant enough
enough DNA of a potential
perpetrator, they can research
through um
In a databases that are public.
It's a very small amount. It's
not ancestry in me, it is not
23ane, it's not those
commercials sites, if they were
able to access those, they could
probably solve um 99.9% of the
case is what I've been told by
our experts that we've worked
with. Um, but they, but through
the just the the public
databases they were able to
build family trees to say, it is
either possibly him or a
brother.
Um, and, and the case of Ralph
Martinez, um, and Edward Duran,
that is exactly what they did.
Ralph Martinez was an APS bus
driver, and with no criminal
history, um, and we connected
into 4 different sexual assaults
from '88 to 92, um, and he had,
um, because of the forensic
investigative genealogy.
And um and he currently is
serving his sentence of 54
years, um, uh, Edward Duran is
another one that we connected
through this mythology and um
After the first week of trial,
he entered a guilty plea. We
connected in the form for up to
8 home invasion rates.
Um, and he was sentenced, he was
sentenced to a significant
amount of time, 27 years, but he
passed away earlier this year.
Um but the the reason I bring
these cases up is because I
think that um it's important
that um as a state, we invest in
in these newer technologies, so
it will significantly help us.
Um, in terms of not only cost,
because currently right now, um,
my unit is almost entirely
funded in the the the uh
laboratory testing is entirely
funded by federal grants.
And as we know that um uh grant
money, uh, you know, from can
can change from year to year,
administration to
administration. And so I think
that if we invest in those
technologies here locally, it
would be cost effective,
ultimately, although the initial
investment is significant would
be significant because it
inquires um 18 months to 2 years
of validation process to, to get
to these points, um, where you
can utilize this and the testing
for the testing and training of,
of laboratory technicians and
also we need, I think we need
additional.
People that are gonna go.
Um, I also think that it would
be beneficial for the state to
do a, a 10 year anniversary
audit, as we're coming up on the
10 year anniversary to see
where, where are we going, and
what, where, what have we what
have we accomplished and what
still needs to be done, um.
And, and I think that could be
significant to find out what um
What other counties as well as
how um Burley County has been
dealing with with their level of
the backlog.
Um, and, uh, in terms of our own
work, we're going to be going
back through approximately 1000
cases once we get through the
last 149 um to re-review them
for viability with some of these
newer techniques to see what we
can go forward with. Um, I, I
appreciate the time. I, I think
that this is very significant
and important issue to be
addressing, um, to, um, with,
with this committee as well as
within the state, um, cause he's
a lot of these, um,
The survivors of these, these,
these very traumatic experiences
deserve the justice that I, I
think they've waited for. Thank
you. OK, who else on the panel
who's up next.
Good morning, Madam Chairwoman,
members of the committee, uh,
I'm Haley Murphy. I'm a resident
of Santa Fe. I serve as the
deputy district attorney over
the Special Victims Unit. Um, I
wanted to begin by talking about
I think it kind of going off
with Mr. Jacks would be more
considered a new backlog. Here
in Santa Fe, we don't have the
historical problem of a huge
backlog of untested kits, uh,
the last data I received is that
there's about 70 untested kits
that uh local law enforcement is
submitting kind of in packages
monthly as allowed by the
Department of Public Safety.
Department of Public Safety does
all of our crime lab testing.
Um, Albuquerque has a standalone
crime lopses, um.
So the issue that we're we're
seeing here in Santa Fe, Rio
Riva, Los Alamos County is the
first judicial district is kind
of a a new backlog or testing
delays.
In August of 2023, August 23rd,
a 16 year old female made a
report of sexual assault by an
adult, uh, all of our justice
partners did their part, school
officials helped report, law
enforcement responded to the
school, uh, miss, uh.
Maria Jose's team at Solace
conducted forensic interviews.
The child underwent a sexual
assault examination. As I said,
that was in August of 2023. The
kit was submitted to the
Department of Public Safety.
that week.
Today,
636 days now well into a case 20
months into a case, and the
biggest outstanding issue is the
lack of scientific testing,
which is all of you know, can be
some of the most crucial
information to corroborate a
victim's report.
Um
So that's, that's where we are.
We are stuck in a position of
myself, the prosecutor on the
case, having to take state's
continuances, an individual who
is, um, you know, accused and
presumed innocent is under
conditions of release while he's
awaiting his day in court as
well. Um, and we are in a
holding pattern, um, at the
mercy of an, of an overwhelmed
crime lab. So,
For our perspective, the bigger
issue for the first judicial
district is, is the fact that we
don't have, thankfully, the
historical backlog, we have such
a delay in testing, um, given
that they are understaffed at
the moment and it's going to be
many, many more months before
the the staff um is able to be
trained up, um, the newer
individuals that they've hired.
This is compounded by the fact
that we are looking um at an
incoming case management order.
Some of you may be familiar with
the one that was implemented in
uh Bernalillo County, Ms.
Brandenburg Cope from the First
Judicial District in I lived
through the implementation of
that order. Um, it still remains
in place and it puts very tight
timelines on when cases have to
be brought to trial.
Even under the most
Expansive track 3 assignment
when that case management order
does come to Santa Fe, we would
be well outside the time to
bring this case to trial, much
less to have produced any
scientific evidence. So what
that means is this unfunded rule
coming from the New Mexico
Supreme Court is going to result
in many, many dismissals has
very few limited opportunities
for extension of deadlines. So I
think the primary concern from
the first judicial district
attorney's office and many of my
justice partners is that these
long delays in
testing will absolutely result
in a compromise to our
community's safety, individuals
will be let out of custody. Cass
will be dismissed, evidence will
be suppressed. Believe in.
January of 202, who's up next?
We change, we change the order a
little bit, uh, Mr. Chair,
members of the committee, thank
you so much for allowing me to
share information with you
today.
Um, I also sit in front of you
as a representative of the first
judicial district.
And the team of service
providers, I've been in my
position as the executive
director, we saw the sexual
assault services, the former
rape crisis center in Santa Fe
for the last 53 years. Um, I've
been holding my position as an
administrator for 14 years in
previously to that, I was also a
service provider, an advocate,
that's like your navigator, your
case manager for survivors. And
also a forensic interviewer,
which is the professional that
gets the details of a disclos
r
From children in youth, so they
don't have to be so um in touch
with law enforcement, with whom
we work really well for adult
cases.
My intention is to give you
information that might expand in
your understanding of how far we
have come.
And the fact that the road from
there to where we need to be is
absolutely attainable.
Especially we get your support.
Which we have had through the
years in many ways, and I'll
start there to thank you for
your service and thank you every
time, year after year that you
have supported funding for
sexual assault survivors.
And those of us serving them.
I thank you particularly for
last year's funding this last
legislature. It was a one-time
funding only, so now my first
ask of 3 today is going to be
that you do everything in your
power to make it recurrent,
because as you see what we do is
essential.
To the well-being of New
Mexicans survivors of sexual
assault.
For the last 25 years,
everything that we do here in
this table, uh, is a, is a small
sale of representation of that,
we do absolutely everything on a
multidisciplinary way.
What that means is that 11
entities come together very
intimately.
Working hand on hand.
For survivors and with
survivors.
Those 11 entities are all the
law enforcement departments
locally. The PD, the sheriff's
office, state police, FBI, BIA.
Are these to attorney's office.
CYFD
Medical providers, forensic
pediatric forensics and also
sexual assault nurse examiners.
Mental health providers,
advocates, the navigators, case
managers, and forensic
interviewers.
We meet every month, we kiss
stuff every month, we review
cases every month, we do
trainings together and
everything we do is supported in
following national standards. If
you were to visit one of these
other multidisciplinary teams
around the nation, you will be
seeing a witnesses, witnessing
the same kind of work. We're
extremely proud of working that
way.
I'll zoom in a little bit on the
sexual assaul nurse examiner's
unit, since that is the one that
is mostly associated with.
The item of your agenda this
afternoon.
It is a very difficult program
to come around.
We're lucky to have one in Santa
Fe standing for 30 years.
The reasons why there are
difficult to come around is
because they're incredibly
expensive.
Typically only hospitals can
afford them.
The one here in the first
judicial, is a program of Saint
Vincent's uh Chriss Regional
Medical Center.
And as of right now, we evolved.
To not only have a unit at the
hospital, but also add solace.
It requires professionals that
have to go through rigorous.
National constant trainings.
They're highly credential.
The reason is because you see
how specialized the work they do
is.
We have a body of nurses in our
first judicial district, and
with them we work.
And their work is done at 3
levels.
You only are hearing today a lot
more about the rape kit, but
what they do is way more
expensive.
Take care for the body of the
survivor number one.
They make sure that they can
address anything, including but
not limited to the possibility
of them being exposed to in any
other type of
I'll say injury that is not
visible to the eye.
Because they condition that
really.
6 crimes, navigate constantly is
that the hard evidence is not is
not always the one that the eye
can see.
But the injury is there. Going
to the hard evidence, they
collect DNA as it's being uh
presented already, but they also
uh do collect all the types of
evidence, like images.
Why it's so expensive is because
they use equipment, instruments
that cost a lot of money. The
culposcope is the one key
instrument is like a.
huge potent microscope
associated or attached to a
digital camera. It will take
images that
No bare eye can actually ever
grasp, and the train I educated
eye of the nurse will be able to
render.
As for opinion, if there was an
assault.
As the origin of what they see
in those images.
And they also, so they care for
the body, they collect evidence,
but they also are.
Medical experts that testify in
court.
So that at that level they
assist the investigation and
prosecution as well. Let me tell
you, I think the world of all of
my peers.
And I think I will not be saying
too much uh.
To say that they are our heroes.
They totally are heroes. What
they see other eyes don't, and
they have to live with that.
Imagine.
The devastating effects.
of having anything related to
delays, much more dismissals.
With what they all go through.
The survivors that had to amount
whatever it takes in life to
come forward. Understanding as
they do that sometimes they're
not gonna have hard evidence.
Why? Because the majority of the
sexual assault that happens in
New Mexico, Indonesia, doesn't
leave that kind of. It is an
assault of coercion and
intimidation and lack of consent
and that typically may not live.
A hard evidence piece, but yes,
it leaves an injury, a
relational injury that
translates to just about
everything in life.
So
That much is what they care for.
We all together come together to
support survivors that way. I
want to now zoom out for a
couple of minutes to tell you
that as all of that is
incredibly important.
And we continue.
Working as a team in the New
Mexico coalition of sexual
assault programs works with
Department of Public Safety to
make sure that everything that
entered the bill of rights due
to what happened 10 years ago
continues to be absurd. We all
are together in that effort, and
they lead us service providers.
It's also important to know that
The best thing we can do for our
communities to be their less and
less and less.
Which being
More and more and more in the
educational aspect of our work
and the prevention aspect of our
work.
Because the majority of the
violence that happens very sadly
for me to share with you,
happens against children in use.
They are the most overt targeted
members of our community.
And we have robust programs
operating now for more than 10
years in New Mexico, in
different districts like in our
own.
Doing prevention work. Miss
Cadiz, if we could wind up your
piece.
Thank you. Last, thank you so
much. Um, I would like to also
compel you to have a
presentation on other recourses
of justice for survivals, not
just criminal because only less
than 20% of survivors will seek
criminal legal action, civil
action is available to them. I
asked for you to have a
presentation from experts that
will speak in regards to our
efforts to um
Modify the statute of
limitations for child abuse.
Thank you so much. Thank you,
Chief.
Uh, good afternoon, vice chair,
uh, Mr. Chair and members of the
committee, uh, first of all,
thank you for the invitation to
come and speak about this, um,
concerning topic, and, um,
again, I'm just very much
awestruck being able to have my
colleagues.
Sitting shoulder to shoulder
with me and just hearing about
the great work that they do
because it is amazing. And um I
would have liked to have seen um
a represent for the lab here.
Um, I don't like to speak for
another organization, but, um,
what I will say is they have
been a great partner for us at
the Sanpey police department.
Um, the challenges that they do
have is staffing and resources,
and that's clear to us with the
delays that we see when we
submit evidence to the lab, but,
um, again, trying to follow
Maria Jose's very difficult to
follow, but the vast
the majority of our victims that
we see that our sexual assault
survivors are often our young
children and teens who know who
the perpetrator is. And it's not
just folks that are from our
community, it's also folks that
are here that are also afraid of
being deported.
And we see that it takes a lot
of courage for them to come
forward just to make the report
to police or tell someone that
something awful happened to
them. It, it takes a lot of
courage. It really does. And we
oftentimes get U visa requests
for these um individuals that
are survivors, asking for their
assistance as we try to bring
justice and speaking to that
justice, um,
The whole system needs to work
for them to achieve that. Um,
I know what the prosecutors and
the victim advocates, they do a
wonderful job supporting these
folks when they do have to
testify before court before the
person that perpetrated that
crime, and it takes a lot and
there's even private
organizations that'll fill the
seats in that courtroom to put
their support behind them. Um,
so for me, I think the biggest
thing is
There are things that we could
have done better in the past.
Those are being addressed. Um,
the support that we've received
from the legislature in this
body, those are paying off in
dividends. And what I would
offer to you is this, one thing
that I see is from a law
enforcement standpoint, we
always think he let's step up
law enforcement. But with that,
there needs to be support
systems for law enforcement and,
and for us, we utilize funding
that's made available by um the
folks at the legislature to sap
up our crime scene unit and
we've had a lot of great
response from that. We had
4 additional positions that were
offered, and they were filled
instantly. Um, I think if we use
the same approach with the labs,
because there's a great deal of
interest in forensic science.
Um, we recently just, um, hosted
a, uh, middle school student who
was a mentor and the lab
participated in that as well.
There's a lot of interest in
that field of work, and they see
that there's a role they can
play in bringing justice to
keeping folks safe. So if
there's any way we could find a
roadmap for that, whether it's
an internship or funding to help
people achieve that. I know the
schools do.
programs with nursing programs
in the schools. That is one
opportunity I think that we
should probably look at to see
if it is an opportunity for us
to make some headway in that
direction. But, um, I, again,
I'm just awestruck by all the
work that everyone does here,
the concerns about the case
management order is also
concerning the press as well,
and we're trying to make sure we
have things in place and we're
going to remain dedicated to
bringing justice to victims of
any crime that occurs within our
community and help others to
also bring justice to those in
their community. Thank you.
Um,
Miss Brandenburg Cope.
Thank you. There, Madam Vice
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is Savanna Brandenburg,
Coke. I am a deputy district
attorney in the 2nd judicial
district, I oversee our special
victims unit. So a little
different than the backlog we
have as Miss Murphy said, a new,
new backlog, um, which I would
say is
In the last couple of years.
I'll kind of wrap things up
since most of you heard kind of
some of the issues, but I see is
We do have a CMO. Our deadlines
are very, very strict, and then
we've had several cases
dismissed for not having
scientific evidence or victims
not ready to do a pre-trial
interview, so many different
things, but with scientific
evidence when we don't have
labs um meeting these deadlines
or even under the law when
they're supposed to test.
The kids, it devastates our
cases, um, and essentially then
puts us in a backlog.
There's many times where we
don't move forward on a case
until we have results because we
don't want our cases to get
dismissed.
And because of that, then cases
are sitting 345 years until that
testing is done. So it, it can
impact the case by case is
getting dismissed or cases
waiting in the backlog in in
fear of a statute of limitations
running. So these highly impact
these types of cases and
sometimes we have to make the
decision to go without
scientific evidence or other
types of evidence.
To make sure the community is
safe and keep these people, um,
either in custody or condition
to release or making sure
victims are also heard, um, in
the system, which also
devastates.
how we present cases as well.
Thank you.
Thank you, um, I have two names
on the list so far. Anyone else
would, OK.
Uh,
hold on. Who else? and I.
All right. Well, OK.
Holy cow
All right.
I got Martini.
All right, so, um, we have about
a half an hour and.
I would recommend that we try to
keep our um input to about 3
minutes each.
Representative Ree.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you guys. Um, first, I, I love
the, the whole committee that
you guys have established years
ago when that started, I
actually sat on that for a
little while, and so impressive
all the different people, and
I'll also say,
Reiterate your sexual assault
nurse, um, those nurses are
awesome. They, they make your
cases. I don't think people also
realize they do the offender
kits. It's uh they they have a
very big job, so, um, kudos to
them for sure. Um, I had a
couple of questions on the, the
rape cases, so for example, um,
Madam Chair and maybe one of you
guys can answer this if if
there's a plea, um, as often
there is a, you know, usually
the defenses are, it's
consensual or.
happen, you know, we all know
that, um, but let's say there's
a plea and the, and the rape kit
has been taken, um, what happens
to that rape kit? Is it still
tested? Um, so that would be my
first question.
Madam Chair Representative
Reeve, I know for our department
we're sending it, um, whether
there's a plea or not, um, based
on the time span that we have,
we have 30 days from the time
that the kid is collected to
submit it to the forensic
laboratory for analysis, um,
whether there's a plea or not,
we are going to send it just in
case something comes up or it
doesn't go through, but I think
it also honors the um Victims
Bill of Rights as well to have
it tested, to have that
information. And then if it's
not needed for the case that we
would work with the victim and
other advocates to see how they
would like to
resolve that or if they do want
it disposed or what they want to
be, um, become of that kid at
that point.
OK, and then, um, Madam Chair
and um experts if it's still a
situation where if a victim
comes in and has a rape kit and
does not want to do anything
with that, that same stores that
kit and that stays with saying
it doesn't go to law enforce.
Yes, that is correct, uh, the
consent form filled out by a
victim allows them to make the
decision to release a sexual
assault evidence kit at the time
of their exam or to withhold
that. Um, and we do have
situations where victims will
initially say no, I, I, I don't.
I want to make this report, but
I don't want it to go forward,
then they change their mind and
we are able to have that that
evidence still. And it manager
and experts, the last questions
I had on your clothes decline
cases, reason for closure or
declination, and as he defended
deceased, unable to locate
victim, victim declined to
prosecute.
I mean, I maybe that's that
situation, insufficient
evidence, statute of
limitations, and the victim's
deceased. Is it, would it?
not be good to get and maybe
you're doing this, getting those
DNAs into the coda system
regardless if they're deceased
to help closure for maybe an
outstanding rape or something of
that nature, could you address
why those are declined and not
put into the system that.
Um, I, I believe someone from
the CODIS.
A ministry's office is probably
the best thing. I'm sorry, uh,
Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair, uh.
Representative Reed, um, um, but
the, but there are definite,
there, there are very specific
guidelines of what can be added
to the database, um, under the,
the existing laws and um in
order to add profiles to the
database to be referenced, um,
my understanding is that you
need to have a certain either
arrest the database, and these,
these profiles that are being
uploaded or just being compared
to what is in the database. OK,
so
and experts, so they're actually
going into the system indicotus
but not.
Be compared to other cases,
yeah, the upload is just to
compare it to what's in the
database from the, um, from the
sexual assault kit, whatever
profile is developed, and then
it will, um, and then it gets
searched and there is a
potential match, we get a notice
through the CODIS administrator
about that and but Madam Cha
experts with these cases just
don't go in there, I guess is my
question. These cases, I'm sorry
ones for declined cases, they
just don't go into the database
at all.
Correct. OK. Is there any um
indication, Madam Chair,
anything that you think that
might change that, I just feel
it's so important for, you know,
these to get into that database
because even if your defendant
is deceased, let's say, um, he
could have raped 3 other people
and their DNAs could be in there
waiting for a, you know, CODIS
match. Um, do, do you see any
changes of that possibly could
come about in this area or is
this just kind of set by that.
Well, in terms of the um as, as
brief as you can get. Oh yeah,
OK, I'm sorry. Uh, in terms of
the defendants being deceased,
we have, there was a match that
we identified the defendants. So
those defendants were in the
database already, but when you
upload, but again, when you, it
has to be a change in the, I
believe in the, the existing
laws to allow what can be
uploaded and compare against,
uh, for future cases. OK. Thank
you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Lu Han and then
Senator May. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I'll try to be really
quick, um, about this. I'm just
take as I'm taking my notes, um,
I saw I marked 6 different
requests from everybody on the
board and I, and I think it all
stems into um the way we, we
fund uh the sexual assaults, um.
Uh
line that we we do every year is
non-recurring, um, I'm and
others have been big advocates
to to change that, and I think I
just want to really address that
and say we need to, we need to
really look at how we're funding
everything because everything
comes down to what I'm hearing
through this whole testimony is
not enough staff, not enough,
um.
Yeah, no, uh, and that's, that's
really drawing my attention. I
think we really need to uh take
this to our LFC uh committee
this year and really address how
we can get this fully funded.
And many uh range of areas,
Madam Chair, so I just really
wanted to say that and command
the chairs today for having this
hearing. I think this really
gives us a, uh, this sets the
prioritization of where we're
going with this, and I just want
to say thank you very much for
doing that, um, the other thing
I really want to, I kind of just
zeroed in on is the Supreme
Court's uh rulemaking and the
rule.
Um, that will be set forth in
January 2026. I think we need
some more information and
perhaps a hearing on on why they
are moving towards um.
Making this rule, madam chair,
because it's gonna as um Express
will compromise safety. I think
that this is a serious enough
for us to take on when we do
have them before us, as we
always do in this committee, um.
As far as uh questions, my only
question is, do you have
internship, do are you engaged
in internships now with your
forensics.
A man of vice chair
representative, um, the Police
Department does. So we have high
school interns, we also have a
partnership with the South Bay
Public Schools which offer a
paid internship program, and
they get a broad um.
Exploration act exploration
experience with all of our
personnel and our department,
but if they want to specifically
do an internship with our
friendsic with our crime scene
unit, we absolutely do that,
yes, ma'am.
Thank you, madam chair, um, I do
know that there is a degree
program at NMSU, and I don't
know if you're recruiting there,
but I know a few students that
have gone through the program
and it's very exciting, um, and
it takes a lot of, a lot of time
and effort to go through that
program, and I'm sure I just, my
concern is this timeline and the
case management that we're
hearing today before us is a
serious issue and.
Perhaps as by um working through
this in turn, um, committee, we
can, we can, uh, really isolate
and uh address those issues
through some better or some uh
legislation and budget. Uh,
thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Maestas and then
Senator.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, members, and thank you Miss
uh Brannenberg Cook. I worked
with your mom back in the day. I
was uh the lead uh trial lawyer
in our domestic violence
division at the time. So hats
off to those folks who do.
Those violent crimes and deal
with.
With the labor intensive
situations and victims. So
anyway, we wish you and your
family well. The um
The backlog of and the money
that went into alleviating the
backlog was during some tough,
tough.
fiscal years and so I'm really
happy we had the political will
to to do that, we um.
And, and, uh, cause they were
really backed up. We've done a
lot of good things, Madam Chair,
in this realm.
In fact, I recall when we uh
only put into law the, the DNA
samples as a requirement of a,
of a felony conviction, uh, that
was a tough, tough lift cause it
just rubbed people the wrong
way. I just, people just felt
there was an overreach, and now
it's kind of like no big deal,
um, but we, we also tweaked the
statute, I believe, I don't know
if it became law, but I think it
did where we, we would take the
samples upon entering DOC as
opposed to.
Going on probation, so that's a
good thing. Um, the, uh, we
didn't for DWIs because there
was a compelling state interest
pretty much that, you know, be
breath alcohol concentration,
blood work was done like within
30 days. Um, obviously that
analysis and that process is
probably simpler than this one,
cause there's not like a
database, but um,
But my question, Madam Chair,
presenters is, is
When the whole point of dealing
with the backlog is that there
that there wouldn't be a
backlog.
And then you're telling me that
these DNA samples are taking
over a year or so to process
into the system. Is it because
the backlog takes precedent, why
is it taking so long today? When
is, when do you anticipate the
backlog to no longer exist.
It just depends on the situation
and and how the case comes in if
there's an arrest or if there's
not an arrest.
And
Sometimes the lab only tests
items if a case is pending
because Bernao County has strict
deadlines.
And so they have to prioritize
testing as well.
We're fortunate enough to have
another lab. We have APD lab as
well, so that's helpful for us.
Um, so it, it depends on the
situation, um, and we don't want
to create a backlog, but
unfortunately, there's a,
there's more than just testing
that affects.
When and how we can move forward
on a case.
No, thank you for that, cause if
we could find the the money
during the dark days, we could,
we certainly have the money now,
um, to, to alleviate that
backlog at some point and then
with regards to, you said a very
important thing generally from
the first is that an unfunded
rule, the
When the second was uh.
When the case management order
was imposed on the 2nd, we were
not aware of what that meant.
The prosecutors and the, the
budget proposals weren't really
aware of it, so try to learn
from the first and come to us
with uh with an appropriations.
Uh, proposal so that we can deal
with that, for another example I
share is when.
Bill reform went in, we simply
as appropriators did not
anticipate the, the number of
preventative detention hearings
and how the lawyering got sucked
into those hearings as opposed
to just good old fashioned
prosecutions. The um, but let us
know, uh, and also, man, I'm
sure these are, um,
I guess I'll save it. My time's
up, but these, these jobs are
Or high paying jobs, we got to
acknowledge that and budget it
accordingly so we can have a
proper scientists and DNA
analyzers want to live in this
state and be a part of this
solution. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Senator Nava
and then Representative Lord.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you all for being here. Um, my
question pertains to funding
specifically just and I know
you're all representing, I mean,
a range of uh entities, but what
proportion of your budget is
supported by the feds and where
do your concern when, where do
your concerns lie primarily.
Where do your concerns lie in
terms of your federal funding
distinctively?
Um, uh, thank you for, for the
question, um, Mr. Chairman and
vice chair, uh, Senator Nava,
um,
The, the entire unit is funded
with the exception of uh myself
and uh the paralegal that
directly works uh on on my
cases. Um, so,
So 2 special agents, 2 victim
advocates, um, two other
paralegals and another attorney
in the contract attorneys that
work with their, you know, are
all federally funded. Um, all
the testing that is done is is
paid for through, um, through
the federal grants, um, and, um,
all the, um, you know, the
travel and things are, of
course, paid for by the
administrative officer of the
courts, but the um the expert
witness fees that come involved
with being having to outsource
the cases are part of the
federal grants as well.
So almost entirely funded by
federal grants, like, you know,
uh, my, my concern is, is, you
know, I
Like a lot of people in in
January, I, I, I, I received the
email from the Department of
Justice saying that the funding
was put on hold, um, and a few
days later, it was said it was
not on hold. And so there's a
little uncertainty with that
that that causes, um, it causes
me some some concern regarding
that. Um, and plus,
How long will the federal
government continue to, to fund
this initiative, this, the
sexual assault Kit initiative is
unknown. Um, uh, so far they've
been very consistent, I think
because of the the work that the
unit has been doing, we've been
able to to
Uh, put forth a good proposal to
receive additional um federal
funding, um,
Every other year and then 2
years in a row we have, we have
got grants as well. Um, but, but
I, I think that's what my
concerns come that we may not
always be there.
From the uh service provision
stand just to give you an
approximate idea.
An agency like Salas 53 years
standing. We typically are
around a 2 million budget in we
will get exposed at 3 levels
directly, uh, approximately a
little under a quarter of a
million could be lost indirectly
in two ways. Some of the money
that we receive is federal
passed through the state, and
that is still not clear to us
how much of that might be an
exposure. Last, there are
entities in the nation that
worked regionally in the
Southwest area that support
agencies like CA.
Avocacy centers when they don't
receive the funding, we don't
receive their support for
training for technical
assistance, so that's another
level of exposure.
Thank you, uh, Madam Vice Chair
and Senator Nava for.
Madam Vice Chair, Senator, um,
we've actually minimized the
amount of funding from outside
sources that are critical to our
operations. So for federal
government funding that we do
receive, those are oftentimes
just limited to traffic safety
type of funding that is a pass
through um to the state from the
feds, and also for um emergency
management grants that come
through, which help us with, um,
funding our special operations
teams or other things that are
not, uh, critical for us. We'd
rather, uh, not supplant up
frontly that we have through our
municipality with federal
funding.
because of the unpredictable
nature of those uh funding.
Madam Vice Chair, Senator, uh,
federal funding in my office for
that, we wouldn't qualify our
case loads or or um.
Thankfully because SFPD cleared
their backlog many years. We do
have federal funding, of course,
for other initiatives. Thank
you.
All right.
Thank you, um, Madam Chairwoman,
and this specific question
Senator Nova, is that it? Is
that 4 minutes? All righty, I'll
follow up afterwards. You're
welcome. Um, I have
Representative Lord and then
Representative Anaya. Thank you,
Madam Chair. So I have a few
statements and ask a few
questions if you can keep them
as quick as possible, that would
be great. Uh, so it looks like
that there are staffing issues,
there's resource issues, uh,
there's recurring front versus
having, I mean, there's um one
time versus recurring fund.
There is issues with um not
having enough crime scene
officers, which you would like
to see more of. So what I would
have liked to seen in your
presentation is exactly what do
you guys need from us?
In writing, like how much money
do you need and for what? Uh,
how many staff do you need each
of you and for and how much is
that going to cost, what is the
training gonna be and what laws
do we need to pass to help you
to be more efficiently, and I
hope to God, I hope that one of
you is presenting before LFC
because you need to get. Um, so
there was an article in the New
Mexican that said despite new.
Lab, New Mexican still has
backlog on rape kits.
but have we were the worst is
getting better, however.
It talks about, and if you'd
like to address this, how, um,
there's a big vacancy rate.
That it's dropped in the lab.
What do we need to do to fix
that issue because in this
article, they're saying there's
less, how do we get more people
working in the lab, and I
understand there's training it
takes a year. So how do we do
that now?
Yes, sure. I'll look at you.
Just briefly answer that
question for me, please. I'm
trying to fix your issues and
and it's hard without knowing
exactly specifically because
this article talks about how
there's not enough lab tax and
then the other issue is 180 days
a lot that law was passed that
they were supposed to have that
back and it's more like 450
days. So we have that, so I, I
don't understand, we have no
teeth on this, and then there's
not enough people at the lab. So
can somebody address those two
issues for me really quick.
Thank you very much for the
question, um, and of Lord, um, I
mean in terms of, in terms of
the old backlog, um, the,
because there, there really are
two different issues. Um, there
are no timelines for when those
need to be tested. Um my
understanding is now, um, that
all, um, the old backlog kits
have been tested.
Um, and, and we, and, and
through our, through our
screening of the cases we go
back and we, we look at what
additional testing maybe could
be helpful because they're only
Testing for certain things, like
certain swabs or, um, particular
items, um.
So in terms of the, the, the new
backlog, I believe that they
have additional I understand is
that the lab has hired
additional analysts, but it
takes about 18 months of the
training for them to even
becoming sort of online to go
through and
Um, and to be able to handle
independent caseloads. I'm and
experts, how do we, what I'm
asking you is, can you get me if
not now, so I don't take anybody
else's time. Can you please get
me what it is exactly that you
need, where your deficits are,
what you need, what you need,
what you need, how much money
you need, what laws we need to
pass, because I don't want to
try to sit here and ask each one
of you, could you get that for
me? Thank you. That's it. Thank
you.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Representative Anaya and then um
Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you, presenters. This is
something very near and dear to
my heart. Um, you brought up two
things that I pulled, um, one is
the advancement of technology
and the ability to get
convictions from it. I want to
thank you for highlighting that.
The second issue that you really
brought was the issue of
timelines in two, in two
different ways. And so I am
looking for some clarity on this
graph that you presented, Mr.
uh, Jacks, um, in the magenta is
statute of limitations issues.
In the blue is uh insufficient
evidence and somewhere in there,
it seems like there may be a
gray area, um, where
The statute of limitations runs
out due to the Supreme Court
order, and is that
Uh, is that part of the blue or
is that part of the magenta on
this graph.
Or is that separate data
completely?
Uh thank you very much for the
question.
Chairman and vice chair of
Representative Anaya, um, the,
What was the last part of the
question I apologize, I'm, I'm
trying to differentiate, um, the
Supreme Court mandate. Um, I
know you all were talking about
the fact that sometimes you just
have to throw out cases
generally speaking, because of
these deadlines that you have to
meet. And so I'm wondering if
that data would fall into
statute of limitations issues or
insufficient evidence for, for,
for our unit, cause we just deal
with the old backlog cases, um,
a lot of the issues become, uh,
that they're, they're.
Um, in terms of identification
of an offender, they aren't
grandfathered in with the new
statute of limitations that I.
I always forget the date on my
uh Eastba always remembers it
from our unit, um, but it's like
I think it's like early 2000s
that the statute of limitations
was changed to where it was
told. There is no tolling before
that for a lot of these cases
and so.
Um, the statute of limitations
were we're operating under is
under the old laws from the,
from the, you know, 1990s and
1980s, and whenever the whenever
the incident happened, we're,
we're locked in on that law.
Um, thank you, Mr. Jack. And
then I wanted to just underscore
um Miss Rodriguez Carriza's
comment about like taking a step
back and also taking into
consideration that this on the
criminal side, those are only
20% of the sexual assaults that
happened, right? So like the
large majority of sexual assault
cases are actually on the civil
side. And so I want to thank
you, Ms. Rodriguez Cardiz for
underscoring the fact that we
need to look at our civil
statute of limitations and
expanding that, especially as
we're talking about CYFD.
kids, public safety, especially
those for children because as we
are finding out more and more, a
lot of those cases are within
APS or within CYFD are, um,
definitely on the civil side of
what's going on, and so I just
want to thank you all for your
work and your presentation.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Martinez and then
represented Berago.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you all for uh.
for being here. I, I just have a
couple of quick questions.
I may have missed this, but how
many staffers are currently
dedicated to testing.
Um, thank you for the question,
um, Mr. Chairman and vice chair,
uh.
Houses with Martinez. Um, in
terms of staff members that are
testing the kits, um, we don't
operate any, we predominantly
outsource all of our testing,
um to um to outside labs. Um,
so, uh, but in terms of the
people that are in actively
investigating screening, and
prosecuting cases our, our unit
is, is 10 people, uh, plus, um,
to uh contract attorneys that
that assist us in that screening
process.
Um, because,
particularly for the newer, uh.
Investigation, DNA
investigations like the, the fig
testing, um, uh, there are
certain qualifications that the
um for that fig testing under
that's interesting. Are, are
those.
They, um, the, the, the testing,
they are not, um, it's
predominantly we use boil lab
for that testing, um, which is
in Virginia.
Thank you for that. And, and my
last
Comment, um.
I've gotten
Three different calls since we
left the legislature.
About
Uh
And in all three cases,
Nothing was done about it.
Complaint was filed, cops were
called.
Uh, assistant district attorney
case was
Gone away.
Um, and, and I've talked to one
of the young men.
And this young man's life
destroyed.
He was a great student. He was
involved in extracurricular
activities.
He was doing well. He was a
leader.
You talk to him now?
He's afraid to leave his house.
Something needs to be done about
that issue, and I'm not sure
why.
I've suddenly, um, but it is
devastating. When I, when I
devastated and what's worse is
They feel failed by.
Everybody
Law enforce they have major
trust he has major trust issues,
um.
So that's, that's you. You're
welcome, um, Representative
Barrago and then Senator
Trujillo.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Thank you all for the work that
you do.
First of all, um, so just 3
years ago when I was um
Well, 34 years ago when I was
with the Albuquerque City
Council, and works with the um
With APD.
On our backlog and uh we did
provide some funding to help
them, um, address the backlog.
And there was, you know, some
progress made, which I'm, I'm
very appreciative of for APD
working on that. Um,
Representative Martinez brought
up a really important point, um,
is one of the understandings
that I had as counselor was um
that
Um
The actual scientist in New
Mexico who looks at some of
these backlog um kits.
We only have like one in the
whole state that actually runs
around the state and verifies um
You know, the response and
correct me if I'm wrong, but if
that's, if that's the case.
Of just one or two people who
actually are qualified.
To
Verify those those that work
that comes back from, you know,
the consultants, um, is that
still the case?
that there was only 1 or 2
scientists.
That actually can verify.
The results of the backlog.
Kids
Thank you for the question, uh,
Chairman Weis chair and, uh,
Representative Rego, um, are,
are you
when, and when you're, are you
talking about an individual that
goes around and collects the
kids now to bring them or actual
verification that goes to the
court.
I, I, I wasn't aware that there
was someone that when when.
That went county to county to
verify the, the backlog. I know
that I mean from individual
counties, I know that in terms
of um Albuquerque Police
Department and BCSO there was um
a an inventory that that was
done and they and they cataloged
all of those and.
Locally tested as many as they
could, but majority of the kids,
um, that we work with that we
got from that back, that, that
old backlog was, um, was
outsourced either Sorenson or Bo
other labs, um, and
Um, and then we report quarterly
and semiannually, it depends on
the type of report Department of
Justice, the, the progress that
is regularly to them and, and
maybe we don't have the
appropriate people here today to
verify that, but that was my
understanding when um these
backlogs and, and the process
was presented to city council,
um, so, you know, I, I would
really like to see and hear more
about that, especially the
centers.
The other question that I have
is with regard to how those um.
How the different districts
coordinate with each other to
become more efficient, and I
don't know that or is it just
district by district and
You know, there's staffing for
this district and staffing for
this district. I mean, I'm, I'm
looking at efficiency and, you
know, the effectiveness of the
whole programs and how they
interrelate because with
dwindling resources, as we all
know, um.
You know, it seems to me like
the coordination factor really
needs to occur, and I don't
know, I'm just questioning how
that how that happens.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Madam
Vice President and um
representative Orego I wouldn't
speak it at the level of labs,
uh, but when it comes to service
provision, there is a tremendous
intimate connection throughout
the entire state. We have a New
Mexico coalition of sexual
assault programs that uh gathers
us on all subjects, including
but not limited coming to the
legislature together, you hardly
ever see us alone. You see us as
a 4,
And also there is another one,
particularly dedicated to the
children advocacy centers as
well. So what we are very, very
networked.
Madam Chair, thank you for that.
um you representative one, no,
I'm sorry, uh, Senator Trujillo.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for being here. It's
good to see you, Maria. I just
want all of my questions have
basically been answered, but I
do just want to point out that
um
when, when Maria, you say that
sexual assault is really more
related to relation.
And it is to evidence, you're
absolutely right. And, and I
think, um, uh, Madam Chair and
um.
Mr. Chair, I would love to see
Nimsia come to uh one of these
meetings because we have a
serious school issue.
Um, we have a very serious
school issue and I can't wrap my
kind of mind around what the
prevention looks like, um, but I
think we need to have multiple
individuals at the table because
that's really, I mean, they've
got.
hundreds of millions of dollars
in settlements that are
happening right, you know, I
just saw their, their general
counsel at a store this weekend,
um, and, and he's like we have
to do something. And, you know,
they pay out those settlements
and uh they try to do some
prevention measures, um, but it
is, it is a serious, serious
problem, and I would love to see
us, you know, have that kind of
broader conversation, trying to
stay within the confines of.
was talking about the rape kit,
but there's a whole other um
issue of sexual assault that's
happening, and it's happening in
our schools, and Maria will do
everything we can. We had great
support for um domestic
violence, to get you on for
reoccurring.
Thank you, Senator.
Are you eliciting comments or?
OK. Um, Senator Cervantes.
Thank you, Madam Cheerio. Uh,
my, uh,
Titled this presentation
intelligent Crime Fighting
because it should be evident to
all of us there are
opportunities here to do some
intelligent crime fighting that
we're not maybe taking full
advantage of the, the reason I
thought this would be an
important topic is we passed a
law that said we, we, as I
understand it, that we test all
rape kits within 180 days, um,
and we can pass all the laws we
want here on crime, uh, and we
can uh have press conferences
and pat ourselves on the back
and say we passed a new law to
do things and if the law
are ignored and not followed,
and there's no follow through or
oversight by us, then we're
really just kind of shining
ourselves on and trying the
public on this seemed like a
good example of an illustration
of exactly that. So I think we,
we need to recognize that we
need to be passing laws that
have some meaning and some
enforcement and some practical
effect, if we're, um, if we're
not getting it done, and we, we
some, at some point in time we
thought 180 days was realistic,
and we must have thought that
was an intelligent deadline.
when we passed the law, must
have had some basis for doing
so, and yet we just now
seemingly ignore it. Um, and so
we're either not putting the
resources, we're not
acknowledging this, and so it
seemed like a topic we needed to
take a look at ourselves in the
mirror again, uh, when it comes
down to intelligent crime
fighting this issue, rape,
sexual assault, to me is
seemingly more important than
panhandling, uh, or other, uh,
subjects that we've, I
identified as crime problems in
our state. Uh, this would seem
to be
Uh, something that should rise
to the level and hopefully we'll
gather the attention of this,
this chamber, um, or the
legislature and the executive
branch and the judiciary too.
It's a little bit off the
subject, but I think we're gonna
talk a little bit about the work
plan here in a little bit. We're
talking a little bit about case
management orders you're talking
about losing cases because the
statute of limitations cases
being dismissed. We're gonna
have to involve the judiciary in
the discussion, and this is an
important topic and it's not an
easy one for me as a practicing
lawyer to bring up, but the, the
courts are legislating, um, and
they're they're creating policy
by these case management orders
and they're essentially deciding
the need for a speedy trial,
which is important in the rights
of people that are accused to
have prompt, uh
opportunities to, to, um, be
heard, uh, is important and
that's an important goal at the
same time, if they're putting
unrealistic expectations on
prosecutors in the process,
cases are being dismissed, and
they're being discharged, and we
ought to at least say what's
going on? It's, it's not lack of
laws, it's the fact that the
court is putting unrealistic
expectations on prosecutors and
law enforcement and others, and
the courts are uh letting cases
go and we ought to just at least
acknowledge that's what's
happening. Um, it's not an easy
thing for a lawyer in practice
to say the Supreme.
Court is doing this, but
they're, they are, they're
legislating and their policy
making and we ought to at least
be talking about that as some
kind of a dialogue. So thank
you, Madam Chair. I thought it
was important the topic, and I
appreciate all the good comments
and questions.
Thank you, Senator. Well, thank
you, panelists, really
appreciate the time and the
insights that you have on this
particular topic, and I imagine
we might be talking some more
about it going forward.
Appreciate it. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'll
take back a moment. Uh, we have
some new members of the
committee. Let me make sure that
you recognize that in your
materials you have voucher, uh,
paperwork that you need to
complete, Nancy, you all will
get to know well, doesn't want
to hound you to get them turned
in so those of you that are new
and you want to collect uh the
per diem that, that you're
entitled to receive for being
here today, please make sure you
get those done and to Nancy and
for all the rest of you that
have been here for a long time,
do the same, right, too, so uh
let's turn to the work plan a
little bit, um, my goal.
Is to gather information from
all of you to digest that after
the meeting today with uh
Chandler, uh Representative
Chandler, Representative
Chandler, um, the, the chair for
the house and the leadership we
have, we, we're fortunate on
this committee to have the
president of the Senate, uh, the
majority leader of the Senate.
We have uh leadership uh on
both, both sides of the aisle
here too, and I'll just remind
members that I really want to
use this interim committee
process to do some good work
that
leads us into a 30-day session
recognizing that we're, we took
all of the 1st 30 days, we, we
talked about that, we used all
of the 30 days that we needed in
the first half of the session to
get uh a competency bill and
behavioral health bill done. We
needed all of that and, and we
had to work pretty hard to get
that done in 30 days. So we have
to recognize that our, our
mission coming up is gonna be a
30-day session, and so let's
keep that in mind, um, and now
I'll just entertain any of you
all that want to propose topics
and subject matter, I do have
from just so you all know, I
have from a number of you,
Senator Brantley, Senator
Thornton, Senator Paul, we're
not here, but Senator Lanier
here. I do have your letter with
topics, um, juvenile justice
reform, pretrial detention, uh,
termination of the APD consent
decree and elimination of
qualified immunity. All good
topics for discussion. I, I will
so I'll start recognizing those
of you with topics. And again,
we'll, we'll, we'll visit with
the leadership, we'll visit with
the House and Senate
representation and we'll try and
come up.
with a realistic work plan, um,
my, my usual practice is try and
focus, really drill down on some
subjects that really merit
priority and so I'm just gonna
for ease, I'm just gonna start
on my right and come around
here, so representative Rien
will come around each, each,
anybody who wants to come next,
just throw it out there. OK. Uh
thank you, Mr. Chair. I, I agree
juvenile justice. I think we
really need to jump on that, um,
that's been the big topic.
Everyone said we didn't do it in
the interve it we've we vetted
it last.
Interim a little bit, and I
think we need to really do that.
The governor really is
interested in that, um, I'm
still getting a lot of uh calls
on fentanyl as child abuse. We
just saw a recent article, um,
of that situation where the kids
were exposed to child abuse and
there's been bills on that, um.
Also, um, I wouldn't, I would
love for us to take up the topic
of medical malpractice. I mean,
it does deal with courts,
punitive damages, things of that
nature, um, and dealing with
that, that big issue, so those
are some of the things I would
like to see.
What's the name?
Come on down. Awesome. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Um,
I will piggyback off of that.
Um, I would also like to talk
about malpractice. I think it'd
be a great discussion. I'm also
on the health committee, so it's
a little bit back and forth and
I would love to hear, um, the
presentation, uh, to CCJ as
well. Um.
As has been stated before, civil
statute of limitations for
childhood sexual assault. I
would like to bring that to the
table. And um,
Uh, Senate Bill 3 and Behavioral
Health and just an update on the
rollout, how it's going and the
intersection with criminal
justice as well.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I echo the sentiments of my
colleagues, Mr. Chairman, I
think we really need to work on
juvenile justice. Um, I think we
need to have good conversations
with regards to medical
malpractice and just the status
of uh healthcare and insurance
law in general and um
Also, uh, an update on the
behavioral health rollout would
be great.
And intersectionality with
criminal justice as well.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for
recognizing the letter we gave
you a list of potential topics I
had to prioritize them again, my
number one would also be
juvenile justice reform. Uh
number 2 being, um, medical
malprice change since the law
Um, it's kind of a, I haven't
drilled down. Thank you, Mr.
Chair, I haven't drilled down
exactly which topics, but there
are several insurance laws that
need to be updated, revised,
revisited, um, I will get you a
more specific list, but off the
top of my head.
Um, some car insurance law in
the state really needs to be
updated, does not serving the
people, it's not keeping us
safe.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. So
this is the, of course, corps
corrections and Justice
Committee just for the newer
members, the justice part of the
committee was added, and I think
it's been a good addition, but
the corrections pieces was
really the focus. I chaired this
committee years ago, and we
would always go and spend time
in some of our facilities and
I'd just like to suggest that we
do that again. Uh, there's been
a lot of changes going on in
terms of population, uh, in our
correctional facilities.
reading about what's happening
in Lee County with the private
facility being shut there where
all those inmates going, um, I
just think as we put together
our travel schedule, it would be
good to
Get us into one of those
facilities, whether it's
southern or wherever, wherever
we go, I, I was remembering Mr.
Chair, uh, actually thinking
about the facility in Hobbs and
the hearing we did in that
facility. I think you and I may
be the only ones left that were
here when we did that. Senator
Stewart was there for sure. Um,
but it was a, it was a a direct
exchange with, with the inmates.
And there was an issue with
medical health insurance that
this committee really
spearheaded and resulted in
significant change. So I just
wanted to
flag that as we put together the
travel schedule. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Couple of things, uh, the bill,
uh, Senate Bill 166, the
definition of harm to self-harm
to others, that actually deals
with the uh two acts, the, the
mental health dis development
disabilities code, but also the
assisted outpatient treatment
Act. We got caught up in the
definition and didn't really
kind of.
School ourselves on the current
procedures in law, it's gonna be
on the call, uh, so I think we
should do a hearing, a quick
hearing on, on the procedures of
the assisted outpatient
Treatment Act. What are those
procedures? What are the, what
are the, uh,
The guardrails currently in
place. Also police training
reform, I'm, I'm committed to
moving forward on police
training reform.
Uh, about 150 was kind of too
big of a bite and got a little
crazy there for a second, so, so
maybe uh uh something that the
executive can can tolerate on
police training reform and then
also getting back to DOC uh
probation reform, there was a a
baby probation bill, probation
reform bill that was signed into
law, uh, this past session, uh,
And so the probation department
will be moving forward, but I
think there's much more work to
be done on that.
In that institution.
Consistent with what other
states are doing with in
probation reform. Thank you.
Mr. Chairman, uh, members, I
would agree with uh my number
one concern, I think being
juvenile justice reform, uh, and
followed by Meal and actually
police training reform, um,
especially when we think about
concerns and folks not reporting
given the federal uh concerns,
so there is a deep concern of
not reporting crimes, um, and I
think police training reform can
be of assistance in that space.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, I agree
with juvenile justice reform.
We've had guns with 22 last week
brought to schools in
Albuquerque, so that's something
we really need to look at. Thank
you.
I don't, Mr. Chair, um, juvenile
justice reformedal I don't
really have anything additional
to add.
I love the idea of
Little field trip.
Mr. Chair, that except would you
be amenable if we come up with
questions to email you and.
If we come up with questions
regarding these incidents to
email them to you to see if, OK,
thank you, sir.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, I
agree with, um, things that have
already been mentioned, uh, the
Mital, the youth justice, but in
particular, um with uh youth
justice, looking at the
behavioral, um, health and the
rehabilitation. I know, um, New
Mexico adopted years ago the
Missouri, um, miracle model, but
we haven't really fully
implemented if we could revisit
that, uh, what we can do, um, to
expand such places.
Just play house, um, having
longer.
Terms for um rehabilitation as
well as having more in, uh,
rural settings and smaller, uh,
be sure to have smaller groups,
but also, um, as we're looking
at crime and reducing it, um, if
we could, um, recognize or have
a discussion or panel on um
alcohol, um, use by underage uh
drinking as well as misuse of
adults and how that influences
crime, there's a high
correlation.
With you, um.
In her personal violence, uh,
the DWIs, the assaults, the
homicides. So I think if we can
um recognize how we can reduce
that in many ways, um, by
raising the alcohol excise task,
but there's other ways to that
um we should uh consider.
That's all. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Yes to
everything before that was said,
I think uh we need to continue
on with the two topics today,
the CFD for sure, is always a
topic, uh, this end of the rape,
the rape kit backlog issue.
Uh, I really wish that they
would have brought all the
requests that they need, what
they needed from staff, or how
much money they need, what they
think, so that we don't have to
guess, so if we can get that
from them, I break down, I had
asked a gentleman here to give
that to us, um, and how we can
help them, uh, crime in general
is still a huge issue and also
court security, uh, there's a
shortage of staff, and I think
there was a request for 10
million last year. I don't know
what happened to that. It was
kind of floating along all the
way through. It didn't get
through and I don't know if you
know, like in Torrance County,
we.
have had some issues and with
shortages and we had a gentleman
that was threatening to kill
people. I'm calling in serious
threats to kill people, so we
need to make sure that we keep
everyone, uh, safe in the
courts. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
As I mentioned earlier, the need
for um increasing forensic
specialists because um.
the work that I've done before I
I would like to know how had an
answer to that question, but I
did receive a text from someone
who's in that um business and
said that they are, there are
limited numbers of forensic
specialists, um, so looking for
ways to increase that, and also
um.
Crimes against children. I would
really like to see a
presentation from APD as to how
that unit has grown because that
whole, that whole, um, aspect of
crime has really increased
exponentially.
So thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So I
too would like to
uh dive into juvenile justice,
um, specifically doing a lot of
research on the Missouri miracle
model and recognized that back
in the Richardson
administration, we apparently
adopted that model, but again,
as was already said, we really
haven't done much to move that
forward. Um, there are some
individuals from Missouri who go
around the country and speak.
To legislators in regards to how
we can implement some of those
things. What I learned is that
in Missouri they've got like an
89% um non-recidivism, right?
That's really a good
non-recidivism rate, whereas in
New York, they've got like a 3%
non-recidivism. It's, it's
horrible. So we definitely don't
want to do what New York has
done, which is increased
penalties. Um, we'd like to, I
think we
I'd like to lean more towards
the Missouri model. I'm thinking
that maybe we could tour, um, it
would be nice to hear from the
head of the juvenile justice.
Um, I, I, I would also like to
consider.
What would it look like if we
separated juvenile justice from
CYFD. I, I find it really
disturbing as a former foster.
Child that juvenile justice and
and foster care. I think it
lends itself to moving from one
part of the agency to another
and, and I, I, I don't say that
lightly. I, I, I really feel
like we have got to focus our
attention on how do we
Really adopt that Missouri model
for reform and how do we really
make sure that our children that
are needing that love and
attention and care and foster
care, have that full and
undivided attention, so thank
you, Mr. Chair. Um, there's a
long list of things, but, uh,
what I really want to focus on
a is um hearing with the AOC in
regards to the behavioral
health, um, implementation of a
SB, um, 3.
We passed 2 and 3, which became
3, and understanding, um, where
they are, where, what's going on
with them, but also integrate
that with our health councils
and opioid local government
collaboratives that we have in
in really looking how they and
the mapping that's going on, Mr.
Chair, I think that that's
essential to us giving them.
Uh, this, uh, mandate. Also, I'd
like to with the AOC in mind,
I'd like to, um, not just look
at the the or the rule changed
it there.
That was um testified to uh
today, but maybe all the the
rule changes that are coming in
January 2026, so that we have an
overview of that. I think that
that would be good for us to
understand that as we're looking
at um policy um initiatives, uh.
Let's see, um.
And then in regards to what
Senator Wirth was saying, um,
regarding, uh, corrections and
spending time at facilities, I'd
like to really take a deeper
dive with the programs that the
facilities, um.
are working on a particular,
particularly the culinary
program, and I know that we gave
funding for a gardening program
and many many others, I think
that that are uh lending to the
workforce that they're
developing or or um encouraging
at our facilities, I think that
that is really important, um,
and lastly, I would say um.
The federal funding changes that
are before us, I think it, it
would be critical for us to look
at what.
That looks like for um the
sector of government that we're
responsible for focusing on in
this committee, and I said that
was last, but I lied. I also,
um, what.
Um, Senator Maestas mentioned
about thised outpatient
treatment procedures, I think,
essential, and that I think can
get be a.
Joined with what's going on with
the AOC and the behavioral
health, um, role that they are
now, um, mandated to um
implement. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Chair, uh.
Two things I agree court
security is an issue that is
Uh, sometimes overlooked.
Um, but we are having real
Judges.
Uh, court officers.
Um, so I'd I'd really like to
take a hard look at what we're
doing.
Uh, to keep those those uh court
safe.
The other thing I'd like to hear
a report on actual.
Crime statistics.
Cause it depends on who you talk
to, crime is up, crime is down.
Um, I, I mean, I'd like to, to
maybe hear a comprehensive
report.
On what the real crime picture
is in in New Mexico.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, I
wanted to add, um,
To the conversation here of the
committee, um serving as the
vice chair of the Legislative
Health and Human Services
Committee. We had an
organizational meeting, seems
like not too long ago.
And part of our conversation,
um, Mr. Chair and Vice Chair is
that both the health and human
services interim committee and
this committee have a joint
hearing.
With regards to juvenile
justice.
Um, and as I mentioned on the
floor, um, Mr. Chair, uh, when
we were debating the bill, this
is not just an issue for CCJ,
but it's also dealing with the
health and human services side
of it. It's, it's, it's both.
Um, so when we had our
discussion and the
organizational meeting.
We wanted to offer and ask for
consideration of this committee,
um, if we could, you know, find
within, um, of course we'd have
to rely on the council to add a
few extra days, but for us to
actually have a joint hearing.
Um, so that we can both hear the
same information, have a, I
think a very thorough discussion
with regards to juvenile
justice, um, and of course we've
looked at the uh calendar.
None of us are meeting on the
same days with these two
committees except in November,
but November's too late.
So, um, both my, I say co-chair,
but the chairwoman, um, Thompson
and I, as well as committee
members agree that we would make
a petition for this committee to
please consider that we would
have a joint hearing.
When we talk about um
Juvenile justice for this
interim, and also to meal is on
our list, so maybe we could add
that in there, um, just because
it's, it's the same issues that
we're both listening to, um, the
same concerns that come up.
But I wanted to bring that in
front of um both of you for
today.
Thank you.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. I
would like us to look at
artificial intelligence and the
risks that it posed to
individuals and
Have a discussion on that, um,
following up on something
Senator Maestas brought up
earlier in our um hearing, um,
the certification board and how
it operates and under what
authorities and are those
authorities being observed, like
to understand the um
underpinnings on that as well as
officer training and where we
are with that I understand it
may be out of date as to what
we've been doing and um
representative Garrett.
Texted me, she's interested in
juvenile justice as well.
But brought up the border
issues, um, the jurisdictional
issues that may be arising with
the federal declaration on the
southern border, so if we're
going to be in your hometown,
that might be something
interesting to look at and
understand. Um, and that's all.
Thank you.
Um, yes, so thank you. I'll,
I'll just finish up with that
last one, the, um, I have made
an outreach to one of our former
colleagues, Zach Cook, who um
has indicated that he can get us
an opportunity to go into the
detention facility in Chaparral,
which has been used for
immigration detention, uh,
purposes we've had legislation
over the last couple of years to
take the state out of state or
local governments out of that
role. Um, so that probably is
something for us to do that and
I, I, I do want to acknowledge
Senator Wirt's comments that the
committee used to be very
focused on corrections. We many
of our meetings were typically
in correctional facilities and
uh years passed when I chaired
it, I wanted to go way beyond
that, so I added the justice
component, which means we can do
whatever the hell we want, um,
everything's justice, right? And
so it was to broaden our, our
scope quite a bit, but, but, um,
his point is well taken, which
is as a result of expanding that
into medical malpractice and
everything else you all are
proposing, it takes sometimes
away from something that's not
quite as sexy, which is going
and having meetings in the
corrections facility, so.
We'll try and do that and, and
we are um we'll, we'll, we'll do
that. I, I assure you that's
important and, and also the
programs, uh, one of the
greatest opportunities I'm
convinced that we have to fight
crime when we talk about really
intelligent crime fighting, one
of the greatest opportunities is
in the correctional facilities
where we have people who are
really um at our disposal day
and night, uh, night and day and
every opportunity to educate
and, and train and and avoid
recidivism, so that's a a great
opportunity there too, um, I do
think that
um, I want to talk a bit more.
There was mention of fentanyl.
We need to be talking about
drugs, I think drugs across the
board, um, you all, we, we just
passed some legislation
commendably this last session to
enhance the opportunities for
enforcement of our cannabis
marijuana laws, um, you all know
I've been somewhat critical of
the laws we passed. I've seen
the latest statistics in New
Mexico's now they got the
highest rate of teenage
marijuana use in the country
and, and it shouldn't be a
surprise to us with the beasts
that we created.
I just spent the last 4 days in
California, Southern California,
which as it was years ahead of
us in terms of legalizing
marijuana and in the 4 days I
was there downtown San Diego,
San Diego, La Jolla, Delmar, I
in 4 days there I didn't see one
dispensary, the whole time I was
there. I didn't smell dope in
the air once in the 4 days I was
there, and you have a state the
size of California years ahead
of us in, in my district has 32
dispensaries in some part, um.
And so we've, we've created a
beast and we should acknowledge
that and recognize the fact that
now we have the highest teenage
rate of marijuana use in the
country, so, um, I, I, I, I
don't mean to.
focus too much on that, but
we'll do that. Um, I think that,
um, good, good, um.
Good suggestions, I will remind
the committee members, and I
encourage you to do so with the,
the items that you have that are
important to you, please reach
out to the governor's staff. I
will do so today. So there's
been some criticism today, um,
that it's never my intention to
be unconstructive, so I will
invite the executive as much as
I can to our interim process to
help us with the agenda because
it will be hers. It will be hers
in a 30 day, and it'll be her
final, and I respect that, that
we'll have an important role for
the executive in in all of that
too. So we'll, we'll
that opportunity as well too.
You have a work plan, uh, in
your materials, please look at
that as well too, and then use
the opportunity of the next few
days to get with me, get with uh
in Chandler.
And leadership in your
respective chambers and we'll
come up with a good agenda for
you that again, please
understand, we'll not get to
everybody and not get to
everybody's interests and goals,
but uh hopefully we'll be a good
prioritization of the things
that we're hearing from all of
you today too, so, uh, we'll,
we'll also make an effort to be
around the state. We'll try and
go north, we'll try and go
south, we'll try and go east and
we'll try and go west and uh uh
we have, you have the dates in
front of you. Does anybody have
any strong feelings or
objections to
any of those dates right now.
Please note that 2 of them at
least are 3 day meetings, um,
and I'll just tell you that it's
usually my, my wish, but I'd
like to hear from all of you
about locations. I like to have
meetings outside of Albuquerque
and Santa Fe for, for one reason
that may escape all of you,
which is that when we get away
to places like not saying this
necessarily, but when we go to
Silver City or Truth or
Consequences or read those, so
there's nothing else to do
except hang out together, right,
and, and dialogue, yeah, yeah.
Yeah, so, so, you know, when we
have a meeting in Albuquerque,
everybody's off to the mall and
having dinner and lunch and, you
know, we don't have a Ruth
Christ in Las Cruces, you know,
I'm saying so, so, um, when we
isolate folks in, in some of
these rural areas, I think we
have sometimes a much more
constructive experience working
together and so please don't be
surprised when I kind of take
you out to the, to the sticks a
little bit from time to time,
uh, and, and give us a chance to
get to know one another. The
other thing too, you'll notice,
I think I mentioned this early
on is I.
try and allow free time, uh, for
us, and I allowed some of that
for today as well too, uh,
nothing on the agenda. Tell us
what's on your mind. Tell us
what's bothering you, what
you're hearing, what we need to
know and what you think, uh, one
another need to exchange with
each other. Um, I think allowing
unstructured time is, is helpful
as well too. So, so we'll do
that, uh, Representative Lujan
on, on any of the topics I've
just raised. Thank you, um, Mr.
Chair, I just wanted to say, uh,
regards to the schedule and
maybe trying to find the the.
Um, date to work with HHS.
To have a cool um.
Um, Harry, that maybe one of
those 3 days we could take one
of those days off. I don't know
how you do that. I've not been a
chair or.
Of the committee during the
interim, so I'm just making a
suggestion so that we can make
that happen before November, um.
Yeah, thank you.
Thank you. Anyone else strong
feelings about it. We usually
that's usually where we get the
pitch from everybody who comes,
say come to my district, but
it's not an election year,
right? So, uh, so.
senators, we still got 3 more
years on our terms, so, you
know, we'll start hearing the
House members pretty soon, come
to my district, come to my
district that I missed somebody
I saw somebody's hand. No. Any
anybody else? All right, uh,
Linda, I'm sorry, Senator.
Yeah, we just, um, for the, um,
LFC we just spent a day up in
Mascara.
And um a day out into your sea
out on the T4 ranch, and it was,
I, I think we talked to one
another and spent more time
together than I have in any
other uh out of Santa Fe, out of
out is amazing, um, meal for us.
So the food was wonderful.
Good. Yeah, I've, uh, to, to
really take this to an extreme
in years past, I've taken the
committee to truth or
consequences and put us on boats
in the middle lake where you
have no choice but to be there
for uh a sunset and a cigar and
uh maybe libations, but there's,
there's some, there's some
bonding that takes place and we
can come up with some kind of
agenda that makes sense for
truth and consequences. I don't
know what it is we'll, we'll ask
you, Senator Brantley or
something like that. Uh, anyone
else on locations? All right,
we've got just a few minutes.
Uh, anyone else for the good of
the cause? Anyone else?
have anything that uh occurred
today, stimulated today that you
want to get off your chest or
share with us before we adjourn
for the day. Anyone else? Yes,
Rosa.
Just quickly, Mr. Chair, we had
an officer in Bloomfield shot
this morning early, um.
It's touching go if he'll make
it.
I just like to, since this is
this committee just to mention
him.
Thank you, sir.
Yeah, but we'll, uh, we'll look
forward to you giving us some
update on information that you
learned about it, please share
with us and we'll, we'll be the
topic didn't come up, but uh we
should talk about guns, uh, at
some point in time in the
proliferation of guns, um.
And um I'm sure that'll
stimulate some conversation at
the right time and place. So
Brantley and Representative
Reed.
Mr. Chairman, I also wanted to
make everyone aware that we're
coming off Memorial Day weekend
is, you know, the largest state
park in Mexico is Elephant Butte
Lake. We normally have about
upwards of 100,000 people that
arrived and disappointed to hear
that we had lost a um an airman
who had drowned at the state
parks, even more disappointed to
find out that state police was
ill prepared. There is not
available dive team or search
and rescue in the state of New
Mexico right now because someone
had not checked expiration on
equipment.
And so the dive team was
actually deployed to Texas DPS
sent someone, and so did the Air
Force to assist in those
efforts. That is a disappointing
failure on the state, um, but
regardless, we send our our
thoughts and our condolences out
with that airman who passed away
on the, on the butte this
weekend.
Let's sad news, of course, and,
and also disappointing that
we've got to be providing that
oversight of, of.
DPS clearly represent.
Did you have something I still
think it's really important that
we make cops enumerated victims
so that they can get notice of
their hearings and, and this
aggravated battery when when you
shoot at a cop and you hit a cop
and it's a higher penalty if you
miss a cop, um, and I, I just
brought those every single year
and just can't seem to get I can
get traction of the house, but
not getting traction over there.
And so I'll be working on you
personally on that and no, I
appreciate you doing that. I, I
hope the committee knows that I,
I try and own the stuff that
I'm.
responsible for, and I, I did so
earlier with CYFD and the fact
that I resisted an ombudsman
program for years and years to
the extent I've resisted some of
your things. I'd, I'd like to
talk about them and, and I know
sometimes the, the, the many I
heard many of you all talk about
medical malpractice. I, of
course, I do medical malpractice
work that shouldn't be a reason
why we shouldn't have a good
discussion on it and be more
than happy to share my
perspective. So represent
Ferrari.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and um
when you just mentioned about
gun violence, I would maybe
didn't say those words clearly,
but there is a high correlation
of alcohol and gun violence, um,
for homicides and other, you
know.
Issues. So if we can tie those
together. Thank you. Thank you.
That's a good, that's a good
point. I, I try to pass this
last year an increase in
penalties, didn't get very much
attention in the press or anyone
else to increase the penalties
for concealed carry of a
firearm, it's a petty
misdemeanor. Right now I am a
concealed carrier, I've been a
concealed carry permit holder
and some of my colleagues will
say, why waste your time doing
all of the training and effort
to to make that happen, it's a
petty misdemeanor. So just carry
without a permit and if you get
caught.
There's, you get a slap on the
wrist, so uh we do have young
people that are carrying guns,
they can't seemingly go to the
movies, can't go out and have we
used to go up the river and
drink beer. Now you've got to go
out and drink beer and carry
guns and uh so forth and you all
heard at the very end of our
last session the shooting at
Young Park in Las Cruces, New
Mexico, commendably our police
responded well to that, but
represent Ferrari, what's not,
uh, discussed oftentimes is the
video where for hours ahead of
that shooting, get young people
out there uh brandish.
guns, uh, using lasers on their
guns to light up one another uh
cars doing wheelies, you know,
this is a city park. So I don't
know why we should have been
surprised at that night ended
the way that it did. Uh, we had
all the warnings that it was
going to happen.
Uh, Representative Lu.
Um, I just got a, uh, request
also from uh Representative
Dixon, if we could add to our
gender uh topics or discussion,
um.
To discuss motor vehicle
accident resulting in death, uh
was HB 600.
Thank you.
Who did that come from?
of Dixon.
Thank you.
Represent. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman, under the auspices of
justice, the um Pew Charitable
Trust Foundation did a fantastic
study on Albuquerque's zoning
ordinances and determined that
the lack of housing and the rise
of homelessness was contributed
greatly to
Zoning laws, and so they have
other examples of Minneapolis is
like the counterpoint or
Minneapolis raised its housing
stock by tweaking its zoning
ordinances, so that might be a
good thing too.
To look at that that will be on
the call next year as well.
Thank you.
There was bills introduced but
didn't get a hearing this past
session.
Uh, there was, there was
legislation introduced
legislation was introduced, but
it got bottled up in uh in
Spack.
Oh, something that we didn't
kill in judiciary,
um.
I, I,
oh yes, I, I, I said judiciary,
I didn't mean senators, um, and
we, and we shouldn't make too
much light of that, but I, I, I
would like to use the
opportunity, uh, with uh Brandon
here and Philip here, uh, the
Senate Judiciary Committee was
referred over 300 bills, uh, in
this last session, um, and we,
we heard amended past, worked on
about 100 of them very seriously
and I think it's noteworthy. The
governor didn't have to veto
very many bills, um, and.
There's a reason for that.
That's because so much good work
is being done by this committee,
by the House Judiciary by Senate
Judiciary and by all the other
committees is the, the bills
that get up to the governor's
desk are are pretty well vetted
and uh pretty well drafted and
amended, so it's a shout out to
us. We had 384 bills for it.
I know there are many
disappointed people, but 384 is
a big number, I think that's
important because again, the,
the two judiciary committees get
a lot of criticism. The chairs.
Uh, take it on the chin quite a
bit, but yeah, if the house got
384, we got, I don't remember
the final count, but it's well
over 300 bills in the Senate
Judiciary Committee and, and
realized, rumor something else
just like the House Judiciary,
they don't reach us for the 1st
234 weeks of the session.
They're in the first preliminary
committee, so we're really
hearing that number of bills
really in about the last 30
days, um, and, and hearing, and
then hearing your bills and our
bills back and forth. So there
was a lot of really good work
done and, and I appreciate all
of you that
Loss and I, I want to take a
moment to thank all of you who
have to be on this committee. I
just with some amusement,
Senator Brantley, uh, you know,
we had on the Senate Judiciary
Committee, we had 3 new
Republican members, all of them
were new and, and I was told
that it's because nobody wanted
to be on Senate Judiciary. Uh,
so, uh
don't take it personally. So, so
I wanna thank all of you who, I
wanna thank all of you who asked
for this committee, or if you
got stuck with this committee
and didn't want to be on this
committee, we're going to try
and make iterative Chandler and
I got to try and make it a good.
committee for you too, so others
is a Senator Truillo and then.
Thank you, thank you, Mr.
Chairman. I will just say that
it wasn't that I didn't want to
be on Senate Judiciary. You just
can't be on finance and
judiciary at the same time. So,
um, if that could happen, I
would have loved to have been,
but, uh, Senator Bergman's just
a text and, uh, you might have
wished that you had adjourned,
but that, um, maybe we should
discuss. OK.
Oh yeah.
Oh yeah,
very familiar with comebacks.
There are kinds of, um,
I just wanted to put in a
request for another meeting from
CCJ and Espanola, um, and I
think it's only Martinez and I
rep Martinez and I that are
actually from Espanola, but I
know that that whole
question of crime and how per
capita and how they want to
turn, I received a number of
comments when we met there last
time.
And I, and they were really
positive, so.
Thank you.
Thank you. We, we had a great
meeting there. There were some
individuals there who were very
impressive with what they're
doing in Espanola and good
again, opportunity for us to
learn from them. And remember
that last year, um, in 2024, we
had 17 days of meetings of 5
with the meetings, 5 out of the
8 meetings were in Santa Fe, and
that's because our focus was so
committed to the special session
and the special session agenda
and the leadership task in this
committee, uh, I think
appropriately to, to really try.
prepare for that session and so
we really kind of had the the
interim last year committed very
strongly to, to a singular
purpose and, and many of the
meetings here in Santa Fe, so I
look forward to going back
around the state elsewhere too,
so Espanol is a good suggestion.
Others, I select TRC on a boat,
but um yeah, the, remember again
when we when we made this
committee about justice, just so
many of the topics that come
before the legislature don't fit
into any of the other committees
neatly, right? And so, so for
example, this
at times has heard any number of
things including the Texas
speed, New Mexico litigation,
uh, which I'm told is close to
maybe getting a settlement
buzz going on, so all kinds of
interesting things we can call
justice.
Anyone else? Thank you for
allowing Representative Chandler
and me to have a, have a heavy
gavel. I think everybody got a
fair opportunity to be heard. We
keep tight time limits, and it
means sometimes cutting you all
off, but thank you for
respecting our role in doing
that and we're a jour.
