Yeah, no, I understand.
OK
Oh.
Not exactly. I had to rein a
couple in, um, so good morning,
everybody. This is the 2nd day
of our courts corrections and
Justice Interim committee and
first on our agenda is
can't find my agenda.
Oh.
First on our agenda today is the
exciting title of Blood Draws
and video confrontation
practical issues in DWI law. So
happy to see Representative
Reeb, and I'll turn the floor
over to you and you can
introduce and and adjust as
appropriate. Sure, thank you,
Madam Chair. I'm echoing a
little.
So I am excited that this got on
the agenda because as everybody
probably knows, we've been,
we've been pushing legislation
for the last couple sessions. We
had Ivy Soto's bill that it was
very overwhelming to everybody.
And then the year before, I know
myself and Representative Rehm
introduced a bill with Curtis's
help and everything. Um, and so
really, uh, and, and we included
in this also, uh, a discussion
on, uh,
Testimony via video, uh, because
since COVID and the lab
analysts, um, having to travel
all over the place for DWIs. I
think it is a contributing
factor to why so many are
getting dismissed and things of
that nature. Um, but I'm really
just going to do the
introduction, you know,
obviously these officers are
experts in this area for the
everyday DWI stops and what they
deal with, and then, uh, Brian
is with DPS and they allowed her
to come and she's got all the
case law and research for us,
so.
I'll turn it over to them to
introduce themselves and, and
that's really all I have to say,
Madam Chair, right now.
Thank you.
Madam Chair and all the
representatives.
I
Can you hear me?
Did you hear what I just said?
Madam Chair and all the
representatives.
Two reasons I'm happy to be
here. One, thank all for your
service to our state. I'm
running the state fair this
year.
I love the state fair, but it's
kind of nice to get away from
the madness and the noise of the
state fair, so I'm happy to be
in Espanola this morning. Um,
listen, my name is Curtis Ward.
I've been doing this state
police thing since 2001. DWI has
been my passion my entire
career. Um, I started the first
DDBI unit for the state police
back in 2003, and I've got about
3000 DDBI arrests under my name.
So been around the block in the
DWI world. Uh, my goal, my
Ultimately what we want, I'm not
a politician, so if I use terms
and things that aren't.
They don't sound like I'm a
politician or a lawyer. I'm just
a street cop that's done this a
lot, so several things because
I've been around for so long, I
know the world before the
Birchfield case came down from
the Supreme Court, US Supreme
Court in 2016. I keep hearing
grumblings that some people just
don't understand kind of what
the world looked like before
that and what the world looks
like looks like now from the
police standpoint, and what are
we after? So if I can just put
in plain terms really quickly
what things used to look like
back in the day.
Birchfield, pre 2016.
If I made a traffic stop and had
reason to believe the person was
too impaired to safely drive and
they ended up getting arrested
for DWI. What happened next was
I would give them the option to
either blow into a breath
machine, give me a blood, a
blood draw, or both, and it was
before Birchfield, it was up to
me whether I wanted one, the
other, or both in the event they
said no to any of those, I was
able to charge aggravated DWI
for the refusal. Birchfield came
along and I actually agree with
a lot of the verbiage and
Birchfield, in essence,
Birchfield tells us that it's an
invasive procedure to
Take blood out of somebody's
body.
Without their consent.
So in New Mexico there's 3 ways
to get blood. We can get
consent, we can basically in a
nutshell, ask for their
permission to draw their blood.
If they say yes, we get their
blood. We can get a warrant or
we can have an exigent
circumstance. Those are the
three ways to get blood into
Mexico post Birchfield. What's
changed since Birchfield is
prior to Birchfield coming down,
like I said, if, if a person
said, no, I'm not going to give
you my blood.
Um, a blood draw. I could charge
him with aggravated DDBI can no
longer do that. I can still do
that if they refuse a breath
test, but I can't do that if
they refuse blood. So that leads
us to, OK, I've got a person
who.
I feel I have probable cause to
make a DWI arrest. I have reason
to believe they're under the
influence of drugs or sometimes
drug and drugs and alcohol,
drugs being the primary
contributing factor. I want to
get their blood so I can see
what's in there, um, to what
extent or to what level and what
kind of drugs are they on.
But unless in in New Mexico
what's preventing me from doing
that and the reason kind of
we're here is.
I can't do that unless the DWI
arrests that I've made is a
felony. Several ways to get a
felony, you can have 3 prior
convictions. You can be involved
in a crash that created great
bodily harm or death. Those are
your options. If I don't have
one of those three things.
I can't get a warrant for a
person's blood in Mexico and at
the end of the day.
I'll let the lawyers talk about
the legal side of this, but at
the end of the day, we'd really
like to change that because I
guess from my standpoint,
If I could give you an example
of how this might look in my
world. I've made a traffic stop.
This is post Birchfield. This is
last night.
I made a traffic stop last
night. I have reason to believe.
Um, that the person that I've
now arrested is under the
influence or too impaired to
safely drive. B, I have reason
to believe it's more likely
drugs than alcohol. I would like
to get their blood, um, I've now
got handcuffs on them and I
asked them for their blood and
they say no. And then I
determined that there, um,
It's not a felony level DDBI. So
what I have is.
My training and experience to
leave me what led me to believe
this person's too impaired to
safely drive, but then I get
into a courtroom and that only
takes me so far. What I'd really
like to have is the blood
results.
Stemming from that resist that
arrest.
Um, and I guess in my world,
what I'd like is
What I'm not asking for officers
to just be able to go get blood
willy-nilly because virtual is
kind of a big deal, um, and
taking blood out of somebody's
body is a big deal. What I, what
we want at the end of the day is
if I have probable cause to
believe this person is too
embared to safely drive, and I
can put into words and present
that to a judge, and the judge
says, yes, you actually have
probable cause.
Now I have a piece of paper
signed by a judge says that,
that says, I can draw blood,
misdemeanor or felony. Um, now I
can walk into the courtroom with
a much better chance of being
able to show to the factfinder
or judge or jury that yeah, this
person was too impaired to
safely drive. Here's what led me
to that conclusion, and here's
the results, the chemical
results to back it up.
That's the Birchfield thing. I'm
sure you guys are gonna have
questions and at the end of
this, um, on the testimony thing
like, uh,
Uh, Ms. Reeves said.
Yeah, the SLD is really
shorthanded.
And their inability to provide
Video testimony they're
responsible for the entire
state. A lot of cases happening
across the state at any given
time, and our ability to get
those people in person to
testify, sometimes very
difficult. So your high-level
cases, you're very, you know,
the ones that hit the media,
things like that, sure they're
gonna be there, but your every
day, um, you know, the number of
cases versus the number of
experts able to be in person at
any given place in New Mexico.
It's tricky, and we don't want
to lose cases as a result of
that. Um,
Defense will argue completely
respect this. The video
testimony that I think the
biggest problem with the video
testimony is the best way to
read a person is in person, like
you guys are all looking at me
and judging me right now. Does
this guy even know what he's
talking about? You can tell that
by the way I speak, by the way I
sit, by my posture, by my voice
inflection, all these things
matter. So if I'm a defense
attorney, absolutely. I'm gonna
argue that, um.
But I also believe that.
You can get a pre gauge off
somebody,
read their ability, read their
read their, um.
Credibility
Early read their credibility. I
was at the state fair till one
o'clock this morning.
A lot of noises, um, you can
judge somebody's credibility off
a video. I mean, we've been
doing this for a while, um, with
the whole Zoom thing and Teams
thing because of COVID, um.
So again, I'll let the lawyers
talk about the lawyers side of
it, but that's kind of my take
on it and hopefully that clears
up some of the misconceptions or
misunderstanding about how the
world looks different to us
pre-birchfield versus now.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Brianne Begay, um, and
before we get too further along,
I want to make sure the
committee knew who was sitting
to my left. Um, if you could
introduce yourself, Sergeant.
Morning, um, Raymundo Lu Juan, I
am a sergeant with the Mexico
State Police out of Albuquerque.
I'm currently assigned to
command the DWI unit full-time.
Uh, it's only a DWI unit that we
have as New Mexico State Police.
I started my career with New
Mexico State Police back in May
of 2015, um, during that time, I
around about 1200, uh, DWI
investigations and the rest, um,
and full-time DWI since 2016,
so.
I've been working with the long
DWI for a very long time as
well.
I just wanted to make sure the
committee knew that and if you
have any questions, um, for the
sergeant as well. Um, I'm with
the Department of Public Safety.
I'm one of the lawyers that
works for the agency. Um,
however, I started my career as
a prosecutor in the Metro
division in the 2nd judicial.
And in fact, Curtis Ward was one
of my very first witnesses for a
jury trial on DWI, um, the DWI,
um, state police crew, um, was,
would have been, um, Ward
Curran, um, and a few others,
and they actually helped me.
Learn how to prosecute DWI. They
were so educated and so, um,
comfortable with, um, their,
their work in that field that I
learned from them, so I, it's
kind of full circle to be here
next to him, um, presenting, um,
alongside, but what I was asked
to talk a little bit about um
and thank you for having us. I
think these are very important
topics, um, and as I drove up
the highway, I saw the Espanola
Police Department has a large
mural that says, please don't
dream.
and drive. Um, and I, that
caught my eye and, you know, we
see these signs, what do they
mean? We have the NDWI signs on
our bulletin boards all across
the state. What does that mean
and how have things changed even
since I prosecuted, um, and in
New Mexico, similar to the rest
of the country, we are seeing
more and more of, um, driving
while under the influence of
intoxicating drugs as well as a
combination of drugs and
alcohol. And so while I
Haven't been prosecuting for
some time. I'm still tapped in
to that community and spoke with
some of my colleagues, um,
throughout the state to discuss
with them some of the problems
they're seeing. Um, and so I'll
be willing to answer questions
on that. Um, but what I kind of
just wanted to do is just a
quick, um, case law, um,
overview here of blood draws.
Um, I did prepare a slight
handout that was provided a
little bit late, but I hope you
all can take a look at it and as
the lieutenant stated, um, the,
the
Fourth Amendment, um, does give
that, um, broad language about
how we, the people, um, shall be
free from warrantless searches
and unreasonable searches in
Caesars, and our New Mexico um
constitution also talks about
that as well. And so I put those
there so they kind of frame our
discussion, um, before I, um,
uh, left the second judicial,
um, 2016 Birchfield case came.
and I did a little bit of a
breakdown here on your handouts
you can take a look at that. But
basically it addressed implied
consent laws in states and
specifically it was North
Dakota, the Birchfield versus
North Dakota case and talks
about the fact that implied
consent laws, which we have,
which you all are familiar with
under 66, um, 8105 through
668112. Um, it permits law
enforcement officers who have a
reasonable grounds to believe
that an arrested person
Driving a motor vehicle under
the influence of intoxicating
liquors to direct the
administration of multiple or
different chemical tests. And so
what we have in New Mexico is we
have language that talks about
that the officer may designate
which test to use, uh, blood or
breath or both, and we still
have that language in our
statute. Um, however, now once
the 2016 ruling came down, um,
it no longer allowed for
officers to choose to give a
warrantless, um, blood test,
right? So it only allows the
officer to give a breath test
under the implied consent
without seeking a warrant. And
how that has truly impact the
state is that if you refuse a
blood draw, right? If the
officer says, OK, um, and, and
I'll actually, I'll just use,
um, State v. Vargas, which is
further down on your handout.
It's the 2017 case.
That really applied Birchfield
to New Mexico. So in that case,
there was, um, a woman who drove
through a checkpoint, and she
blew, um, 0.04, 0.05. She gave a
a breath test willingly. The
officer believed she was still
impaired and was concerned, so
he said, I'm, I would like to
give you a blood test and
although she initially agreed,
she later declined, um, and so
the officer, um.
went ahead and um had that, um,
or went ahead and had that um
blood draw taken, um, and then
later the Supreme Court said
that that was not following the
Birchfield testing, um, and that
she could not have been charged
with aggravated for refusal. Um,
and so here we have the issue,
um, where Birchfield has
impacted New Mexico is that one
we cannot charge aggravated if
you refuse a blood for a
misdemeanor, and we cannot
charge
uh,
and we cannot charge under, say,
our, our rules where we are, we
know what percent you're
impacted besides the impaired to
the slightest degree. So in
Vargas, the officer took the
refusal, charged her with
aggravated and the Supreme Court
said that was not allowed
because you cannot give somebody
an aggravated under the implied
consent for a, for a blood draw
for a refusal to do a blood
draw.
And then Vargas also reiterated
the fact that in New Mexico, if
you refuse a blood draw, unless
it's a felony, as the lieutenant
stated, you cannot get a warrant
for that if it's only a
misdemeanor, right? If you don't
have great bodily harm, if you
don't have, um, say, multiple
convictions that are clear on
the record, um, uh, 4 or more.
So, um, that basically, and, and
New Mexico we are story v. New
Mexico also addresses that, but
Vargas really gave us that
framework in New Mexico on on
those, um, concerns. And so,
speaking with my colleagues
across the state, different
jurisdictions, different DA's
offices are handling the changes
in the law differently. And we
have some, we have, you know, 8
years or so, right, since
Birchfield came down. And so
different jurisdictions have
come up with
Strategies on how to address
this and what do they do, um, in
the second, I, I am familiar
with the fact that they are
having difficulty when they have
a checkpoint driver who either
refuses to do fields, um, or
refuses, um, to do a blood draw
and the officer believes they
have ingested some sort of drug
based upon their training and
experience, and they are not
able to get a blood draw. So
Investigation stops there.
They do charge them with the DWI
if they believe there's enough
evidence, um, but they don't
have necessarily bad driving
unless, you know, say they like
hit something in the checkpoint,
they don't have the bad driving
to, um, to, to go on, but they
know based upon their training
experience that this person is
likely under the influence of
something, even if they don't
smell that alcohol. And so their
investigation stops. They are
allowed to charge them with a
simple misdemeanor DWI.
And then pass that off to the
prosecution in order to make a
case, um, and so I'm, I am
talking to my colleagues and
they're telling me that
sometimes they'll decline to
prosecute those cases. They
don't have enough facts besides
what I just told you, um, or
they are losing to judges, um,
at directed verdicts, so they,
they start the trial, um, and
then the judge says that there's
not enough evidence because you
don't have driving or any other
circumstantial evidence to show
that they're impaired to the
slight.
Degree, um, or, um, they are,
are losing these on pretrial
hearings. So this is what
they're seeing more and more
with these, um, stops where the
officers believe there's more
than just alcohol, or they don't
smell anything or where they're
seeing erratic behavior that's
related to what the officers
are, are, um, in their best, um,
judgment believe is some sort of
intoxicating drug. And so with
the misdemeanor, those cases
are, are, they're having.
difficulty prosecuting those in
the second.
In the first, my understanding,
um, based upon talking with my
colleagues there, is that they
are dismissing cases as they
come in in order to get the
information that they need. Um,
and then refiling the cases as
they've evaluated them and get
all the evidence from the law
enforcement agencies, um, with
their felony DWIs where there is
a blood draw or someone has
consented to a blood draw on a
misdemeanor. Um, they are it's
taking them 6 to 9 months to
receive those results from the
blood.
Chemists, um, and, um, analysis
from the SLD, um, yes, and, uh,
so that is taking them some time
to refile them and they are
seeing more repeat offenders
because these individuals are no
longer under any sort of
court-ordered pretrial services,
or they're, they're not pending
charges because they've had to
dismiss in order to refile. And
so that presents a public safety
issue, um, that I'm sure you all
can, um, uh, relate.
To or, or, um, uh, understand.
So, and then in the rural
communities, that's another
issue that they're seeing, um,
where even if they are able to
get a blood draw, um, it does
take some time and there's a 3
hour window under the law to get
that in order for it to hold up
in court and be able to use to
prove that someone was under the
influence. So that's kind of
like the broad um concerns that,
that we're seeing, um, you know,
From 8 years ago when Birchfield
came down, um, different
jurisdictions are handling it
different. They're still trying
their best. Um, I know that drug
recognition experts, um, they're
specialized law enforcement
officers who've gone to
intensive training in order to
be able to evaluate, um, an
individual to determine whether
or not they may be under the
influence of intoxicating drugs.
There aren't that many of those
officers out there and only in
the second does APD have
A whole, a whole unit or 2 or 3
individuals we can't.
That's right. That's right. And
and as
as Lieutenant is reminding me,
um, that it is still voluntary
right for an individual to
subject themselves or to be
subjected to a drug recognition,
um, exam, which is follows a DWI
investigation when the officer
believes there is more to, um,
more to this individual that
would just be alcohol. Um, and
so these are the
The problems that they're
seeing. Um, I don't know if how
you want to do it, Madam Chair,
if you want us to stop and take
questions on this or if you want
me to go into some of the video
confrontation discussion. I
think we should do it all
together because I'm afraid
we'll get so involved in the DWI
conversation. We won't ever get
to the video. So let's do it all
and, and people can keep you on
the list. Sure. OK. OK, great.
Um, so before I just, um,
conclude just my little brief
overview of our conversation on
blood draws in New Mexico.
has been in recent years,
proposed legislation, HB 158 was
proposed in 2023, um, which.
Right here, um.
Which was presented by or which
was sponsored by Representative
Reeb and Representative Ream,
um, and it did address the, the
concerns, um, changing, um, the
New Mexico implied Consent Act
to allow for chemical tests to
be taken, um, for, uh, with a
warrant, a blood test for a
misdemeanor. And so there was
some attempt to do that and I,
um, I know the representative
can talk a little bit more about
how far that went, um, but we're
here today because it's
proposed.
Right? And that's why we're
having this conversation so we
can talk about, you know, where
this body wants to go, um, and
what you want to see coming up.
Um, another bill that addressed
this was Senator Iy Soto's large
bill, um, from this, just this,
this last year, 2024 SB 190. And
there was, um, multiple, um,
requested change proposed
changes to the DWI statute. I
think some folks have called it
a complete overhaul, um, and I
don't know how the senator who's
not here today.
Um, would call it, but I think
that, um, it's definitely, um,
attempted to address multiple
concerns within DWI that have
been outstanding for years,
including the Birchfield Vargas.
Um, and so that's there within
Senate Bill 190 as well. Um, and
I think it's, it's good that I'm
moving directly on to video
confrontation because it does
play into the fact that here in
New Mexico we, we do have a lack
of resources. We have a lack of
the ability to recruit.
Analysts and chemists to our
state, um, based upon, um,
other, uh, states' ability to
pay more, other states' ability
to, um, offer certain other
benefits. And so here in New
Mexico, as I told you, um, we do
have an issue with the state
laboratories division getting,
um, their results and getting
their their work done in a, what
we'll just say timely matter.
And of course, I don't believe
any of those analysts are
sitting around twiddling their
Thumbs waiting to write these
reports, but but there is just a
lack of resources. And so what
we have here is, and I, I saw
some of this as a prosecutor in
the second even is when we had a
blood draw case, um, we would
have to ask for a definitive
trial setting because we only
had 1 or 2 SLD um analyst
doctor, I think Doctor Wayne
Wong. Doctor Wong and then a
woman by the name of Pitti
Sarker and they were the only
ones who could come in and
provide
This testimony. Um, and so we
would have to get a designated,
a dedicated, um, confirmed trial
date and then try to work around
their schedules where they were
testifying around the state. I
don't know if it's the case
anymore, but at one point in
time, some of these analysts
were being flown around the
state to make the trials in
different rural communities and
then also in the urban areas. So
what, what we've done is we've
taken a look at this concept of
video confrontation, um, and
how, you know, with
Technology, um, with changes in,
um, um, I guess the, I guess
our, um,
our I guess our approaches to
things with COVID, um, and how
we do have the ability, um, to
put an individual in front of a
two-way audio visual, um, and
allow them to, um, be heard, be
seen by the defendant, be heard,
be seen by the judge, be heard,
be seen by a jury, as well as
the defense the defense attorney
and
Prosecution. And so we've, we've
done this actually in New
Mexico, um, since 2020, um, and
2022. We've done this with
preliminary hearings. Um, the
Supreme Court changed the rules.
I have them here. It's 53026202
and 7202 to allow, um,
individuals to appear virtually
in magistrate, Metro, and
district court for those
preliminary hearings, um, and so
long as the witness is able to
see, can be seen.
By the defendant counsel for the
prosecution and the defendant
and the judge. Um, and so we've,
we've tried to, um, to make
those changes in order to keep
up with with what was COVID er
restrictions, but also, um, with
the abilities that we have now
with two-way conferencing, um,
and so that has really changed,
um, and so in looking at this,
um, in New Mexico, we can follow
some other states who have
actually addressed this for
their forensic.
Analysts and their chemists, and
those two states that I, that I
was able to, um, uh, confirm
where Tennessee and North
Carolina, and they both have
state rules that allow for
chemists and forensic analysts
to testify remotely, um, and
those, um, in North Carolina,
that has been ongoing for about
10 years, although they adjusted
it recently and Tennessee more
recently. Um, and the federal
rules also, um, discussed this.
They allow it.
This is to remotely testify in
court under a good cause
standard. So obviously, the
judge would have to make that
determination, um, based upon
various factors, but they also
highlight the fact that they
also have a rule talking about a
subpoena can only compel witness
to court within a 100 mile
reach. So they've used the good
cause standard in some
jurisdictions in the federal
courts to allow for that. If
someone's beyond a 100, say a
rural community, a chemist
testifying who lives in Albu
Turkey traveling to Hobbs or
Clovis, um, to testify. Um, so
they've used that rule too. So
we have some good, um, we have
some good examples of how this
can work and how individuals
Sixth Amendment, um, and, um,
New Mexico constitutional rights
to confrontation, um, can be
still upheld and not violated.
Um, and because of our issues,
um, with our analysts, we're
hoping that this body would
consider that, um, and so has
there been
Any proposed legislation? Yes,
there has. Um, Representative
Reed presented, um, just.
The 2nd session of 2024. House
Bill 62, which does address
that, um, and would allow, um, a
laboratory analyst who
subpoenaed to court to testify,
um, virtually or I think the
word we that um we used here was
appearance by means of
interactive video. So, um, we do
have some examples, um, and we
do have the preliminary hearing
here in New Mexico that has
already been adjusted to
accommodate the state and the
needs that we had during.
COVID.
And um I don't know if there's
any questions yet or if there's
anyone that wants to jump in
from the panel, but if anything,
I'll just stop talking.
Representative Reed, did you
want to add any?
laid it out great.
And those, yes, so those bills,
I know that, uh, my first bill
and Representative Ream's bill
got through judiciary and then
sat on the house floor and then
I know Iy Soto's bill got
through the Senate side and then
I remember came to Judiciary and
it did not get through
judiciary. And actually the, the
video testimony one got all the
way through the house side and
just never got hurt on the
Senate if I remember. So we did
get some positive feedback on
it. It's just what I'm trying to
figure out.
where everyone feels about this
and you know, if we can get some
positive feedback and where you
want to go with this because I'd
like to really still try to do
this legislation and I really
think this committee could
provide some good feedback for
me. OK, thank you very much,
Representative. Um, I have on my
list so far Representative Ream
and Senator Maestas,
anyone represented Barrego.
Anyone else at this point?
OK, well, Representative Rehm,
Madam Chair. Um, I'd like to
begin by noting for the
committee that we actually have
two different standards for DWI.
If we go to House Bill 158, and
we go to page 2.
And we go to line 2 and 3 for
alcohol, it says that you're
impaired to the slightest
degree.
But for
Uh, drugs, we go down on page 2
line 5 through 7, unsafely
operate a motor vehicle, and I
don't know why we as a
legislature made two different
standards. There should be one
standard. Whatever that is,
whatever the legislature decides
that standard should be.
There shouldn't be two different
standards.
Uh, the other thing I'd like to
talk for a moment when I was a
DWI officer,
um,
Do you need this?
He was just being a helpful
person.
Yeah, yeah, no, we're, we're,
we're, we're playing games with
your brain there, Bill.
The other thing, what I saw, uh,
as a DWI officer, of course,
alcohol and marijuana were
frequently mixed, but when we
started through the 80s, we now
add cocaine and PCP and all this
and all these cocktails started
coming up and they were, uh,
very deadly, you know, um, and
so the FIR that you have for
House Bill 187. If you go over
to page 3 at the bottom.
significant issues. Now, let me
talk about how scientific lab
does their analysis. The first
thing they do is they look for
alcohol. If they have 0.08, they
stop.
If they don't have 0.08, meaning
it's less than they do the drug
screen and this is
pre-birchfield, what they did.
This analysis, so you look at
what it says and you're going to
note that of those that were not
08 and above 90% tested positive
for drugs and alcohol.
So, um,
Uh, it is a real problem in our,
in our state. There's some other
literature that uh, Nancy has
sent out to the committee and,
uh, you know, the governor's,
uh, uh, commission on DWI noted
that there is a real increase in
drug driving, and we need to
address that.
Um, I sent out some information
that Nancy just sent out and it
came from a OMI report that I
was reviewing and if you note,
they're now showing on that OMI
report, how quickly the drugs
dissipate. So let's talk about
marijuana for a moment.
Marijuana, yes, you create 234
metabolites as Doctor Wong
testified previously.
But what the blood, um, uh,
analyst who, you know, expert is
going to testify is this
metabolite, which has a short
life.
is the one that is responsible
for the errant driving and that
uh and I don't remember the name
of it, it's very long, but it
has a 3 hour life.
From the time you smoked, and
that's what you're kind of
seeing that they're talking
about in the OMI report and
they're showing that the 5
nanograms, well, 5 nanograms was
what other states used as their
background
for, uh, recreational marijuana.
Now I do agree that there's not
a lot of research out there that
5 nanograms you're impaired, but
I want to back up for a moment.
So the officer is observed
errant driving. He has stopped
you. He determined that you're
impaired. You have failed to
field sobriety test, you're
under arrest for DWI. Now
they're, they're going for the
blood or the breath test. So we
have to remember this is not a.
We're just gonna test everybody
driving down the road, which
I've heard previously, you know,
they have to be under arrest
before you can take the test.
Um,
Anyway, I think we should look
at what the other states have
done 5 nanograms or whatever,
but.
Uh, then there's another problem
as to why we need to do these
search warrants, um, uh, and
they're, they're now electronic.
They can do them electronically.
So if a person is involved in a
major collision in the Roswell
Clovis area. They're flown to
Lubbock.
If they're in Las Cruces,
they're flown to El Paso. Well,
you can't just go down to
another state and obtain a
search warrant and take that
test within 3 hours, which is
what we mandate by our statute.
There's one other problem we'll
end up seeing very minor
collisions, or we assume they're
minor to begin with. I can give
you an example of a man that was
involved in a motorcycle wreck
and had a real small little
raspberry above his left eye.
Well, he went to the hospital
with his brother just to, you
know, more to see how his
brother. When I got to the
hospital, the blood vessel in
his head ruptured and he became
a paraplegic. Well,
When we're at the scene
investigating it, the results
may change later on. So if we
couldn't get that, that blood
test early enough. We don't have
the evidence for the felony case
now.
Anyway, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Maestas and then
Representative Barrego.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Thank you presenters very much.
It's always good to revisit this
statute in here.
My brother reams rendition, um.
Because it's awesome rendition.
I, I, uh, just real quick, Madam
Chair, on the, um, on the
difference between the alcohol
and the drug, uh.
Looking on page 2.
Of 158. That is very
interesting, um, the under the
influence of of alcohol is.
You know, a 0.08 or greater, and
then the judges came up with the
magic words impaired to the
slightest degree, which made it
even stronger.
With regards to drugs, there's
no per se violation.
So someone could be.
You know, someone could be 0.08.
And literally driving a vehicle
safely, but the law doesn't
care. They're still guilty of a
DWI. And so I think that's the
standard for drugs is since
there's no per se violation, you
have to prove that they're
incapable of, of driving safely.
I don't know, just, just my
guess. The 3 hours, um, the 3
hours, there's not a prohibition
on 3 hours, uh, you can, uh,
You know, take someone's blood
3.5 hours later, but you
wouldn't get the per se guilty.
Um, we, we did a, I think it's a
biological contradiction, but,
but in statute, we put in the 3
hours that there's a biological
phenomenon of 0.082 hours, 59
minutes after the crime occurred
and that still attaches and
makes you guilty of a Dra, but
you, is that correct that you
can do a blood draw any time.
It's just the 3 hours locks in
the per se violation.
Madam Chair, Mr. Senator, yeah,
uh.
The 3 hour window means
If I, if I make an arrest and
then within that 3 hour time
period, they, they blow 0.10.
It's considered to be what they
were at the time of driving. If
I go outside the 3 hour window,
then we would have to put an
expert on the stand, use
retrograde extrapolation to have
the expert explain that based on
male, female, weight, height,
things like that.
Um, people are smarter than me
can, can take a person and say,
OK, if you blew this amount at
this time, 4 hours after the
time of driving, based on
science, um,
to believe as experts that you
would have been.
This at the time, whatever they
they come up with at the time of
driving. So that only comes into
play when we go outside that
three-hour window. So there's
nothing that says we only have 3
hours and if we don't get it
within 3 hours, we're just done.
It just means the rules kind of
change the way we attack this
thing kind of changes on the
criminal side and the legal side
in the courtroom, it changes
when we get that chemical test
outside that 3 hour window.
Thank you. No, and that's rare,
Madam Chair. It's very rare. In
the old days, we didn't need an
expert, we just kind of
extrapolated the defense
argument was
Well, yeah, he's a 0.09 an hour
later, but it was 0.06 when he
was driving, um, so it'd be kind
of like that same argument, but
it would be tougher for the
defense 3.5 hours later. Um, but
anyway, it's rare that there's
a.
Breath or blood 3 hours later on
the, on the, on the birch field.
If someone's DWI, I'm sure, as
you know, the, the penalty is 0
to 90 days, if it's aggravated
DWI, the penalty is 2 to 90
days.
So theoretically a judge could
sentence somebody to 90 days or
2 days or 5 days, we, we, the
state merely loses that
mandatory time.
Uh, which is many times used in
a plea agreement to to drop the
aggravated. So my point is, uh,
you can argue consciousness of
guilt. If someone refuses a
breath test.
And you have no chemical
evidence. Now granted, you have
an odor of alcohol and that's
the key is there's an odor
alcohol. There's not an odor of
drugs many times,
um, you can still argue
consciousness of guilt. So
didn't Burchfield merely
prohibit us from charging the
two days? Can we still have the
exact same trial.
Uh, and, and use consciousness
of guilt.
Now granted, I think it's a
better, anyway, what's your
thoughts on that?
Yeah, the, the 2 I did 2 days, 2
up to 90 is basically a
sentencing or it's an
enhancement to the charge,
right? Um,
I don't think that our biggest
concern is the amount of jail
time possibly attached to a
guilty on an ag I think our
biggest concern is just our
ability to get the, the blood in
the first place via a warrant
when it's a misdemeanor. I think
that's our biggest concern as
far as being able to charge
aggravated for somebody who
refuses.
Um, not really concerned about
that. What I wanna be able to do
is get blood on a misdemeanor
DDBI, um,
Whereas right now I can't,
unless it's a felony, I can't.
Thank you for that. Thank you.
uh, the, um,
And so in the in the smaller
bill that was proposed, it's
kind of a blanket you can get a.
Uh, you can get a warrant on a
misdemeanor DWI.
You know, for any reason,
obviously you need, you need the
reason on the, on the bigger
bill, the, the 190.
The Ibito rebuild it it draws a
distinction on page 72 and 73,
it talks about
That the person has to ref has
to uh.
Essentially blow.
Below 0.08. In other words, the
person's whacked out of their
mind and they blow a 0.02.
And you're like, wait a second,
this person does not is not just
a 0.02 alcohol, there's
something else going on.
Under that, um, isn't that what
we want? Like, do we want a
blanket?
Uh
Statute or should we get more
specific, uh,
As what you described that the
person blows under a 0.08 or
blows 00 on alcohol, but you
know that person's impaired.
Isn't that kind of what we're
getting at, um.
I want to make sure I
understand, Madam Chair,
Senator, I want to make sure I
understand what you're asking,
um.
I think in Mr. Ay Soto's.
Like, essentially what Iy Soto's
proposal accomplish our goal.
Kind of, I guess the part that I
don't understand about his
verbiage and in his bill is the
need or the requirement to first
do a breath test showing that
the person's under 0.08 before
trying to go after blood when.
Why go there if I know the
likely contributing factor is
more likely drug versus alcohol.
Why subject a person to blowing
first, um.
Showing that they're under 0.08,
I guess.
It's an extra step that I don't
understand. Is it that big of a
deal? Not really, but why, why
mandate that we do a breath test
when we know the likely
contributing factor is drugs
versus alcohol. Got you. No, I
think, uh, that's a great
question. I think, Madam Chair,
that if it's 0.08, you don't
need the blood draw, regardless
of how drugged out that person
is like Mr.
Reem said, um,
If I get a, it doesn't really
matter if it's 0.08.
Or higher if I send a blood test
to SLD. The first thing you're
going to do is test for alcohol.
If it's 0.08 or greater, they
could be loaded on all sorts of
drugs and we're not going to
know it because they're going to
stop because I have a per se
violation on the alcohol side,
so they're gonna stop. No need
to go any further with the
blood. Um, it's when it's under
that now I can take it a step
further and say, OK, there's
0.06 on alcohol, but here's the
other stuff that is also in
their system. Understood. And
then also,
Um, how often, how often do
folks just admit to drug use?
Madam Chair, sir, the very
common, um, it's kind of weird.
It's, it's kind of.
But a lot of times people
It's the weirdest thing. I'll
say like as an example, sir, how
much did you drink tonight?
Couple of years. Anything else?
Yeah, I took a couple of blues
and
yeah, smoke a joint and stuff
like that, but I only had 2
beers. It's the weirdest thing.
Um, white people do this? I
don't know. But it's very common
for them to admit.
Yeah, I'm not drunk. Uh, I'll
even blow for you. Let me blow
in your little machine to show
you that I'm not drunk.
Yet in the same sentence,
they'll tell us the other
plethora of drugs that they've
ingested.
But in people's minds, I don't
think.
The society as a whole is a
grasp the idea that DVI doesn't
just mean alcohol, it means any
influence or any, any substance
you put in your body that can
influence your or impair your
ability to safely drive. That's
considered a drug. Um.
Yeah, so people don't grasp
that, so they're just
willy-nilly saying, I did this
and this and this, but I only
drink 2 beers.
Come on, man.
No, it is weird. Thank you,
thank you, the, um, sorry for
Mr. Mr. Moore, what is your rank
now?
Madam Chair, sir, I'm a, I'm a
lieutenant now. OK, thank you,
Lieutenant. Thank you.
Sergeant back in the day back
many,
many years.
When, when Sergeant Ward's name
was on the complaint, you just,
you just put it out. It was game
over. The um so so the point I
want to make Madam Chair, is
that that if this doesn't pass
the, the, the difference is the
odor when the officer says I
smelled an odor of alcohol, it
gives tremendous credibility
that that person in fact drank
something, then you couple it
with the driving, the field and
then the, the breath test or the
refusal, which is a
consciousness of guilt. So I
think if those folks admit to
the drug use, I think you could
still get there.
little harder, uh, so we got to
just train our officers to be a
drug recognition experts where
they can identify this person on
meth, this person on heroin or
whatnot, and then also
prescription drugs are a killer
to drive on. I had a clamp and
was just sacked out on Xanax. It
took me 3 months to convince him
he was guilty because he's like,
but it was prescribed, and I'm
like, the body doesn't care if
it's prescribed or whether it's
legal, it's whether it impairs
you. So anyway.
The
Senator, we have representative
Barrego and then Senator and I
were.
Thank you Madam Chair. Um, thank
you, gentlemen and ladies, um,
So I, I'm looking at, I'm not a
lawyer, so I'll let the lawyers
do their thing, um, but when I
think about this issue with
regard to what you said earlier
about sometimes it takes up to 9
months to get a response from
the people who are the experts,
and I think about that person
driving drunk for 9 months when
they got a violation, 9
additional months of nothing.
Happening to them. They're just
doing their thing. It, it
really, it really concerns me,
and I know you mentioned two
states that, um, but I think
both of those states are back
east. So I kind of think about,
um, you know, what is best
practice in terms of, um, like
what are other states doing to
because I'm sure other states
are having the same issues that
we're having, um,
You know.
I, I, I wonder like about
effectiveness and efficiency,
like if we have 1 or 2 people in
the state that can actually
determine those blood tests and
in testify, what are we missing
there? I mean, we're not being
very efficient and that's no,
that's nothing toward the state
police because I know these guys
are out every day and you know,
APD and all of our police
officers, but like
What are we doing that's not
practical, um, in terms of
running.
You know, these tests that we
can improve on.
Madam Chair,
Representative Brigham, Madam
Chair, um, thank you for that
question and I, I cited to
Tennessee and North Carolina as,
as states that have done
specific changes to their rules,
um, in their state courts that
have allowed for forensic
analysts and chemists to
testify um via remote via remote
two-way audio visual. Um, but,
um, Representative Reeve's been
in, um, just recently, um, House
Bill 62, it actually inserted
Language to allow a chemist to
testify, um.
By appearance by means of
interactive video and it was
inserted into the implied
consent under the uh under the
implied Consent Act, which is
that 66, 8. Uh, hold on, I have
my notes here. 105 through, um,
8112. So it was inserted into
that saying basically if you're
a motorist and you, you have a
driver's license in New Mexico,
you have basically consented to
having an analyst testify.
That was that bill and as you
heard from the representative,
it didn't, it didn't get to the
floor. Um, but there are other
ways to address it, right? The
federal rules have, they have a
like a blanket rule for the
federal courts that allows for,
um, individuals to testify
remotely if there is good cause.
So, and then they also discussed
the fact that if it's over 100
mile radius from the courthouse,
perhaps that is good cause and
you could not subpoena someone
outside of that to appear in
person.
So we do have examples, um, and
you know, it's up to you all to
decide what works best and to
pass, pass the laws. Um, but
there are ways to look at this.
Perhaps it is under a good cause
standard, and the judge still
has to hear why this analyst
cannot make it to this court
hearing, or why it's going to
take them away from their
testing that's taking 9 months,
right? Or is this something that
as motorists and as individuals
who are out on the streets are
going to be um
Consenting to as part of the
implied consent. So I don't know
if that answered your question
Madam Chair, thank you for that.
Um, it seems to me like there's
two distinct issues with regard
to that piece of this is one is
that it's taking us 9 months to
get the results. And 2 is that
the testimonies are limited
because we only have a couple of
people in the state that are
experts in that field, so, you
know, um, and I'm not a
proponent really
of sourcing out but in some
instances, I mean, especially
when it's very technical in
nature, it seems to me like the
state could maybe we could find
people that we could get those
results faster than 9 months and
not allow that window of those
individuals driving drunk for an
additional 9 months before they
go before a judge
and then secondly is, Madam
Chair
issue that you just raised is
how do we sort of tighten that
window also. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Madam, would you mind if
we just, um, yes, Madam Chair
Representative Brego, um, I
think you have highlighted that
these are distinct issues, but
they do overlap, right? So what,
what we're, what we're here
before you today is to discuss
the fact that there is the issue
of testing taking so long. Um,
and we are also correlating that
issue with the
fact that these individuals are
stepping away from their labs,
right, in Albuquerque or
wherever that may be and driving
to Hobbs to testify because they
have to appear under our rules
in New Mexico. They have to
appear in person at trial. So
that two days or whatever that's
taking them to get to that trial
is taking them away from the
testing in the labs and things
like that. And I think if, um,
you know, it is something that
the state has effectively used
as contractors or even folks out
of state to
accomplish certain tasks, right?
I think that that would compound
the issues here because you
would have to bring in that
individual from another state to
testify at a trial in Hobbs or
Albuquerque or whatever. So I,
I, I, I see what you're saying.
They, I believe they overlap and
so that is why, you know, we
wanted to have this discussion
about letting an analyst testify
via video, um, obviously, um, as
long as, um, you know, it's
allowed under the rules. Thank
you, Madam Chair and
Yeah, I just think that that
highlights the question of, you
know, what is the most effective
route and the most efficient
route to
reach an end goal and it seems
to me like that, that piece of
it and I'm like I said earlier I
want to let the lawyers do their
thing with the other part of it,
but that piece in terms of
running an agency and and
ensuring that there we're doing,
we're being the most effective
and efficient in terms of
Our addressing those issues, I
think we really need to look at
best practices as much as
possible. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Nibert and then Senator
Cedila Lopez.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I may have misunderstood the
testimony that you provided, but
if someone blows 0.08. There's
no
Further way you could prove
aggravated.
DWI.
If that person was really zonked
out on whatever drug but only
below 0.08. You'd never get to
that point. Did I hear that
correctly? Madam Chair,
Senator Never,
um, yeah, that's it. If somebody
blows into my breath machine,
and it says 0.08 or anything
above that under 0.16, 0.16 or
higher makes it an aggravated
offense because of the 16, but
between 0.08 and 0.15.
It's considered a per se
violation. So my breath machine
doesn't.
Read anything other than
alcohol, so there could be a
whole slew of drugs in their
system, and it's not going to
detect that and because I have a
per se violation, let's say on
the blood side, let's say this
person says, Yes, I'll give you
my blood, and I sent it to SLD
and they test the blood and it
comes back at 0.10 or something
above 0.08 or greater, I have a
per se violation on the alcohol
side. So they're not going to
take that blood and test it
further to see what other
chemicals may or may not be in
their system because I already
have a per se
I have a 0.08 or greater on the
blood, therefore,
Um, yeah, I can't, I'm not going
to know anything beyond that.
Well, Madam Chair, and, and
Lieutenant, does that
Do, do you see in the field a
need to address that issue
because it seems to me that
there's a lot of people.
who are impaired by drug use
that are on the highway creating
problems
and they may
put down a beer, you know, while
they're driving as well, but,
but.
It seems to me that
That if you suspect they're on
drugs.
That we shouldn't have that.
Wall that prevents you from
getting evidence that may be
needed to get to the aggravated
um.
Offense, Madam Chair, that that
that's it, when you describe it
as a wall, that's why I'm here
today. That's why I care about
this because that wall in my
world is my inability to get a
warrant on a misdemeanor DDBI,
which is our most common DDBI
arrests. There's much many more
misdemeanor DDBI arrests than
are felonies, and
If I have that ability to get
blood, send it in and get it
tested. Now I have the ability
to not only because of my
training and experience, but now
I have this chemical test that
says Lieutenant Ward thought he
was under the influence of
fentanyl or whatever it was, and
I have a blood test that
confirms that I have a much more
solid case going into court, but
as it stands right now, I can
have reason to believe
somebody's high on something, I
can have enough probable cause
to put handcuffs on them and
take them to jail and charge
them with DDBI. When I get in a
courtroom, if I don't have
chemical evidence to
That up me sitting there as a
non-expert, non-doctor, just to
experienced police officer, I
can't just sit there and tell a
judge or jury, I'm pretty darn
sure that they were under the
influence of fentanyl or
whatever it was, that's not
going to get me anywhere. And if
I'm a defense attorney, I'm
going to tear that apart all
day, but with a chemical result
tested by our state lab to back
up my belief, my findings, now I
have a much better chance of
getting a conviction on that
case.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I think
that's something we need to look
at.
C.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
think I'm gonna,
you took my question, but I'm
gonna follow up a little bit
more. Um, why? Why did they stop
after the per se conviction?
There's nothing in law requiring
them to stop, is there?
Madam Chairman.
Senator, my best response to
that is, again, the level of
staffing at SLD and I don't
think they can legally, um, and
I'm being careful here, I'm not
a lawyer, but I think once they
get a per se violation with
somebody's blood, I don't know
how they would justify taking it
a step further and it's like,
well, we've got this guy's
blood, so while we're here,
let's just see what else is
there. I think they need like
their, their sole existence is
there is to determine, is there
a per se violation on alcohol,
and if yes, stop there because
that's what we're after.
If there's not a per se
violation on alcohol, then we
can.
Justify taking this blood a step
further and seeing what else may
be on board.
But, but if you say this person
was, you know, if you send it,
and you say, this person didn't
look like they were just buzzed
on alcohol. This person looked
more serious. Will you test for
other drugs? Won't they do that?
So, um, Madam Chair, um, good,
good morning, Senator. Um, you
know, I have not looked at the
SLD, which is under the
Department of Health. I have not
looked at their standard
operating procedure, but I can
tell you that if there was a
warrant, right, an affidavit
written by that officer and
approved by a judge for that
blood draw, and if there's not
particularized facts stating
that the officer believed this
person was under the influence
of an intoxicating drug, either
on top of alcohol
Or just, um, that drug, then I
don't believe the, the, the
Constitution would allow the SLD
to go further. So,
What's the problem with getting
a warrant?
Having, like if you stop
somebody.
And if this looks like a drug
situation and I trust your
experience that you've got a
reasonable suspicion or a, you
know, whatever, you know, that
you, you could put together
enough to say this person's eyes
were red. I mean, I, I don't
know all of the things that,
that you ought to be able to get
that test and there's nothing,
and I understand the need for
probable cause or reasonable
suspicion. There's nothing in
the law currently that would
stop you from doing that. Is
that true?
It just surprised me, um, that
whole line of questions
surprises me, Madam Chair. I'm
going to go right back to the
warrant thing. If I, if I have
an affidavit that it spells out,
you know, I'm gonna present this
to the judge and it tells my
story. Um, here's why I stopped
this person, here's why I put
handcuffs on this person, and
here's what I think this person
is under the influence of and
why. Now I have a piece of paper
that's gonna be seen by multiple
people. Now I have justification
for saying asking SLD, hey,
while you're in there testing
this blood, could you look for
this because I have really good
reasonable.
I believe that the person's
under the influence of this and
maybe this, probably both, um,
but I have an affidavit that
spells out in detail the
justification for taking that
blood test a step further, but
without the ability to get a
warrant on a misdemeanor DDBI
and without the SLD regs, I'm
pretty sure the SLD reg state
will test the blood there's a
per se violation, we're not
going to test it any further.
Unless something else exists and
right now as it stands right
now, that's something else
doesn't exist unless it's a
felony because I can't get a
warrant on a misdemeanor. Mach
must be missing something, so
why can't you get a warrant on a
misdemeanor DWI? Because 668111
says that the the DDBI arrest.
Which makes it eligible, so to
speak, for a warrant.
Has to be a felony. So unless I
have 3 prior convictions, great
bodily harm or death? 668111
says, and Vargas has confirmed,
I can't get a warrant. OK, thank
you. That's what I was missing.
And then I just another um brief
question and this is for
Representative Ree Reeb,
um,
Are there any separation of
powers issues with telling the
courts, um,
Whether they're going to allow a
waiver of the right of
confrontation.
For the testimony for the
testimony on this bill, 62.
Well, that, that was the Madam
Chair, um, Senator, that was the
main issue when I brought the
bill forward was the issue of
confrontation. Um, and it always
seems to be that defense can
have an expert testify via
video, but the prosecution
can't. After COVID, things
really changed and now we have
some good case law on this to
where we can actually, I mean,
if you can do a pre-lien where
there's a total right to
confront and.
Everyone has to be there and
you're talking about it and in
this bill I start started simply
like with DWIs and traffic
offenses. I hope to pass
something like this and then
someday move it to lab analysts,
you know, in our drug
drug understanding is this is
already happening and I thought
COVID changed it, so I was like,
if it's already happening, the
judges are using their
discretion. Why do we need a
bill?
That I think kind of intrudes on
their, their ability to write
the rules of their court and
their decision making about
whether it's appropriate to to
use this lab expert in this
particular case.
Um, Madam Chair, um, Senator,
um, the rules did change for
preliminary hearings, um, in New
Mexico, you know, in order to
charge someone with a felony,
you can use the grand jury
system or you can file a
criminal complaint, um, and, um,
present it to a judge during a
preliminary hearing process, um,
different from grand juries,
preliminary hearings require the
rules of evidence to be applied.
Um, and they also allow the
defendant to bring in any sort
of, um, witnesses.
compel them to testify, um, and
to, um, cross-examine the
state's witnesses. Um, so, um,
that is, um, it does fall under
the confrontation rights. It's
not an ultimate, but the courts
did amend it to allow for
preliminary hearings for
individuals to testify via video
with those specifics, um, that
as long as, um, I think the
language here says, um.
And it's Rule 530262027202, but
it says provided that the
witness is able to see, can be
seen by the defendant counsel
for the prosecution and the
defendant and the judge. So that
did change and they are using
that effectively. Um, but we're
asking to take it a step further
and to address it at trial so we
do not have to have our
analysts, um, who are doing
these, um, blood, um, analysis
to travel around the state, um,
for this specific portion of the
trial.
Which is the, the testimony of
their expert opinion.
And the judges haven't seen fit
to change their rules for the
trial.
They have not. OK.
Thank you. And that raises my
separation of powers issue,
um, you know.
It's an issue telling judges how
to run their courtrooms. Thank,
thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, thank you, Senator.
Representative Balcon and then
Representative Chasey.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I was
hoping Senator Ceda Lopez was
going to ask my question and I
wouldn't have to do this.
OK, let's go to the laboratory
analyst. How many?
What is the lab analyst. How do
you explain that to me who
qualifies as a as a lablyst.
Madam Chair.
Representative Alcorn, you've
been doing this for a long time.
Yeah
Is that me making the mic thing?
I don't know the hiring
procedures for SLD to determine
somebody's a lab analyst, but
they're chemists. I know that.
And
Part of the problem is
Because of the level of training
and they have to have to become
be certified by the Department
of Health SLD, the scientific
scientific laboratory division,
um, they're hard to come by and
because they're hard to hard to
come by and because other states
pay more for the same.
Um, experience in a different
state, it's hard to get more
here.
So
There's kind of a snowball
effect and.
Ms. Farrago.
kind of to piggyback off what
you said and I think there's
some confusion on on this how
the blood, how this matters not
only for the lack of analysts,
but if if we have an analyst at
SLD in Albuquerque, that's where
the SLD lab, that's where all
this testing takes place. If,
if I only have a couple of them
in there, I say I if we as a
state only have a couple of
people testing all the blood
kits from around New Mexico.
And then on next Tuesday, we
have to take that person out of
there to go all the way to
Hobbs, 4.5, 5 hour drive to
Hobbs to testify on a case,
hoping it's just a one-day
trial. What I've done is all
those blood kits that have been
sent in are awaiting blood
testing. What I've done is
kicked them back, kicked the can
down the road further and
further and further.
They're not getting tested if
they're in court, if they're
able to appear in court
virtually, the timing of that
changes. Now they don't have to
drive the hobs. They can sit in
their office, testify.
And then get back to testing the
rest of the blood that's sitting
on the shelf waiting to be
tested.
The other concern here is the
timing. We've talked about this
6 to 9 months, 9 to 12 months,
it can take a really, really
long time if I get a blood draw
on a person and I send it to
SLD.
What happens when I charge
criminally charged somebody,
they get arraigned that starts a
timer. There's a 182 day rule
where I have this 6 months,
basically a 6 month rule that
this case has to be adjudicated
by the DA's office. So if I have
a six month window to adjudicate
a case, but I'm not getting a
very key piece of the puzzle
involving that case until 9
months later.
That's why in the first there
are often times um no pro
they're they're dismissing a
case.
Pending getting the blood
results back.
Primarily because they can't
adjudicate a case within 6
months when they don't have the
key evidence they need to
adjudicate the case because it's
going to be 9 months till we get
the blood, so.
The video testimony thing.
It, it
It's like a domino effect. If I
have the person in court
virtually, I have that same
person more spending more time
in the lab testing the blood,
which maybe means instead of
taking 9 months to get the blood
result back, maybe it's 7
months, maybe we hire an extra
lab tech and they'll meet now
goes into 4 months, so, um, I
don't know if I'm making sense,
but there's a limited number of
People qualified or certified to
test blood in Mexico, those same
people are the experts that go
to testify on our cases in New
Mexico and their inability to do
so virtually means that there's
many days where they're not in
the lab testing blood.
And if one of my cases is that
blood left on the shelf because
they have to drive to Hobbs that
day. What just happened is my
case just got kicked my blood
got kicked further down the
road.
So I can't carry my case
forward. Lieutenant, you're
telling me, Madam Chair, you're
telling me that there's 2 people
working in the state of New
Mexico right now that are
available to testify in court,
Madam Chair, Representative, I
don't know the exact number. I
know they're very short staffed
and I know there's a very
minimal number of people that
work in the lab at SLD that test
blood and also have the
credentials necessary to testify
as experts on
How that test happened and what
the results were. And so my next
question is uh.
What's the purpose of this lab
analyst testified in court. What
the, what is that lab analyst
subpoenaed to do. What is that
supposed to bring out in the
court that is going to make any
difference, uh, on this case.
Madam Chair, Representative,
that lab analyst has to lay the
foundation for their
qualifications and ability to
take someone's blood, test it.
Accurately to then sit in a
courtroom and say, here's my
credentials, here's the test we
ran, here's the test we ran in
addition to the initial test to
confirm the first, the first
test, and at the end of our
Testing process and they lay out
in detail the testing process
and it's all scientific stuff
way above my head, but I've
heard him do this. So they talk
about all the the cool tools
they use and their training and
experience and how do they take
this vial of blood and at the
end of the day say, in this file
of blood, we've determined that
John Smith over here had this
many nanograms of THC and this
many nanograms of PCP or
whatever it was.
They have to lay the foundation
for their ability to do that
accurately because it's an
actual person we're prosecuting
here, so.
A person's guilty or not guilty
may be on the line here, so they
have to lay the foundation for
their ability to do this
accurately. No different than me
sitting on the stand having to
Present to a judge or jury, what
are my qualifications to go out
and get in a police car and make
a traffic stop and then do an
investigation and take somebody
to jail. It's the same idea just
on a different scale because
these are people much more
educated than me in that field.
Um, ask Representative Reeb to
explain because it's a legal
issue. I mean, there's to lay
the foundation for evidence,
that's the, that's the basis of
it, Madam Chair, and
Representative Alcone, I think
also, while they do do that, so
when I prosecuted for DWI, we
had one guy, Dr. Wong, who went
around all over one expert. So
you have your person that runs
the runs it through the machine
and then you have your expert
like in this case Doctor Wong,
and he can testify to the
machine and then he comes.
In and what he does is he, he
says, OK, this is what I'm
reading, you know, this is
methamphetamine, whatever he
finds in there, and then he also
is familiar with the facts of
your case, and he says, this is
consistent with what I'm seeing
in this case. I'm seeing this
bad driving. I'm seeing this
sort of behaviors and, and he
links that to the, um, actual
driving and the case which makes
it an expert makes your case
stronger and makes it so it's
not just this is how we do the
testing. He
Analyzes what's in there and
then actually says this will
cause erratic driving just like
I'm seeing in your case, um,
and, and so there's this link
that he makes or she makes that
is so crucial, um, when you're
trying to prove uh an on drugs
DWI case and that's how I've
always used these experts is to
have them look at the case and
correlate that all back
together.
Madam Chair.
See, uh, Madam Chair, the one
and only one time in the, uh, I
don't know how many years I
magistrate judge that I have a
uh somebody from the state lab
come and testify.
And the only thing they did was
come and tell us how the test is
run.
There was nothing and honestly,
I cannot understand why we could
not have a written affidavit or
something to that effect or
there's that no sign this and
say this and this and this was
done on this W.
I case and sent to the state or
to the department that uh that
charges the case,
uh, I just don't, I'm I'm going
backwards, OK? You're going
forward into the future. I have
going backwards into the past or
you just have a stamp affidavit
that says this and this was
done. So why can't we do that?
Because that's the law. I mean,
you know, you can because you
have to be able to
cross-examine.
Somebody to question what's in
the affidavit.
There could be,
yeah, I'm sure she would love
that I'm sure that's how it's
just not how, yeah, it's just
not how it works anymore. You
just need that expert testimony
to, you know, it's no different
than a homicide with a state
police officer telling you what
happened with all the evidence
and how this correlates and this
is how this homicide occurred.
It's just the the day and age
we're in, but I, I like it,
representative. I mean.
Madam Chair, um, if you don't
mind, Representative Alcon,
that's kind of why the US stands
out on our constitutional
democracy, right, our
constitutional republic is that
other countries do um do trial
by affidavit without witnesses,
um, and things like that. And
so, you know, we need these,
these rights, um, to be upheld
in order to, um, you know,
continue the, the democracy that
we have here and that is that
right to confrontation, but we
are asking, um, for
An exception, um, under this
because of the concerns that our
stake uniquely has.
I think we need to move on,
I'm just going to drop it at
that. I think the more I look
into it, the, the more I think
I'm ahead, but I can't win.
All right, representative.
Representative Jay.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I'm
sorry I missed the, the main
thrust, but I, I feel like I've
lived through this a lot in
House Judiciary, um, and I, I.
I really appreciate Senator Cia
Lopez and Representative Alconn
because my my concern is, as a
policymaker, I wish we could
just make laws that
Um,
Effectively deemed, um, issues
that are unconstitutional
constitutional so that we could
go on with them.
Um, for public safety reasons.
Um, but I wonder how you,
if you, um, and you can just say
yes or no, because I know that,
um, this is
There are probably others who
want to ask, but how do you
overcome or does it overcome
bull coming? I, I really
remember that in 2011 that
Supreme, it was a New Mexico
case that the Supreme Court
decided and, um, the, the need
to, to, uh, be able to confront
and cross-examine and so forth.
In that case, I, I believe it
was the analyst, a different
analyst. So I think that's an
issue, but if you have the same
analyst.
Just
Then, um, does this, does Senate
bill 190, um, fix that.
Actually I think you're looking
at the House bill, right? I
mean, you're more inclined to be
looking at their house bill, um,
represents 62, um,
representative, uh,
Representative Chasey, um, and
Madam Chair, um, but yes, Bull
Cumming actually came down, I
think when I was practicing and
so that did change kind of the
way we approached it because it
was, um, like a substitute
analyst that came in after the
fact that testified to what
their colleague had done, and
the Supreme Court said that that
Violated the confrontation. So
we're not actually asking to
change that at all. In fact, we,
you know, we changed how we
prosecuted, we changed who we
called to testify, um, and so,
you know, in a lab, maybe
multiple people have touched
different samples, but
ultimately we need the person
who made that opinion and
conducted that final analysis to
come and testify at trial and
under the rules and the, um, uh,
the statutes as they stand,
these analysts that have
conducted
That complete,
um, review now are having to be
taken away from their work.
And Madam Chair, and, um,
Representative, the other thing
I think I always look at is, is
what we do with autopsies now. I
mean, New Mexico is known to
have be the training ground for
autopsies and so all these um
pathologists, they leave and
when they leave, basically how
we do it in that situation, I
happen to have one of the cases
that made this law is that
pathologist comes in, a new one
does, and reviews all the work
and makes their own opinion. And
when they make their own
opinion, they're allowed to
actually
Come in and, um, say I've
reviewed all those results. I
didn't even look at what they
found. I mean, I looked at it
all fresh and new, obviously not
the body but the pictures and
and the, the, the things like
that. And this is my own opinion
and I don't see any reason why
that could not be done in this
situation of a lab analyst left
also we have some pretty good
case law, um, and, and in that
case, we're talking about a
homicide, you know, so I, I
would just throw that in, Madam
Chair.
Um, I just have two things and
we need to move on to the next
presentation. Um, so I'm curious
about and now we keep it going
back to this.
If there's a blood test.
And it comes down to something
lower than 0.04 05, whatever.
Um, but the officer is convinced
that the person was seriously
impaired. That officer is
thinking, oh, it must be
something besides alcohol,
right? And so the blood test is
useful in that regard. I get
that.
Um, the question that I have
though is if there's a blood
test done and then it's, it
confirms the person is
intoxicated with alcohol.
They won't go any further in the
testing. I heard you say that,
Lieutenant.
And my question is, and I, I.
And
that people touched on this, but
I still think it's pertinent.
And the reason to go beyond and
see if there's anything else.
And the reason is, uh,
Wouldn't that go to how the
person might be sentenced or how
the judge might view how
egregious the person's conduct
was, you know, it's one, because
not only are you drunk, you're
also putting, you know, illegal
substances on top of that and or
legal, yeah, or legal, illegal
or legal, and, and that's even
to me more reckless behavior and
improper behavior. So
how come nobody's ever like
pursued that.
Or whatever, you get where I'm
going. I think there's some
merit to going further.
Madam chair, I couldn't agree
with you more, and here's my my
thought on that.
If I, I think our ultimate goal
here is to get people off the
road before they hurt or kill
somebody if they're too impaired
to safely drive, right? But to
also look at what got him there
in the first place. Does this
person have a bigger problem
that we can address so it
doesn't happen again. So if I
know that a person is impaired
on alcohol, but other stuff is
on board and there's a chance
that person has a problem with
that other stuff, whatever the
other stuff is, does that not
also open up the door for us to
give them services or give them
some help that they
Probably desperately need and in
doing so, what we're doing is
helping them get off the
substances they're using so that
they don't put themselves in
that same situation again and so
that they don't hurt or kill
somebody.
That should be our ultimate all
that junk together isn't our
ultimate goal is catch them
before they get hurt somebody
and inspire them to never do
that again. If that means we
know now that they're addicted
to some sort of
Um, substance that they, we may
be able to help them with that's
golden for our society, right?
and then I'll, I'll I'll rep
Bream wants to weigh in on one
small thing, but before we go
back to him, um.
This whole business about we
can't get results sometimes 6
months, 9 months, yada yada.
Well, this goes to something
that we've been talking about
globally is yet another reason
why we're not prosecuting people
who need to be the recipients of
Sure Swift justice, right? Um,
another glitch in a system that
we're administering, not the
problem with our laws,
but although there is something
we could maybe fix here.
It's the problem and how we're
processing evidence. So I just
want to point that out if we're
looking for ways to help in
prosecuting people promptly and
ensuring that there's adequate
evidence to support a conviction
and sentencing. It seems like we
need to do something about the
lab and try to get them the
support that they need so we can
get results more quickly. So
let's add that to our list of
things we can do to help law
enforcement, right? Well, money,
of course.
But also it's hard to recruit
people. We've been hearing that,
you know, it's, so it's been
hard to even when we put in
money and we raise salaries and
we give them all extra bonuses
and we do all kinds of things
and we say come to New Mexico,
it's beautiful, um, you know,
we're still having trouble, but
I, I think that should be on our
list of crime, you know, how to
help, help, uh, with the crime
situation in this state, you
know, this is not trivial stuff
helping on that. OK, uh, um, OK,
I wanna move to Re but keep it
short because we're over time.
Sorry.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Lieutenant Ward, I want to talk
to you about prior to Birchfield
when you were a DWI officer,
were you taking most of your
blood test, uh, at the police
station or were they taken at
the hospital from drivers
involved in collisions. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, Senator,
Both, um, it depends. I mean,
obviously at the hospital, that
probably means somebody's been
in a crash, but there was a lot
of times where I was the blood
draws were taking place at the
the station, um, again, because
I knew there was alcohol or
alcohol was maybe on board, but
not the likely contributing
factor that led us here was
something else, drugs, um, so
yeah, there's been many, many
nights where I sat at the office
and watched a blood draw take
place. Um, but there's also
sadly, a lot a lot of nights
where I was at a hospital
watching some.
Who's been involved in a crash
watching a blood draw take
place, so both.
Thank you.
I think this was really helpful
for to lay the foundation for
when it comes back to our
various committees and last year
it seemed it got to our
committee late and it was rushed
and I think we need to have a
good understanding what the
issues were, so appreciate it
and I thank you, Madam Chair,
for letting us present this. I
just think that the bottom line
is we can't do any of this
looking at the extra drugs until
we can get those warrants. And
that's really what we're trying
to accomplish, so, but I thought
this would be a great way for us
to break the subject again
again.
people are interested, obviously
based on the questions and
comments. Yeah. OK. Thank you
for coming and have fun at the
state fair, Lieutenant.
I don't know. Do you have a pie
entered or something, so you
know, maybe you'll get something
out of it, a blue ribbon or
something.
Hey.
OK, um.
All right. Next up we have
partners for re-entry
opportunity in workforce
development and it's a goodwill
industry program and I
amendment.
OK.
Sometimes the constitution is,
yeah,
I know.
I know
That
I
I think abortion was legal in
the original at at that time.
Um,
Good morning.
So Nina, that's you. OK, great.
So Nina, um, why don't you take
the floor and introduce yourself
and others, and feel free to
begin your presentation.
Good morning, Chairwoman
Chandler. Good morning, Vice
Chair Cervantes. Good morning
members of the committee. My
name is Nina Chavez and I'm the
director of government relations
for Goodwill Industries of New
Mexico. Joining me today on this
panel is Sasha Lee, Chief
Services officer at Goodwill
Industries of New Mexico, and we
are a 501c3 nonprofit. Lisa
Ortiz, executive director from
the Northern Area Local
Workforce Development Board and
Ralph Martinez, a respected
community member and leader.
Additionally, with us today in
the audience is Shawna Castle,
president and CEO of Goodwill
and Roger Gonzalez, president
and CEO of Gonzalez Strategy
Group.
We're here not just on behalf of
Goodwill, but as part of a
broader effort to coordinate and
collaborate across providers and
agencies on the needs of all
individuals released from
correctional prison facilities
here in the state. New Mexico
Corrections Department and
Legislative Finance Committee
cited that annually 1800
individuals are released
statewide.
From these facilities. And just
as crime is affected by various
social and economic conditions,
so too, as you know, a
successful reintegration. As the
LSC stated in their August
evaluation report, Crime in New
Mexico and Bernalio County, one
of the most significant
challenges faced today is to
ensure that justice involved
individuals are prepared to
re-enter the community with the
tools and treatment they need to
be successful and to avoid
reoffending. In fact, the 1st 45
days, as you may also know,
after being released are crucial
to achieving that.
Coordination of tools and
treatment.
Materials for you today are
organized in a packet that looks
like this, ABCD. I'll be in tab
A for Goodwill's portion.
Lisa's workforce board materials
will be in tab B.
A PowerPoint describing critical
barriers faced by the rantry
population, though we know it's
not, um, an, an exhaustive list
is tab C and tab D is an
appendix with the logic model,
um, to support a larger
coordinated proposal that is
still ongoing as well as some
success stories of Goodwill's
program we'll be sharing with
you today called Next Steps. So
I'm on page one in tab A and it
looks like this.
Are you a school teacher? I was
a school teacher. Yes, madam
chair.
It's like, Madam Chairwoman,
members of the committee,
Goodwill's next steps, a
re-entry workforce development
program is aligned with the
sequential intercept model and
driven by individualized case
management based on individual
service plans. So it's all
tailored to understand the
individual's needs. Next Steps
was launched in July of 2022 by
Goodwill's own funding with a
mission to improve employment
outcomes and reduce recidivism
at the prison level. Applying
the sequential intercept model.
Goodwill focuses on supporting
individuals at.
intercept points to focus on the
individual's specific needs.
So the program is tailored more
than just the direct work that
we do.
Outcomes of next steps to date
are on page one in that soft
blue section right in the middle
of the page. To date, 5 out of 6
individuals, um, who participate
do not reoffend or 84% to not
reoffend. 69% attained
employment and of that 60%
retained employment six months
afterwards. Sasha and her team
of case managers are expanding
that research to an additional
12-month marker. Going on to
page 2, has a map and it's
titled Current Pilott Services.
You can see that Goodwill's free
non-mandated program next step,
next steps currently operates in
5 New Mexico correctional
facilities, providing structured
workforce development support
that begins 90 days before
release for the vast majority
and continues for up to 12
months post-release for
individuals released in the
metro. Next steps addresses some
of the most common re-entry
challenges. Um, most
specifically obtaining
employment, but also important
to us is navigating and
accessing the additional
necessary community-based
services. Again, more to
the better regardless of where
your intake and enrollment is.
So through a comprehensive
personal centered reproach.
Very, very much at the root of
what we do. So staying on page
two, but more on that left side
that looks like a little org
chart. You can see a variety of
enrollments by referral and the
way some of our services works
just really succinctly. Um, so
the first enrollment that I've
already mentioned is accessible
90 days prior to release and
it's a referral by New Mexico
Corrections Department facility
staff. That's the most common
pathway that individuals have.
enrolled in the last 2 years.
Um, the other two options for
enrollment are post-release, one
being referral by a federal
treatment court, which extends
our reach to those released
under federal supervision. And
the third one is the newest. We
just started in August of this
year. It's, um, a collaborative
effort effort continuing the
relationship with New Mexico
Corrections Department and
through reentry and parole and
probation leadership and its
referral by state parole and
probation officers.
On page 4.
You'll see a list that I'm just
gonna go through really quickly.
These are a list of key elements
that we think are, um,
attributing, um, factors to the
outcomes we're seeing from our
participants we're sharing with
you today, um, and this again,
um, is a little bit adjusted to
what I'm gonna read off So
responding to individuals'
unique combination of needs, a
safety net for employment. We
guarantee an interview at
Goodwill if someone is
interested in that pathway to
lifting themselves up on their
upward mobility and job training
as well through Goodwill.
Consistent community resource
navigation and referrals.
As I stated earlier,
programmatic relationships with
state agencies, their divisions,
um, provider partners across the
state, not just in the metro,
we're continuing to expand all
of those relationships.
Consistent and trusting
relationships with the case
manager. That case manager that
engages with someone pre-release
is going to be the one that they
engage with that Goodwill post
release. We very much believe
that is a cornerstone.
Consistent, um, co-enrollment in
other goodwill programs,
especially for specific
populations such as veterans,
um who are homeless or at risk
of being homeless.
Um, as well as seniors.
In the general population.
Partnerships, especially with
government and employers. It's
not just about the, the job
seekers, but it's also the
employers that we build
relationships with through
programs just as this one, and
the fact that no one is
discriminated against from being
considered for enrollment in
next steps, regardless of
conviction.
So going back one page to page
3. This is an expansion of the
program that we want to present
to you today, um, and it's an
ongoing refinement of this ask.
Um, because of the workforce
success that we're seeing in
next steps, um, and the pursuit
to continue to build those
relationships across the board
with providers and agencies.
Goodwill is looking to expand
next steps to all correctional
facilities, public and private.
Additional referral enrollment
pathways, um, research into
county level, for example.
And to tie in a pathway for next
steps enrollees to, um, even
more intentionally engage in
goodwill's, what I call train to
hire programs. We have one in um
the film industry, but we are
starting in 2025, 1 of three new
pathways into clean energy, and
our first pathway starting in
2025 is, um, training to become
a solar technician. And again,
that's in partnership with
employers just as much as we're
helping the job seekers.
And then again, like I said,
we'll have a new training
program in that clean energy
space in 2026, as well as 2027.
Additionally, Goodwill is doing
the work and research on a
broader proposal that you'll see
elements of in the budget that
you have in front of you in tap
A as well as the logic model and
tap D.
Um, and that requires ongoing
identification of the state
funding, historical and current,
and is preparing, Goodwill is
preparing to host a provider
roundtable, re-entry provider
roundtable, to discuss a big
picture coordinated effort of
services to reduce
reincarceration costs, support a
stronger workforce and build
safer communities. And now I'll
pass things over to Sahali,
Goodwill's Chief Services
officer, who will share insight
into why Goodwill saw the need
to start and self-fund next
steps, limitations of being a
self-funded.
more detail about the impact
we're making on individuals'
lives. Thank you.
OK
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you so much for
the time today.
um, Goodwill's model is really
focused on hope and opportunity.
We've been serving New Mexico
for over 75 years and our
expertise lies in the area of
employment. Last year we placed
over 1500 New Mexicans into
employment in the community, um,
and many of those might have had
criminal backgrounds, but one of
the things that we did see is
individuals returning from
incarceration face a unique set
of barriers.
Not every job seeker is going to
encounter. So they're facing not
only the fear of stigma, um, the
automatic barriers that are in
place with regards to housing
and employment, um, the loss of
personal agency and depending on
how long they're incarcerated,
what has changed in the world,
and are they able to keep up
with the technology and how to
access the resources. So we
built a program in order to be
able to provide these
individuals support to navigate
these complex systems to have a
coach.
Um, and to be able to achieve
their goals for a successful
re-entry. Um, so we built in
layers into this programming to
try to fill gaps in order to
mitigate crises, um, in the
early transition from, uh,
incarceration in order to try to
make sure that hope stays
accessible. And one of those
things that we built in as fast
track options into, um, our
services. So individuals who run
our program who are interested.
did, um, in working for Goodwill
has a pathway to a guaranteed
interview with our stores, um,
not a hire, but an interview.
Um, we also connect them with
employers that were building
relationships within the
community and we want to keep
them hopeful and accessing
resources so that they maintain
positive momentum moving
forward.
Um, so in addition to fast track
another layer that we're putting
into our programming is access
to the clean tech energy
training program. We
participants can access this
training very quickly upon
release. It's a very fast
training. It's only about 4
weeks and then be able to be
placed in a job where they can
start above living wage, um, and
be able to rebuild their lives
from there.
While we focus on employment, we
do offer a wrap-around case
management program, so it's more
intensive services we assess for
all potential barriers that the
person is experiencing, uh, you
know, housing, transportation,
clothing, mental health,
substance abuse issues, and we
work with them on a plan in
order to be able to access the
resources they need and help
them help guide them through
those systems that can be a
little bit daunting and complex
when you're trying to tackle
them on your own. Um, so we rely
on our community.
partners and our strong network
of providers that we work with
to be able to provide the
supports that we don't provide
in-house, um, and we continue to
build those relationships last
year, Goodwill did over 23,000
points of outreach, uh,
statewide in our communities
that we serve.
Uh
Goodwill has started the program
in July of 2022 and through
December of 2023, we have
invested a total of $215,550 in
revenue from our stores to
facilitate and hire staff and,
uh, deliver this program.
Um, we have seen good enough
outcomes that we're really
excited about and positive
momentum in the program, the
Goodwill made an additional
investment for 2024, increasing
that budget to $350,000. Um, at
some point, revenue from stores
only covers so much, and we
have, uh, we have a large
capacity to be able to expand.
Um, not only do we have a very
strong infrastructure, uh, with
the ability to, um, expand into
multiple locations due to our
existing.
stores which you can see, um, on
page 3 and tab A there's a map
that shows where we're located,
where we can be near prisons and
offer pre and post-release
services and for communities
that we're located in that are
not near a correctional facility
we can take post-release
referrals from parole and
probation. We also have capacity
to serve, uh, facilities that
are a little geographically out
of our reach with virtual
services. Additionally, we offer
10 other programs and services.
We've administered
Federal grants, uh, couple state
contracts as well as our
self-funded programming. So we
have a sound organizational and
financial infrastructure to be
able to, um, scale up and
deliver supportive services and
additional programming supports
very quickly.
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, if you
will go to tab B,
my name is Lisa Ortiz. I am the
executive director of the
Northern Area Local Workforce
Development Board, um, located
in Santa Fe. We cover 10
counties in the northern region.
Um, so we do receive, we owe $1
this is federal funds that we
received, uh, specifically, um,
we use some of those fundings
for incarcerated individuals.
Um, we have recently in the past
two years partnered with New
Mexico.
Corrections department and we've
had several training programs to
assist those individuals. Um,
currently in the past two years,
we've had a cohort with our
Springer facility to train 10
individuals as a heavy equipment
operator. Uh, out of those 10
that completed the program, 7
were employed, uh, 2 were
reoffended, and 1, we had no
contact.
We did, uh, since it was such a
huge success. We did a second
cohort training those 10 women
in the Springer facility, and 10
of those female did complete the
program. Uh, 9 are pending
release.
Um, we currently just completed
a cohort with the Santa Fe
Penitentiary, uh, with this,
with, uh, the culinary arts. Um,
we did have a training program,
a training 10 individuals,
incarcerated individuals, um,
with Chef Luis, um, he provided
culinary arts training and they
just completed in June.
Uh, 9, of those individuals
completed 9 job placements and
pending release. Currently, we
are in the process of
Holding another training with
our Santa Fe Penitentiary with
an HVAC training program. We
will train 10 individuals and
that will be, uh, beginning
October 1st. And also, we will
be training, um, at our grounds
facility with the New Mexico
Corrections Facility, 5 women
and 5 male. Um, and that will be
heavy equipment operator.
So in the past, a couple of
years, we have spent a little
over 370,000 to train these
incarcerated individuals so that
they can have a second chance
and be placed in employment upon
release.
Thank you. Thank you.
Madam Chair, um, Mr. Vice Chair
committee, uh, my name is Ralph
Martinez and I work in Los
Alamos at Los Amos National
Laboratory. I'm a government
affairs specialist, and I've
been there for 9 years prior to
that, um, I was addicted to
drugs for 11 years, um, between
the years of 2001 and 2012, I
was addicted to cocaine and
heroin in 2006, I lost
everything because of that.
I lost my family. I lost my, my
home. I lost my self identity,
ended up homeless here in
Espinella Valley living under um
a few different bridges in the
Bosque area in makeshift tents
in abandoned buildings in places
I can find warmth in the cold of
winter, um.
In between that time, I picked
up 6 different felonies because
of the things that my addiction
led me to do. I've done time in
Rio Riba County. I've done time
in Santa Fe County, I've done
time in Bernardo County. I've
done time in McKinley County,
San Miguel County, and West Palm
Beach, Florida County.
Um, in 2012, I went, I went to
rehab in 6 different locations.
I went to rehab in San Diego. I
went to rehab in South Florida,
I went to rehab twice in
Farmington, New Mexico. I went
to rehab in Hernandezs, New
Mexico and my last rehab was in
2012 at Oy Recovery and
Verardda, New Mexico in 2012, I
learned a lot about myself and,
and, and I had been through
through a lot and I was able to
plant my feet back on the ground
and re-establish my life and
move forward.
And, um, in 2018, um, I started
working at Los Amos National
Laboratory in 2015 in 2018 I
applied for an expungement of
the 5 felonies that I held here
in the state of New Mexico. I
went through that whole process
and um at the end, I got granted
uh expungement from Judge
Ellington, um, in 2019, I
applied for a pardon of those
same five felonies that I held
in the state of New Mexico
through.
The governor's office, and I
went through that whole process
and um was given a pardon by
Governor Michelle Lujan Grisham,
and at the end of 2019.
Um,
I, I, I, I've been through a lot
and I've seen a lot, and when it
comes to situations like um um
re-entry, uh, I have a unique,
uh, look and, and, and
experience in that. There was
many times when I was in jail
during my time of homelessness.
I, I, I, I burned a lot of
bridges and, um, and, and that's
why I was in the position that I
was at because of the choices
that I was making in my life,
but there were times when I fell
into jail and
Um, I remember being in jail for
anywhere between 3 months to up
to 11 months and when it was
time, by the by the time it was
time to get released, I was
thinking straight. I was, I was
feeling better. I was excited
with that second chance of life,
right? Excited, I would tell
myself, this is my turn, this is
my chance to do things right.
And then I would get out of jail
and um and the world would hit
me, reality would hit me. And um
and it would take
A week or two of um of, of not
being able to move forward for
me to fall right back into the
things that I was doing, and
that's where that recidivism
comes into, um, we didn't have
services, um, back then that we
can lean on for support. We
didn't have any type of re-entry
methods, um, in jail. I remember
one time that I was in Rio Riba
County, they offered a DWIPod
and you had to apply to get into
that DWiPod and I applied and I
remember getting
It was a 30 day program, went
through the program, um, they
taught us pro skills. They
taught us resume building, um,
they taught us how to conduct
ourselves professionally, things
of that nature, but um when I
got released, the doors were
open and it was a.
Goodbye, good luck, and that was
it. There was no follow up.
There was nothing in place to
help an individual in my
situation, um, stay, stay with
his feet planted on the ground.
And so, um, so reentry uh is
very important on so many
different levels and um and and
I I was happy to partner up with
Lisa and her organization. I'm
the co-founder of the
Entrepreneurial Institute of
Northern New Mexico, which is
the culinary program.
That um Lisa helped to fund um
uh, we had a Representative
Andrea Romero also fund the
first cohort we did, we've done
two cohorts, me and me and, uh,
Three Time Food Network
executive chef Fernando Ruiz,
uh, it took us about almost 2
years to put this program
together, um.
We, we, we built a culinary
curriculum that's specific to
things of New Mexico and um and,
and we, we, we sent it off to
PED and we had to do some edits
and went back and forth.
Nonetheless, it took about 2
years, um, uh, Representative
Andrea Romero,
she, um, openheartedly funded
$75,000 to Junior Bill funds for
us to launch our first cohort.
So our first co
was launched in April and we did
um we, we, we didn't do it
inside the prison, the first
cohort, we did it outside of
prison, we were still working
the kinks of being able to
conduct it inside New Mexico
State Penitentiary and so we did
a cohort of uh previously
incarcerated and at risk
individuals, there was 11
individuals that signed up and
um so we ran that, we ran that
first cohort right now, 4 of
those.
Inviduals work at Escondido
restaurant, the restaurant that
chef Fernando Ruiz just opened
up, um.
Before we finish with that
cohort, we had worked out, um,
the opportunity to be able to go
inside the New Mexico State
Penitentiary, which was our goal
from the very beginning, and we,
um, that's where we partnered
with Lisa and her organization
to run the first cohort inside
PNM in Santa Fe, New Mexico
State Prison, um, like Lisa
mentioned, we had 9 individuals
that signed up the Department of
Corrections are the ones that
identified these individuals.
They had to have a year or less
of.
Incarceration left to be able to
qualify to join the program. So
they, they were, um, they were
identified by the Department of
Corrections that we run an
8-week program, um, all 9
individuals are now sort of safe
certified and uh AAA food
handlers certified and uh we had
an end of cohort dinner inside
the New Mexico State
Penitentiary, where all of the
participants are the ones that.
Cooked a five course meal, we
set up the cafeteria inside of
the penitentiary, made it look
um very elegant and it was, it
was a fine dining night. We have
a couple of representatives, um,
Andrea Romero and uh Tara Luhan
who attended this dinner amongst
a source of, of other
individuals. Ms. Lisa was there,
um, were these individuals were
able to put the talent that they
learned to work and um and it
was amazing on both sides,
right?
The, uh, the pride that they
took in doing what they were
doing, the excitement, um, been,
uh, breaking through the fear
of, of, uh, speaking with
individuals that held certain
power is what they said they
had, we have an individual who
is in our cohort, um, he's
getting ready to get released
from a 15-year sentence and um
in the midst of the cohort, he
tells me, uh, Ralph, can I speak
with you? And I said, yeah,
what's going on?
He said,
I'm scared.
I said, What are you scared of?
He said, I'm scared of getting
out, he said, I don't know, and
this was at the beginning of the
cohort, he said, Ralph, I'm
scared of getting out because
I've been in, in, in, in prison
for 15 years and a lot has
changed, but the community that
I come from, he comes from a
community down south. He said a
community that I come from, um,
I burnt a lot of bridges and I
don't think they're gonna be
very welcoming and so we had a
long discussion about that by
the end of the cohort, he was so
excited to be able to have
An opportunity to go back to his
community and um when he gets
out and, and, and, and prove
himself worthy, right? Uh, we, I
shared a lot of my story. Chef
Fernando Ruiz has a similar
story as mine, and that's why we
work so well together because we
have that shared lived
experience and um and so I'm,
I'm here to support in any way I
can.
Thank you for your time.
So Madam Chairwoman, um, with
that this proposal that you have
in front of you that we've
shared with Goodwill, but also
in Tap A and tap D you'll see
extensions that talk again about
a larger picture thing beyond
just one individual provider.
Um,
this is all meant, um, to
continue to provide possible and
scalable solutions to re-entry
um that aligns with state
workforce development and public
safety priorities. So, um, we
urge your support and discussion
in expanding these vital
programs and others that I'm
sure you've heard of time and
time again.
Not just in this month's
hearings, but over the past
couple of months and more. Um,
and we'll continue to, um, do
the work that we've committed to
to expand the research and
coordination again amongst
providers, partners who are
already doing, um, their own
great work in this space as well
as state agencies so we can
refine and ask for session, um,
because fostering long-term
success is really our goal. So
thank you so much for your time
and consideration. We look
forward to questions and, and
discussion.
So so far I have Representative
Chasey and Representative
Martinez. I have Senator Ceda
Lopez.
Anyone else, um, but Ray.
Oh.
Oh
Representative Herrera.
Anyone else? OK. So
Representative Chase.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you all very much and I'm really
glad you made the northern
connection for this meeting
here. Um, I just wanted to say
that I, I've been a fan of
Goodwill because my grandmother
was, and I mean, we're talking,
my grandmother lived to be 100,
so, um, this was, uh,
Quite some time ago, because of
their, their record of hiring
individuals with disabilities.
I don't think I realized they
were involved in transition from
prison to, uh, the community.
Until I actually had to make a
few remarks to the business
community meeting, this, uh,
last legislative session and of
course, there's a lot of
discussion then as always about
community safety. But somehow it
never seems to be brought up
that the um our correction
system should be part of that
discussion.
And, you know, people want.
Get everyone off the streets,
but we have to get them back
safely into the community. And
so the folks from Goodwill were
at that breakfast and they
contacted me and, um, my chief
of staff, uh, Lisa Lauer, and I
have visited with them and I've
been incredibly impressed and
then I was not aware of this
before. Representative Martinez
and I were sitting next to each
other at our last meeting and he
is also very much aware of your
work and supportive of it. And I
do hope that
There's an opportunity for, um,
state funding because that
transition and the support
actually helps the probation and
parole, um,
Office and it, it makes our
community safer and I'm, I'm so,
um, glad to hear of your journey
and, um,
It sounds to me as if the work
you did at Springer, it's just a
little snapshot, but you had a
70% success rate. So with, with
the, with the 10, the 1st 10.
And uh, so 7 of them began
working to recidivated and then
one you didn't have any
information on me perhaps that
um woman did OK, but, um, what
we're looking for is much
greater success in recidivism
and that's a
huge, a huge, um, even though
it's a small snapshot, it's,
it's really good. And I hope
that um,
There can be state funding
available in the future because
this is the kind of thing that
is um when you say you get what
you pay for, and if you invest
in it, this is going to be as
good as some of the other things
we're being asked to do that
might not get similar results.
So that's all, Madam Chair.
Uh, Representative Martinez and
then Senator Cedia Lopez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you presenters, uh.
I've known about the programs
that at Goodwill.
With their work with with
veterans, um, so I was, I was
always very impressed and.
Always wanted to support them.
And when I met a few months ago
regarding the next steps
program. I was.
I was very happy to see what
they're doing, um, in the
transition, but I do have a
couple of questions,
um, that maybe you can clarify
for me,
Um, what type of vetting process
do you have?
4 inmates. I know the big one is
they have to be within a year of
of release. What are some of the
other.
vetting that you do with with
some of the inmates.
Yes
Madam Chair, uh, Representative,
thank you for the question. So
we try to keep it low barrier as
possible. So the only
eligibility criteria for our
services is that they're 90 days
pre-release and they have a goal
of working once they're
post-release.
We do not restrict on the type
of offense, um, currently we're
pretty limited to people
releasing into the Albuquerque
metro area, uh, because that is
where most, um, people are
released to and where most of
the resources are, but part of
our expansion is looking how to
support individuals released to
other areas of the state as
well. But it's as simple as 90
days out and being, uh, with the
goal of getting employment.
Thank you for that, and Madam
Chair, do you help with job
placement?
Because it's great that you're
training them.
But are you, are you working
with community members to get
them.
Placed in that field?
Manch representative, yes, we,
uh, consistently do outreach and
network with employers to try to
connect them with jobs in the
community. We try to do a
strengths-based assessment based
on their employment skills and,
um, what type of employment
they're looking for and get them
a job in an area that they want
to pursue. Sometimes it involves
getting them an immediate job to
get money in their pocket and
then building a training plan,
and then a career path to a
better job. But we do
collaborate with
employers in the community and
we actually host career fairs at
our Goodwill, uh, Sam Mate
location twice a month.
Thank you for that, Madam Chair,
just 11 last question. Um, how
about
Those men or women that want to
go into business for themselves.
Do you have some type of program
that's gonna help them with
that,
um, because there's a lot of.
Um,
There's a lot of resources in
the state that can be taken
advantage.
Of, um, and I'm kind of curious.
I think it's great that you will
train them and place them in a
job, but how about if they want
To open their own business.
Madam Chairwoman, Representative
Martinez, thank you for the
question, um, Sasha and her team
are constantly looking at new
services that we can provide and
how to refine any train to hire,
um, concepts as well as
continuing to hear feedback from
employers, um, and so that's
very much still in a research
phase of what could Goodwill do
in that space? And again, we're
grateful that we have um some of
the fiscal ability to pilot some
of that on our own, but we also,
our case managers are also ready
to have solutions immediately
for our, our clients.
So our case managers have gone
with individuals who are ready
to go to CNM and how to navigate
enrolling into courses. And so
we very much rely on the partner
providers and other again higher
ed institutions or agencies um
services to help navigate things
immediately at this point.
And I, I will also um if it's OK
to go back, Madam Chairwoman,
um, we're here on this panel
together with Lisa to share the
good work we've done separately.
Um, so our stats show different
results for different
populations we've served. And
so, a part of why we're here
together today is to really show
the next step of what we want to
do beyond again just one
individual board, one
individual, um, provider like
Goodwill and, and kind of really
show you moving forward that
there are going to be multiple
multiple providers and, um, even
more coordination, um, on the
bigger ask that you're just
seeing a draft of.
In your, um, in your packet.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Just one
last comment. I'm in full
support of
Your program because I've seen
the results.
Um, and I, I also want to thank
you for the courage that it,
that it takes on a daily basis
to face your addiction, but to
then.
Own it and come out and and want
to help the next person because
you are the biggest key.
To their success because
They can see that it works and
that it can be done. I want to
thank you for your courage, um,
And for uh.
Everything you're doing to bring
that next person along with you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Thank you, Representative
Senator Cedil Lopez and then
Representative Barrego.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I too
want to thank you for your
courage and for turning.
Your life into service to others
in your story and to service to
others, that's just so
incredible. And I want to thank
you for your work, um, I'm, I'm
very impressed. I did have a
couple of questions just, um,
Just as I was looking through
the, the materials and if I miss
something that you said, I
apologize, but on page 2, when
you say one and one case
management.
How many individuals can one
case manager handle?
Madam Chairwoman, Senator Cedo
Lopez, um, Sasha has designed a
model so her program manager and
case managers have a caseload of
55 individuals and that
incorporates both pre-release
and post-release, but of course,
that knowledge that pre-released
enrollment is the majority of,
um, the enrollees in that first
pathway.
Perfect. And then, um,
Were any of these individuals
over 55?
Didn't say the age or, you know,
we don't know too much about
these individuals. I was
curious.
Mhm
Madam Chair, Senator, thank you
for the question. Um, I, I'm
unable to tell you exactly how
many, but we do not have any age
restrictions, and I do know that
we have had at least 1 or 2
participants that are over 55.
Thank you, because I think those
are challenges. I'm seeing um.
So many people are calling me
these days who are older, um,
who are just having trouble
getting to work and Social
Security is not covering it and
they didn't have the retirement
plan and so I, I'm just, I can't
imagine how much harder it is if
you've been in prison and
cutting out at this age. So I, I
really appreciate that you're
working with that population.
Are you having, are you seeing
issues with that?
Um, Madam, Madam Chair, Senator,
I actually, um, would like to
bring up that we have a senior
community service and employment
program at Goodwill where
individuals who are 55 and older
and low income can receive paid,
um, on the job training
experience through our host
agency partners and individuals
in the next steps program have
the ability to co-enroll in that
program. So, uh, we are seeing
an increasing amount of seniors
who aren't unable to keep up
with expenses in that program
is.
One of the solutions that we, we
try to offer. That's great to
know because now I have
something else to to try to
refer them to, um, and then
finally I was very impressed
with the logic model that that
you're proposing and I bet the
federal government will be
impressed with the logic model
as well, but I had some
questions about the numbers in
it. So on page 14,
The 1542 per year.
You have that under in
development, and then you have
272 per year also in
development.
And then you have 60 that's
probably what you put in your
grant.
Could you please explain those
numbers? I was just trying to
follow it, um, especially in
light of, you know, now I know
your, uh, ratio is 1 to 52. So I
was just trying to understand
the scope.
Madam Chairwoman, Senator Sero
Lopez, I'm gonna start the, um,
response, but I want to bring up
Roger Gonzalez, who's helping us
with this logic model for again
that bigger scope of work. So
we're working on focusing this
larger ask that we're continuing
to refine around that number of
1800 individuals released
annually.
Um, so it starts off with, um,
that red section and those two
numbers should add up to 1800
individuals. Um, and I'll pass
it on to Roger for how we've
calculated all the other funding
to help us afford the train to
higher portion of that workforce
development, um, component.
Madam Chair, Senators.
Um, when you look at the logic
model, we're both looking at
both state funding and federal
leveraging and so when you look
at the columns that are in
yellow and in green, uh, the
yellow represent, um, grants
that the coalition has applied
for either to the Department of
Labor or the Department of
Justice and the green refers to
the northern area local
workforce Development Board's
investment, but the red
symbolizes is the investment
that we would have to make as a
state to, to meet the, the
prescribed need of 800
individuals.
So when you ask a question about
272, these would be 272
individuals who would get
credentials credentials specific
trainings, that means they'd
actually get a certification to
go into a job where the 1542
represents those who get the
holistic case management and
stabilization services, but may
not get a certification.
I see. OK, that makes, so you
have to come all the way down
to, to understand that. And
1800, we released in New Mexico
1800 individuals per year.
That's how many we release. So
this would cover everyone who's
released. If we were to get this
funding, for to get the red
funding. Madam Chair, Senator,
those individuals who are
released from state-run
facilities. These do not include
county or local run facilities.
Thank you Madam Chair. This is
very impressive.
Madam Chairman, if I can also
just say on page 5 and tab A,
there is a budget breakdown. Um,
the, the left version is much
more refined than the, the dark
blue side on the right, and
that's what I just want to
reemphasize. The dark blue is
going to continuously get
refined as we continue our
conversations with um various
state agencies who we've been
spending quite a bit of time
with and are grateful, um, to
their insight and access to
their divisions for support as
well as other providers, um, so
we can continue to break down
especially those larger light
items that you can see um that
we.
Broken out.
So we'll continue to refine
that.
Thank you, thank you, Senator,
um, Representative Barrego and
then representative Herrera.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, so
my one of my favorite places to
go is to, uh, Goodwill, so you
guys will probably see me there
from time to time. Actually,
some of the art in my house is,
if you guys haven't checked out
the art at Goodwill, let me tell
you what, um, so you kind of
partially answered my question,
I think, but um, so do you guys
you coordinate with CNM. I heard
you say that at
extent and then I have um follow
up regarding another
coordination possibility.
Madam Chairwoman, Representative
Borego, I'll start the answer
and if Sasha feels like there's
some more we can add, we'll
we'll, we'll, we'll tag team
this answer. So, um, from this,
um, experiences of our case
managers, one level of the
relationship is literally from
the intake individualized
service, um, uh, plans that are
made between a case manager and
their client into next steps. If
they identify as wanting to go
into um a higher ed institution
such as CNM, um, we'll make sure
we help navigate them through
those resources. So one level is
literally being, um,
System, um, for the client, and
I know that I can say, um, in
general, um, Sasha and our
president Shana have ongoing
conversations to coordinate and
continue to, um, have dialogue
with institutions such as CNM.
That's wonderful, um, and just
Moving on, what about the
unions? Do you guys coordinate
with the unions at all? I mean,
in like training and because I
know that they work with, you
know, people that have been
released as well.
Madame Cheron Representative
Borego, um, we, um, we're
learning about all of that space
and some of our program managers
have been um building those
relationships for us and we're
also building some of those
relationships. So we should be
having a meeting in the next
couple of weeks to learn about
those coordinations, especially
with previous appropriations
that are focused on the trades
and the unions and what's
happening already through them.
So again, our programs like this
train to hire with the clean
energy that we shared with you
today, that will start next
year. We want to make sure what
we're doing is in line with the
whole bigger picture again,
because that, that means we'll
lead to
Success in employment for, uh, a
client.
Um, Madam Chair, and I just
bring that up because I can just
envision just a really strong
program, you know, between the
community and people who are
trying to turn their lives
around and just, you know, I
guess goodwill is a nonprofit.
Is that correct? Um, and I also
just want to turn my attention
to Mr. Martinez, and my mother
is Martinez, by the way, so I'm
half Martinez and then
There's another representative
that sits on this table that's a
martinez, um, you know, I think
that when I heard your story and
I heard your testimony, um, you
know, it just really struck me
that, um, you probably got to a
point where you were tired of
being sick and tired, and the
role model that you represent to
us today at this table, um, and
I'm, I'm, I just want to let you
know how.
Proud of you I am because
turning that that table on
addiction is not an easy
process, and you should be
extremely proud when you walk
out today and go into that
community that you're working
with to be sort of the face of
what we're trying to accomplish
in bringing people back into
society as people who are
actually functioning and
Contributing to our society, so
I just want to thank you for
your courage and your bravery to
come here today and and express
your story to us. Thank you so
much.
Thank you, uh, Representative.
Borego and thank you, Senator
Lopez and um.
And House Minority Martinez, for
your words of encouragement. I,
uh, I really appreciate them,
um.
I truly believe that we all go
through things in life.
And um, and it's not about where
we've been, it's about.
What we're doing with what we've
learned through the through that
journey.
And so I, I, I stand on a firm
foundation that recovery is
possible and, um, and I'm
honored to be able to share that
with you all, with my community
and my neighboring communities,
so thank you guys.
Thank you, Madam Chair. It's
difficult to leave those demons
behind, so thank you for that.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Herrera.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you all for your presentation.
It's deeply appreciated. And I
would like to say that to say
Ralph Martinez is a community
activist would be the
understatement of the highest
order in Espanola. You should
all know he helped start the
pathway shelter program and if
anything's happening in
Espanola.
Ralph is there. I'm just going
to tell you that's just how it
works. He said every wake and
wedding, um, and, um, we, we
totally appreciate uh his uh his
service to our community and and
to all of you too. What I'm
curious about is.
I get where the expansion's
going. What are your current
budgets now and how many clients
are you serving now and what is
the cost per client? That's what
I'm curious about.
On an annual basis.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative,
thank you for the question. Uh,
through July of 22 to the end of
December 2023. Um, we total
expenditures for the program was
$215,550 for 110 individuals
served with one on one case
management services. Our current
budget for 2024 is $350,000 and
we're currently at 1033 persons
served year to date.
OK, um, I'll get those numbers
and do the annual the the cost
per person. I'm curious about
the cost per client me in here.
Oh I thought you. Oh, OK.
We can definitely get you the,
the cost per client.
Yeah, because if we're gonna, if
we're gonna replicate this at
the state level and you have
your numbers you really need to
kind of understand what that is,
um, it's important to know.
Madam Chairwoman, um,
Representative Era I call Roger
Gonzalez back to help us with
how we've calculated, um, we're
trying to model the workforce
development component of this
off of WOA. And so we're using
that to also influence, um, the
cost per participant with the
expansion we're proposing.
That
Madam Chair, Representative
Herrera, of course, when we look
at leveraging resources, we
typically will spend around
$7500 per client, and that's if
the client receives a
credential-based certification.
So you look, when you look at
the budget, that's why we've
only taken a percentage of that,
uh, 20072 individuals who
actually get certification
because that's all based on the
providers out within the
ecosystem who are what we call
ETPL certified. That's eligible
training provided is certified.
So they have to be, they have to
be certified through the local
workforce development.
The boards across the state. So
they charge a rate depending on
what specification they're
applied for. So that's why a
portion's budget only allows for
the the high-end certification,
but most of the individuals will
be getting around, uh, $6500
in in both direct case
management and supports. What
this does, Madam Chair, members
of the committee is in Wioa.
There's a function that we call
supportive services. Those are
typically um gas cards, um, a
uniform to get employment.
That's very limited. It's
typically.
$500 a person. This really
expands that service because we
have to stabilize these
individuals for, for, for a
household and basic needs. So
those are things that within we
all we cannot leverage and so
this will allow us to uh very,
very similarly, um.
There's a program called Reset
that the legislature funded 2
years ago. That was a huge
success. You, you all invested
$2.5 million in around 4 months,
they exhausted the money, um,
completely. And that model
basically assigned around
$10,000 just to stabilize
re-entry populations,
um, uh, for 6 months.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you. And can you uh tell
me, what do you do about
housing? I, I assume that that
would be the most difficult part
of this job, Ma.
Representative, I'll start with
the answer again and then we'll
tag team it. So, um, we'll make
sure that we show you the
historical cost per participant
when as Goodwill has self-funded
it to date, we'll also show you
the breakdown of the cost again
between someone who would um
want to pursue the complete path
into a train to hire program
like we've discussed a little
earlier as well as if they just
got the services without that
credential.
Oh
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
you were asking, uh, how we
assist them with accessing
housing.
So currently we do that on a
referral basis to other
providers um that are that have
that housing funding available
off the top of my mind, it would
be, uh, we use Frontline
recently in Mexico re-entry
Center and supporting them in
trying to access funds to be
able to secure a deposit. We
currently don't have that level
of funding to be able to do that
for them, so we have to utilize
partner resources in the
community and we help them
navigate that way. Um, and as
part of this expansion and
including supportive services
and being able
To provide them at a larger
scale. We offer, uh, the
supportive services for veteran
families program at Goodwill, in
which we do provide a temporary
financial assistance. We've done
that program for over 12 years.
So we have experience in
facilitating rental assistance
through, um, uh, the temporary
financial assistance process,
uh, but we don't have it
implemented in the re-entry
program as of yet.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. That's fine. Thank you,
Representative Senator
Cervantes.
I'm pleased to hear that you all
have plans to expand into my
part of the state, Las Cruces
and Donana County. I remember
Goodwill being there many years
ago, at least as I remember
growing up and then you were
there and then now you're not
and you're coming back.
Is that fair?
Chairman and Cervantes, there
are two goodwill territories, if
you will, in New Mexico.
Goodwill Industries of New
Mexico covers 26 territories,
and what that means is we can
put retail stores in 26 of the
33 counties. Um, where we can't
put retail stores is in the, the
Southwest.
corner. We can provide all of
our services and in fact the
federally funded veteran
services that Sasha and her team
have led for over a decade now
are um in, in all across the
state because of an MOU with
Goodwill Industries of El Paso,
and so goodwill of El Paso has
about 2 stores, I want to say,
in Las Cruces, and so that's
their territory where they,
where they provide some of their
own unique services and I should
be more clear because I looked
at your map and so what you all
are doing in terms of this
programming that we're talking
about is, is, um, not being
handled.
The El Paso goodwill territory,
is that right?
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, yes,
that's correct. We have an
agreement with the El Paso
Goodwill to provide services in
their territory that they don't
provide themselves. And it's
always important that those, I'm
always looking for the
opportunity to bring Southern
New Mexico back into the state,
uh, whether it's water issues or
whatever else it may be, it
seems that the history with the
connections to El Paso, we're
still living some of that down.
Um, I want to, um, years ago
I've told this committee, years
ago, this committee used to be
called the courts and
Corrections Committee.
Representative Chasey Senator
Stewart and Senator Wirth may
remember those days when this
was just the courts, courts and
Corrections Committee, and when
I chaired it in the house, I
asked to have the name changed,
which we changed it to justice
because I, I thought if we added
the word justice committee, I
could do anything I wanted, uh,
and call it justice. And, and,
and it would expand our scope
beyond just courts and
corrections.
I, I regret that I think in some
respects sometimes it has had an
unintended consequence and, and
with Representative Chasey
leaving us in the legislature, I
think it's important to
recognize that she's always been
a champion of focusing on the
corrections process. We used to,
the committee used to meet
routinely every year, at least
once or more in one of the
facilities. And, and because of
the expanding the scope, and
really my unintended doing,
maybe we've gotten away a little
bit more than we should from
probably the the role of
oversight in.
In the corrections process and
listening and, and buzzing in my
ear, Representative Chasey, and
then
I represent Chandler,
we, we can't help but note that
when we talk about crime in our
efforts to address crime the
seemingly the issue of
corrections, it was not raised
in the special session at all.
There's been no discussion or,
or consideration of the
corrections process in
addressing crime, and what we
did learn is that with a great
deal of focus on competency, we
learned during our committee
process that that may account
for 4.
5% of cases with this revolving
door process we talk about the
revolving door, people with drug
addictions or or low level
crimes coming in and out of the
system. But if, but if that's 4
or 5% of our cases we overlook
the fact that 100% of our cases,
um, probably means somebody
who's convicted being imprisoned
and incarcerated and the
opportunity to do some of the
things that Mr. Martinez has
described for us and that
changed his life and, um, so,
uh, just a couple of questions
on that, Mr. Martinez. You, you
talked about the fact that you
were in and out of
Various experiences of
rehabilitation efforts and so
forth all over the country. Uh,
and then you said something,
you, you didn't really say why,
but something changed for you in
2012. Um, and so if you could
just briefly tell me, was there
some particular thing that, that
um took?
Well,
I had already been through a
lot, uh, by 2012 in 2012 I felt
like I can feel death breathing
down my back. I had OD'd on a
few different occasions flirted
with death on quite a few
different occasions. I had, um,
3 children at the time and um
and I grew up without a father,
and they were constantly on my
mind and I kept in contact with
them, um, from afar on a regular
occasion, they would go visit me
in jail when I ended up in
rehab, they would go visit me
and.
and I was lucky to have the
support of their mom to be able
to do that, and it was always
their choice and they always
chose to go visit me. There was
times when I was underneath the
bridge, um, there by the Dandy
Berger here in town. The bridge
by the Danny Bergers where I
spent my first year homeless. I
lived underneath that bridge and
I would walk over to Dandy
Berger and I'd use the pay phone
and I would call um their mom
and uh she would ask me, Ralph,
what, what are you doing? And I
would tell her, I have no idea
what I'm doing right now. All I
know is I.
miss the kids and I want to see
them so bad and she would tell
me, where are you at? and I
would tell her I'm at the people
at Danddyberger and she would
ask the kids, do you guys want
to go see that and they would
say yes, and they were all
young, very, very young at the
time, and, um, and uh she would
tell me we'll be there in 40
minutes. You better be there. I
would tell her. I'll be here and
I'd sit there and I'd wait and
she would show up with the kids
and we would sit down and we
would talk and I would always
try to explain to them according
to their age and understanding,
um, of where, where I was at,
right? um.
But in 2012, um, I, I felt like
I can feel death breathing down
my back. I had already been
through so many, so much trial
and error with all the
rehabilitation centers that I
had been to. I wanted to quit. I
wanted to stop. I wanted to, um,
to, to become this productive
member of society and grow in
the things of life and be the
father and the and the, um, and,
and, and the husband that um
that I always knew that I that I
could be, um, and, and so.
So there was a lot of
acceptances that I had to come
to in 2012 and I appreciate that
and I'm sorry for the limited
time we could probably hear a
great deal and learn more from
you. But you did tell me
something in your last answer
that I think is meaningful for
me and I hope the committee,
which is, you talked a lot about
the connection with your family
and your kids have been able to
see them and being in the
community and we, we learned
yesterday that a lot of local
governments are abandoning the
jailing process. Um, they're not
keep we we say, well, this this
committee doesn't have a jail.
Well, it did have a jail. They
stopped.
Maintaining it and they stopped
funding it and they stopped
supporting it and so it went
away. And, um, and we're seeing
that around the state and
frankly I think that's a problem
in Albuquerque as well too. They
have a wonderful facility that's
understaffed and remote and not
utilized locally and and keeping
individuals who we are going to
jail in the local community
where they can see their family
and their families can see them
easily, whether it's for
competency, um, in Las Vegas, or
whether it's in, in jail or
incarceration is important, I
think, to hear from you.
That that being able to keep uh
people who we are going to jail
for a period of time, try and
get them to support like
Goodwill and the other services,
but also keep them close to
their family and their kids
because it sounds like that,
that was a big turnaround for
you. And so that, that's what
I've, I've learned from your,
your presentation today. So
thank you, Mr. Martinez. Thank
you very much. Thank you. Thank
you. Any concluding remarks, um,
Ms. Chavez, Madam Chairwoman,
members of the committee, just
thank you again for your time
and um we would love to continue
dialogues as we continue on
moving in the next few months.
Um, we've had encouragement from
various, um, divisions and state
agency leaders as well as
legislators to continue to
pursue how could this be um um
expanded to also increase into
county, um, referrals and
enrollment. And again, we're
we're investing the time to make
sure that multiple providers in
all the facets that we all inter
interconnect in the re-entry
services, um, are going to be
included and or incorporated in
some way into the larger ask. So
we look forward to seeing you in
during session, but also welcome
more dialogue as we move
forward.
Thank you very much and
obviously people are very
interested in your program.
Thank you.
So it's time for lunch and I
just want to note that um Ashley
Wagner, our dear friend from
Namoga, is providing lunch today
and so thank you very much. We
really appreciate it. And so
we're, we have a break for about
an hour we're going to start
back up at one o'clock with our,
um, next part of our program.
Thank you.
