here to present along with some
experts whom she will introduce.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, good
morning, everyone. I'm Liz
books a night sky statute, and
it's time for some improvements,
and I have some experts here
with me today who would uh like
get your feedback on the bill so
that we know how we can improve
it as we keep going and with me,
uh, to my right is Peter
Sky International. So I'm gonna
turn it over to Peter at this
time.
The chapter has over 100 members
statewide and more about the
chapter in a few minutes.
In 1999, the original version of
the New Mexico Night Sky
nighttime environment and its
value as a natural and cultural
resource.
Such a measure was in common for
its time and put New Mexico on
was passed, several towns, city,
and county governments have
enacted ordinances specific to
outdoor lighting. Albuquerque,
Las Cruces, Los Alamos, and
across New Mexico, designated as
dark sky places. These actions
demonstrate interest in
stewardship.
section and education about why
darkness matters.
We now have an extraordinary
opportunity to take a positive
step by updating the act and to
reestablish our leadership role,
demonstrated by the passage of
right, in 2000 and, yeah, just
less than a year ago we we
hosted a stakeholder workshop,
the uh Dark Sky chapter of New
Mexico. Um, and we invited
There were scientific research
facilities, um, ecological,
environmental concerns. And
while they all shared with us a
Protection Act. We would like to
update it and have it improved.
So,
That is why I'm here today.
Next slide, please.
fixtures, preserve and enhance
the state's dark sky while
promoting safety, conserving
energy and preserving the
environment.
It seeks these goals by
requiring shielding of lighting
dairies, feedlots, industrial
and mining or oil and gas
facilities. The construction
industry's division is
responsible for the
implementation on state
that because it's not achieving
its stated objectives and needs
to be updated. Um, the primary
change in, in technology that
curtailing the growth of light
pollution. So in the next slide,
I've created a an animation that
will demonstrate that.
which, as this progresses, you
can see continually shrink.
Over a period of time. What once
was a string of pearls along the
major highways, uh, 550
corner of the state as well.
The next slide, so, basically,
when we talk about light
Shows the Skyglow impact, so
what you might expect to see on
the black areas, uh, a very
Next slide. Next, uh, component
of light pollution is glare, and
this is a good example of how
in front of it, you can notice
there's someone actually
standing in the gateway by the
fence there. So there is a
problem. Next slide, please.
owner rights. Um, it's something
that we, we want to, uh,
respect, uh, and having light
coming in from an adjoining
property is not respectful of
property owner rights.
exposure to artificial light at
night affect that negatively
affects our human health,
possibly increasing risk of
sleep disorders happen,
depression, obesity, diabetes,
on that with the idea of light
trespass, um, respecting.
Property owner rights and uh
containing light to the property
of its origin.
Next slide.
lighting in natural areas is um
altering life sustaining
behaviors such as reproduction,
feeding, migration, rest, and
cover from predators. Scientific
evidence is suggesting that this
Um, there's an inhibition in
inhibiting scientific research
says it interferes with
observations by amateur and
professional astronomers and
Yes, lighting is important for
safety way finding, but there
are conflicting views about um
how like decreases crime. It's,
line. Um, that outdoor lighting
can decrease safety by making
victims and property easier to
see, um, so.
The glare from Bright unshielded
Um, there are economic and
environmental consequences.
As impacts for light pollution.
Our next slide.
a cultural resource. So the
ancestral night sky no longer is
brimming with stars and many
parts of our state. And that
inspired
Science, religion, philosophy,
art, literature.
it's especially important to
native cultures, traditions,
practice.
And we have undermining tourism
astro business, um.
webpage.
Of which image speaks to them
most about New Mexico, and the
one that got the most comments
was uh one of the white sands
to those interested in a night
sky. We have people coming in
from out of state because they
can no longer see the night sky
from where they live. There are
astronomy communities, remote
things there that we need to
consider.
Responsible outdoor lighting.
Before we address these
recommendations, we just want to
light pollution, provided it's
well designed and installed.
Dark sky and the illuminating
illuminating Engineering Society
have jointly developed a set of
principles for responsible
standards issued by the American
National Standards Institute
ANSI.
So, our recommendations that
we're gonna share.
and some of number 4, so have it
be controlled. Use light only
where it's needed.
And uh use timers and motion
detectors. So we'll get into
His purpose. Um, we understand
the current legislative practice
excludes purpose statements, so
we we uh propose to delete that.
night sky Protection Act, but we
propose a um a revision to
include
Fully shielded under 74123, um,
of the fixture. So, um, what has
been what has been demonstrated
with lights that are just
limited to the horizontal plane,
nothing above 90 degrees, is
You can see an example of
unshielded, partly shielded,
shielded, that's the 90 degrees,
uh, and then fully shielded,
showing its better directed and
Um, further updates on
definitions, we would like to
add light trespass, meaning
artificial light sources
emitting into adjacent
properties or public rights of
way.
before about the impacts on
wildlife, property owner rights,
and light pollution in general,
like trespass.
Next
and with the rapid evolution of
technology and lighting, mostly
to LEDs, wattage is pretty much
meaningless. It's a, a measure
of power consumption, we propose
quantifying the light emitted by
a light source. Further on, uh,
updating.
We proposed that um,
fixture installed after July
1st, 2025, that is mounted more
than 4 ft above the ground,
shall be fully shielded and
installed and maintained in
accordance with manufacturer
specifications and instructions
directed toward the night sky or
public right of way and shall
not result in light trespass. So
this takes into account the
changes that I mentioned before
about LED technology, uh, and
appropriate measure, uh,
And yes, LEDs are more efficient
and provide visible light.
better than the older
technologies. So, um,
Yeah, to have an automatic
shutoff device between the hours
of 11 p.m. and sunrise.
And 74 125, we would propose
that we change that to just say,
Um
of 11 and sunrise, or installed
with a device that automatically
turns the light.
Of no longer than 30 minutes
after its first turned on.
So we have um.
know, the exempted industries
are not subject to 74-125.
Next slide for exemptions, yes,
interstates and federal pri
primary highways.
Advertisement signs can be lit
from above and achieve the same
functionality.
But when the lighting is
replaced, the replacements
become subject to all the
provisions of the night sky
Protection Act. So we don't want
Uh, they're not surprised.
Suddenly they have illegal
lights.
Next, so outdoor lighting
2027. Um, we suggest that
responsible lighting can be
installed at comparable costs,
so long as it's planned before
construction. Responsible
lighting is as safe or safer
of 2023, uh, we had people who
are members of the New Mexico
Oil and Gas Association, and
we've engaged in dialogue with
them. Um, we are, um, finding
Uh, at their facilities, um, to
be more responsible, uh, and
create it uh.
Higher and enhanced level of
in related to film or television
productions. So we propose that
something be added as an
exemption for that, um, since
that's a very valuable, uh,
industry in our state, and we
Questions.
So, Madam Chair, members of the
committee were very interested
Anyone else?
Senator Wirth, Senator Maestas,
OK, wait, let me, let me do
this.
I asked this
Rep Barrego.
try to keep it to where are we
here?
About 5 minutes each. Senator
Neiber.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
really noticed that on I-40, uh,
between Albuquerque and Klein's
Corners, uh.
A lot of those billboards are
not. I noticed you took out the
word advertising signs, um.
I'd like to look at a couple of
provisions in the bill and some
of them are not your changes,
Um,
What about activities that are
in progress.
After 11 p.m. so if you have a
midnight softball.
It seems to me that that uh
If we're gonna have an exemption
for sporting events, it
shouldn't matter what time.
Senator Neibert, um, Madam
Chair, um.
Welcome your, your comment about
billboards and, and, um, you
know, we're hoping that we can
And, and the other thing that um
that I find really obnoxious are
these electronic messaging
boards, um, like, like the ones
at casinos and so forth, um, a
lot of things like that should
know, rather than at the state
level. Um, regarding sporting
events, I think the language in,
in the bill clarifies that um
anything that that is still in
that's what is that there may be
a, a, an event scheduled
Midnight Madness.
Maybe softball instead of
basketball, but things that
start at 12 midnight.
the one that started at 11 would
be allowed. So I, I don't know
why there's a time.
midnight start. So Senator, we
could put in a special exemption
for events held after that time.
Yeah, point, point noted, and I,
and I think we, we can modify
that.
Yeah, and then, um,
Um, and then, lines 22 and 23.
Why are we not concerned about
Seems to me that the added
language should not be added.
I think the point there is that
um the sorry?
these things is, is, um, is
constantly improving the
feedback that we got from
Nemoga, um, and the oil and gas
industry in general was that,
is no time to um turn on lights
in order to address that danger.
Um.
Um, the, the idea is, is that
given a couple of years, the
technology could improve to to
on the light is, uh, um, uh, but
Madam Chair, you're, you're
saying that it's necessary for
safety, but you're then saying
maybe it's taken care of. But if
it's necessary for safety, we
ought to be concerned about the
safety and not the light.
And so I would, I would strike
Um, Senator, your time is up.
Well, that's too bad because I
had 2 more comments I'm certain
We have Senator Wirth.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Senator Deanics and
presenters. Uh, so a couple of
suggest you not change that. We
can debate it during the
session, but starting football
games next door to a
neighborhood at 4 in the
morning. I just think that's,
that was done. I do have some
specific questions about on page
3 section A. I wanna make, is
there a uh
requirement for the 4 ft and
under, but I don't see one for
section A. So I'm just curious,
is, is there a specific, I mean,
can I put any brightness of
in, in the bill. Um, when we
have written, um,
Ordinances for municipalities,
we do have um lumen limits, um,
anything about that either, and,
and we wanted to make only
minimal changes this time around
to the, to the fundamental bill,
but we, but, um, but that is
certainly something that we
could consider as we go forward.
Senator Worth, um, Madam Chair,
that is correct.
Yeah, so I think if we're gonna
put it in one place, it just
Uh, second thing, I just, I have
a question about the, the term
light trespass.
And when I look at the
definition,
outdoor light up and I can see
it.
Basically, then that's
considered a light trespass.
Senator Wirth, Madam Chair,
illuminates the entrance to your
property.
Um, as long that, that light is
visible from the adjacent
property, but that light doesn't
neighbor, uh, has a porch light
that I can certainly see, I
don't think it's
Designed to be directed.
forward. So, again, those are
just some thoughts I appreciate
very much the work that's been
done since we heard this up in
Questa in, I believe is Water
and Natural Resources, because I
think this is a, a really
important law on the books that
we've had for a long time and
technology has moved forward,
and I'm really hoping we can get
Thank you.
No, thanks for the presentation.
I learned a lot, um.
And, uh, because when I saw the
headline.
books for 25 years and it's done
some good things. And I do think
we need to modernize modernize
statutes every, every decade or
so. So, uh,
Uh, paragraph 2, 74-12-2. What
does that say?
I, um, Senator Maestas, Madam
included in bills these days, so
that's why we repealed that.
Thank you, thank you. Yeah,
that's the rumor. Thank you. Um,
and then uh it's a rumor that's
repeated regularly in this
So I would work on that, on
that, uh.
On that definition, cause that
definition's a killer, you know,
You know, my yard is a little
brighter, so to speak.
Without that light, but, but
it's the light bulb. It's the,
the, the ray of the light, um,
can go to the local municipal
golf course and hit a bucket and
enjoy themselves. And people are
just losing their minds, uh,
cause it's such a beautiful open
space, um, and the key was that
the light.
work on that definition if, if
you, if you want.
And then also, um.
Um, Senator.
Senator Maestas, um, Madam
that, you know, lighting for in
sports stadiums needs to
illuminate the field. It doesn't
need to illuminate the houses
that are, um, next door. And so,
um we'll incorporate those, but,
um, but yeah, to, to actually, I
mean that 11 of the reasons for
the, for the 10 degrees below
horizontal is, um, is to prevent
It's, it's not numbered, but the
update shielding, that's, that's
fantastic. And I think that that
modern technology will get us to
the right side of the page on,
outlying nighttime advertising
in signs, um.
And so, just, just keep in mind
if, say if I
Sign a two-year contract with a,
that's a taking, you know, um,
you know, in a perfect world, we
wouldn't have any.
Uh, advertisements on our
roadways so we can see the
landscape, but that that's just
good public policy. So, uh, what
we may want to do is grandfather
the lighting in and say any
future billboards have to have.
Uh, you know, the fully shielded
clause. However, when when
existing lighting fixtures
become unrepairable,
regardless of whether they're
unrepairable or not, once
they're replaced.
Like the, the language, in my
them for any reason, they should
be subject to the new, to the
new statute. And then my
question is on page 4, Madam
Chair, Ser Stefaniks, uh,
What
installed prior to. So are you
suggesting that after January 1,
2027, no lighting can be
installed in.
In a workplace environment?
um, we're wanting to put that
time on or that date on there to
give them time, um, to keep the
lighting they already have, and
then upon new installations that
they have lighting that's fully
have to be, there's certain
requirements that they put in,
um, but other things installed
uh after.
January 1st, we would like to
see them fully shielded and, uh,
it kind of outlaws all lighting
after January 1, 2027. Thank
you.
Thank you, Senator. um
Representative Barrego and then
Senator Sadia Lopez.
guys met with the Albuquerque
planning department, um, because
we do have a, um.
A night sky ordinance in the
city of Albuquerque and I just
would be a very good thing, um,
and you know the city of
Albuquerque when they do
development, they use recess
lighting and parking lots,
especially, um, so I, I support
The ordinance and the the
existing ordinances that are
already out there sort of don't
conflict, so I would just
encourage that as much as
industry.
Um, there is.
There is a union that, um, and I
can definitely put you in touch
You know, I mean, I'm sure that
they'd be willing to sit with
you and
You know, discuss what their
needs are as well and make sure
that we don't discourage, um,
Changes if if need be, but um I
would just encourage those sorts
of things. I think um.
that already have existing night
sky ordinances that we probably
um should also not just
Albuquerque, but since I
represent Albuquerque, that
would be my, those would be my
Thank you, Representative
Representative Barrago, Madam
Chair, um, if I could just
mention, yes, we did talk about
the local ordinances,
Albuquerque, for example, Los
And the film industry, IATI, we
would love to take you up on uh
making contact with them.
Senator Sadia Lopez.
Um,
skies, but I was a little bit,
and I don't know if I'm missing
something maybe in some other
section, but on page two,
there's a on, on B, um, line 7,
uh, trespass.
If we added some language
related to the shielding and
that the source of the light is
not visible, but the effect is
only visible. So that would, you
Senator, it's referenced on page
3 line 13 is 13, where is it?
OK, 13.
And shall not result in light
trespasses, so that's the only.
What is measured in 13.
Uh, I'm just thinking of
Of litigation and some somebody
sue somebody for light trespass.
Yeah, I think that's where it's
uh um senatoria Lopez and, uh,
Madam Chair, that is definitely
worth consulting with uh an
attorney. You give us a little
more guidance on legal
You know, I don't know that that
just struck me. And then uh
again with the definition of of
lumen.
about lumens. Is that a
generally accepted term in.
In science
Uh, yes, Lumen is the
international standard for light
it was an incandescent bulb.
It's now marked in so many
lumens. Um, so 100, 100 watt
light bulb is about 800 lumens,
700 lumens, something like that,
wattage is a unit of power
consumed by a fixture. LED
lights are so much more
efficient than um than
incandescence that um um it
meaningless to anyone else. Um,
so it's I, I, I think yes, of
course, we have to change.
Watts to Lumens, but maybe it
should say an internationally
measurement. What standard of
measurement, who, who, uh,
Sets the standard.
Is the standards set by
industry, you know, that, that's
all. I, I'm just trying to be a
comment, and that was on page 4
line 24, um, you, you gave an
exemption for film or television
production, and I've been on
those lots, and I agree it looks
like you're in day during the,
it looks like day.
When you go there. And would you
I, I couldn't, um, see.
Road construction has an
exception here and maybe I
but.
Uh, it's something to think
about.
Thank you, Senator. We're going
to consider all of your
comments. We're, you know,
making the rounds of all the
committees, so we're taking
All right. Um, any concluding
remarks, um, Senator?
do so. Uh, I'm just going next
door to another committee, so
I'm available, um, and I'd like
to thank the gentlemen and the
statewide coalition for working
we're ready for our next um
panel.
See you guys. Thank
We are um on our second agenda
item for today proposed changes
Heats along with their expert
whom they will introduce, so.
I don't know who wants to start,
Senator perhaps who are
representative. I'm whomever.
And thank you, Madam Chair, and,
amendment for two different
bills. One, it will be amendment
to our constitution on the
anti-Donation clause, and then,
um.
the concerns about the
anti-donation clause, but please
indulge me just for a couple of
minutes to make sure that our
constituents and viewers
understand the complexity of the
To any non-governmental
entities. This has been um a
part of our Constitution before
we've even been a state. It was
back in, uh, when we were a
um, but it is through the years
and the complexities, uh, the
states have all, uh, adjusted
their anti-donation clause.
able to move forward with
funding and legislation to be
able to help non-government
entities. Um, I just wanted to
talk a little bit about the
You know that we've been working
for a year on this, but we've
been standing on the shoulders
for years and years, um, with
together a group of individuals
from DFA, uh, we've had, uh, uh,
a Michelle Jaske from
Legislative Council, Kathy Corp.
as well as um your chair,
Chandler and uh colleague
Representative Romero have been
a part of this group. Um, I, uh,
I wanted to just kind of go over
The PowerPoint in presented to
you. Thank you.
Well, good morning, everyone,
and uh as Representative Cates
permit exceptions for a variety
of issues, most recently just, I
think 2 years ago, um.
But it still creates a a bit of
your support for a, a, a ballot
initiative that would change the
constitution to permit New
Mexico to join the other states
who have found ways to deal with
usefulness and other states have
recognized that and moved and
that's what we're seeking to do
with this. So I'll just run
through the PowerPoint. Um, are
you putting it up? I don't know
if it gets, it doesn't get put
Constitution and to replace it
with, uh,
A statement that public funds
must be used for public purpose.
be where you'd see the actual
checks and balances that would
be included in the process.
So we would propose this uh
constitutional amendment. It
couldn't be voted on until 26.
um, amendment passes. Otherwise,
it, it, it goes out of
existence. So
When people go to vote on the
constitutional amendment, they
would have the enabling
Um, in addition to the
Constitutional, uh,
Uh
Change
On the anti-donation clause,
we're also proposing to repeal
Article 4 of the Constitution.
absolute control of the state,
uh, can receive public funds
through the legislature. And
that's what's been very
complicating for counties.
purposes.
To support the work of those
employees, you have to pay that
out of their regular budget who
do nothing but keep track of the
properties and of that
equipment, keeping track of all
of that has become an incredible
burden, because we're requiring
that the county or the
municipality owned the property.
we can give them the money to
fix it.
And so that's one of the, the,
the, the many complications that
occurs, uh, under the existing
language.
Um
We just don't have the capacity
to do it. Uh, and, and so it,
it's restricting how public
monies can be used to help
people in the state.
3
have needs, uh, not everything
that, that people need is
provided right now by
government, the classic example
for me is, um, uh, services for
Department of domestic violence
within the city government or
the county government. They rely
on a nonprofit to do that. They
fund it with the contract, but
if that facility,
Needs
money to go to it. And that's
the dilemma. And it's not just
legislative money, it's local
government money can't go to it
either. The prohibition is
strong.
To do things like the, the idea
for baby bonds that's been
circulated or to provide
disaster relief. Those are all
issues that have run into
And we also in in drafting this
of including cooperatives,
nonprofits and cooperatives,
because the co-ops in many
communities are where, uh, food
that same language in almost
every state had it at one time
or another. I think 47 states
had that 44 had, had that, um,
have figured out ways around it,
have, have dealt with it through
laws. Uh, we've tried to deal
with it through um.
Uh
Exemptions or exceptions that
specific exemptions. Um, that's
how we make economic
development. And so the irony is
we currently make it possible to
give a private.
that community. We do that to
private companies, but we can't
do the same thing to to a
nonprofit or a co op, the
seeking government money to
In New Mexico, we already do
provide capital outlay funds to
charitable nonprofits. We, we
haven't stopped that entirely.
Particular service that was
intended for this, it still has
to go through that route and it
complicates and delays things.
And it's, and it's, and it costs
for nonprofits in order to get
this done. And that puts them in
a situation in which they have
to maintain a lot more oversight
fiscal agent, anything that goes
wrong, the local government is
responsible for.
Um
Then Slide 6.
We call it the vibrant
Communities Act, and it, it's
where the guard rails are
spelled out. It would define
who's eligible.
That is the 501c3s. Keep in mind
cooperative. Those would be the
two types of 501s, 501cs that
could be eligible for for these
direct appropriations.
in, in, inappropriating these
funds.
Um
Slide 7 talks about the enabling
This is like the 4th iteration
of this, I think, but, but
various legislators over the
years have been involved in
this. I've been involved for
several years, uh,
Representative Cate for the last
this year and we're openly
soliciting other uh willing
supporters who might want to
have their names associated with
the effort. Um, but it also had
and, and have provided keen um
counsel on, on, on how best to
do this, what would be the most
workable way. Um, the council
service has also been involved
all the different proposals and
then making a list of
recommendations that are brought
to the legislature for.
action.
Um, and then nonprofit leaders
So the, the uh final slide is
about other considerations, uh,
it would go before a vote of
the, on the next general
costs some extra money and there
would be some additional staff
needed in the future if this
were to pass, uh, because the
enabling legislation calls for
questions and, uh, I think most
of the questions are going to
get answered by Sephora because
she's the one with the most
intimate knowledge. She's been
working closely with the
drafters. But if either
Representative Cates or I can
Senator Sail Lopez.
Anyone else?
Senator Wirth.
dream. Um, because you're right,
you said it best when the
Constitution was written, it was
like after toward the tail end
of the Porfiatro and the US
economy and government was
nonprofits in the 70s, 80s, the
501c3, as you know, Madam Chair,
refers to the section of the IRS
code, uh, where people utilize
So we, we definitely need to
get, uh, our friends in the
minority to be on board on this
one, and the less government
folks should, should eagerly
um, just a couple tidbits,
madam, cheer it up.
Representative Cates, when you,
when you do the Enabling Act,
uh,
I would shy away from just
saying.
Z because if we take the IRS
code in it's, you know, word for
word, and it includes religious
organizations, and that would
violate the, the US Constitution
of the United States, um.
Swells, you know, a swelling of
support from minority
communities, smaller towns, the
media, because we only have one
shot, you know, if this goes
entire room just gets deflated
and we just kind of move on to
the next bill. Um, unless a
judge says it violates it, you
know, I don't think we should be
And the kind of the legal um.
hoops that we jump through to do
the same thing, you know,
legally, so.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um
governmental work, um, and
instead of expanding the
government, this is an
opportunity for us to be able to
make sure that we are putting
that roof on a foster home or
have.
found even I one of my um cities
in my district, which is the 3rd
largest city in the state, they
really help the small rural
communities as well as even um
the cities that are not able to
have that and we are getting
are many different guardrails to
be able to do that and audit
reporting and accountability.
I'm a big believer in
accountability and trans uh
Great. Thank you, Senator
Senator Sadil Lopez and then
Senator Wirth.
Thank you. I'm so glad you're
doing this. Um, I at at
and so this, um,
This spells it out. My only
little concern and you just
might want to look at it, um,
with that in mind is, I think
legislation maybe having some
kind of uh technical assistance
built in for, um, you know,
cause like I said, once you get
that you can call and just
Get help with doing, because
look at all of the things they
have to do. They have to
describe the project.
For a lot of people, that's a
you've done it.
But it, it can be intimidating
to a small nonprofit or a small
community, so, so that's, that's
a little concern and then this
one. it's not that hard, um, and
so that kind of concerns me. I
think it should say they should
have 501c3 status or 501C12
status and provide.
educational services, whatever
you think would, would capture
the groups that we want to fund
because opening it up to
that
or some things, but I really
like the guard rails. I think
that really helps with the
potential for corruption. So
thank you for doing this and if
you need somebody to support,
one of the considerations with
limiting the types of 501c3s is
because there are churches that
do provide services.
C3 status and provide social
services, so I'm not saying
exclude them completely, but
exclude some of their other
activities.
Yes, it does, and we will review
the language, and there are
guard rails they have to
demonstrate public purpose and
it goes through a committee that
gets vetted.
threshold. I, I understand, I
understand that process and that
I, I would just feel more
comfortable if
If people didn't even think they
were qualifying organization if
I make that suggestion. I did, I
just think it'd be easier
because you, I think you're
gonna get a lot of applications.
Or, or you're going to get the
creation of 501c3s to do
whatever it is they want to do
that doesn't fit the criteria.
running a 501c3s as well, and it
is not just the creation, it is
there will be, I look forward to
you reading the enabling
legislation, um, for the
and
financial stability through
auditing mechanism, and there's
also a clear definition, and
then there is a review work to
municipality, um, also agrees
that that is um serving their
overall strategic plan. So there
are several different layers of
those guardrails. Thank you very
much and thank you. I love those
we have Senator Wirth.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you for the presentation.
Uh, as you know, I've struggled
with this bill, I think, because
I probably have the most
You know, every nonprofit set up
and they think they can do it
best and if I've got 400 lined
up in front of my office, how in
the world do I determine what
I know I carried the
constitutional amendment that
changed the PRC and when we got
the enabling statute in front of
members, it, it helped address
all the hypotheticals, the
and I mentioned this to Senator
Ortizipino, it feels like
You know, the system we've kind
of come up with to navigate
around the anti-donation clause.
agency and all of a sudden, a
program that's been on the books
for 10 years is now being
flagged for anti-donation, um,
Mexico where we have such a
vibrant nonprofit support system
and services being provided,
services that quite frankly
we're not providing at the
government level, being provided
by, by nonprofits.
at the enabling statute, because
I do think, and the plan is to
run these hand in hand, correct?
Yeah, so that's important. So
again, I just appreciate this
Um, anyone else?
So I, I just want to lend my
support to this too, so I, I
worked on a bill a few years ago
need to address our broadband
internet issue quickly, um,
federal funds were coming in
very quickly and the
transportation department in
particular, but other state
our easements and rights of way,
um, without charging fair market
value, and that was a firm
decision um opinion from the
attorney for the transportation
purpose and I know that local
governments have been frustrated
because they're not allowed to.
rely on that in particular, so
I, I'm open to this and
supportive of this and have um
anti-donation clause originally
and, and how it really doesn't
serve our society uh in a
modern, in the modern way.
for example, in Los Alamos, you
know, we have a chamber of
commerce, we have something
called the creative district,
which is part of our Main Street
program. That's a not for
profit, Main Street is a not for
Yeah, why? Because that's a
violation of the anti-Donation
clause to just loan the tents
for the crafts fair, you know,
these are the kinds of issues
are old tents. They're not even
brand new tents. Um, so, and,
and what happens is local
governments and even state
government does all
kinds of loop de loops and
there's exchange of value, you
know, and all these other things
when a lot of the value is, um,
intangible, OK. Sometimes it's
intangible, sometimes it's very
know, subsidize those services,
right? Because we have a, a real
serious problem here, substance
abuse, behavioral health, etc.
but they'll be told by their
local attorney, their in-house
too afraid to, uh, we have a
county council, county
commission is too afraid to buck
the lawyer, and I always say to
them, you can buck the lawyer,
but they don't listen to me.
Because they're afraid of
Although I wish you would
listen, guys would listen more
trained to listen to lawyers.
So, you know, I think the time
is right now to really look at
citizens in the state and that's
what all of this is about
supporting our citizens with
necessary services that just
happened to be provided by our
local non not for profit
wanna lend my support and thank
Senator or TCP now for his long
standing interest in um advocacy
on this issue and, and before um
we get to the next item I just
unfortunately, I haven't had a
chance to work as closely with
you because we can, you know how
we all operate in our orbits,
our orbits haven't.
Delighted as much, but I, I, I
next presenters, just a couple
housekeeping things before
lunch, we'll approve the
minutes, so we'll do the work
plan on that. Um, also, lunch
Jared and Dan Najar pro are
providing the meal, so that's
great and I really appreciate
it. So, um, just want you to
kind of know what to expect so
you're.
I'll be ready for that. So.
findings and recommendations of
the House Memorial 40, that's a
2023 item and House Memorial
representative Chasey. Uh, thank
you, Madam Chair, uh, and thank
you very much for having us on
the agenda today. I'm going to
a very, uh, brief introduction
bipartisan and there were
members of Congress as well as
members of the public on a panel
that served for a long time and
who doesn't agree with it. It's
not like it's a partisan issue.
um.
And every state is to be
we could support the enforcement
of the act in our uh county
facilities.
productive this interim, and I
have with me today Elena
Rubenfeld, who's the legal
director of the New Mexico
coalition of sexual assault
Douglas, uh, Carver is the
acting director, um, Linda
Freeman recently retired and
Douglas was once the staff
attorney for this committee.
Perhaps uh answer some questions
or support the, the work of the
task force. So with that I'm
gonna turn it over here and I
Um, I just wanted to thank
everybody for allowing us to
present today. My name is Roman
Varela. I am the
pre-Administrator for Berlio
County Metro Detention Center.
the last 5 years where we've
been able to become precompliant
and passed 3 federal audits in
the last um 6 to 7 years.
Um
director at the New Mexico
Coalition of Sexual Assault
Programs. Uh, we lead the
state's efforts to reduce sexual
abuse and sexual violence, uh,
by providing training and
specifically on, uh, New Mexican
survivors who are incarcerated,
as well as
preventing sexual assault in
such settings.
Mexico, and we will talk a
little bit more about Priya to,
to give you some helpful
background on that, um, and
we've worked, we've been, you
know, instrumental in the
creation of a hotline for all
across the state to corrections
staff to, um, uh, Priya
advocates who work with rape
crisis centers, uh, that, um,
assistance to sexual assault
nurse examiners who among their
many, um, tasks to take that do
perform sexual exams for
um, survivors who are
Memorial 45, which was also
House Memorial 40, the year
before, um, the goal as, um,
Leader Chasey said was to make
correctional facilities
compliance with uh the federal
prison Rape Elimination Act. Um,
before we get into our, our work
and what we discovered and what
you know, supposed to be
happening on the federal level
and why, why we gathered for
this space and, and hope to
strengthen policies here in New
Mexico.
Um,
The background of it is it's a
federal law maintained by the
Department of Justice is one, it
was signed into law in 2003 by
the Senate, um, had huge
support, especially because of
all the data that was provided,
the stories that were told uh
throughout the hearings, uh, it
was really noticed that there
just had the opportunity to go
to Washington DDC where we
celebrated or uh the 20th
anniversary and talked about
what is the next steps in the
future of Priya.
the programs that are happening
or the implementation that's
occurring throughout this
country.
Um
Like I said before, it, it
applies to all confinement
this law applies to them, except
for ICE, ICE has actually its
own set of Prius standards that
are almost identical to.
Uh, these standards.
And the main right that came out
of this is that inmates have the
right to be free from sexual
abuse and sexual harassment. You
kind of sounds, I guess, um.
Crazy that we have to say this,
this as well, um, about medical
care, uh, privacy we've always
talked about inmates, you lose
all right to privacy when you
enter a facility that is no
longer true. You do have some
And several other um rights came
out of this as well, um,
referring to, uh, gender
identity and other specific
things around that realm.
Uh, some of those categories are
prevention response training,
education, screening
investigation, medical care,
discuss um the task force
background.
Thank you, Roman, um, or
Servarela we, um, so as we
state. Um, and the task force
mission was to, to make
recommendations for changes that
might be appropriate here in our
state, um, to make sure that
we're complying with Priya to
really um unique and and
important coalition of partners.
Um, we absolutely had partners,
um, who represented facilities
Lee County. And then we also
had, um, representatives on the
task force who
There, you know, within their
capacity in interacting with
Priya, they focus mostly on
keeping, um,
worker rights issues. Um, we've
met 8 times and um, you know,
there were several big topics
that came out of these, these
really thoughtful meetings. Um,
With, within the state, we have
state facilities that, um, have
oversight within the corrections
department with the Inspector
facility is, um, is overseen by
its county commission.
And so what results from that is
we, we don't have a centralized
if they're complying in the way
that that is meaningful and, uh,
with Priya. So, um, that is
something that we identified in
all of these facilities, which
is not true with state
facilities, right? We do, we are
able to have a better
understanding of how Priya is
There are varying practices
around Priya in different
facilities across our state. And
work. We've heard of facilities
where pre-coordinators are
wearing multiple hats, um,
perhaps hats that are, are very
difficult to wear while being
prea coordinator, um, in our
rural communities, there are
need to investigate, um, someone
for a PRA violation who they
know. So obviously, that's a
real challenge, and um
ultimately, like I said,
supposed to.
to. I also want to note that our
county facilities are a large,
um, population of, of our
corrections facilities, um, MDC
alone are, which is a county
facility, um, houses as many
people as the entire state
corrections department. So this
means that a lot of the
individuals who are incarcerated
So with that, I just wanted to
get to what our task force
suggest first suggestion was,
um, to be clear, there's more
work to do in lots of areas.
recommend increasing support for
county facilities through the
creation of a centralized
statewide pre-county compliance
office, um, the task force.
um, the southeastern part of the
state. More specifically, we
identified uy debaca, uh Otero,
Curry, Roosevelt, and Chavez
counties, um, because they're
And what our hope is with this
pilot project, which would last
2 years, is that there would be,
um, this office would have the
task of a doing several things.
barriers for them meeting
compliance. We also would like
for this office to be a source
of educational and technical
assistance support to staff and
incarcerated individuals.
eliminate barriers to meeting,
um, the goals of PRIA.
And in the end, after the two
years of working on, on, um, in
suggestions for a successful uh
expansion for a statewide
office, given the experiences
and what they've learned in the
pilot project. So what some
individual county should, um, we
expand to some sort of support
for, for, um, state facilities
as well. Um, what are barriers
Um, and with that, I don't know
if there's anything you.
Uh, I do want to point out,
Madam Chair and committee
members that um we have had the
Uh, we've had clay corn on our
um working group and he is with
the Association of Counties.
administrator of every single
county facility would support
this. It's not, there's nobody
saying, no, no, we don't want
that. They all want to do
Strengthen the counties um and
not leave them open to exposure
for lawsuits that they might be
comments, concerns.
Input
I don't see any.
You guys are so thorough.
um, my, uh, yesterday, I think
we were talking, one of the
suggestions by DA Bregman was to
move um
18 year olds, as soon as they
they said, well, we could
segregate them in the adult
prison and I asked well why
can't you segregate them in the
juvenile prison instead just
thoughts and data about it. I
know that's not directly related
to what you're talking about,
Cedillo Lopez, I don't have uh
the data on me when it comes to
juvenile facilities and how many
incidents occur and how many
substantiated when it comes to
have requirements that we must
fulfill out of the PRO standards
to ensure that safety, but
that's talking about somebody
that's under the age of 18.
Um, when they come, when they're
Do we have pre standards in the
juvenile facilities and who, who
should kind of continue. I don't
mind having treatment options go
to 20 up to 25, which was
another, another thing, but I
just felt like
Um, Madam Chair, uh, Senator
Siio Lopez, there is a standards
for um juvenile facilities, uh,
the PRIA standards are broken
confinement standards, and then
there's lock up standards.
So it's broken into 4 different
categories to ensure that their
standards specific to each
different area within
corrections.
Madam Chair, Senator, um, yeah,
I, I, I believe so. I believe
properly located in a place
where they can be safe, right?
And so, if there were to be
younger, um, incarcerated
absolutely, while this is
focused on adult facilities,
specifically, um, we, I think it
will absolutely have an impact
across the state, and we want
this to be something that grows
across the state.
And, you know, if, if there is
work to do in juvenile
facilities, we're hopeful that
we will learn about that and we
those juvenile facilities. I, I
think at this point in time,
it's just that the district
attorney suggested a potential
would think that that um would
come into play if in fact there
were um some kind of a change.
I, I did, I, sorry, I didn't do
be carrying the torch on this in
the future.
And uh I want to give him a
chance to say a few words.
If that's OK, in the middle of
I've been thinking about. So I,
I, I, in a way hijacked your
committee a little bit, so it
only fair game for you to hijack
my question. Uh, Madam Chair and
Senator, I don't, I don't, I
facilities want
More support and more direction
and really quite frankly, better
training.
say that this working group and
this task force has just really
done a great job of just
bringing everyone in and really
just trying to uh come up with
the plan and the strategy, uh,
Anyone else with questions,
comments?
So within the Prius standards,
there's a screening tool that we
required to have.
Um, also with classification as
well. Um, one of those factors
So age is one of those factors.
Are they this young or are they
above this age, depending on the
facility, which depends on how
we categorize our factor and how
told really drives on where do
we house this person? Where's
the safest person to be how?
within our facility.
Chasey Senator, the, the, just a
quick comment, apologies I had
to take a call, um, for work,
but the, uh,
The jails, the, the juvenile
jails are county run.
the, the majority on the county
commission is totally dropped
the ball on the local jail. So
anyway, when the conversations
occur as to whether the state
have now just is
not working. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Anyone else?
system in here, um, uh, you
notice that you mentioned that
inmates or you know, people
entering the system are
Um, Madam Chair, so for us at uh
MDC we actually were given a a
project with us, um, to help us
establish a very unique swimming
pool screening tool that would
focus on
Factors that affect Albuquerque
widely used, uh, um, myself felt
like it was too generic and we
we needed to really focus on
data that it was occurring
within our local area, so with
that partnership with UNM, we're
anyways. How do we score them
for us in Albuquerque and how we
can make sure it's, it's used
effectively um to ensure the
safety of all that are held
I'm just wondering because I
looked to uh Douglas Carver
because the Sentencing
commission does a lot of
gathering of the data on the our
Doug, Douglas, um, was shaking
his head, but I'm just
wondering, um, about these tools
I can't remember the exact
department is.
Um
You.
We're trying, we're trying to
brainstorm among ourselves here
to figure out which part of UNM
might have been involved in
this.
Of the sentencing commission,
uh, Mr. Carver, had, did you,
have you looked at, have you
been involved in the tools that
are used at the state
corrections facilities, or have
Yeah, go ahead. Don't just don't
sit in the precious seat, OK.
Yeah.
Um, uh, Madam Chair, Madam
Leader, uh, members of the
we've never been asked to look
at those, but as to your earlier
question, I imagine, um Bernao
County, the MDC was probably
the Berna County work.
Ma'am Madam waiter
you and Mr. Carver. I Institute
for Social Research is what was
if we had an LFC analyst here
today, and I don't see one, but
the, um, house budget analyst,
Amanda, um Brides, um.
corrections, and I think it
might be good to, um,
To visit with, um, the LFC about
this as well, they're important
and I met with the um chair and
vice chair of House
Appropriations and also with um
Great. Uh, well, uh thank you
for those answers. I, the reason
I'm asking is we're starting to
focus a little bit on the use of
algorithms, you know, we can
heartened by Mr. Varela's answer
because it sounded like at least
you know how the algorithm was
constructed and the factors were
that were taken into account and
I
thought out correctly and you
know, the population that you're
screening isn't their
characteristics aren't
appropriately taken into account
and it sounds like.
You're ahead of the curve on
questions or comments? um.
OK, well, thank you for the
presentation. We're a little bit
ahead of schedule, which is
extraordinarily unusual for us,
control.
Division and uh if you guess,
give us all a minute, um, we'll
get.
topic, so kudos to Senator
Maestas, who's gonna pinch it.
Senator Duhe had a child sick
child issue and um she needed to
Anyway, uh,
Senator Maestas, I know you're
you're probably drinking from a
Senator Doig, uh,
Representatives seem to be
senator elect or soon to be
senator rather uh Linda
Trujillo, so.
With regards to cannabis, the
of regulating.
Um, the point in my mind of
ending prohibition was to, uh,
to end the underground market
and the, and the horrible
to 1/3 of cannabis is part of an
underground market. When it
comes to alcohol regulation, uh,
state police had what was
formerly called SID Special
Investigations Unit. Uh, now
the alcohol laws, uh, the
alcohol license owners, the,
the, you know, distribution of
alcohol through normal
processes, and they enforce
Um, but for whatever reason
they're not, uh, I think it's
because one is it's kind of new
to them and like, well you guys
legalized it? Why should
Why should we, why should we
This bill is going to be
introduced in January, uh, and
it proposes to create through
the cannabis, uh, control
division, a uh, a law
executive's recommended budget
recommendations to essentially
have a law enforcement officers,
uh, that then have police powers
to specifically
division, uh, there are various
law enforcement, uh, arms of
various, uh, various entities
within RLD, um, just as a
general course, I think.
but this is necessary given this
moment in history, uh, and is uh
really, really requested by, by
the leadership of RLD. The
superintendent of RLD was unable
to be here today. And as
folks have and address any
concerns folks have, uh, so they
can be addressed between now and
January.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
just so I'm understanding, it's
get it, so who will run the
department is kind of like you
said the liquor control board
and how they do their stuff, it
Control Division doesn't have a,
a law enforcement arm. It's
handled by state police. State
police has a special unit that
deals with alcohol regulation
and as you all know, any cop in
cannabis control division, they
would be employees of the, of
RLD.
But with, uh, with law
enforcement powers.
OK, and so, Madam Chair and
turn that over if there's like,
if there's a criminal aspect to
it, I know there's civil aspects
and criminal aspects. How would
that work? Thank you, Madam
Chair, Representative. They
would not prosecute a similar to
asking for a full-time employees
that would be law enforcement
that would essentially be police
officers. So they would do the
investigation and I'll I'll get
some clarity here in a second.
So for example, cannabis control
division can go to a site, let's
say somebody has a license for
1000 plants and there's 5000
plants.
Right now, they'd have to
the wall example it actually
occurs in this situation they
would be police officers. They,
they could get the warrants.
They could seize the plants or
they can tag the plants. They,
This, uh, I wouldn't say
reluctance, this kind of uh.
They wouldn't experience any bad
attitudes. They would understand
OK, thank you, Madam Chair. That
helps me understand a little
bit. I just wanted to kind of
understand how it would all
work. Um, thank you, Senator.
So we do have the drafter coming
people and um get that taken
care of. Does that make sense?
Anyone want to propose a motion,
um, Representative uh Chasey.
none, so we have approved
minutes, um.
Uh
Senator Maestas, while we're
waiting for the draft, I have a
question and maybe they'll be
answered by the drafter, but
um, so for example, selling
this would not be a producer,
this would be in the retail shop
selling to someone under the age
of what, 21? Is that what we
we, you know, there's a sting
operation, blah blah blah blah
blah, who, who, who would do
that, you know, like they do
with alcohol sometimes. Thank,
thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
You know, find some teenagers
with beards and they could go in
there and do a sting and stuff.
Um, this, this, uh, bureau
language is in uh Senate Bill
274, Senate Bill 274 from the 24
session.
Uh, and it, uh.
And it creates the compliance
And cancel anything I said
that's incorrect.
Yeah, and feel free to do your
um disclaimer if you feel the
need, you know,
Wrote, I don't know, 3, is it
on? 34 weeks ago, so who knows
what I remember, uh, it is, it
creates the enforcement bureau
So this creates the enforcement
bureau and the Office of the
Superintendent. It, uh, allows.
are, um, certified and
commissioned law enforcement
officers.
And um they may seize.
Cannabis products.
tag things, um, to say this is
adulterated misbranded, uh, if
it's a, if, if the division
believe.
And Madam Chair, uh, it is the
language significantly different
from, from last year's
Centerville 274.
It's identical.
New and improved. OK, all right,
um, a Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. A couple
of questions.
Um
These people could go into a
bar, uh, look at the license,
uh, examine the premises, pull a
license if necessary.
had a security company that
would work nightclubs, people
would panic when these, these
people would walk through the
door. Is it a similar
Uh, idea.
theoretically. Uh, the, the
cannabis control division can
deal with licenses, deal with,
uh, permission to sell,
permission to grow, permission
to transport, things of that
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
Senator, so would they have the
ability to apply for search
warrants and stuff like that.
have law enforcement and what
what you described was more kind
of regulatory, uh, but it, but
it could trigger a criminal
allegation. So yes, there would
be law enforcement officers that
would essentially have to call
the cops. If we pass this and
fully fund it, they would be the
cops.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Senator. So would they, would
Madam Chair, so would this be a
separate law enforcement agency
that we're setting up here.
Madam Chair, Representative
Martinez, yes.
could revisit it, you know, 35
years down the road once.
All the law enforcement
community in the state is privy
to cannabis.
certified law enforcement
agency, they would have arrest
powers.
Madam Chair Representative
Martinez, yes.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator.
Thank you, Representative. Um,
we'll go back to Representative
that the PDs have with not
having enough room to store all
this cannabis. Are you gonna
store your own cannabis or is
there going to be something in
the bill that allows taking a
like the local agencies to store
all this cannabis, Madam.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair,
Representative Reeb, that, it
would just depend on good old
fashioned policing what you're,
I mean, seizing up.
But it will not, I don't believe
it will be in the bill, uh, but
let me just explain it on a
practical matter.
Department of Agriculture
inspectors tag things that are,
um, adulterated or misbranded.
If and because they have a seed
computer button, it can't be
sold. If it's illegal,
Um, and
Black market, whatever, um, that
Keeps growing even though he
doesn't have a license anymore.
He's using water, doesn't have
If it's illegal, um,
They can pull it up out of the
ground, or they can figure out a
way to uh make sure that no
plants can be.
gonna be tasked with the issue
of storing.
All of this cannabis or however
they choose to take it and then
if there could be some language
in I don't really know how this
enforcement or if for
prosecution and often that
evidence will be transferred
and, you know, over to them or I
think we just don't have the
cannabis that this new
department is going to be out
collecting and gathering.
Madam Chair, I think that's not
gonna be a problem. Uh, they're
The problem you described
theoretically exists today if we
properly enforce this.
This, this commodity, um, that's
a great suggestion we should see
if, uh,
command chain of command and or
not chain of command but chain
of custody. Um, but yeah, let's
talk about that, uh, come
session time. um, but they
wouldn't be, I don't see them.
Anyone else with um questions or
comment on this bill?
Oh, Senator Sadi Lopez. And this
is just clarification and if you
the civil violations and the
criminal violations. What if you
could give examples about what's
a civil violation.
And what might be a criminal
violation.
Uh, you would get noticed and
you would, and you would face a
fine, um, you would face the
regulation of your license, you
would face, uh, whether you can
Selling cannabis in the
underground market, uh, that you
don't have a license for and the
crime would be.
You know, jail and the criminal
justice system and all on that
Madam Chair, uh, Senator Cea
Lopez, that, that would
constitute a crime, yes. And so
the enforcement of it now just
doesn't have the teeth, uh,
What, what's the problem we're
trying to solve or what good are
we trying to bring to the state?
And I just wanted to get more
clarification.
On, on the problem, um.
prevalent in New Mexico. Uh,
local law enforcement, uh, is
dealing with street crimes in
their local communities. They
may not be as familiar with the
investigating these crimes and
they go and get a, a warrant to
seize the product and the
product's gone. I mean, it's, we
need a special law enforcement
arm in New Mexico to eliminate
of law enforcement, so why
wouldn't we just have
Provide funding to law
enforcement or a statute that
would, you know, create
something that law enforcement.
The cannabis division, you know,
uh, or law enforcement within
cannabis.
What is it trying to solve that
we couldn't solve with what we
crime. We, we have what
constitutes outside of the
bounds of legal licensing. We
have all that. We have local law
enforcement, we have state cops.
We have all have all that. But
for whatever reason, local law
enforcement is not devoting the
time and resources necessary to
deal with elimination of the
is law enforcement that's
specifically focused on this
industry and that has
Seized knowledge with regards to
the regulation of this industry.
I don't, yeah. Again, it seems
to me, and I haven't seen this
bill that we're creating
something.
To solve a problem that we have,
this agency.
That couldn't be solved with
what we have now, Madam Chair,
Senator Cecile Lopez, let me
answer your first question
Officers, um, but there's
specific task would be to
regulate the cannabis industry.
unregulated. It is illegal. And
so the proposal is to eliminate
that underground market, and
this is one of the proposals to
do that. Now we can.
we could say, guys, I know you
hated this bill, but it's legal
now, regulated, we'll call you,
see you next week. It it's not
happening.
um thank you, uh, senator for
your
I know trying to defend a bill
that actually is not your bill,
a House Bill 86 and I was
working with the state police
protection.
State police department
regarding um
department protection and
testing equipment for
Illegal cannabis, um.
And it was only a half a million
police and the, the chief, um, I
came to find that they are ill
equipped to handle this issue,
the most, you know, if this is
the most efficient way of doing
this. I mean, if we already have
the state police and we're
discussing, discussing the very
fact that the state police does
not have the equipment to seize
um
I don't know how, how to define
it, but um.
Shipments or whatever, um.
something that we probably
should sit with Chief Weisler
and his folks and and really see
what is the most efficient way
come back and ask for additional
funding, and um, you know, I
think I, I always look for
what's most efficient and what's
look to our um departments to
see what makes sense.
And um.
I'm not sure. I'm not totally
that input through the
legislative process. Two quick
points. Keep in mind a variety
of divisions within RLD have
police powers already. The
financial institutions division,
maybe 2 to 8 officers is a lot.
Um, if there was an alternative
proposal.
I would gladly weigh that
proposal. There is not no
alternative proposal as of right
weigh in on this a little bit,
so go for it. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and for allowing me to
kind of go, I know we're just
kind of go back and forth on
that they are stretched
extremely thin and we got a kind
of wonder, do we want them
focusing on our violent.
Criminals and violent crime and
our law enforcement, so I just
wanted to kind of chime in on
that, just from my experience,
but thank you for indulging me
on that.
Mm
favorite restaurants in town,
so, um, I hope you all can enjoy
that and we'll come back at
about one o'clock, OK?
Thank you.
