I hope I said that. Did I say
that correctly? And if you
please? You did Shuff Shuff and
I have a summary. I think, uh,
here
Just it talks a little bit
about, um, the presenter and the
program and so on, Um
Earliest month. The Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services
announced that New Mexico was
one of 10 states selected to
participate in the latest
Medicaid demonstration program
for BH CS S providing
sustainable funding for these
wraparound clinics that are
required to provide a robust
range of community outpatient
mental health and substance
abuse treatment services,
regardless of ability to
Hey.
Representative Sapanski has been
working on a draft legislation
to put the CBC model into state
statute that will be distributed
to committee for your review and
input in the upcoming days.
Today. Dorn Schuffman, a
consultant for the National
Council for Mental Well-being
and former director of the
Missouri Department of Mental
Health, will provide an overview
of the model and results from
states where these clinics have
been are operational.
Mr Schuffman oversaw the CBC
roll out in Missouri, which was
one of the first states to be
selected for the federal BHC.
Medicaid demonstration phase in
2015.
Today. He works closely with the
National Council for Mental Well
being the organization that
operates the substance abuse and
mental health services
administrations. Sam SCCBHC
State Technical Assistance
Center, helping states implement
the model.
Floor is yours, sir.
Hey, let me see if I can share
my screen and ask you if you can
see a PowerPoint
We can
OK?
Well, thank you for having me
today as I have You introduced
me. My name is Dorn Shuff. Um
and I'm speaking to you from
Missouri, where I worked at the
State Department of Mental
Health for a number of years.
Uh, in a variety of roles. I did
serve as department director for
five years. Um, then I took very
early retirement. I was young.
Um, but, uh, they asked me to
come back and work on a series
of projects. Uh, first project
was, uh, working with, uh
Frederick qualified health
centers and C MH CS to integrate
their care.
Then that led to, uh, Missouri,
applying, uh to and becoming
this first state in the nation
to develop health homes, both
primary care health home, and,
uh uh, behavioral health homes.
I live the Behavioral Health
home initiative.
And then Missouri decided to
apply when this opportunity came
available for community
behavioral health centers.
To apply to be one of the
original states. And so they
asked me if I would, uh, read
that or that initiative, So from
the beginning, I was involved in
the planning and then applying
to be one of the, uh, original
eight states. We did get
selected.
So then, um, I served as the
lead for implementing the CCBHC
initiative here in Missouri and
then developing a state Medicaid
State Plan amendment so that
once the demonstration was over,
uh, we continue to operate the
CCBH CS here in the state of
Missouri. Um, as I was nearing
the end of that project, I got
contacted by the national
Association. Uh,
For, um
Mental Well being, um, changed
its name recently. Uh, that's
the Association of all the
mental health centers in the in
the Nation. It's their
professional organization. They
contacted me and asked me if I'd
be interested in serving as a
consultant with them to assist
other states who were interested
in the Ccbc model and an
implementing the model. And I
said, Yes, I would. So that's
what I've been doing for like
the last three years, and that's
what what brought me to you. So
what I'm gonna do today is give
you a little bit of more
background on CCBH CS.
Um, what That model is how it
works. But I know your primary
interest is in, uh, courts and
corrections and justice. And so
what I wanna share with you is,
um, how in Missouri? Uh, we used
the CCBHC model and how you
might use it in New Mexico to
address some of the issues that
the courts and corrections and
juvenile and the justice system
the, uh uh, law enforcement face
in behavioral health issues and
and how we address those and how
you might
C CV HC. So let me begin by just
giving you a brief history. You
know, the the CCBHC program came
about as a result of a a
congressional. Um, uh, act the
A A. The protecting, uh, access
to Medicare Act, which
authorized, uh, demonstration
program, And originally it was
just a twoyear demonstration for
eight states. Uh, 23 States
applied and got planning grants
to prepare for that We were one
of those, and then eight states
got selected in 2017 to actually
Implement the demonstration, and
Missouri was one of those
Um in 2018. Samsa SUBS some use
Mental health administration
started providing with with, uh
Federal, uh, support Congress
support, uh, was providing funds
to providers to mental health
centers to help them prepare to
become CCBHC should that become
a reality in their state. And so
they started funding that across
the nation and doing quite a bit
of that in 2022 or 2020. Excuse
me. Two additional states were
added
The demonstration, so there were
10
in some states the they began to
make their own initiatives to
try to move towards becoming
CBC S, Texas, Uh, for example,
in Kansas, uh, both did state
plan amendments to move toward
adopting the CCBHC model in
2022. Congress passed
legislation that significantly
expanded the opportunities for
states to participate in the
demonstration. And as you know,
Congratulations. New Mexico is
one of the additional states
added here in 2024. So now there
are what 18 states that are
going to be involved in the
process. And then in two more
years, um more states can be
added to the to the initiative.
So let me share with you. What
the a little bit more about the
model and how it works. And
then, um, what it might mean for
you.
So while it started as a
national as a as a demonstration
with just eight states for two
years, it quickly became obvious
that it was something of
significance and so it really
has become a national model. Um,
both Congress and, uh, certainly
substance use and mental Health
Administration and Medicaid have
all recognized that it's a
significant, uh, program and so,
uh, it while it's still is a
demonstration that states can
participate in demonstration, it
really is now thought to be a
national
It's federally defined.
But what I wanna assure you is
that it's really state driven,
Um and we'll spend a little time
talking about what that means.
And, of course, uh, we at the
state and the federal
government. We don't do any of
the work. That's all done at the
local level, so I'll talk to you
a little bit about that.
So the national model, um in the
statutory statutory authority,
the statute that established
statutory authority set out this
goal for the model and we'll
we'll keep coming back to it. So
the goal of CCBHC of of adopting
this model was try to improve
the availability of
Services of of of of array of
services, access to those
services and participation in
services and participation means
serving more people.
So making more services
available. Making access to
those services, Uh easier and
how thereby hopefully serving
more people and improving the
quality of those services.
By adopting evidence based
practices, but they're trying to
do that without increasing net
federal spending. So the truth
is, if you adopt the smile
correctly, you will spend more
on community behavioral health.
Uh then you're spending now.
But also if you adopt it, uh and
and adopt it correctly, you can
offset a lot of costs in other
parts of your system,
particularly in Medicaid for
hospitals and emergency rooms.
So that, uh, you you are
offsetting some of the
expenditures that you're making
for the expanded expenditures
making for comm community
behavioral health.
The national model has two
components in terms of the way
it defines the model. One is a
set of criteria developed by
Samsa that describes what AC BHC
is. The other is guidance from
the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid. Um, the payment model.
The payment model is a uses a
organization specific, cost
based reimbursement system,
which they call prospective
payment or PPS. So there's a
guidance from Samsa on the on
the C.
For a certification and guidance
from C MS on the, uh,
reimbursement model.
The guidance from Samsa on
certification criteria. It
defines the array of services
that count as CCBHC services. It
outlines the care co ordination
responsibilities that IC CBHC
has and we're going to look at
both the services and the care
coordinations and a couple
slides here. These the
certification standards also
establish certain access
requirements. So, uh, requires
that, uh uh, urgent care people
who need urgent care be seen.
One day people who need routine
care be seen within 10 days. It
also requires CC MH CS or CCBH
CS to have evening and weekend
hours when that makes sense, So
a lot of effort to, uh, to
increase access to care
And then there's a number of
requirements for CCBH CS to
report certain kinds of data to
the state and to the federal
government. I know the
demonstration that have to do
with achieving certain kinds of
outcomes and, uh other measures,
So there's a number of data
collection reporting
requirements. And then there's
uh, the standards also specify
what types of organizations can
participate as CCB HC is
essentially it's non for profit
entities and state. Uh uh,
public or, uh, qua
Public entities are eligible to
be CCB eight CS.
The CCBHC services list that's
in the The criteria published by
Samsa are these crisis response
and there's an array of of
elements to that. But the key
component of that is 24 hour
mobile crisis teams.
Screening assessment diagnosis.
Treatment planning.
Both, uh outpatient, both mental
health and substance use
treatment and outpatient basis,
A
What's called primary care,
screening and monitoring that is
not providing primary care. But
it is, uh, actually, uh,
assuring that people with, uh,
behavioral health needs get
their, uh, general health care
needs attended to, and that they
learn how to manage their
chronic other chronic diseases,
and we'll look at that in a
little more detail later
targeted case management, which
is simply case management
focused on people who are making
transitions of care, either
moving from the hospital into
the community or moving from, uh
Um, um, one kind of residential
setting to another making sure
that you're providing adequate
care case management during
those times of transition, or
from, uh, when kids are moving
from a kid system to an adult
system, another point where, uh,
there needs to be excessive. Uh,
significant attention paid to
case management.
Psychiatric rehab, which is, uh
um
Rehabilitation for adults with
serious mental illness and kids
with serious emotional
disturbances.
Here and family support
services. Um, that's become it's
become evident that, uh,
involving peers in service
delivery has a huge impact on
uh, the success of providing
rehabilitation. We'll talk a
little bit more about that. And
then there's a requirement that,
uh CCBH CS are tied to the, uh,
veterans and and Veterans
administration services and
members of the armed forces. Um,
so that we make sure that we're
providing appropriate care for
them, Uh, when the veter
Administration is not or armed
forces are not. So those are the
services. Uh, states get to
elaborate on those, Um and, uh
we'll talk a little bit more
about what That means.
Care co ordination is another
one of the things that AC CBHC
is responsible for, and I guess
Samsa uses calls it the lynchpin
of what ABC does.
You know. Typically, Medicaid
pays for face to face services.
So you go to see your your
physician or your go to, uh, you
you, uh, have a, uh
Licensed therapist that you're
seeing you get the Medicaid pays
for that face to face
intervention. Typically, it
doesn't pay for anything else
Now, uh, it started the health
home program, um, a few years
ago in which it it paid for use
of PM PM approach, which most
states use for managed care as
well. P PM PM approach does
allow you to pay bill the cost
of doing other things besides
face to face, So in this
project, it doesn't use a PM PM.
Uh uh, Reimburse
Model, but it does allow you to
build in the costs associated
with care co ordination because
those are absolutely critical to
being successful in serving
people with serious mental
illness and substance use
problems.
So CCBHES are are required to
have care coordinations, uh,
relationships with primary care
physicians to make sure that
people get the primary care they
need with federally qualified
health centers in their area
with other specialty care
providers. Other community
service uh and support providers
recognizing that, uh, you know,
people are whole people, not
just people with brains. They
have bodies and, uh, they need,
uh, a whole range of services
and supports in order to be
successful.
CC BT is required to follow.
Follow up on a referral. So
instead just referring somebody
to care. Uh CCBHC is required to
refer them and then make sure
they got there. Um and not just
send them but make sure that
there's a connection made there
and and that that's working.
They're also responsible for
tracking admissions and
discharges of the clients that
they're serving to hospitals or
to nursing facilities or other
kinds of, uh uh, residential
centers both to make to track
their admissions and their
discharges.
And really important to follow
up after discharge. Uh, if you
follow up, uh, immediately after
discharge from hospitalization,
the chances of, uh, preventing a
rehospitalization improves
dramatically so care
coordinations a key part of what
a BHC does. It's not a service
that they get paid for instead,
the cost of doing that are built
into the rate that they're paid
when they do a face to face
service.
So that's the requirement side.
briefly. The other, uh, guidance
from the federal government has
to do with the reimbursement
system, which is called
prospective payment. Uh, in the
CCBHC model. Each organization
has their own rate of
reimbursement. So you get the
every every center has a
different rate. Um, the
organization's repeat payment
for what's called a qualifying
visit. Not for an individual
service. Uh, but for a visit in
a visit, it can either be
Day if a state chooses that
model or a month in which
there's at least one face to
face encounter.
Or one eligible telehealth
encounter between a qualified
practitioner and an eligible
consumer, providing one of the
CCBHC services, so they get paid
for a visit. So during a visit,
there may be a lot of services
Provided. Uh, you may see your
psychiatrist. You may go see
your case manager. You may see
AC another clinician. The CCBHD
girls just gets paid one amount
for that visit, and another day
you might see one of those
people. CCCCCBHC still gets paid
that one.
All of those costs are average
in together so that the visit
that is the reimbursement model.
Uh, CCBH CS the organizations
They complete a cost report,
which is based on a standard
format developed by C MS.
Um, and it requires the CCBHC to
kind of to build to state their
actual costs based on audit.
And then to estimate the
additional costs they're gonna
have for doing new things and
also estimate the number of
visits that are gonna be
providing so the rate is the
rate per visit rate is
determined by simply looking at
all. The allowable costs at
every cost is allowable
Allowable costs are both the
audited costs that they've got
for providing those services and
the projected new costs are
gonna have for doing things they
haven't done before or for
expanding services, and then
that divided by the total number
of visits you get.
The cost per visit.
That is really the it is the
payment model that actually
makes this system work. And when
I say work, I mean it enables AC
BHC to achieve the goals that
were articulated in the statute
and I'll show you why I say
that. So when you do a PPS, Um,
it allows the organization first
of all to recoup their actual
costs associated with providing
direct services so they built in
their actual costs. Their auto
costs, um for providing services
plus
But it's what new costs are
gonna have for adding a service.
And they get paid for that. Um,
and that payment is what it
costs them. So, uh, unlike many
other systems of care where
providers are just paid with the
with the, uh, payer wants to pay
them in this case, we're paying
them what it actually cost them
to do the service. We're
requiring them to do
Even more important, however,
uh, in the PPS model you get to
build in the costs associated
with doing the indirect services
and responsibilities that really
make this system work. I've
already mentioned care co
ordination, so you get to build
in all the costs associated with
doing the care co ordination
that's required.
I'm gonna focus a lot on
outreach and engagement because
I think that's relevant,
particularly to what you're
interested in.
Um, you can get people you can
get and not everybody who needs
services comes to a mental
health center. And so one of the
key elements of this model is
going out and getting them and
connecting them to care.
It also builds in the cost of
adopting evidence based
practices to Fidelity.
Many evidence based practices
require a training of staff, uh,
to do things in new way They
require a lot of new kinds of
documentation that require
ongoing assurance that you're
doing it right. And all those
things have costs. So you build
those costs into the rate of
reimbursement. And then as I
said, there, uh CCBHE is
required to collect and report a
lot of new data and so the cost
of doing that are allowed to be
built into the PPS rate.
And as it turns out,
Um, do it. This a model? This
approach is essential to
Generating the offsetting costs
associated with the increased
community Behavioral health
services that you're going to be
spending
Because it's a lot of the things
that you do in care, co
ordination and outreach
engagement that offset costs in
other parts of the system. As I
will show you
Uh, there are four different,
um, kinds ways that a state can
choose to set up its model for
reimbursement. Um, they're split
into you. They can choose to do
a daily rate or a monthly rate
And then, um
If you choose the monthly rate,
you can also choose whether you
wanna just have one monthly rate
or whether you want to have a
monthly rate for, say adults
with serious mental illness and
a different rate for ones with
kids with serious emotional
disturbances or another rate for
people with substance abuse
disorders or whether you just
want to have one monthly rate.
You can do it either way, um and
then for both the daily and the
monthly rate you can also choose
to segregate out your costs and
have a separate rate for
specialized
The services. This is these are
new. Um, When we started the
program, there were only two
options, a daily rate or monthly
rate. Um, now they've added some
more. Um, And so it remains to
be seen which states will choose
Most states so far have chosen
the daily rate and and there's
reasons for that there's
advantages and disadvantages to
this. So as you're looking at
what you want to choose you, you
probably want to get some, um
some good technical assistance
about that.
So that's the federal
The definition. So there's
these these standards or
criteria developed by Samsung.
What CBHC looks like and then
there's the payment model that
that Medicaid has established
for reimbursing these services.
But it's really the statement
that drives the model. So if you
look at the two bottom, uh,
statements on the right hand
side here, um, first of all, the
state behavior, health
authority certifies, uh, all the
providers in their state that
are gonna be CCBH CS. They do
that in accordance with the
certification criteria that
Samsa published but the
certification criteria allow the
state a considerable amount of
flexibility in how they do that,
And what, how they interpret
some of the, uh, criteria and
certainly
What they choose to require. In
addition, you don't have to just
do what the criteria say you can
require more than that, Uh and
we did it. And I think every
state does that, Um, now should
be sharing some of that with
you, Um, also really important,
the state chooses obviously the
PS approach, but even more
important, and I think people
don't always recognize this. I'm
not sure the original states all
recognize this. But, um, you get
to approve the state approves
the C PC CPHC cost reports.
It's not as though just the
provider does the cost
reporting, and that's the end of
it. Uh, they send in the cost
report, and, uh, in our case, we
sat down with each of our
providers and went through the
cost report looked to see that
they were doing the things we
wanted them to do, Uh, In order
to, um, develop our services in
their system, and um, and both
in some cases said, you know,
you're being a little over
ambitious in how many staff you
think you can hire to do that?
So cut that cut back a little
bit.
Um And so we had them redo the
cost report. We also and a
couple other cases said, You
know, you're not being ambitious
enough. We want you to hire more
peer specialists. One ain't
enough. So, um, we're gonna be
monitoring. You wanna make sure
that you're expanding in that
area and so redo your cost
report build more in there, So
it's really the state that gets
to decide is the are the local
systems doing putting in the
plate things you want them to,
and are they doing it in an
appropriate manner?
You know they're the ones that
are doing the work, though. So
you want to make sure that you
are you are being, uh,
reasonable with them. It's
really a negotiation process
that you're trying to find the
best balance for both of you.
And then the most important
thing. I'm gonna spend time on
the rest of the time on
Really. It's the state that
establishes its own priorities.
expectations in adopting the
CCBHC model, how you make it
work in in New Mexico is going
to be different than we did in
Missouri. Um or that some of the
other states I'm working with
Idaho and I've worked with
Indiana and Rhode Island.
They're doing different things,
and that's fine. Take the model
and make it work for you. So the
first thing you do as a state is
you begin with the end in mind.
And remember, the goal is to
improve availability, access
participation and quality. With
our increasing net federal
spending. So you ask yourself as
a state. What are we missing?
What? What's not available or
not available enough? So in our
case, one of the things we
thought was, you know, we have
some providers. Most of our
providers had some peer
services, not everybody, and we
thought that was a really
important thing to do. And so
that was an emphasis for ours to
to significantly enhance
availability.
Access accessibility. In our
case. Um, we thought that, uh,
we wanted to improve
accessibility in a number of
ways, and I'll share some of
that with you. Participation.
How are you gonna? How are you
gonna get more people, uh, to
care.
What are you gonna do in terms
of improving the quality of care
And particularly? What is it
you're doing that will help
offset some costs in other parts
of the system.
So here is kind of the meat of
what I wanna share with you.
These are some of the things
that, uh, that are
We did, which we thought were
improving critical to improving
care for people but also help to
offset generate some offsetting
costs.
We already had a crisis system
in place. Um, that met their
criteria for, uh, for CCHC. So
we had mobile crisis teams
across the state. Um, if you you
know if you don't if the state
doesn't you know, that is a
really critical, uh, component,
and we it it's critical to
people's lives, but it's also
critical to offsetting costs in
other parts of the system.
Um, because you're preventing
people from getting, uh, worse
by reaching out to them. We're
in crisis. You're preventing
them from having to go to the
emergency room. If that's the
only place that's available to
them and using those resources
by doing outreach and
engagement, uh, through the
crisis system.
We went to same day next day
access that's not required by
the standards, but we wanted to
significantly improve our access
to care. Um you know, and
historically our our experience
was in some places somebody
would call to come to to get
into a mental health center. And
they'd say, OK, we're gonna make
an appointment for you in three
weeks.
Well.
That wasn't people didn't show
up. Um, they got sick. They got
worse. They went someplace else.
Um, and we we wasted time
because we hadn't had an
appointment for them. And they
didn't show up. And now what do
we do? So we went to the same
day access. So in Missouri, if
you call the center or you walk
into the center, and we'll see
you that day or the next day,
um, that meant that, uh, some of
the senators had to employ some
additional staff to do that.
They also had to learn how to do
that. Um, it's really not so
much that you need a bunch of
staff. It's that you need to
learn how to manage your system.
So you can take walk ins, uh, as
they come in, uh, but it did
require some additional staff
and like every place else, um we
were stressed for staff. Um, but
part of the reason for that is,
uh, we weren't paying our
providers very well. And so they
were not competitive with people
in their system that were losing
staff to, um, to hospital
systems. They were losing staff
to private, um, private
practice, and so a part of what
we did was allow them to change
their, uh, if they could
demonstrate that to us allow
To change their salary structure
so that they could be
competitive and it it made a big
difference, both in attracting
staff and retaining staff.
And then the third thing that's
really important, uh, same day
next day Access is really
important to to improving the
number of people you're seeing,
because people don't drop out.
They come when they need to the
second thing that you do to
improve the the participation is
go out and find those
People who are who need your
services but aren't coming to
them.
And we did a lot of things. We
did three things I'm gonna share
with you. We did outreach to
emergency rooms. We did outreach
to law enforcement, which we
call community behavior, Health
liaisons, and we did outreach to
high users of Medicaid.
And so combined together. Uh, we
believe it was the same day
access and the outreach and
engagement that led to this
result for us.
Um, we're now serving about
30,000 more people a year than
we were when we before CCBHC.
People are able to come in and
get service. They're not going
out someplace else. They're not
taking emergency room and so
forth. Most states and CCBHC
have similar something of a
similar growth in the number of
people that they serve. Uh if
they're doing it correctly.
So let me go to the outreach and
engagement. Uh, items. These are
kind of things that I think are
particularly relevant to your
interests. Um, two of them the
emergency room enhancement teams
in the community of behavioral
health. Uh, liaisons. We
actually started those before
CCBHC in in, uh, at least in
some parts of the state, And we
did that, Uh, it grew out of
actually a public safety issue.
Um, our governor at the time was
concerned about some of the
things that were happening in
other states with with, uh
Behavioral health issues and and
problems and was wanted to
prevent anything from happening
in Missouri. Now, you know,
having been the the director of
mental health, I need to say to
you. Most people with mental
illness are are not dangerous to
anybody. In fact, they are, uh
tend to be very vulnerable.
But of course, there are some
people who, um, who have, uh,
can be a threat to other people.
And so you want to be recognized
that and be aware of it. But
those are
That is not the majority of
people by any means.
Nevertheless, we wanted to be
good, proactive and prevent
people from having deteriorate
to the point where they become a
problem for the public.
So these three programs
First one. The emergency room
enhancement teams we started in
just a few parts of the state
before CCB HC and we found it to
be so successful. We built it
into our ccbc. Um, uh, program
and again, these these teams,
they don't bill for any
services. They're outreach and
engagement, so just the cost of
the team being built in, uh, you
can see since it started in
2013. We've served 17,000 people
in this program in this last
year year. 10 of the project.
Uh, 23.
People. We reached out to
emergency rooms. Every ccbc has
a team they reach out to the
emergency rooms in their area.
Um, when somebody comes in,
that's got a behavioral health
issue. They're there from
behavioral health. Uh, problems.
Uh, they can. The ER can call
the team team goes over and, uh
and interacts with them and
tries to get them engaged in
ongoing care so that they're not
using the emergency room all the
time. Um, you can see that. You
know, the majority of these
people have a psychiatric
diagnosis, and most of them also
have a substance use.
You know this is so there's a
lot of dual diagnosis and it's
important to understand they
also have health issues. Um, and
historically, you know,
behavioral health looked only a
behavioral health. We don't do
that anymore. We're concerned
about the full, uh, the whole
person and looking at their
health concerns as well.
Uh, when we do that, uh, the the
emergency room handsome team is
really only involved with a
person for a day or two and
three at the most while they're
getting them connected to care
elsewhere, engaging them and
making sure that they're getting
the services they need. But we
do try to follow up with people,
Um, to see how things are going,
And at three months we follow
up. Um, this last year, we were
able to find, uh, 60% of the
people, uh, that the team was
able to find 60% of the people
they'd had some contact with,
um, in the first step and at six
months.
A third of the people and they
were still able to locate, um
And services.
But here's some of the outcomes
with the with those groups so
over on the left hand side, you
can see that's uh, in the
previous 90 days. How many
visits did these people have in
on average?
When, um the emergency room
enhancing team got involved in
and you can see. On average. It
was about 32.8 and then for the
people who we followed up with
within six within 90 days, um
Uh, they had about the same
amount for people we followed up
within. Uh,
Uh, six months, they had a
little bit more a little bit
more than three visits, but you
can see the number of visits
drops dramatically, uh, by
engaging them in ongoing care,
Similarly, with
hospitalizations, Um, you can
see that on average. Um, the
people that we were contacting
had, uh, more than one hospital
administration in in admission
in the previous 90 days and
again that drops dramatically
once you engage them in ongoing
care.
Similarly here on the left hand
side, uh as about 40% of the
people that we were contacted in
this in this last year year, 10,
were without a home.
And, uh, I engage in them and
getting them care and getting
them connected. We're able to
reduce that, Uh, significantly,
um, get them involved in housing
and the same with employment.
Uh, fewer, You know, only about
20% of them are not employed.
Uh, when we first contact them,
but nevertheless, uh, focusing
on getting them involved in care
and getting them employment. Um,
is, uh, has been somewhat
successful.
Emer emergency rooms, hospital
emergency rooms, love this
program. Um, they don't know
what to do with these people
often, and they're very happy to
have the emergency room
enhancement team available to
come Connect these people. Um,
so it's both, um, huge benefit
to people who are serving and
for the hospital systems.
The second, uh, outreach and
engagement is focused on law
enforcement. Um, we again we
started with a few places. Uh
before CCBHC we built now built
this into CBHE. And now every
CCBHE has a a community health
at least one. Often they have
two or more behavioral health
liaisons, depending upon their
size.
These are people who exclusively
work with local law enforcement.
They're generally master's
level. Clinicians are good at
outreach and engagement, uh,
with people and even though we
have the crisis system, the
crisis system only responds to
people when they're actually in
crisis, But law enforcement
comes in contact with lots of
people who are not in crisis but
nevertheless have behavioral
health problems.
And the courts and courts and
law enforcement have to deal
with them. So the behavioral
health liaisons are connected
closely to their local law.
enforcement. Uh to, uh police
chiefs and and, uh, county
sheriffs and, um they are
available to go out with the
police and law enforcement to
residency checks and wellness
checks. Um, to see how people
are doing. They, uh they're
available to assist. Uh,
officers in dealing with people
and just community settings and
trying to get them
Care. Uh, they know how to do
civil commitments They get that
get involved in that they work
with all the other local crisis
systems and agencies that have
core responders, so we're not
duplicating our effort. Um, they
can do, um, they they
participate in a law enforcement
helping train, actually, uh,
crisis or venture teams for law
enforcement. Um and they provide
support and referral for law
enforcement or coping with
stress and trauma, And they do a
lot of other things. Um, again.
This is extremely
You're popular with sheriffs
and, uh, City. Uh, police chiefs
who are more than willing to
come and testify before the our
General assembly about the
advantages and help with this
program, And I think maybe you
got a hand out that, uh, that,
uh, in which one of the I think
this police chief from
Springfield, uh, Missouri talks
about, uh, how great it is now
to have C CBC in Springfield.
Um, And since 2000 from 2017 to
2021
We've had 71,000 almost 71,000
referrals to C CBC CCBHL, Uh,
staff from law enforcement, So
it's it's they're very busy.
Um and they they they and the
people who do this. Love it. Um
they're the kind of people who
enjoy outreach engagement.
The third kind of outreach. Uh,
program. Uh, very effective. Um,
we medicate our Medicaid agency
identifies individuals who are
18 years of age or older who
have spent who have cost
Medicaid more than $20,000 in
the previous quarter.
Um and uh in pharmacy and
medical charges, excluding
certain ones that you would, uh,
you know, don't apply to
behavioral health and have a
diagnosis. These people have a
diagnosis that would fit into
our psychiatric and rehab rehab
programs for people with
substance use disorders.
Um, but they're not in our
system. We've not seen them.
We're not serving them.
So that they generate a
quarterly list. We provide that
list to an individual at each of
the CCBH CS, who does outreach
and engagement to those people
try to find them when they're
always successful in finding
them, But But, uh when we find
them, then it's a matter of
trying to engage them in care
and get them connected to
ongoing. Uh, services in our
health home that is dealing with
their general health care needs,
and, uh, with their
rehabilitation services, these
things together. I know this is
a busy slide have had a big
impact.
Um It's very hard to do this
kind of analysis, but, um, this
was done by the Saint Louis. Uh,
the University of Missouri Saint
Louis, looking at pre and post
hospital costs, and, um it's
really hard to do this looking
at all the different funding
sources for people in the system
and I think you can see what 31
and 32,000 people that they were
looking at. That had been in
CCBHC looking at their pre and
post hospital costs and you can
see that, uh, overall a $15
million saving
To, uh, Medicaid for
hospitalization for these
people.
So this is the kind of thing the
outreach and engagement you do,
getting connected to care that
really can have an impact on
your costs in Medicaid. This
does not include emergency room
costs, which I'm sure are also
significantly reduced as a
result of the, uh, outreach to
emergency rooms.
The other important thing is
primary care, screening and
monitoring this I think in in in
Mexico, you have health homes.
Um, As I said, we had health
homes with first date to to do
that, Um, prior to, uh C, CV HC
and the what you do in a health
home. Is this primary care
screening and monitoring? What
does it mean? It means
identifying individuals with
chronic illnesses and unhealthy
lifestyles.
And connecting them to primary
care, monitoring their chronic
conditions and other chronic
health conditions. They got
coordinating care for them and
promoting healthy behavior
change in them. It's not a it's
not a primary care service. It's
a behavioral health service and
involves knowing about the
stages of change when people are
ready for change, it involves
knowing skill, skills and
motivation, interviewing and
helping people see their need
for change and then supporting
and coaching them, coaching them
to develop and maintain healthy
behaviors.
And we became convinced that
this was really important to do
and why we did health homes
because of a study that was done
some years ago. Uh, it was
clinical trials of
antipsychotics in, uh, research
hospitals and as a side bet they
were looking at the other health
needs of people with serious
mental illness, And it turns out
that the people who are in these
studies and research hospitals,
um for behavioral health issues,
88% of the people who had
cholesterol problems weren't
getting treated 62% of the
Who had hypertension weren't
getting treated and 30% of the
people who had diabetes weren't
getting treated. We were just
paying attention to their
behavioral health needs, but we
don't do that anymore. So we now
have health homes we built that
costs into our into our CCBHC
rate again. Health HOME staff Do
not bill for anything. Um, they
don't provide direct services.
They do it mostly care
management activities. Um and,
um and and those costs are built
in And the fortunate thing is,
if little changes in these areas
can make a big
So a 10% reduction in
uncontrolled cholesterol has
about a 10% reduction in
cardiovascular disease. And on
the right here, you can see this
is just the first year, three
years of our our health arms we
were able to reduce, on average
the cholesterol levels by more
than by 19% more than double. Um
The amount on the left.
Similarly small changes in in
blood pressure levels six point
drop in blood pressure can have
a 16% increase or decrease in,
uh, cardiovascular disease and a
a big impact on stroke and
likelihood of stroke and again,
Um, just in the first two years,
you can see this. The reduction
in both as stock and on an
average, uh, average across all
the people we were serving.
And similarly for a one C and
diabetes A one point drop in a
one C has a big impact on other
factors on diabetes related
death deaths and heart attacks
and on other microvascular
complications as result of
diabetes and again doing some
basic care coordinations, making
sure that people are getting the
treatment that they need
following up on their treatment,
particularly these are all
people with serious mental
illness. Um, who, you know, have
trouble navigating the systems.
This makes a big impact, and it
A big impact on the cost of
general health care for this
population.
Uh, states get to choose the
evidence based practices. These
are the ones we chose. You get
to choose your own. I'm not
gonna go through all of those,
But you have them in front of
you, Uh, we chose. You don't
wanna choose too many. We choose
ones that some want some of
them. We were already doing.
Everybody was already doing.
They only choose a few chose a
few new ones to begin with,
because adopting an event space
practice takes a lot of work so
you don't wanna overwhelm
people. Um, we're now adding new
evidence based practices because
we've been into it for a while.
Mister sh. And then I just want
to share this with you, Mr
Increasing? Yes, I want to
encourage you to start wrapping
up. We need to save a little bit
of time for questions.
OK, I'm on the last slides. So
this is, uh we were interested
in increasing peer and family.
You can see we did that. We're
also interesting, including
increasing, uh, medication
assisted treatment if you're in
the demonstration
You can expect to learn you
probably may mistakes. You need
to be patient with yourself and
your system they take you know
you won't be CCBHC Day one. It
takes a while to learn how to do
all this stuff and to put it all
in place. So be patient. I'm
gonna skip that. I'm gonna skip
that.
And I'm gonna end with this. Um,
as mentioned earlier, the the
National Council now has a
contract as the CBC Technical
Assistance Center. And, uh,
we're happy to help states.
That's what I do Help states
prepare for an implement this
system of care.
And I'll be happy to answer your
questions.
Very good. Thank you. I. I see
Representative Lujan are there
others who have questions or
comments about this program.
OK?
Um representative Romero OK,
representative Lujan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, and
thank you for presenting this.
This is this is quite the
established, um
Model for behavioral health
care. Thank you for bringing it
forward. Um, we've we've had a
few different, uh,
Information pieces on big plans
for, uh gal health and mental
health. Um, modeling for our
state, one that comes to mind
that we had in in our hearings.
Madam chair last year was the
Florida model.
Um, ma'am, Sure. Uh, gentlemen.
Are you familiar with that
model? The regionalization of
those the care centers and, um
you say the Florida model that's
correct. Miami, particularly
Madam Chair. No. You said a
little bit more about it. I
might, but just by that name, I
don't know it right? I wish I
was looking for that right now.
But these are big, big
implementations as you are
discussing, and some
Questions that come to mind. Uh,
quickly manager or how we would
implement it in regards to our,
um
Where do I have my notes here?
Our house Purchasing act. Are
you familiar with our health
Purchasing act?
I'm sure
Sir.
That's a question for you, sir.
Are you familiar familiar with
our health Purchasing act, sir?
With yours.
OK?
Um, are you familiar with some
of the the provisions that we've
changed within our health
purchasing act in regards to
behavioral health and how we
then the coverage we have in our
state.
No, I'm not. I'm not familiar
with what New Mexico has done. I
did see the I did see the slides
that, uh, the secretary
presented earlier. I'm sorry. I
missed your presentation because
it looks like you've been doing
a lot.
And that, uh, adopting CCBHC are
really ready to do a lot more.
Thank you, sir. Uh, it seems
simple, but we have a lot of we
have a lot of things in place,
and I'm just trying to, um, just
Understand where you how you're
familiar with our state and our
statutes. Um, and what we've
done? Yeah. So for me, I, I
serve on health appropriations
and finance. So to me, it would
be a great analysis to have what
that cost savings really would
look like for our state. You
mentioned a little bit about the
$20,000 in cost and charges for
certain populations. I just like
a better breakdown of that
because we do. Uh, if you've
been listening to our our
presentations, you
Know that we have spent $1.1
billion for behavioral health.
um, care in our state, and
that's through programs that's
through all sorts of things that
we've done. And one thing that
we've done in in updated in our
in our Health Care Act or
purchasing act is that we we
cover behavioral health so that
it's free of charge.
Um many of our insurance plans.
It's not across the board, but,
um, just trying to see how
familiar you are with our
statutes and how we would
actually implement something
like this. And also mount your,
um, with what you've been able
to do in Missouri. Thank you for
bringing that to us. How would
you
Is, are your providers that go
to the emergency rooms and and
and show up at at at these?
these, uh targeted places are
they on call 24 hours. Can you
just walk me emergency? Just
walk me through if I make a
call. I'm sorry, man. I'm just
gonna make it simple. Can you
walk me through the process if
I'm an individual that needs
care.
The crisis system is on call, so
the 24 hour mobile crisis team
is on call the behavioral health
Consultants who who outreach
with the police, and the, uh
emergency routines are not 24
hour a day, um, positions, but
in they do try in the different
parts of the state to adjust the
working time so that it fits
with where the particularly in
emergency rooms. What are the
high use use of usage time
periods, So they work evenings
often, but they're not 24 hour.
Available in either case.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So do
you find gaps with? Um, um,
finding those individuals like
during the hours that are not
covered, Madam chair? Of course.
Thank you.
I'm just asking. I mean to me,
It's just bringing nothing is
perfect, right? No, I understand
that completely. But we do need
to revamp. I'm I'm in favor of
of of changing, uh,
systematically changing, Uh,
what we have in place, so I'm
I'm just asking some of these
questions, Madam chair. It's
nothing to like it nothing
against you or anything. I'm
just trying to get some, um,
information from the way that I
see things. Um
I think that's kind of the
enrollment.
Um, process you said you're
really It's the people that are
gonna be on on the ground that
are going to be working to
enroll these individuals into
this program. How long did it
take you to enroll the
population that you have in
Missouri Madam Chair.
Hey.
People were automatically
enrolled. Uh, I mean there.
There was no enrollment. There
is no enrollment process. If
you're if you go to a center,
you know, they just enroll you
as an individual that you're
there's nothing no particular
Additional enrollment process
other than the center has to
enroll anybody. It's not.
There's no
Additional process for them. OK,
thank you. No, I'm so these are
centers. That would be the
people that would have to be
Certified as you said, and then
we would direct these
individuals to the centers for
their services. Is that correct?
All the all of the CCBH CS were
were formerly community mental
health centers, so they're
comprehensive service providers
that serve a geographic area and
they've been doing that for many
years. OK, so we certified all
our our C MH CS in the state,
uh, covering our covering the
entire, uh, geographic areas,
Each one has their own
geographic area, so people in
those areas are used to going to
those centers for public
services. But the outreach and
engagement is critical to
getting people who don't who
won't show up.
We go to the emergency room or
just come in contact with law
enforcement Never go to care,
and you want to get them
involved in care? That's right.
Thank you for me and and knowing
how we are set up and knowing my
state, I would say that would be
a phase one. Is that correct to
say that we do establish for
those locations in the region?
Not quite regionally, but
statewide and to see where those
centers already exist. Where in
our state we don't have many of
them.
Well under the demonstration you
can a state can choose that
doesn't have to do statewide. We
from the beginning knew we
wanted to do it statewide. But
even in our case, um there were
some providers who weren't ready
for it for a variety of reasons.
so under the demonstration the
state can choose to do, um, at
at minimum three providers
initially and try the pro try
the program so you could choose
seven or six or whatever works
for you. Um, but the idea is
that eventually you're gonna
want to you'll find I'm sure
you'll find it. Um
Um, very valuable and you're
gonna want to expand it.
Absolutely I. I see the value in
this. I'm just we're just in a
in a place where we don't have
the infrastructure for it. So,
so that's That's why I'm saying,
How would you phase this into
implementation and I can see a
path by just by your answers.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm not
gonna take any more time.
We have representative Romero
and then representative Al Cohn
and then representative Bargo.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. So much for the
presentation. I'm I feel like I
asked questions that were
answered in this one about how
to outreach to the folks. Um,
super interested in how to
create that.
Um, connective mechanism through
our, um and I that all the
acronyms um
Yes, your organization and then
and then again, the some of the
pain points in New Mexico. That
were certainly, um, facing with
how to make all of this connect
and one of the things that was
really interesting to me in your
presentation, and I don't know
page numbers, but it was on the
E ER ER E team's impact. Um,
because part of the discussion
that we've been having is on the
unhoused and how to connect them
into housing and again how to
address some of the underlying
Um, issues that folks might be,
um, facing and you and I don't
know if this is the Missouri
model. I think that Yeah, I
think it's an mo.gov, um, link.
But I'm just curious. How that
you how you may have gotten
folks into housing and what that
What that looked like outside of
just the sort of first
responders um and folks that you
had reached out to, But I'm
really curious because we're in
a housing crisis. Like so many
other states, Um, and it's
getting harder. It's getting
harder here as well. Um
Yeah, but, uh, couple things,
you know a number of our
programs also operate, um,
supported housing programs so
they have they have apartments
and, um, In some cases, they
have multiple a building with
multiple people living at it's
but it's supported housing, so
some people go into supported
housing. Uh, we we're providing
you know the housing and
supports to them to be able to
live in the situations. We also
provide the emergency room
enhancement teams have state
We don't use federal money
because Medicaid doesn't pay for
this, but we they have money
they can use to for temporary
housing to pay for temporary
housing to pay for
transportation to pay for food
and clothes for people, um, on a
temporary basis. So, um
That helps them to transition to
getting trying to find a place
to live.
Excuse me.
That's great, and I and I think
just thinking through like you
said, it's getting harder to do
that. I think we without even
knowing whether or not we're
again creating those supportive
housing can I'm sure we are. The
question is at what level and we
don't have the same data that
Missouri does. So if anything to
the data structures you provided
today and help us, Um think
through what we what we would
like to see presented as all of
these things connect, So thank
you so much manager.
Thank you, representative,
representative Alcon.
Thank you, madam Chair.
I guess my question is, uh
You have a place Where you, uh,
speaking can keep these people
until they're treated or while
they're being treated, Do you in
the in the state of Missouri?
Yeah. I'm sorry. Yeah.
facilities where you can do
in-house treatment.
Yes, we have. We have some, uh
Well, CCBHE is a is basically an
outpatient program. That is it
doesn't it doesn't pay for any
residential care, for example,
Um, but we do have crisis
stabilization units, places
where people can go for 23 hours
worth of price of support and
try to get them into another
setting. We do obviously have,
um, psychiatric beds and we do
have some as I said, supported
housing and some residential
group homes, but those are not
part of CCBHC.
C CBC does not is a community
based outpatient program and the
residential portions are paid
through the state.
OK, the drug madam chair so
throughout the whole state, and
you, uh of Missouri. How many
facilities do you have? And how
many different places within the
state can you get? Uh, service
right away?
Well, we have AC ECB HC in each
of our, um 25 service areas.
And they have several of them
had multiple sites, not every
site at which they're located.
Do they have, um, uh, same day
access, but they have one or
two, at least in each of the 25
service areas.
And some of them have more than
that.
OK, I couldn't say exactly how
many there are but
There's this based on
population, or, uh,
Or GE GE. The service areas are
based, are they're not strictly
based on their geographic, um,
their collections of counties or
in the case of Saint Louis.
And, uh, Saint Louis. Uh, city.
There's there's census traction
in Jackson County, which Kansas
City there collections of census
tracks, but the rest are
collections of counties. Um, and
so it may be a three county
area. The largest, I think is a
10 count area. Of course, we're
very different than New Mexico.
You use a frontier state have
very different geographic
setting than we do.
OK, so OK, So Madam Tara, you
reimbursement basically is from,
uh from, uh, Medicaid or you
have ways to get Medicaid in the
state. So I think I heard one of
the representatives say we do.
We pay.
We were doing this before. BHC,
um, for people who don't have
resources and are not Medicaid
eligible. We have a standard
means test and we pay for care
for people. Um so
Medicaid pays for Medicaid
eligible clients, but we pay the
the PPS rate for other people.
Um, if they don't have the
ability to pay
The GR. OK, so, Madam Madam
chair, So the one that can say
you have a a budget that the
state provides You, Uh, X amount
of dollars to work with.
You ask me a question? Yeah. Do
you have a budget for the state
of New Mexico? I mean from the
state of Missouri that provides
you the money so that you can,
uh
Do your work, so to speak.
Yeah. So one of the advantages
we had, as I mentioned to you we
were doing some of these
programs. We were doing the
emergency outreach and the
community behavior and also the
outreach to, um I uses Medicaid.
We were doing all of those
before CCBHC and we were doing
them with General revenue, State
general revenue and we were
doing a crisis system with state
and revenue. Well, now that we
have all those things folded
into the Medicaid program that
made that made those dollars go
dramatically.
Further and so that enabled to
expand our system considerably.
OK, thank you. Think about it
Chair.
Thank you, representative
representative Bargo.
Madam chair and thank you, Mr
Shofman.
Um so I'm I'm gonna you. I'm
glad that you mentioned that, um
New Mexico is very different
from Missouri and I have had the
pleasure of visiting Missouri
and stayed in Cassville as a
matter of fact, so I was in the
interior of Missouri. Um, but
As I was looking at some of the
statistics regarding, uh, race
and population, I noticed that
Missouri is about 76% White
11.3% Black 5% multi
multicultural. Whatever that
means, Uh, 4.9% Hispanic as
compared to New Mexico, which is
about 49% White 50.1%, Hispanic
or Latino.
7.2% native and 2.7% black and
Looking at those statistics. Um
You know it it I was thinking
about, um, the issues that New
Mexico has, and I know that we
can't compare because it's all
it's like comparing apples to
oranges, but in a perfect world,
and it kind of behooves us as
legislators to look at all these
different programs across the
country and what's working and
what's not, and it could
potentially work in New Mexico.
Um
What in a perfect world. How
would you see so because we have
a lot of also reservations. How
would you see such a program as
yours implemented in a state
where we have a much higher
majority of, um
Um minorities.
Mm.
I'm not I you know, so say a
couple of things Remember the
very the first slide. I showed
you after, um
After saying, you know, this is
the state The state driven is
Begin with the end in mind. You
need to do that for New Mexico.
I can't
I don't know. New Mexico. I'm
not familiar with your statutes.
I'm not. I've been to New
Mexico. I love it. I have.
Actually, I have a cousin or a,
uh, a brother in law who lives
there. Um, but, you know, I'm in
no position to advise you on
what is appropriate for the
state of New Mexico. All I can
do is say this is a model which
you can. You can
Um uh,
Make use of given your
priorities And your, um your
needs, Uh it's very it's. The
point is, it's very flexible.
Um, So what? What is it you need
to do? You can build a lot of
costs into the PPS rate that
are, uh, things that typically
you weren't able to be paid for
through Medicaid before they
nevertheless are really
important to, uh, serving
people.
With regard to the greater
percentage of minorities. Uh,
I'm not sure.
What impact that in of itself
would have.
Um
On the implementation of the
model. Um and Madam chair. Could
you tell me a little bit more
about your outreach program?
Because that may be something
that may not be something that
would fit for in New Mexico. I'd
like to know a little bit more
about that.
How you
Yeah, the three I described to
you three different outreach
efforts.
One is the is the identification
of high users of Medicaid, which
we reach out to
Uh, two is the outreach to the
emergency rooms and three years
outreach with the law
enforcement and so we're finding
through law enforcement. It's
outreach to people who come in
contact with them emergency
rooms as people going to the
emergency room instead of going
to other systems of care, and
there are a lot of people who go
to the emergency room. Uh
because they have a behavioral
health need. They present it as
a physical health need, but it's
really behavioral health
underlying it. And then, uh, as
I said, how your is a Medicaid.
We're wanting to they they're
not connected in
And the way they are be. It's
not outreach and engagement just
on the street. It is outreach
engagement to specific
populations.
OK, and thank you, Madam Chair,
um with regard to so you
My understanding What you're
saying is that you're working
with existing services to do
some of your outreach. Is that
what what I'm hearing
You know, we're trying to. We're
trying to help other systems of
care, hospital systems and the
the other another place. I
didn't talk much about this
because I didn't wasn't sure
you'd be that interested, But,
um, his Children services. So,
um, a lot of the C MC CBH CS now
have staff located in, uh,
connected to their local school
systems. They have somebody in
each one of their schools in
their school systems. Not
everywhere because not every
school is interested in that.
Um, but, um, but in a lot of
places now there are staff
located from the CCBHC in the
school system, Uh, helping to
identify kids early and get them
engaged in care. That's another
form of outreach.
Thank you. Thank you, madam
Chair.
Thank you, representative as
well.
Um, thank you, sir. We very much
appreciate the presentation. I.
I know there's some keen
interest on the committee, and
there's some interest in looking
at legislation that might may be
involved in implementing this So
your information was extremely
helpful. And we appreciate your
time. My pleasure.
Thank you very much. Take care.
OK?
Next on the agenda is First
Amendment overview, time place
and manner restrictions, and
this is code for the median
bill.
OK?
Um
Mr Suzuki was kind enough to
agree to do some research on any
of the scope of the law on Oh,
my goodness. The use of public
places for expression, including
panhandling, which is
expression, and, um, he's here
to brief us in his UN neutral
way as he can
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, so
my name is, Simon says you can
I'm a staff attorney Bill
drafter with Legislative Council
service.
Uh, Additionally, I'm assistant
staff for the court's
Corrections and Justice
Committee for the 2024 interim.
So before I get started, we have
to give our disclaimer so the
following presentation was
prepared at the request of the
chair. The purpose of the
presentation. It is well in the
presentation is based off of a
memo I prepared for the chair.
The purpose of the presentation
is to review the First Amendment
case Law regarding time, place
and manner restrictions.
And of course I'm providing this
presentation neither in support
of nor in opposition to any
matter before the committee. Any
opinions I do express are mine
and mine alone. They do not
reflect the opinions of the
Legislative Council or any other
members of its staff.
And, um, I
I believe Nancy passed out
copies of the memo, and my goal
is to answer this question. So
what is the relevant legal
framework under the First
Amendment for analyzing
legislation that may affect free
speech activities on public
streets and media?
And Madam chair. I just for
clarity. Uh, a couple
overarching principles.
So as it pertains to
individuals, individual rights,
liberties, privileges and
immunities, as many of you know,
the United States Constitution
provides a floor of protection.
a baseline of minimum
protections that every person in
the United States is entitled to
states cannot provide less, but
they can provide more.
Um, either.
Uh, in their constitutions, or
statutorily, and similarly,
Congress can provide more or
greater rights, um through
statute.
Uh, in New Mexico. The courts
have adopted what they call an
interstitial approach, which
means that they basically defer
to federal case law on
Many of the state analogs to the
bill of Rights.
So in in some circumstances, the
New Mexico Constitution
explicitly provides more
protection than the United
States Constitution, um, and has
been interpreted in some
circumstances to provide greater
protection.
Um, So it's kind of a caveat
that, uh,
The state constitution may be
interpreted to provide more. Um,
but for the purposes of this
presentation, we're gonna focus
specifically on the federal case
Law.
So let's start with the First
Amendment, which says in
relevant part that Congress
shall make no law abridging the
freedom of speech and Congress
means Congress and really state
action at all levels of the
federal government.
Uh And, um, you know, with the
the ratification of the 14th
amendment, it applies to states
and States political
subdivision.
And although the constitution
although the First Amendment
says no law, it doesn't really
mean no law.
Our courts have recognized
pretty early on that, Uh, some
restrictions on speech are
necessary for legitimate
significant or compelling policy
reasons.
Um, and the topic of this
presentation time, place and
manner. Restrictions are a type
of permissible restriction on
speech.
So what are they and it kind of
in the name But generally, these
are
Content neutral restrictions.
That regulate conduct in public.
Um, access to public property or
other matters of public
concerns. One
Example outside of like access
to public property or the zoning
laws.
Um there's famous cases about
adult entertainment in certain
areas of town.
Uh,
And with these, um, restrictions
provided that they are content
neutral because again generally
they're content. Neutral courts
apply intermediate scrutiny.
Which requires
That they narrowly tailored to
serve a significant governmental
interest and leave open ample
alternative channels of
communication and we're gonna
get into that in a little bit
more detail.
In a minute.
But with every First Amendment
issue
Uh, courts.
En engage in what they call
their threshold inquiry and they
have to determine first, whether
the conduct that's affected by
the statute. The ordinance, the
rule, or, you know whatever
state action is at issue is in
fact speech that's protected by
the First Amendment.
So speech.
Uh,
Broadly under the First
Amendment is the spoken word,
The written word It includes
expressive conduct, which is
conduct that communicates ideas.
It also includes the conduct
necessary. Oh, and I should say
in all different medium mediums,
Uh, so in writing.
Uh, on film on stage personally.
And the conduct necessary to
create the speech to disseminate
the speech or to otherwise
communicate the speech.
And additionally the UM speech
also includes the ability to be
an audience to hear to watch to
see.
And the conduct necessary to do
those things, so it's very
broadly defined speech can be
either protected.
It could be less protected or it
can be unprotected.
And the Supreme Courts recognize
some narrow categories of
unprotected speech, and those
are the famous examples.
Incitement. True threats
fighting words. Obscenity
defamation, fraud, perjury, Um
Speech integral to criminal
conduct, and there's specific
examples of, uh, that type of
speech. But outside of these
narrow categories, most speech
is protected.
In the context of these
regulations the courts have
found as, uh
The chair noted, Um, protesting
sharing political or religious
ideas covering the news. Hate
speech soliciting charitable
donations or panhandling and
even having personal
conversations. Uh, small talk,
um, are all protected and
This similarly found that
This type of speech often
occurs.
On medians and roadways. Uh,
You know another public places,
and there's a quote from, um
I think it's uh, United States
versus Stevens and was adopted
by the 10th circuit. Most of
what we say to one another lacks
religious, political,
scientific, educational,
journalistic, historic or
artistic value, let alone
serious value, but it still
sheltered from government
regulation.
So a takeaway is again It's
gonna be a case by case
analysis, but it's
Very, very broad coverage.
Once the courts make their
threshold inquiry and determine
that, uh, speech is actually
implicated.
It then conducts with what the
courts call the Forum analysis.
And
This is to determine
All the scope of the
government's authority to
regulate the property. And and
similarly the the scope of the
individual's right to access the
property.
And use it for speech purposes.
So the court recognizes three
form categories. The traditional
public forum, the designated
public forum.
And the nonpublic forum.
And the traditional public
forum. Uh, is is most relevant
here.
So this is the place which by
long tradition or by government,
Fiat
Has been devoted to assembly and
debate.
Um
And
Again. We're you know, thinking
about tradition, particularly
our country's tradition, the
Western tradition, uh, in our
social studies, classes and
civics classes, we often talk
about the town square. Um, you
know the Roman Forum, the Greek
Agora, So that's
This place where
Members of a society come
together and ideas are just
inevitably going to be
exchanged. They can be profound
ideas or banal.
Small talk.
You know, every day, sort of
Um
The typical traditional public
forum is a property which has
the characteristics of a public
thoroughfare.
And which has the objective use
and purpose of public access or
some other objective use and
purpose that's inherently
compatible with expressive
conduct. So that's something to
note that when we're talking
about public
Of a public forum.
The court see it as inherently
compatible with expressive
conduct.
And we'll come back to that in a
minute.
And coming back to the median.
Um
Uh, pedestrian safety questions.
A public street, broadly defined
to include the entirety of the
speed the street, the sidewalks,
the shoulders and the medians
and other features.
Is a quintessential public
forum.
Um, just for your information.
Uh,
The second category, um, is
designated or limited Public
forum, and this is the place
that's not typically open to the
public for First Amendment
activity.
But was created or designated
for public discourse by
purposeful government action. I
was trying to think of an
example and I think
Um, one might be the rotunda
during session. Uh,
You know, there's a little bit
more regulation. There's art
displays right now. Um, but, you
know, maybe during session, the
art displays are taken out and
tables are set up and
You know the state could be
argued, as is opening that for
public discourse.
With designated public.
Or the state may open or close
them at their discretion. But
when they're open the same rules
for traditional, uh, a
traditional public forum apply.
The third category is the
nonpublic forum. And these are
all of their
Public properties that are not
compatible with the expressive
conduct.
And this is where the state has
the strongest power to restrict
speech activity. And this could
be, um, inside of a courtroom
inside of the committee room
While the committee is doing its
business inside of our offices
on public property, it's
technically public property, but
it's not a free for all for, um
You know, speech activities.
So that's the second inquiry
and the third inquiry the courts
make is regarding, um, content
neutrality.
So
Mhm.
This inquiry determines what the
state's burden is in justifying
its statute, its ordinance. Um
whatever.
And it recognizes.
A difference, um, between an
intent to censor and incidental
effects on speech, so a statute
can be, um and I should say so.
If a statute is content based,
it's subject to strict scrutiny
If it's content neutral, it's
subject to intermediate scrutiny
and we're again we're gonna get
into the nitty gritty of of
intermediate scrutiny in
particular.
But back to the content
neutrality question. A statute
can be content based, either
facially or through a
discriminatory purpose.
So facial content. Um
Facially content based, uh,
statute.
Target subject matter in its own
text, Um, and even if it doesn't
differentiate between viewpoints
so it can address an entire
topic or prohibit discussion on
an entire topic. Um, that's
still considered content based.
When the state does begin to
distinguish or discriminate
among viewpoints within a topic
Quartz characterized that kind
of discrimination as viewpoint
discrimination.
And there is a Supreme Court
case a United States Supreme
Court case.
Um, regarding the trademark and
patent statute.
Whereupon a finding of viewpoint
discrimination. Um, the court
invalidated the statute without
applying any scrutiny.
Um, so it's, uh, they
characterize it as an egregious
form of content. Discrimination.
Um
And the, um the the second way
that a statue can be content
based in its purpose.
And that's when it was adopted
for sensorial motive or when
it's specific motivating
ideology or opinion.
Um, is the rationale for the
restriction?
So
Uh,
One, and I was discussing with
my colleague. Uh, earlier. I
don't exactly remember the
citation. Um, but there was a
case where California or the
city of San Francisco had
banned. Um like wooden, dry
cleaning. Um
Shops and you know, it was
argued that it targeted a
certain, um, racial class. Uh,
that would be an example not not
specific to speech. But sort of,
uh,
Discerning the discriminatory
purpose of the statute.
Another would be a like a flag
burning statute, Uh, states, and
I think the federal government
tried to enact a statute that
prohibited flag burning and it
didn't you know, because in
theory, um
You know if you're if a flag is
being burned, uh, as a form of
expressive conduct, it can
Stand for a bunch of different
opinions. Uh,
But even the
The broad coverage of this type
of conduct was, um
Found to be, uh, this, uh,
content discriminatory.
And just for contrast, uh,
content neutral regulation is
one that serves the purpose
unrelated to the content of
expression again, even if it
does have an incidental effect
on some speakers or messages,
but not others and madam chair.
A quick note on strict scrutiny.
Again. I said, we're gonna focus
on intermediate scrutiny. But
just for the committee's
information, this is the highest
level of judicial scrutiny.
For these types of
constitutional issues.
And it requires the state to
show that the statute is
narrowly tailored to achieve a
compelling governmental
interest.
And that this the
Statute is, in fact, the least
restrictive way to achieve that
interest, so it is the least
restrictive way.
And the compelling interest is,
um means that it's essential.
It's necessary. Uh, you know, so
the state has really no choice
but to pursue this.
Intermediate scrutiny. On the
other hand.
Requires the state to show that
the statute is narrowly tailored
to serve a significant
governmental interest.
OK?
And leaves open adequate
channels of communication. Mr
Baker touched on it yesterday a
little bit that the test
A significant interest is
More than a legitimate interest,
but less than a compelling
interest. Um and
This heightened scrutiny is used
in different
Four different issues.
And but the for time placing
manner, the court has fleshed it
out a little bit more, Mister
Snooki. Perhaps we could go to
the cases that relate to the
media and stuff. OK, let zero in
on. I think people really
quickly, though. So a, um, so
it's a state is furthering a
significant governmental
interest when it is directly and
materially.
Alleviating a real specifically
defined harm.
So directly, I materially
alleviating a real and
specifically defined harm.
And it's narrowly tailored to
that harm.
When it does not.
Burden substantially more speech
than is necessary.
And we can
If anyone has a Madam chair
questions about that. We can,
uh, touch on it later, so
Between 2019 and 2021, the 10th
Circuit Court of Appeals decided
three cases that are very on
point. Uh, they all dealt with,
uh
And this is an important point
municipal ordinances that
Um
Uh, restricted conduct on
medians or other parts of the
roadway.
And they did come to
Different decisions in each of
the cases, and it's um
Interesting because
You can. They were deciding
sequentially and you can
If if you dig into them, you
really see the the way that that
the 10th circuit developed its,
um
It's case law in this matter. So
the first was Evans versus Sandy
City, Utah.
And this one was 2019.
The city ordinance at issue
Prohibited sitting or standing
on.
Paved medians that were narrower
than 36 inches.
And unpaved medians that I mean
pay the mediums.
So and I'm gonna editorialize
the facts just for for time, but
Um
But what I think the
What's important with the facts
in this Evans case is that
Um, the
This the the genesis of this
ordinance, so
The police department had
Observed what it characterizes
close calls.
And then this was the story
Throughout the record, it had
never changed. They had they had
these close calls that
You know nothing really bad
happened, But you know it could
have been devastating. And
that's a paraphrase from from
one of the police officers that
testified to this
So the the police notified the
city attorney
The city attorney took the
information and he went and
conducted sort of an informal
survey of the medians in
Sandy City and concluded that
paved medians and more than 36
inches were, um
Uh, dangerous because they
didn't provide enough refuge
from passing cars and unpaved
medians were dangerous because
many of the medians in that city
had landscaping that created a
fall hazard.
So the city attorney drafted the
ordinance introduced it to the
council. They debated it and it
was enacted and
At all times. That was the
story.
So after it was enacted, Um
As a resident in Sandy City. Uh,
Mr Evans was cited four times.
He, uh, was someone who would
Panhandle for for money.
And
Two of his citations were for
standing on medians that were 17
inches, um, wide.
And I. I should have said
earlier. Um, importantly, the
The Sandy City ordinance.
Uh,
Left. Oh, it it. It had a very
minimal effect it and the the
court found that it
It left open 7000 linear feet of
medians within the city and of
the medians that were affected
by the ordinance.
Some were only partially
affected, and that's important
to Mr Evans's case because the
two citations that I mentioned
for staying on the narrow the 17
inch narrow median.
Um, it was part of a larger
median that just 10 ft. Away,
widened to a greater than 4 ft.
So the the court found that you
know, he could have walked 10 ft
and would have been in
compliance.
So Mr Evans made some made some
arguments made three arguments
regarding narrow tailoring that
first that it placed a
substantial burden on his speech
because it required him to stand
a substantial distance away from
the most effective place to
reach his target audience, which
was passing cars, Um how he
stopped at a light or something.
Uh and then second that it was
not narrowly tailored because it
was not a close fit between ends
and means and that the city was
required to compile. He argued
that the city was required to
compile data statistics.
accident reports et cetera, to
find that close fit.
And then third. He argued that
it was not narrowly tailored
because the city did not
demonstrate that measures less
burdensome. So he he was arguing
this. This the city's burden was
to show
That it's that there were
There was that there were no
less burdensome alternatives and
remember part of narrow
tailoring is that, um
Uh,
Unlike compelling of
intermediate scrutiny, unlike
um, strict scrutiny does not
require the measure to be the
least restrictive. It requires
it to be narrowly tailored and
to leave open, uh, adequate
alternative channels.
So the court disagreed with Mr
Evans and upheld the ordinance.
They? They reason they spent a
lot of time focusing on the the
the circumstances surrounding
the citations where he could
have just walked over, Uh, 10
ft. And he would have been in
compliance that it that the
scope of the ordinance
application was, um, was so that
you know, plenty of other
medians were left open. You
know, some
Of the same median, you know,
was technically um, it was legal
for him to stand on. And
similarly on the adequate
alternative channels. They
focused on those facts as well.
The
The
And I should have noted Mister
Evans relied heavily on the
United States Supreme Court case
called McCullen versus Coakley.
Important background
information. This was, um
regarding to Massachusetts
statute that created
A buffer zone around
Medical clinics where abortion
services are provided.
And the
Um, the statute prohibited
sitting standing loitering
within 35 ft of these clinics.
So
As Mr Baker said yesterday, he
he referenced the the war versus
Rock against racism case That's
another Supreme Court case.
That's sort of the seminal case
on this issue that
Established that that
intermediate scrutiny standard
applies that it's narrowly
tailored to serve a significant
governmental interest. It leaves
open, um adequate channels and
it does not have to be the least
restrictive.
Uh, way to achieve the goal.
You know, kind of a paraphrase
was, you know
States shouldn't be expected to
exhaust every possible
alternative with intermediate
scrutiny. They have discretion.
Well, McCallen, and then it was
a It was a unanimous opinion in
the judgment. Um
Uh,
Found that
Well, yes, The states don't have
to select the least restrictive
way. But in order to find this
close fit, the state has to
Engage in some sort of
They they have to explore.
Consider other alternatives. And
that's not exactly what McCollum
said. But, um
When we go and I'll just move on
to the next, uh
Circuit case. The McCraw case,
the Oklahoma City case.
Um
So, madam chair with with this,
Um the ordinance in this case
was was much broader. It
Prohibited sitting and sitting
or standing.
On medians that were less than
30 FT wide or located less than
200 ft from an intersection.
And, um
The the medians in Oklahoma City
are
Very they diverse. Um, you know,
one of them had a fire station
on it. I tried to look up a
picture, but I couldn't find it
And there was also a history
with this ordinance, it had been
amended several times. It was
originally a
Uh, it prohibited soliciting
without a permit, And then it
was amended to be a little
narrower. And then they
ultimately ended up with
With this version of it.
And
In
This case,
the the court actually found
that it was not, um, that the
ordinance was not narrowly
tailored.
The reason Um why? And they the
Would. Admittedly even for
myself, You know, I had to, uh,
review it several times.
Is
They ultimately applied the the
standard that Mr Evans had
proposed in his case that
And again, this was in light of
of the McCullen case that
There had to be
Some demonstration that the
state at least or in in this
case the city had considered
Other measures that were less
burdensome on speech.
And at this point, the 10th
circuit had reasoned that, um
Because the ex the extent of the
media of the extent of the, uh,
restriction in McCraw was so
much greater than that in Evans.
Remember, it only applied to
those two types of medians and
Evans that
With such an extensive
restriction.
The state needed a more
comprehensive justification,
basically, for its
It's um, enacting the
Uh, the ordinance in the first
place.
And that takes us to the brewer
case. And that was against the
city of Albuquerque. It was
decided in 2021.
And
It, Um, the the District Court
of New Mexico had found in favor
of the plaintiffs before.
The 10th circuit had decided
McCullen and had
And not explicitly, but but
Just inherently called into
question. The court's reasoning
in Evans that in light of MM
You do that the state kind of
did have to compile data and I
should I should have gone back
and said that
Um, the city of Albuquerque
included a preamble. Um and I
should say that it, uh, the the
the preamble cited, um
National statistics information
from
NHTSA.
At this summary judgment
hearing. They had, um, a civil
engineer testified to principles
of safety and roadway design,
but nothing really concrete and
specific to Albuquerque.
Um the the city had also
provided a bunch of traffic. Um
Uh, incident reports.
And
The
Court. Um
Through the through the
plaintiff expert witness, um
You know, establish that of all
of the reports that the city of
Albuquerque provided
50% of the incidents involving
pedestrians. Um
Were involved pedestrians
crossing the street legally.
Another. I think it was 43%
involved Pedestrians.
Crossing the street illegally,
And then there were were, um
there was a percentage of
incidents that involve, uh
You know, substance abuse.
People with mental illness, more
unique situations. Uh,
And in this case, the court
found that the city of
Albuquerque didn't really wasn't
really furthering a significant
interest. It was not. It was
conjectural. It was speculative.
It was not real and specifically
defined.
And the ordinance that it
ultimately enacted, which was
much more comprehensive and the
the there was a specific
subsection.
That applied to medians.
Um
Would just not and again based
on the the facts that were
established in the hearing would
not have directly and
materially addressed.
These harms they were
speculative.
And the the 10th circuit went
to, um
Great lengths to sort of
reconcile these opinions and
ultimately concluded that
In light of in light of
McCullen.
In the 10th circuit. A statute
is narrowly tailored
When, um, it's
Uh, that it it passes
intermediate scrutiny when it's
narrowly tailored to serve
significant governmental
interest.
And that the state ordinarily
has to seriously consider less
burdensome alternatives.
Um
Some points, Um, on the McCullen
case that Massachusetts had AAA
different statute that
explicitly prohibited blocking
the entrance to those types of
reproductive clinics. Um, the
court spent a lot of time
focusing on the fact that that
you know Massachusetts was
claiming that there were these
issues with violence but
couldn't provide proof of a
prosecution.
Um, under whatever existing law
that they had
Um
And with, um
With Evans. The court was I
mean, with Excuse me with
Brewer. The court was really
Concerned about the fact that
that
The state was casting such a
wide net in
O over areas where, you know
For traditional public fora, um,
that were inherently compatible
to speech and just did not have
Uh, a clearly defined, explicit
reason to, um to do so. And I'll
sort of, uh uh, wrap up for
questioning because I think it
might be a little bit, uh, more
helpful.
So I think we'll go to
questions, but I wanna I wanna
like, summarize something too.
Kind of tie all this together.
So we're talking about a First
Amendment issue, so there are a
few things we have to first. Um
identify. One is, Is it, um,
speech that's covered by the
First Amendment
and in the case of medians and
panhandling and a number of
other things.
The answer is yes. The the those
activities that typically occur
on medians or other parts of the
roadway. Yes. Is it a public
forum and, um, in this one, I
would say is what we I have
learned to be a traditional
public forum. That is, you know,
sidewalks, medians, things where
people tend to congregate have
been viewed. And so it's a
public forum. That means we have
to now.
Look at how we're gonna
regulate. Can we? To what
degree? Can we regulate the
speech on the public Forum?
In this case, um it appears that
the scrutiny is intermediate
scrutiny, so I think it's what
do you have to have a legitimate
governmental interest? A
significant or significant or
substantial interest? OK, so we
know that's number three. That's
the third elephant. So how do
you prove that and what we're
seeing is that about three
cases?
That are a little bit around the
edges. But what the court saying
is, you've got to show me the
beef and what's the beef? The
beef is
our people at risk of injury. Is
that a true statement?
And in these cases, it appeared
that the cities who lost could
not show any data that the
individuals were at risk or the
people driving past them were at
risk at that. Any data other
than having experts come and say
in general, it's not a good idea
to have people standing in
meetings. Well, OK, That's not
enough. When you're looking at.
I'm just trying to, like, put it
all together, you know.
That's not enough. You have to
show a really real problem that
you're solving. You cannot one
that you're speculating about if
we wanna Well, you wanna think
it's a problem because there's
they haven't been able to show
the data and that's where they
lose. And I just wanted to pull
it all together so we can have a
conversation about that. So
That's great. Thank you. Um, Mr
Suzuki. I have re and then, um
so Los. OK, Thank you, madam
chair that that was one of my
questions was
It sounds like we need that
data and I don't feel that we've
gotten the data like it's
listing in this. You know how
many people were involved in a
pedestrian crossing the street
so that that is one question I
had, but I guess my main
question is all these cases that
are cited deal with city
ordinances and, um, kind of
what's happening within a city.
But how is that gonna hold up
when we're trying to do a state
ban like how does that compare
when we're dealing with the
cases involve city ordinances?
And and then when you're trying
to do a statewide ban, like can
you kind of correlate that to me
in what you foresee?
Like possibly being issues.
When we're specifically dealing
with city ordinance cases as our
precedent.
Yes, Madam Chair and
representative Reb.
So
I, You are correct that these
these cases on point deal with
municipal ordinances and madam
chair, the the geography and the
infrastructure of a particular
place. Um, it is going to
matter. It's gonna come into the
the narrow tailoring analysis
and I mean it goes without
saying, but I should have been
clearer at the offset that these
are very, very fact. Specific.
Um questions. What's narrowly
tailored for one community is
not going to be narrowly
tailored for another community.
Um, just going back to the macaw
case. The Oklahoma City one
Madam chair, the
The court noted that that in
Oklahoma City, there was a
tradition of, um
Activity on medians and that,
you know, it's sort of focused
on that the city would sanction
fundraisers there was a
firefighter fundraiser there
were you know, and their their
medians were bigger and more
like public parks. In some
circumstances. Um
So when a state or municipality
Madam chair is going to to be
conducting this
Narrow tailoring, Um
Scaling it up. Scaling it down
is definitely um, from from my
reading of the law is something
that the court is going to
expect.
Madam chair and thank you, I. I
just see issues with that, and
the data is the big thing to me
as Madam chair mentioned, so I
think we all kind of seem to be
on the same page on that, but
that those were the points I
wanted to bring up. Thank you,
Madam Chair. You represent a
senator Cil Lopez.
Got you.
Thank you. Uh, Mr Suzuki. I
thought it was a really good
memo and and very helpful. Um, I
always start when I think about
legislation as a legislator, and
I think it's because I taught
this stuff. What are we trying
to do? What is the problem We're
trying to fix. What is the
benefit we're trying to achieve
And here we're saying that the
problem is safety.
Right public safety and as you
pointed out, everybody else
needed all these other cases,
They required evidence. Well,
we're we're a We don't have
legislative history. Um and so
we have to create some kind of
record that we
Looked at evidence. So what kind
of evidence would you consider
that we would need to see a
whether it's a legitimate issue
that public safety is
legitimate, and I think people
are saying we don't seem to have
any data that people are just,
um, getting killed on these
medians, you know, in any kind
of significant way, um
So that's one question. But then
also we have to have look at the
mechanism we use, which seems to
be a ban.
And that's a total band, and we
have to look at whether it's
narrowly tailored tailored and I
think, uh,
I think Representative Reed had
a really good point about when
you're going statewide. How are
you gonna nail nail narrowly
tailor anything?
Um, when I think about narrow
tail, narrow tailoring, I think
of well, what could we do?
instead of doing this? That
would have less of an impact.
So I'm thinking about
Well, we could make these areas
safer, right? We could allocate
money and somehow put
Some kind of barrier so people
wouldn't um
Easily fall into the streets.
Um, but I wanna II. I guess I'd
ask you to engage in that
analysis. What is it? We're
trying to do, you know? Is it a
legitimate problem? Do we have
the evidence to show it's a
problem? And do you think that
what we have here is narrow is
sufficiently tailored And and
Madam chair. Um so a few points.
So, um, just again. This is the
the federal framework and I
should have had the citation
handy. But there there are.
There are a couple of, um,
supreme
Court cases
that provide
When the state is when the court
is trying to discern legislative
intent. A. A lot of stuff is, um
Is on the table, the the
drafting process the sometimes
they actually look at what the
statute says, and we we tend to
take out legislative intent from
Madam Chair, the courts will
will look beyond the federal
courts will look beyond the four
corners of the document. They
they will, um
The the circumstances of its
introduction, the its drafting
and its passage, um, are
relevant and and I I'll get you
the citations to those cases,
Madam Church of the second. Um,
A second point is that
The the courts are still adamant
that for four intermediate
scrutiny, it does not have to
it. The
It does not have to be the least
restrictive way to do it. They
just have to show that they can
seriously consider alternative
less restrictive alternatives.
And one more point, Madam Chair,
um on on the data.
Uh, importantly, in the the
Evans case there, there was
really no data and and the the
harms that that the city cited
were kind of speculative,
Remember, they they were close
calls. They were things that
could have been
Uh, devastating.
Um Evans is the outlier. It
seems, uh and
From the 10th circuit's
perspective again. It was the
the extent of the restriction,
so it was
Much fewer medians were affected
in Sandy City.
So the court kind of reasoned
after the fact in the in the
brewer case that, um, looking
back to their decision, and and
Evans that
The, um the
The less um the the lesser
extent of the restriction in
Sandy City.
Required a less extensive
justification.
So in that case, the the
anecdotes, Madam chair that's
correct.
Were sufficient. Um, because
again, it's a case by case
analysis and will not be one
size fits all.
So just just following up then
should we? If we are gonna do
this, should we start having
hearings on the arms? Should we
start thinking about different
proposals? Um, to achieve the
goal of safety? What should we
do to ensure that this thing
isn't struck down as quickly as
the Albuquerque ordinance was?
Oh, madam Chair, Senator, I
don't think I can answer that,
Um, it's again. It's gonna be,
um, the
The the courts are going to
expect a state or municipality
to have
Work to find an appropriate fit,
so they the the states have to
Balance the burden on speech
with the seriousness of the
harm.
Um
And
Seriously. Consider
Less burdensome alternatives and
But by taking into account their
geography, um, the type of
speech that's affected. Um, the
infrastructure in a particular
area. Uh,
So so again, it's it's really
impossible to say who
You know what? What would pass
the you know, intermediate
scrutiny or not? It's gonna
Just depend on the totality of
the circumstances. Thank you,
Madam Chair. I would suggest
that we haven't done enough.
And that if we
Were to go down this path. We
should at least talk about the
evidence and talk about
alternatives to this, uh and
also address the question, madam
chair of whether
Statewide ban is appropriate
given all of the different
mediums and circumstances We
have no disagreement for me
other than I would say we would
ask for the evidence. I you know
from the those individuals who
seem to believe that we need
such an ordinance. Absolutely.
And I was thinking of mediums
like there's a median in Berlin,
where we generally that's where
they meet in the middle of
drinking. I got it and
representative
Thank you, madam Chair.
I hope that I can clarify a
little bit of stuff here. Um, I
happen to serve on the City
council during this time that
we the ruling came down and I
also happen to serve as a
president of the City council at
the time that this case was
resolved and came back to us and
basically the city of
Albuquerque lost, um and just to
give you a little bit of data,
um
There is, in fact data from the,
uh, the Department of
Transportation. The F, the
National Department of
Transportation statistics that
show
Nationwide where we have the
most problems with deaths on for
people that have had deaths on
on me, hands or sidewalks and
and New Mexico was actually one
of
Top. Unfortunately, we were at
the top of this list. Um for
debts. Um, for people that
You know, were killed. Um, and
that's how some of this came up.
Um, but the city lost the case.
No, I know, but I'm just I'm
just explaining how this start
some of this started, Um And so
there is data, and so if we talk
to the Department of
transportation, we can get that
data because that was a planning
issue that was very prevalent
that came to the forefront.
In the Planning Department and
the engineering department in
Albuquerque because we had so
many problems, um and
Counselor.
Jones, I think was the one who
initiated this. Um, this case
that we lost in court in the
10th circuit.
Um, so it in fact, was a public
safety issue. Um
Then there was discussion later
on. As we lost this case about
maybe we need to look at the
size of our mediums and and
Delineate that possibly the
smaller um, you know
Sort of mediums are the are the
problem.
Um more recently, Madam Chair.
Um
Ordinance.
8-2 dash 7-2.
Which is ordinance 22-44, which
I mentioned yesterday to the
governor's staff. Um, has also
passed and this was initiated by
Councilor Basson and Councilor
Benton and basically what it
did. Is it set up? Um
Some restrictions on
And and this ordinance is in
place right now. As a matter of
fact, it's posted all over
Albuquerque.
The thing about, um
And I'm not a lawyer, but
sometimes I happen to act like
one.
Is the fact that cities can
impose more restrictive
ordinances than the state. So if
the state passes an ordinance
passes a law now
Actually, the city of
Albuquerque or the city of
Roswell or the city of whatever
can actually impose a more
restrictive ordinance than the
state of New Mexico. And I'm not
exactly sure. Mountain chair.
Why we're
Going down this path because
cities can impose their own, Um,
ordinance. Um, but as I
mentioned yesterday, also,
there's $100.
Um
Trespass, I guess be for people
that it's a misdemeanor. And,
um, I just wanted to mention
there is data and that's the
that's the key. And the other
thing is that the city can
impose a more restrictive
ordinance in the state. So even
if the state passes something at
this point in time, other cities
can't come back and impose
something more restrictive.
Oh, thank you.
Representative Lujan and and
they'll try to wrap it up. Yeah,
I just
Uh, the S US into our our
discussion part of of this
venture or just, um as I'm I'm
following and understanding. Uh,
the proceedings that would would
take place based upon these case
studies that we have, uh,
rulings. Really, um so
So
There. See the the discussion
draft we have we've been looking
at to me.
Would, um
We probably need to threshold or
or the threshold for inquiry. Is
that a correct? Uh, viewpoint?
Madam Chair
Madam Chair representative, Um,
again just to to caution that
it's it's a case by case thing,
but but
Going back to my just kind of
overview of what speech is. It's
very, very broadly defined.
And
The courts have found both that
the Supreme Court the 10th
circuit, you know many of the
district courts here that the
activity that takes place um on
medians whether it's
campaigning, whether it's
protesting and panhandling,
specifically, um, is speech
under that that threshold in
Thank you. Thank you. So, Miss
Madam chair, so the way that
when I'm reviewing this myself
and and keeping the
The the constructs of of what is
legal and what is accepted and
how the laws are written, are
always how we are always as
policymakers, uh, are proceeding
and we're
Trying to achieve better laws
for our our government. Um
So I look at the pros and the
cons. And if we if this is
something, uh, that would go to,
um, go to the the judicial, Uh,
court to the system. I mean, I
There are things that could be
argued pro and they are things
that can be argued Con, and
that's precisely why you're
making these statements on a
case by case and I think that as
I'm reading through this
mountain chairs, we're entering
our discussion. I feel like this
is something that would
Trigger A or I wouldn't say
warrant, but it would trigger
the the possibility of this
going in into the judicial
system. Can you clear? Can you
add? Or can you
Yeah, sure. And I just like to
try to wrap this up. I think
Representative Reed and and
Senator Las Lopez hit the nail
on the head.
These things work in the context
of cities because there you have
certain conditions that can be
validated and established and
then shown whether or not it
meets the standard of review,
right?
We are a state that is very
different in many ways. You
know, the rurals are different
from the cities and then so on
and so forth to establish a
state law that can address
conditions that are so varied in
such a varied state, I think
would be very difficult. And
that is why almost all of these
laws, ordinances are at the city
municipal level because you can
do it at that level. At a state
level. It's the conditions are
way too.
To be able to craft a ordinance
that's narrowly tailored to meet
the needs. You know the
purported goal of the ordinance,
so you know, I just Yeah, I just
want I think that's my my
opinion. I know, but I think
some of my lawyer colleagues
probably agree, and I just think
that that but maybe we can kind
of
Wrap this up at this point, and
we can have additional
conversation when we when we
have to, But thank you so much.
The memo was excellent. Um, um,
Mr Suzuki, and we really
appreciate the work you did for
us, Of course, Madam Chair and I
must say, I, I turned it into
our proofing department. Uh, a
little bit later than I should
have. So I wanted to give them a
shout out because they they make
sure they check all of our
citations. And they make sure
that we're giving, um, the
committee and all of the members
of the Legislature. Accurate
information, So thank you to
your word processing. It's
always a team effort, Mr Suzuki.
Thank you.
Um
So, um, really appreciate
everybody's participation today
as always a good questions and
interest and we're now on
committee discussion. Um, so
anyone wished to share their
worldview, Um, thoughts about
what? We've been discussing
these last couple of days.
Um
So what you're having for
dinner, you know? Oh, And
actually, that reminds me before
we do that.
Um
There is dinner being offered at
the penitentiary of New Mexico.
Guys in the dining hall. Just
want you to know it is being
prepared by chef Fernando Ruiz
and his inmate students and we
are all invited to attend. And
if you wish to, um you can reach
out to Secretary Tafoya, Lucero
And if you need her contact
information, let me know I have
it.
So let's move on to committee
discussion now and we'll do
public comment.
Well, whoever wants to speak
raise your hand or whatever,
Representative Lujan. Thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you for
putting the this these hearings
together. I think this is
To me a win win because we're
talking about behavioral, health
and mental health and our court
systems. I think that this is
the crux of of, um
Of policies that are that we
have
Um
We have not really, um, brought
up to date as we were having
these discussions, and I think
that that is a to me. That is a
benefit for us to be having
these conversations. It really
is. Um behavioral health is
In crisis in our state, and this
is a nonpartisan issue. Uh, I've
worked on policy myself and
worked with with members from
from both sides of the aisle and
hope to continue to do that,
And, uh, addressing this in this
committee, and at this time is
is, um
Is, um
Such a benefit. I'll just say
that and I'm if we get anything
out of what you know our govern
our governor, calling a special
session to help us really focus
what we wanna be addressing in
our state, and it is behavioral
health II. I just wanna say
that's a That's a thank you from
me because we wouldn't otherwise
be this, uh, have this much
intent, and this much focus on
the subject matter, So I just
wanted to say that, but as far
as you know what we're looking
at policy wise, which the
Concrete, Um, information that
has been given to us. There's
still so much more work to be
done. Um, but I wanna say thank
you to everybody that has shown
up for our committee for your
committee because it shows what
we are.
We are devoted and this is the
work that we have signed up to
do. And I just say, I just all
the points of view, everybody.
That is the input that is
That is put forward as we're
having these discussion is so
important. And I want to thank
everybody for that. Thank you,
Manager.
Thank you, representative.
Anyone else wish to engage in
discussion?
I'll have one last few
Thanks. So, um, thank you for
continuing to do this part of
the agenda. I think that's
important to add I. I think, uh,
When I was chairing the meeting,
I would ask members to tell me
what we've learned from the
experience.
Um, one of the things that I
hope we'll do is to realize that
although the the the plan was to
use three meetings, I guess in
June to try and set up a special
session, work out the
legislation and
So the next time we're scheduled
to meet will be yeah, days
before What is the schedule
Special session? If it
transpires and II, I believe
that the plan was that by by
then we would be polishing
things off and slapping each
other on the back and and having
agreements so we can bring all
of our colleagues in and and be
done. And that seems highly
unlikely to me at this point in
time, especially because we're
getting bills even today and
yesterday, uh, that that differ,
So it was a good plan. Um, but
I, I don't see it coming to
fruition.
At this point.
So, um, that's that's one
observation. The other 12 is
that that I appreciate what
what, Uh, the leadership has
done, which is to really
dedicate the last several
meetings to what is effectively
the governor's agenda.
But I I caution us from not
thinking beyond that a little
bit. I'll give you an example.
Yesterday. I'm sure you weren't
here. But I brought up the fact
that we've got a new Supreme
Court decision last week on the
issue of guns.
Uh, for for the last two years,
I've always watched my
Republican colleagues looking at
me appalled when I said the
Supreme Court got it completely
wrong. In their earlier
decision, the Thomas ruling
about historical analogies was
never gonna hold up. And, uh,
everybody probably thought I was
pretty arrogant to be sitting
there, saying the Supreme Court
doesn't know what it's doing,
but we It's pretty clear they
don't know what they're doing.
And so we already see them last
week back and away from the
Thomas Standard for guns and and
he's all by himself. Now, he
he's the only
And and the others have pretty
much abandoned ship with him. I
bring that up not to get into a
debate over guns, but to to say
that the the agreement we have,
I think is that we're not going
to talk about guns into special
session and that's really kind
of too bad. Uh, because that's a
big issue. That's a big problem.
Um, and the fact that we don't
wanna do the contentious things
or the or the, uh, things that
are gonna lead to some hard
debate or hard votes or hard
decisions. I think that's too
bad. And and we now have a
Supreme Court decision that
should really give us the chance
to go into that. Apart from that
last week, those of us in
southern New Mexico again you
all have been hearing me for
years, saying I think we were
gonna lose in front of the
Supreme Court on the Texas V New
Mexico case. You all have heard
me saying that I had to argue
with the attorney general's
office and the state engineer
for years on them. I thought
they were wrong and
We were told repeatedly that
they were right and they were
going to win. And, of course.
last week, the Supreme Court
said, no,
no sorry to New Mexico. No
Texas, the feds and the farmers
have a pre eminent position on
the Rio Grande project, which is
naturally to all of you knowing
who I represent, and knowing my
position on this issue is what
I've been saying for several
years now, um so so the water
issues the gun issues, we can go
down the list. There are a lot
of really important things that
we as a state need to be talking
about and debating in this
committee, and we shouldn't um,
put
All of our eggs in just this one
basket, uh, of the agenda that's
for this special session. And
so, I. I hope we'll be planning
to get ready for a 60 day
session. Apart from what we're
doing now and start to begin to
broaden, Uh, some of our some of
our perspective on what we wanna
do as a group as a committee, so
I hope we'll do that Madam chair
and I know I know you've been on
board with that all along, too.
And, you know, I look forward to
your your thoughts on on a
special session as well, too.
II. I do wanna that I. I agree
with the governor very much for
making, uh
Um, public safety basis for a
special session. I think it's
important enough to do that. I
just wish that we were doing
something other than jaywalking
or or panhandling or whatever it
may be, Uh and I think the
public demands a lot more of us
from them than that.
Thank you.
Who I'm sorry. Represent. I
misheard Nancy, representing
Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair and I'd
like to echo some of what
The vice chair, said that the
discussion has been incredible.
Um
The
Topics I think have been
Um
They've been very interesting. I
I'm not sure that we have
consensus on all of them.
Um, sure, we don't I. I think
there's
Yeah. I mean, I'm I'm looking at
the four of the drafts that we
have.
Um
And I. I was
Tempted to
Ask for a straw poll to see
where we're at, but I think it's
pretty evident.
Um, I'm not sure that these are
ready for prime time.
But I agree with the vice chair.
We cannot just limit ourselves
to these four issues.
People want to see.
Something done about public
safety.
And we have to come together.
We have to
Show the the people of New
Mexico that were also concerned.
And we want to accomplish
something.
And it's not. I mean, I I've
been very vocal about
Not being a big fan of special
sessions, but it is what it is.
And I hope we come together and
we accomplish something that is
going to have
An effect on the crime that is
affecting every new Mexican
Um And I hope that we can do
that I. I have faith in this
body that we can do that. And,
uh,
I don't know that these four
issues will
Will get us there, but I
appreciate the chair and and the
topics that were brought
forward.
Um
Very, very interesting, and I
appreciate the hard work in
getting this done. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you very
much. Representative. Anyone
else,
Mr. Hemry represented he Thank
you. Thank you, Madam Chair and
and I would just kind of
Echo a little bit of what? Uh
representative Martinez said,
and and the vice chair said that
But you know of the four issues
or four or five things we've
seen, Um one is a bill that
already exists in law today.
It's not voluntary, it says
shall And if they need, um, a
ballistics information to be
included that bill gives the
Department of public Safety the
ability to promulgate rules.
Standards, procedures and forms.
They can do that now.
Um
We hear that that two other
bills, I think the assisted
outpatient treatment and sounds
like the median safety bill have
significant constitutional
issues and so and and may be
subject to significant
constitutional challenges and
maybe enjoined and not even, uh
uh, implemented by the time we
get to a regular session, So,
um, for those to be the things
that, um we
Are looking at, um, is somewhat
disappointing to me.
Uh, thank you, madam Chair.
Thank you, representative anyone
else?
Well, thanks for the great
discussion. Good meeting again.
We're gonna now go to public
comment. We have one person
online and to present so why
don't we do the one person
online? Um, virtually, um
Honey V Hill.
Are we ready? I'm sorry.
OK, well, two is fine, but, uh,
you know, can we get online?
MV Hill, are you there?
MV
MV Hill.
Apparently.
Miss V Hill. You're muted. Could
you unmute yourself, please?
Is there another person we could
go to
Tanika Gonzalez. Could you
unmute yourself? You have two
minutes. Um, good afternoon,
madam. Chair members of the
Committee. Um, can you hear me?
Yes. You have two minutes.
Fantastic. Let me set, my timer.
Um
OK, First of all, my, um, chair
members of the committee. My
name is Tanika Sosa Gonzalez and
I'm, a board certified
psychiatric mental health nurse
from Las Cruces. I just want to
thank you for the opportunity to
zoom in and make a comment when
I came in February on the sixth,
um, to make comment. We, um um,
weren't able to do that, and
they had to come back to Las
Cruces. So for context, I want
to share my professional
experience. Madam Chair. I was,
um, For five years I was the
director of an inpatient program
that partnered with a OT to, um,
provide the first, um
First admissions for five years
to a OT. Um, we had our first
ignition on May 12th 2017 while
I was doing that for five years.
I, um, worked with CJ CC and I
also presented to HHS on changes
for the involuntary sta status
to the crisis triage centers. I
left that position to become the
program director for the first
S a Ms A certified behavioral
health care center, um, in the
state of New Mexico, actually
ahead of the state certification
process in November of 2023.
Additionally, I have in my
Current role oversight of the LC
three Behavioral Health
Collaborative, which is the most
robust behavioral health
collaborative in the state, and
was the um first nurse in the
detention center for the Bravo
settlement. And while I do not
in any way, speak on behalf of
these organizations that I
volunteer for I am the board
president for Disability Rights.
New Mexico I am a chair for PM E
and I was just recently elected
to the board for the New Mexico
Behavioral Health Providers
Association. However, these are
my own. These are my opinions.
Um, we do not have an a not
guilty
By reason of insanity law in New
Mexico and one of the, um in 20
in 2017, after spending 10 years
at the state Hospital for
murdering, Um his mother, My
aunt, My cousin was released to
the streets and so we don't have
a 72 hour. Hold law. Um
And that's really that's really
challenging and he was found,
Um, he was found, um NGR I but
still dangerous. And so that
issue has has yet to, um, has
yet to be addressed, and because
he was found in GR I He, um and
was never, um, never charged. He
can also own a firearm so going
forward when we're having these
discussions, um, would really
love to see providers people
with lived experience at the
table. And, um, I'm thankful
just in in general, for all of
your support and attention to
these matters. Thank you, madam
Chair members.
Committee. Um, thank you very
much. Um, let's go back to
Connie. Miss V Hill, are you
there?
If you are a pleasant OK, um you
have two minutes for your
comments, please. OK, I'll talk
this. Thank you so much
Chairman.
Chandler and Chairman Cervantes
members of the committee.
11 of the 15 members are
basically attorneys. However,
only one representative who want
to recognize his and re she's
worked as a prosecutor D, a
elected in Curry County for
three terms. I watched the full
meeting this morning and I feel
there are questions that were
not answered by legislators,
including representative Alcon.
Uh, Senator Maestas,
Representative Re Senator Cillo
Lopez and represent Lujan and
Castano. I would like to mention
that Tim Shields is a very,
very, very capable, um,
director, but I believe that the
questions addressed to him,
maybe better suited to be asked
by George Morgan, who is the
facility manager? Potentially
also, Um, our Cabinet secretary
Patrick Allen. I also would like
to say that considering section
a and F of this committee's
work.
And your work is cut out for
you. And I'd like to say that
Section one A is the one
question I have what is working?
What's not really working I? I
think all of you know, I've been
to behavioral lobbyists for over
10 years and I wanna recognize
that the representatives from
this committee who have
committed to go to the Miami
model, which representative
Wuhan alluded to it is the best
model in the entire country. It
addresses every single issue
being brought up through this
committee and Senate and health.
And I want to recognize those
that signed up in the past that
would include and how did
interest Alcon Lujan Romeros
Antoinette S Lopez was signed up
to go about 10 days ago and due
to her family as she couldn't
attend. I wanna also recognize a
representative Kenna from Las
Cruces, who had also attempted
to go last year. So far, 50
individuals leadership from
across the state. One legislator
who I think we all know is the
champion of behavioral
As our only medical, Uh, expert,
uh, along with Martin, Senator
Hickey in behavioral health, and
that is Jennifer Jones. She
recently took seven
representatives from the town of
Demming, including herself, so I
would highly recommend, and I
did write a note to all of you
because I summarized the meeting
and I'll be emailing it to you
since it couldn't be passed out.
But again, I really appreciate
this is the best thing we could
ever do is bring this to the
forefront and your committee
along with the Health committee
has
Buying efforts to see the best
models not only see them. Thank
you. Thank you.
Thank you.
We have, um two in person, Um,
sign ups in the audience. I
believe.
Um
Now, Dean.
But he's pointing and winter
tour OK, winter.
Miss Torres.
Madam Chair members of the
committee. Thank you for letting
me speak to you for another
couple of minutes today. Um, I
wanted to mention some things
that you should consider that I
wasn't able to mention
yesterday. First of all the
grants pass decision from the
United States Supreme Court
should be coming down any day
now. Um, I know that the
panhandling issue is typically
looked at through the First
Amendment lens, but, um
Rents pass is gonna look at
status of somebody, so if the
people who are being targeted
for, um panhandling, um,
enforcement
Tend to be the homeless then I
think we're gonna have then
there could be a constitutional
issue there too. So you know
we're waiting for that opinion
to come down and then create
some legislation in like two
weeks and pat and past United
States constitutional muster by
July 18th. And I think that's a
bit much to ask, Um, second with
regard to any of the seven day
holds, Um I think all of you
know, at least in Albuquerque at
M DC we're having. We're
experiencing a lot of deaths in
the jail. Um
The jail and then like if the
death happens at the hospital a
few hours after they've left the
jail, it doesn't get autopsied,
so we don't really know what's
going on there, and they're
severely understaffed, so
putting people in jail for a
hold is not. We're not in a safe
situation really, to do that,
either. Um, with regard to, um
A family member or somebody else
asking for a hold an issue
that's come up in other states
is using that to control in a
domestic violence situation, so,
an abuser says this person, um,
is incompetent. And then that
person gets locked up, so that
is a really severe issue that we
would have to be on, Um, on
guard for
Um
You know, all in all policy
revision could be great, but it
just isn't gonna fix our
situation on the ground that we
don't have the providers. The
money doesn't get out promptly.
Um, we have implementation
problems in Medicaid and
computer systems and staffing
and all sorts of things. And
then I think there is finally a
way to work on pedestrian deaths
without having to look at a at a
constitutional issue.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, Mr
Vice Chair members of the
committee.
My name is nt de I'm a
disability advocate and a person
with multiple disabilities.
And, um
I believe in humor.
Thank you for the frequent
flyer, But it is often the term
that is utilized to identify
people who present multiple
times to the emergency room, et
cetera it it has not very much
to do with mileage points a
couple of other terms, Gomer
Get out of my emergency room,
Lola adds little old lady, not
an apparent distress, So you
know, we always wanna use the
The, uh
Just be aware and and and I
appreciated the intent.
Um, so, um, there's often bias
or implicit bias. It happens a
lot to me. Um, it's just part of
the
Having a
Uh, billboard at the end of my
arm that says I'm disabled
because I have a service dog and
we need more mobile crisis
response teams. I'm very excited
about the salesa funding that's
coming through 988 has been a
heavy lift in the long roll out
that we worked on for more than
a decade at a federal level, and
I serve on some of the UM
advisory committees and councils
that that work on it presently,
um
AC, T and CCS are not available
in, uh, everywhere assertive
community treatment plans, or,
uh, it's just not available.
People will call in the programs
are not there. The waiting lists
are longer. We just don't have
the stuff cases that are often
kicked out after seven day hold.
I know that it's just been
exceptions to be in longer than
a 14 or 16 Day hold because of a
family situation where they
can't bring their loved one back
into the home because it's not
safe for the people within the
home and it's not safe.
Individual is in a behavioral
health crisis. Justice involved
individuals often do not have
access to their records,
Although they would like very
much to apply. Please let me
know in my two minutes are up
and they're up.
That was almost perfect timing.
Thank you so much for to
everyone for the committee for
the interim for my ability to
participate, and I will see you
all remotely.
In the future. And thank you so
much. Thank you very much.
Along the meeting.
Yes, not we are adjourned.
