Good morning everyone before we
get to the business at hand
couple of reminders you all have
some paperwork to get to nancy
before you leave today to and
you do have two forms for your
predium to fill out because the
fiscal year for those of these
that are just joining us maybe a
little bit late also we have a
deadline that we're working up
against with the mescalero tribe
and the inter the mountain god's
reservation so please make sure
you get your reservations or
that information down there
today before you forget I think
we have a deadline of what
friday
so the hard deadline of friday
we're going to join us to read
those though but well you're
thinking about it take care of
it today for me please and I
think that's all the business
anybody have anything else
before we get down to the agenda
seeing them
welcome we have the chief
justice uh the mexico supreme
court and we appreciate you
being here today along with the
plenty of staff I think it's way
that I understand so
a pretty good group to help
answer all the questions so
chief justiced thompson
series worried terrible vice
chair members of the committee
uhm thank you for having to
speed for setting sorry you have
to start your early morning
looking at us but hopefully
it'll be interesting the way I
present these like to give you a
little traditionally one of one
can I introduce you to the
branch
and then go through a few topics
center mostly around be
available health
I understand you've had some
conversations about uh other
issues case management in
security
so I intended I usually do to
just uh leave a lot of time for
questions i'll do my best to add
to those in a way that
appropriate
let me introduce the chair said
the staff um we car pulled by
the way
so those you know worry about
the carbon footprint it was.
Rather a large car but everybody
was packed in
surgery comes our deputy
director of a o c mr sprug to
luceral she's heading up our
behavioral health answer.
Um and the sort of the person in
charge of
the obligations are kindly.
A imposed on us by the
legislative branch with regard
to be a real health structure we
can talk about that mistake bone
she's our senior statewide
program manager for behavioral
health she also was very
experienced in the area of
alt um.
And other areas sort of
collateral two behavioral
health.
And then and key to this the
general council for the chief
justice I am the chief justice
and mexico supreme court we
serve a term of two years we
rotate those
and so by the time you can be in
your next interest meeting there
will be justice fargoes here we
do that as a matter of course it
is not elected our position is
elected we're actually we got
through a nominating commission.
And then we go the governor for
appointment and then we are
elected as statewide there are
five of us.
Below us in the court structure
so the speakers the court of
appeals her ten of those judges.
Back horrid here's everything so
if you have a complaint about
what a trial court did you
everybody has a right to go the
court of appeals.
When it gets stars likely you
have to ask us permission to
take the case over a surport and
you have to tell us why it's
important why there's conflict
and then we agree to take the
case or don't take the case and
as far as the new mexico law
never score constitution where
the final word on that below the
court of pills are number of
child core to go to hear about
district thirteen judicial
districts those were created
kind of a long time ago
but there are line will be talk
about behavioral health they are
aligned in some of the
behavioral health districts that
are being created through the
executive team.
Those districts handle founding
cases.
Below them are magistrate courts
behind non tony and and.
Routine civil matters.
Those judges in some
jurisdictions are lawyers.
In some jurisdictions they are
not it depends on the statute
that your road about the size of
the population.
We have its calling metro court
and albert turkey that is in in
effective magistrate corporate
all those.
Uh judges our lawyers minutes
are very large court.
There are your municipal judges
you may have heard from on
occasion
they are not part of the state
judiciary.
We do regulate judges and we
regulate medicinal judges and we
regularly probably judges those
set
sort of war citizens through the
probably process.
As the chief just a suspense
court I do two things one as I
write opinions.
We are issuing nine this week.
Um we will have I was still on
the chair because we talked
about case management orders and
everybody has concerns about
case management orders I will
address those.
Who else is under case
management order the new mexico
supreme court.
We have told ourselves all our
opinions that we hear in
september will be out by july
fifteenth everything in this
term will be out by july
fifteenth of this month.
Um.
So I write opinions we also
operate the courts.
And we do so on a very direct
way so you'll see many of us on
particular it shows just a some
more often talks about
behavioral health.
Just to speak is access is very
strong and access to justice a
number of issues senior justice
we hire is very strong and
participate in a matters of of
criminal la and just as far as I
focus is currently and she'll be
the next chief fund on
children's court issues.
We have an administrative office
of the courts and that sarah and
carl so they do our
administrative implementation
a steewide and so that is our
structure so.
Because sometimes i'd like to
ask you to tell me to stop if I
use an acronym which
language which is known to the
judiciary but not the same the
lead sight of a judicial not be
happy to clarify that.
Um.
Yeah.
So
in this last as you say your
session I think was a it was my
first sixty day right.
Um it was great.
This wonderful.
I hear
I don't think we have enough
time to
download the hall
here's a summary
which is the court during the
follow that previous before your
sixty day
there was conversations about a
special session
and then
one of their cards upset came
out of that was that did you
dishear he would stand up some
pilot programs on eot and we
have an update on those and as
we went into the special session
and there was a focus really as
you know strike that your sixty
day session on behavioral health
and competency.
Um we were engaged in
with the the legislative
leadership and the executive on
implementing a behavioral health
system the focuses and I want to
urge really stresses focuses on
the criminal justice system
cause that to what we know
we are not here to be their
behavioral health experts I tell
my colleagues we are not
beheavor a hope providers we are
here to assist.
In implementing its best we can
a steep wide system bit allows
the very stakeholders together
where a lot of these people
engage and they just engage in
the criminal justice system
that's where we see a lot of the
individuals involved and so
that's why we were happy to.
Well happy we were willing to
participate and and
I take very seriously there
obligation to do it and we're
going to do it and we're gonna
answer
and give you updates when you
would like them on where we are
let me I just have end before I
run through
these items with this caveat.
I want to temper expectations in
the following area.
We are not the executive I don't
have behavioral whole scientists
they don't have behavioral
health providers I cannot tell
providers what to do.
Are ability is to convene these
and to route people through the
criminal justice to some in a
way that is appropriate for the
judiciary.
And that is the process we are
following but
when it comes to as we've moved
out.
The track on this and we come to
the nuts and ball to providing
the service that is not
something with the in the
judiciaries keep ability as a
constitutional branch that is
executive and that is oversight
by the legislature and we will
continue
to
uh
reaffirm those concepts to you
so let's walk through them very
quickly and then will stand for
questions to anything I leave
out terrible
tell me assisted our patient
treatment.
We have stood this up in the
first judicial district we've
received a three petitions and
accepted one into the program.
The four judicial district will
be operational by july.
The good thing about the pilot
programs are they realised some
of the.
Issues
involved in implementing a lt
we are discovering that.
The petition process is
can be burdened some for
providers we are finding some
resistance by providers to
participate based on
compensation.
They are not being compensated
in some circumstances either
signed enough for david or and
or
testify.
We have reached out to
and we have.
The.
Educational programs to for
example jail saturday county
jail we've reached out to them
this is what is available again
with the limits of my branch I
cannot go bring people into the
program that is not appropriate
rate.
And we are.
Then the neutral we rely on.
Days.
Public defenders in this case
the state hospital in in large
part or unmh in large part.
Um that if they want engaging lt
that
that they file the petitions.
The.
Competency diversion was another
part of eot not another part
meaning we rolled them out at
the same time I don't want to
combine them.
We have four active pilots of
first the third the fourth in
the twelfth we have one hundred
and twenty six total cases
referred forty three active
participants and twenty four
graduates of those that have
completed.
You are name is conducting its
error can talk about this the
third party evaluation.
We are.
In cover stations with metro
court and albuquerque to have
another program.
And we will see where where that
goes.
Um hba that as I express my
disa gratitude
euros
here's what we have done so we
had the effective date of this
legislation was
we can be in the executive
committee on twenty third twenty
fourth twenty fourth.
Wonder the thing someone to talk
about with regard hbad in a to
letter I I sent you all which
we would appreciate
reconsideration in the next
session is in metroport which
again is our magistrate court
but it's a high value magistrate
court that high high value I
actually sat on arrangements
there
if someone says i've got a
competency issue as soon as it's
raised we were able to address
that at at metro court within
that magistrate court the new
legislation now transfers that
to our felony court second
judicial court.
What that has as and i'll have
more numbers at your next
meeting what that what's going
to happen is we're gonna.
Take a lot of high volume
competency cases pull them out
of metro court where I think I
have twenty twenty four dollars.
And place into the second two
digital wear there's already a
lot of pressure on that criminal
division and second judicial.
We we encourage in the second is
a short preliminary hearing so
not grand jury
so this is just added to some of
that so
we'll see what eventually what
the numbers are
as as legislation rolls out and
will have.
More information on that.
Regard to the behavioral health
investment in reform act
we.
I think there were.
We've presented at a number of
committees in the nation was
talking as with the chair I
think there is some confusion
about the amount of money the
alc has received so under this
act to be clear for those
watching and you all know but
talking to a prider ideas this
large part of money was not
given to the a l c r were given
one point seven billion to
implement this and then as we
bring the state holders out
we're going to put plan together
and they're going to reach out
to the executive basically for
this funding so I wanted to be
real clear.
For all stay colders in the
behavior hold the rena don't
come run the day or see for a
grant right we are not.
We are not we were given three
hundred million dollars in order
to implement the program.
Would give my one point seven to
execute
it'll come into a plan and then
i'm the soliciton.
We have completed and continue
to complete a simapping I assure
with regard to the you are
sitting in the eight judicial
district so
mostly thousand raton
we have completed some mapping
in the eighth you are tom where
we are sure good morning mr
chair
they
know the eighth judicial
district has done some form of
their sequential intersept
mapping so they're prime to
start region regionally planning
and i'm happy to talk more
details about how we're thinking
about sending bill three how
we're thinking about that
implementation at the direction
of the committee
but we are looking at a very
closely what sort of simap being
exists how we can easily
supplements and mapping in the
behavioral health region so that
communities are able to start
planning more quickly and we're
not reinventing the wheel from
something that the community is
already involved in.
We have our executive committee
and the executive committee
has
convened and they have their
second reading in august.
And.
The.
III will have.
The briefly touch idea her
longer conversation with all
centimeter check was her
decision okay good she gives me
online other few devices we
deliciously protect the.
So she knows a lot about
security appreciate the ongoing
conversations certainly it
should be a matter of of concern
to you given
the national trend of so we
consider we appreciate
consideration of the judiciary
and your conversations about
additional security for our
government to entities with
that.
We good
charostan for a question so you
want to fill in the caps
I I don't think so but happy to
answer any questions from the
committee thank you mister
chair.
Okay thank you appreciate the
time to chair thank you for the
presentation today some of my
questions are going to go along
the lines of which how the
executive meeting went on
tuesday I know as well attended
so congratulations on that the
group moving in it we're
literally
turn a page for behavioral
health in new mexico but when we
are talking about one of the
things that was served with.
The.
Um the districts.
Are being created through the
executive board so can you
expand on that mr chair thank
you.
Mr chair representative have
surrounded to that question and
as we do
a little background.
Um.
What does districts would do
absolutely thank you mister
chair think you represent low
and further question
so the executive committee that
was created and senate bill
three is really the entity that
is they are responsible for
setting the regions which they
did at the last at the very
first executive committee
meeting those are behavioural
health regents mirror the
judicial districts um so
whatever judicial district
you're in that is the
behavioural health region that
you are a part of
um the executive committee is
also tasks we're setting the
funding structure for the money
they are also tasked with
reviewing and approving the
regional plans as well as
monitoring the deliverables and
things like that so they
actually carry a bulk of the
responsibility I think for this
does that answer your question
representative and yes thank you
that that's exactly my question
so one of the things that i've
been
uhm trying to clarify on and
really help because of the other
thing you said you're going to
be working amongst the
communities who already involved
in implementing their own plans
so that's that's what the
mapping in the you're going
around the state and doing that
and you know very commendable
it's a lot of work that's the
grass roots work that we need to
due to implement this correctly
or fully for it for for what
it's worth my question has been
is how are you working with the
health councils to do this
because one of the issues that
keeps coming up and it was it
was again in the meeting is that
you're interactions of how
you're bringing in tribal
communities into the discussion
thank you mister
thank you mister chair think
your representative looking
so we're working with the health
council is very closely um and I
are health councils received a
small appropriation sort of
convert rate and so we're
working through what that looks
like with the both the
department of health and the
health councils um we think that
the health councils probably
play an integral role in at the
regional level in sort of
convenient and organizing
mistake holder.
So not not to push anything off
on them but that they know
what's going on in that
particular region and so we're
thinking through how to kind of
build that out and how to best
you don't eyes the health
councils in that way and so in
in the immediate for the
planning and foundational level
we see them as an interpretable
partner at the regional level
and making sure that everyone's
at the table in that space thank
you mister chaired that that is
that's perfect would have been
wanting to hear and I and i'm I
am so happy that that is
happened happening because they
have done the structural
infrastructure work of which you
are doing now
I would just be interested in
how they're overlay of what the
regions that they've developed
into integrate with our judicial
regions as well so that that's
really important thank you so
much that's that's a lot of work
I commend you
so the the funding mechanisms
that the the executive is going
to be
creating the structure for.
How are you working with hca to
do that
they are thank you I misretair
representative behind so we're
out the sort of beginning stages
on the funding structure and I
think there's kind of this
chicken or the egg thing right
now of whether the funding
structure can sort of dictate
the regional planning process or
kind of a vice versa
there's also a band I know a lot
of discussion about like well
how can the money get out the
door more quickly and that sort
of thing and so
the
senate bill three money that is
conditioned on these plans I
think there's sort of a larger
question about how coordinated
we want the structure to
actually be there's a lot of
behavioral health appropriations
that are not tied to to the
behavior or health investment in
reform act and I see you know we
we sort of think that the
executive committee was the
structural entity that my sort
of oversean coordinate all of
this different type of funding
and so there were a couple
things that were proposed at the
executive committee that would
lend itself to kind of looking
at these larger structural
investments at the state level
but then also the service
delivery the senate the senate
bill three money that's all
condition is about a hundred
million dollars so really when
you dive that up amongst all
these different regions it ends
up not really probably being
that very much money and so I
think you know our
recommendation will always be
that the system should probably
be more coordinated and how can
we do that and so the
recommendations coming from the
judiciary to the executive
committee will mirror that um
and it's unclear sort of how the
executive committee sees that
but we're really trying to push
on this kind of overarching
coordination that's not just
contingent on the senate bill
three funding but also on just
all of the behavior of money
that's going out the door.
Yeah so we talk about this on
the way up
it's why these things you learn
as you do their cell the
executive you know they.
They've been running behavior
all for a long time before this
bill so there are pools of money
within executive agencies for
behavioral health.
This is new money that is
contingent on.
When we when you're hearing me
sim plans this first step.
And it's contingent on putting
these plans together.
What is he merged is.
What do you do with this
additional.
Additional money that the
executive has at department of
hell through each ca.
Yeah.
And I think some of that part of
the work of the executive
committee will be to.
An lsc we're going to engage rc.
Pretty directly on this because
this is your decision how do you
integrate does find if that's a
you choose to do thank you
visit her I I appreciate that
that is that's one of the thing
it's been very replacing for me
it is looking at all these
entities and one of the things
that i've been drawing to the
attention of what you're doing
in the regionalization as well
as the overall point settlement
find because our local
governments have the book that
funding and a lot of the the
regions have gotten together and
created their own behavioral
health claboratives if you also.
If you want to come into a here
what you're saying and one of
the things that I asked or da's
yesterday mister chair was about
our diversion programs in fact
you are very you you let us know
what's going on there but you
also said it's contingent to pin
the days and those numbers
increasing those numbers
what is that relationship in how
are you how are we going to make
sure that you know with all this
money that we have at hand in
the population that you're
concerned with and what you're
responsible for are we're going
to really see the utilization of
those those funds be you know
being used
i'll have to pretty sarah on on
some of this and that rolls into
the area of our are treatment
courts which we also operate
under alc.
As with alt.
The state gopule.
So first of all that was a large
settlement.
I don't think any that money
went to the courts they went to
operations within.
The counties for diversion.
The diversion programs are run
through the courts we cannot
again.
We can set up a treatment court
which is an assents a way in
which tas we will set your
criminal charges aside.
If you complete treatment a.
Scientifically objectively.
National best standards program
we cannot set those aside if the
district attorney won't agree to
that the version or a public
defender.
Won't agree to send out clients
to those programs so
are direct participation
is to create the treatment
court.
And for alc to say.
This is a national best standard
I know you hate uniformity but
this is what the best standard
is for this kind of program
maybe it's hopefully and then
make that available to the state
prosecutor in the public
defender as an offer rate so
think of an arab to.
Incarceration the pin it have
side this would be an off round
to say we're gonna handle the
treatment of this individual and
hopefully they will not be
engaged with the criminal
justice system so our role is to
set up the treatment court and
then
we do rely.
We don't have the treatment
provider so it's kind of similar
to be here for a half.
So if there are
providers
we do rely a lot of times on the
local government
who have the funding to the
opioid settlement to provide
those thank you mister chair
amazing wrap up because my times
limited it it just sounds like
we really the plan is you you
put in the plan together with
all these levels of
infrastructure that already in
place where their treatment
courts and with our diversion
programs working with our
counties and then working with
our you know our locals and I
think that we are put all our
on your shoulders and I I
compliment you for taking this
on and it's not going to be easy
but the feedback that we receive
from you is really going to help
us you know move forward and if
there are any kind of
tweaks that we need to make or
what we need to do um.
We need to we need to really be
a intimate and understanding
that because of the issues and
the problems and everything that
we had in the past in putting
two point two billion dollars
into behavioral health for our
states we saw how the same
problems we just have now put an
abundance of that responsibility
opaned the aoc so we want to be
very diligence and very
respectful on how we move
forward with what we've given
you to do so thank you mister
thank you mister chair for the
time
thank you mister chairman thank
you for being here
thank you for putting up with us
and agreeing to take on this
added responsibility
so mischairman and mister chief
justice yesterday we heard from
someone from the counties saying
that they had heard that none of
the funding was going to be
available for several years but
that got my attention so i've
opened april to show what is in
the budget today is the first
day of our fiscal year so I see
right at the top you're one
point seven million to the aoc
right underneath that seven
million to the aoc for a
treatment courts so can you just
expand a little bit are you
going to
produce more is set better
funding so they work better we
did here yesterday that there
are some under utilisation of
our treatment courts can you
talk a little bit about what you
plan to do with that
mr chairman
senator
amazon and long drive cause you
talk about this too
so it's it's actually it's real
concerning that their comment
that was made I will just tell
you
in what I talk to say about it
so.
If someone has a question about
that they can ask slicks there's
there i'm not going to add to
the question directly but
there's an answer to that and
that's not the correct answer
I understand the confusion and
we're going to reach out to
institution accounties.
And we're gonna have to do what
we call
people hate it and have
bureaucracy world but faqs so
now we're gonna lay out
this is the process but I would
occur to everybody if you have
before something like that comes
out that just respectfully not
an accurate statement so with
skidding the details about or
it's best we know when my then
about how the funding is going
to roll out i'm going to turn an
ad over to my expert but let me
say this again
lets see
else it's going to play a big
role you are the appropriators
so we're going to come back
again and again and then beatle
you know
you've got a god make sure that
that appropriations have all the
to matter of like and the
executive do the department of
finance administration let me
tell you they have to be in the
loop to and be able to because
they actually release the money
so there's one thing about two
writing where it goes then the
face to wonder release it so.
As much as we will take on with
regard to this we're going to
continue push back and see what
this is where lc comes in and
and probably definitely so with
that we have any information for
the chair in the senator on on
the funding absolutely thank you
mr chair thank you senator for
the question i'd like to point
out also that seven million was
appropriate and in grow rate so
it's two point three each year
and it's the languages fairly
broad but it's also contingent
on these regional plans rate
which means that the courts and
the court programs will need to
get incorporated into these
regional plans and in order to
access further courts to access
that particular funding
which I I think is probably the
right thing to do I think the
open question for us is well we
got this three million that
wasn't contingent right it was
the special appropriations that
we begun these programs and now
we are not going to be able to
continue those programs until
these regional plans are
finalized and that assumes that
the local community is on board
with continuing to fund it as a
priority in the regional plan so
it creates all you know it has
created some issue for us but
that's how we're thinking about
it and so will we are going to
try to work that fine line and
the regional planning where
we're hosting and convening but
we're also want to advocate for
the court programs to get
included into these plans but
again it's a small amount of
money rate in that
in those local regions so we are
thinking about that and then I I
did also want to mention senator
stewart to to anything to your
point also the executive
committee will also hear from
lfc at the next
executive meeting to walk
through all of these funding all
the different funding that
exists and where it is and what
it's conditioned on I may think
that's a very important piece of
the puzzle
under your location of treatment
think you choose justice yes so
yes I arm we know that there is
some under utilization of the
treatment courts and our
treatment court programs have
been like a.
Full scale review of all of the
treatment quarters and I know
that it was included in your
last performance measures update
that there were a few districts
that see a pretty low very low
utilization rate so we're gonna
be doing some work both at the
state and local level I think
it's a lot of education arm and
it's convening the public
defender and the district
attorneys to make sure that
everybody's on board with how we
can utilize those programs I
think that's where some of it
kind of false falls off so.
They won't thank you thank you
for that thank you mister
chairman.
I sent a nancy bad a spreadsheet
so you can send it out committee
it really goes and it did and
it's from elfc
we we have this very good staff
person and lfc that that worked
with everyone in the run up to
this bill we took six months
creating this bill before
january needing with everyone so
we're proud of it we want it to
work though
and one of the main issues for
all of us that created this bill
was that we don't have enough
behavioral treatment places i've
got a call from a constitution
at home desperate to put the
young woman in two treatment
program in these we don't have
any I said I know
so we put in to these or bill
their barrel were used any
buildings that are available we
have tons of commercial
buildings not being used in of
course in the meet the cities
but are focus was really to at
this five regions have those
regions worked together with the
courts with police with public
safety etc so that's the idea
behind it it's always
interesting to see how that idea
is working out so.
So for your upcoming regional
planning meeting that you've
data on july eleventh is that
for just one region or is this
the executive committee meeting
thank you for that question mr
turns energy stewart it's um so
it's not for a particular region
it is to get organized on the
state level to make sure that we
know how to sort of roll out the
planning at the regional level
so how do we make shirts like
this is these are off functional
things administrative things we
need to get the food covered we
need to fix make sure that
invitations are going out in the
appropriate way do you we want
an rsvp how are we going to do
the voting at the regional level
to identify the priorities of
those things so we have a member
of the executive committee will
be there and then we'll have
other state state colders as was
indicated in the update I cannot
work through those logistical
things before we then work at
the regional level
thank you for that and mr my
last question is your general
recommendations from esperance
letter that we got such a great
lead out so well thank you for
that is it identifying the
government in the early in the
process it's crucial so how are
you doing that and do you do you
think it's gonna be different
for the different regions and
who who was coming to the top as
the governmental end to day
that's going to be that go to
person.
Mr mr chair and senator stewart
I think so it's the
responsibility of the executive
committee to identify those
government entities
and so there's again this lake
does I need to have happened
before or after and we're really
wanting to look to that region
to kind of tell us who do you
think this is at the local level
and so there's been conversation
is this the local collaboratives
is this the health council is it
the counties rate
and we haven't yet got him to a
place where I think we've sold
the identified that but we are
going to recommend that to the
executive committee that we
identify those government entity
sooner rather than later because
we think they're going to be
intercalled to the planning
process and also the funding
structure and what they can do
alright so
the the car be out with those
experience with the ot as even
within one judicial district I
will have a county that is
really often running happy to do
it and he county but it's not so
we have to be very careful about
we would love them to self
select but they have to be
people that are going to execute
one thing nothing we talked
about is with these plans
there's gonna have to be some
uniform the dvds plans because
as much as people hate that.
If you leave it up to the
thirteen and then the regions
you will get quite a variety
some very good and some not so
good so
but talk to serve about there's
gotta be some kind of framework
where everybody it's got to look
something like this in order to
meet the standard for us to for
the executive committee to about
sellers
or so mister chairman how what
does that look like where are
you getting that from where is
the plan you talk about at
framework that looks the same
for everybody or is that
framework whose developing that.
Sarah one search of reliance for
first and then sir hopefully the
right answer I imagine that's
what the executive committee
of
a purpose of the executive
committees but sir I have mister
chair senator stewart
the health care authority has
offered to draft sort of a real
break for these regional for the
regional plan so we I don't
think we've seen that yet but I
know that they are actively
working on that and then that
that will be a starting place
for the executive committee and
I start wasn't really laid out
in the legislation so we're just
trying to work through that
alright i'm sure my time is I
have only started with my
questions but I there excited
about this and thank you for
stepping up so easily thank you
mister chairman.
Thank you mr chairman um thank
you cheap justice and your staff
for being here today
very much appreciate um this
discussion about planning
because you are talking my
language right now
so before I get into the the
regionalization questions I had
a question that I asked
yesterday
regarding um and I know the
judges cannot
mandate family involvement or
whatever that family unit is or
friends or whatever it is
do they encourage that I just
curious when they're doing going
through treatment
mr chair and representative for
a go
yes I think it depends on the on
the judge and what's available
in the district um I think it
may be a suggested to the
attorney is I I think it depends
but I I don't think there is
anything that prohibits the
judiciary from encouraging that
but we wouldn't go so far as to
say we're trying to recruit
people in that particular
program yeah and and and the
reason I asked out because you
know a lot of people that go
through treatment they need that
support system and I just anna
and sometimes that support
system doesn't exist but you
know I just curious about that
question what another additional
aspect of the someone is paying
for that if it's been a real
health even at addiction issues
so sometimes it is for example
neal a complication would be the
availability of resources if
insurance doesn't pay for a
medical doesn't pay for it.
Whether the resources had family
has
to pay for the
testimony app and david
evaluation thank you for that
and I realize that's a difficult
question but you know it's I
think that it's nice if we can
strongly encourage it somehow
that the families are bright
along without individual
with with regard kind of
shifting gears with regard
mister chairman with regard to
the regionalization question I
am so excited to hear about the
gis system that you guys are
working on I come from a
planning background we
established our g I s system and
planning in the nineties it
works very well there's a lot of
layering into it and the really
good thing about real gis system
and albuquerque as it's
connected to um the real time
crime center and so one of the
things there was a young lady
that spoke yesterday I think
center per checker about
security
and one of the questions that I
asked was how you know whether
the courts are in areas where
it's available if the courts the
the actual courthouse could be
connected to the gis system
would help with security if it
was connected to the real time
prime center so I just wanted to
sort of talk a little bit about
that and put that on the table
to think about especially in
areas where it is
connected I know like informing
ten they have the the license
plate readers and alva cricket
we have the real time crime
center I don't know what areas
what other areas of the state
have real time crime center but
I think they're being developed
and other areas so I would
mister chair strongly in courage
that that does connections be
made.
Um because it would help with
funding you know I mean since we
have such limited funding
in a lows connections may be
easily
made
the other thing was
I mean I think that
you know I wanted to mention
about your planning process
I know that planning takes time
and I appreciate that you guys
are doing that but the benefit
in the end is up.
You know I mean you can't.
You can't really count that cost
because that is something that
if you plan up front in the end
you're going to have something
that's much more beneficial to
the region so I highly encourage
that the one question that I had
yesterday mister chairman was
with on page four of the
the cast of detention and you
may not have that in front of
you but there was a mouth that
that was presented to us and I
can share that with you but
it showed all of our facilities
state wide
and some of those are getting so
a credited adult detention
facilities and some are juvenile
whose three juvenile
and one of the things that I was
thinking about when we talked
about this was sort of the
collaboration between where the
jails are located
where the police um you know are
located where they have their
facilities and then the
coordination between the mental
health coordination
facilities that may be planned
in the future
um so that there is sort of an
overlap of where these things
are so that are funding is more
efficient and so I just thought
i'd raise that that to you as
you're doing your planning
and do you have any comments
regarding that
mr chair represented brigo yes I
think you are appreciated
everything you said and i'm
absolutely I think um to the to
the last point you just made
this is why we propose these
integrated infrastructure
regions to the executive
committee so that things like
you're talking about rate what
are the main resources that we
spend the most amount of money
on in those local areas I mean
if you talk to folks in local
communities they all want a
particular we all want impatient
we need more beds we need all
those things but we obviously
are not going to be able to find
an every single location.
And so how does the state want
to see those things coordinated
and that would absolutely tie in
with jails.
Yeah in a in the reason that I
raised that mister chairman is
because I having worked in in
the government system for a long
time I know that people get
their little tustoms you know
and that I think sometimes we
have to reach across those
little typedoms and break down
those barriers
in order to be more effective
with our dollar itself those
with reasons I sort of read that
and boy do I wish I was only
planning committee
you guys are great
thank you for chair we heard
most of it's a lot of phone
calls
thank you mister chairman
represented a good example of
that probably the reaps so prior
ladle services are down in los
crucials too different
judicial districts that's how we
design it but there are
a lot of services I would guess
and she was no better price
provided done the most christian
just offer anything that any
assistance
thank you senate are ribson of
challenger
what nice to see you chief and
really appreciate
all the work you're doing in
this area and I just wanted to
acknowledge all the support we
got during the last time interim
session working on a house bill
for which marked into house bill
you know the competency work I
really you all really stepped up
and gave us a lot of good
support and guidance and
appreciate your willingness to
take on the challenge of the
intersection of behavioral
health and the judicial system
so first wanted to say that
circuit is i'm interested in
pretrial diversion and i'd like
to get a sense from you of how
well it's utilized you have you
know you know I don't expect
data at this point in time but
you know just overall what's
your sense about how well it's
being utilized.
Across thursday.
Thank you mr chairman and a
representative
you know I think it's probably
under utilized
the diversion aspects of pre
trial
it's something that we're still
working through and i'd like for
our experts dc boom to address
you if that's okay mr chair and
representative chamber she might
have some particulars to out
about the diverse the the actual
pre trial diversion programs if
that's okay with you
but i'm sure it's okay with the
chair
good morning mr chair good
morning representative channel
in regard to diversion we are
rolling out competency diversion
which is going well
in the pilot sites that we're
seeing as the chief just as
mentioned earlier we are
expecting an evaluation from you
and am to give more specific
data points around that
utilization in those outcomes
related to public safety in
residentials in particularly in
a broader sense with pre trial
diversion we are looking at
other ways to utilize pretend to
version programs are pre traffic
looks at the crooping in
navigators and that pre trial
space to really kind of blend in
some services voluntarily for
folks that might need connection
to services when they're in that
pre trial fees of their case so
there are certainly efforts and
within the arc in the judiciary
to enhance that and then of
course our partner is at the
district attorney's office have
preprosecution diversion in
other other programs that sort
of earlier in the process and
that we would love to see
increase utilization of as well
highlight sort of that point
which is critic or so
the courts jurisdiction is
involved when the charges are
filed so that is.
Then we set a trial
we can talk about cmrs court my
husband orders
but there's a stage before that
chair representative which is
pre prosecution and that is at
the discretion of the distortion
so there's an opportunity before
jurisdiction is voted in the
court
very good point um so where I
think i'd let me read back or
say back when I think I heard in
terms of the behavioral health
pre trial diversion we have some
pilots going in your youth view
that is a promising in terms of
how they're being utilized and
the like is out of fair a
statement I know it's fairly
early in the process
thank you mr chair think for the
question representative channel
yes and we are seeing some
promising information so far
most of it is at a small scale
because we are own paylet fees
and but we are seeing amsterdam
some really great engagement as
the chief just as mentioned at
the beginning of his
presentation we do have
graduates of that program it's a
little early press to tell if
those folks are received a
recitivating but we are starting
to look into that now that we've
had folks and completely the
program for six months were able
to pull that data and should
have that for you you know
should you need it at your next
meeting and but we are seeing am
some preliminary positive
outcomes then we are getting
some information from unm and
they're suggesting some tweaks
to our process that were eager
to implement once we have their
final report and we're happy to
share that with you as well
great and my recollection on
that politics it is that's in my
donor
that district are there any
other districts that are
participating I don't remember
yes and their donny and a county
is one of the paylet districts
so at the third judicial
district the fourth judicial
district so semi girl counting
what a little bit and mora and
we have the first judicial
district so santa fe county and
rearieba county and most almost
have sort of opted out that we'd
be happy to bring them back in
should they feel the need to
engage and their population of
folks where they're arrested in
competence he is raised as
pretty low.
But we're happy to have them and
then we have the twelfth so link
you know terror counties or are
payless sites and as the chief
just as mentioned i'm worried
contractor were in negotiation
conversation with metro court as
well so that would be the second
judicial district to be a fifth
site in the future for for
twenty six and you all have
embedded in these programs data
collection tracking and the like
so that we can a value eight
going forward how well they're
working and that kind of thing
and I own the chair appointment
out there on p's twenty five c
report that we got
yesterday there is some
discussion about the need for
data and these various programs
and like in some other things
are mr chair and chief if you
want comma would love to comment
on that about this I always
chair representative again
here's a basic
so
in its data and everybody is
very interested in data we get
request from the executive quite
frequently and we answer those
on
different matters so the data
did you ditched collects we have
a case management system so when
something is filed criminal case
was filed it goes into our case
management so some bad is our
database we don't collect data
we are not a
education institution so there
is some frustration I think from
the other branches like why
can't you produce.
Resident with some data well
it's not something we do we are
able to create this through the
usually through the help of you
and m
but.
For example in the area
pressure to tension and holds on
their on a new violation we are
creating codes and which were
able to track that for you
easier but it's not always as
easy to just produce the data we
usually do that through through
an educational institution or
ncs yes so I think I understand
what you're saying and actually
i've gotten some of that
feedback from people to that you
collect data for your purposes I
mean you're you're inputting
information
for your own business purposes
whatever they may be and
sometimes you're getting
requests for manipulation of
that data that's not part of you
know kind of how you do things
if that's kind of what I hear
you saying
that's correct a good examples
who sitting for our purposes of
treatment court that is
important because you're going
to want to know whether they
work right you're going to want
to know we're spending this
money is a keeping people out of
the system.
As an operator of a judicial
system
that's not my
direct concert
but it is something we now
attract us later would care
about that for sure correct
recent corrupt now on pre
prosecution diversion that's
solely within the hands of the
prosecutors the days essentially
they operate that system and my
understanding and behind this is
just a reaction from you is that
is not terribly well utilized
across the state is when you
react to that in agreement or
not.
Of
mancher vice chair we can ask or
I think they're generally under
you lies respectfully from my
position but I understand why
and let me give you the reason
is because.
There you know I will tell you
i've just been frank with you
we've had the as though like
i'll take the rest that i'm
going to put someone on pre
price.
Because it's kind of the
price correcting to do but if
that person goes sideways
I am gonna take a lot of heat
and so I get it
uhm my personal view not in
every district is that it is
generally on you lies and it's
an important step because it's
before their engage it before in
the weeks fell out of time I
expongement.
This is before something before
the record is made
you have a view different from
that
think you chief justice I do not
able to concur with your
interpretation of that that is
what we're receiving in hearing
as well
thank you to you I think it is
something we should look at one
of the rear I looked into this a
little bit you know in the
course of all these things we've
been asked to look out and one
of the feedbacks I got was often
if it is utilized they're asking
the defend the charge person to
give up the right for a trial so
they have to plead to whatever
charges are potentially filed
and then if they go sideways you
know with free rain in terms of
you know if they've just played
guilty so I I is that something
you've observed as well chief
share vice chair that was the
policy of a previous district
attorney in the state
I won't
to me that it's not a successful
policy because if they're going
to plead to it
I mean they could do that to
day's choice i'm not sure.
You know they can plead up to
the facts why we go on through
preprice but that has happened
yes well thank you anything's
again and really appreciate all
the work you're taking on on and
for the state and you know for
her residence who really need
these kinds of support systems
mister chair and three.
I have a few observations one is
them when I share with the
committee in the public
listening uh the discussion you
and I have very briefly but it's
one that I think I think is
important for me to renew which
is a I I appreciate the court
stepping into this and although
you're making some light of it
we did kind of dump executive
branch responsibilities on to
the judiciary and that's a
concern we're doing a lot of
that we're doing it would see
why if d we're doing it here
we're kind of saying the
executives not getting it done
so we're going to put this into
a different branch and i'm I
i've expressed the chief that
i'm i'm hoping this is a short
time short term solution to
maybe addressing an immediate
problem it's not getting
addressed adequately but but
it's not a long term a
restructuring of our separation
of powers in in our form of
government where we we have more
and more executive branch
functions being handled by
somebody else in the executive
branch that see if we have the c
ID example I give we assigned
his last session's
responsibilities to the attorney
general's office that we
arguably still within the
executive branch but see where
the different part of the
executive region we're just
where that were blurring lines
in that always caused me some
concern in in the reasons for
that I think are
a bundle in clearance of the
national level these days where
we see the the clash between the
judiciary the executive branch
uhm in in the legislative branch
at the national level seems
going to be sidelined in the
whole process there too the
whole game there seems to be
these days between the supreme
court and the executive branch
and the rest of us are going to
buy standard so I I caution when
my colleagues in I know I know
this is not directed to the
judiciary itself because we ask
you to do this and and I smile
because you you've used a kind
of uh thing the right mindset
which I appreciate you do you
don't this would good good humor
good grace and stepping up to
the task way I do appreciate
that but I think I think we
shouldn't get used to it is I
think what we're really saying
here do the um part of the
reasons for that of course it's
it's often times we have this
clash between what what happens
when we disagree.
The executive branch within
itself were legislated branch
and of the judiciaries in the
game it's hard to be the empire
at the same time I know that the
chief is still coaching the so
coaching basketball is at what
it is I think
I retire it after I want the
city championship like
hmm that's a nice plug
to better how many cases in
front of you right now but but
the
yeah the
I I think you understand because
we've been there before and even
this again i've been part of
lawsuits involving legislature
versus executive and sort of we
come to the judiciary to settle
the issues we this last year had
issues between the judiciary and
the legislative uh over some of
the benefits to staff and so
it's important I think to keep
those lanes and and keep those
rules separate as much as we can
and and also I think it's
important to recognize that by
ask you to take on all these
additional executive branch
responsibilities that's time
that you don't have them to
write those decisions and into
and to do the other work that's
already very demanding on you
and I know you're going to step
up and give it the additional
time in the men on you but
there's only so many hours in
the day and there's only so much
work you can get then so it
seems inevitable to me that by
asking all the stand up of
behavioral health system to a
large agree that's going to
detract from the work that
you've already historically in
constitutionally have been been
required to do
am I
and and I have my sense from
talking to you cheapest that you
you see that the same way that
you see this is a temporary
fixed to out on immediate
problem that we've asked you to
step into and I appreciate that
I am doing it what we have you I
think addressed a couple of
issues were a quick I I would
commend members to
something that i've done and I
should have put it in your
materials which was your state
of the state I guess it's not
really state of the state but
your your address to the
legislature this last session
I assumed that was a written
speech er chief may have wing
parts of it but I think for the
most part it was a written
speech.
And and be helpful for us to
have that I think we can get
that from you because I thought
it was very thoughtful and you
covered a lot of lot of areas
that I think are of interest to
many of us one of the areas that
you touched on briefly in your
speech to the legislature was
the issue pretend attention
and you definitely did not wait
into the political part of that
discussion but I think you are
so gave the legislature some
direction on where the law
intersects with some of those
initiatives politically in a I
appreciate then I think be good
for the members of the committee
to read back over some of those
comments and think about them a
little bit some of us
issue predraging doesn't seem to
go away seems to come up
repeatedly whenever there's a
bad outcome whenever there's
somebody who is out
there something terrible that
happens in a na acknowledge that
ever whenever that happens then
we hear all the voices in the
press conferences we need
prechild attention but but I
thought your comments to the
load teacher were were helpful
very helpful in an act I think
in particular because you
focused those comments on the
new mexico constitution which is
different in the federal
constitution we always hear the
other feds can do this vets can
do
they have a different they're
operating under a different
constitutional framework then we
are at the state level and and I
also you didn't again I said you
did this deathly you didn't say
as much but I I have a little
doubt you're better not reacting
this at all i've very little
doubted and we were to nack
something like that to be struck
down by the supreme court here
in your school immediately look
at that face that's a poker face
research but no no no no comment
on that but I I have all the
confidence in the world that
we're that would just be an
exercise for the for the cameras
right on an
suppress
I do I do think it's important
that them sometimes in the end
and we go back and revisit
though the issue pre trial
attention from the standpoint of
the gps information and data I
know that that was a big issue
for the legislature about the
sharing of that information the
gpa state and the effectiveness
of that.
I appreciate justice we hill I
think it was really his
leadership but it may be shared
with others stepping in to point
out the fact that for a while
they're my recollection and for
newer members we had g PS had
individuals we released on their
own regard to since using gps uh
ankle bracelets I guess is the
the common pilots but we weren't
really monitoring the
information or is it pay
recollection as we weren't
monitoring it on weekends or
after five o'clock which was in
kind of like well we were going
to do bad stuff just do it on
saturday and we're sunday
mornings is a good time to and
and I I want to commend the
judiciary I think the judiciary
pointed out the problem
in and I think try to address it
with some of its rule making
process with some legislative
back and forth I think on that
too but that's where I think
there's some overlap between her
roles right which you all are
doing what we're doing in a I
want to make sure that that
remains in effective system
because two of the terms of I
read the stories about somebody
cuts off their ankle bracelet
there is something bad but I do
want to make sure we're
monitoring that information and
for my colleagues the issue that
we addressed in the last year or
two and I think we need to
continue addressing is how much
of that information belongs to
the judiciary and how much that
information belongs to maybe law
enforcement and that may be an
overs- overly simplistic way of
of seeing it but we we we had
that data and my recollection of
the time was that the judicial
branch was taken the position
that that information was really
belonged to perhaps probation
per old uh parts of the court's
function and law enforcement
wanted it and I I think the
legislature stepped in I think
with the legislation we pass and
we want that information be
freely shared with law
enforcement when it comes down
to crime fighting right and and
I think that's them I can't go I
mean we may when I was coming on
that chief I kind of get the
sense you do.
Just added
one everything i've said or
really no I just want to make
sure yeah yeah so let's start
with two percent well let's
start with them communication
with between the branch
government I I there's a natural
tension between the brouches
based on our constitutional
structure i've discovered that
in the last sixty days and you
come to realize that just a
natural part of it
and that's ok right the problem
is it if it if the tension
prohibits
any advancement of what the
status trying to do I will tell
you would be over a health I
will be honest I said this at
the judiciary and when they
signed the bill I think it was a
good example of the branch is
getting together trying to solve
an issue in which we could have
stayed in our lane to judiciary
could have said
not touching it the executive
could have said to stay out of
my business and let's see
trickers said what we're gonna
draft the last changing
everything so people got
together and try to work it out
health care authority has been a
very good partner so far in this
process
will continue as I told you
before to press them to fulfill
their obligations to make sure.
They are accountable to you and
not us
so I think that model has
hopefully
worked out
we continue to evaluate our own
systems you talked about
precharge attention you're
correct we we believe that
this is an area which i'll see
generally is as matter which is
left to the judiciary but there
are problems with it in those
who raised by the leds sector
one of them was.
What do you guys do and when we
have a mild and release and they
pick up a new charge
right
and we address had in rule we
just talked about the city
converges relating to we now
have a system where if an
individual picks up a new charge
they are held and tell that
original core where they
violated that charge can see
that defendant we made that
change it was large part based
on the feedback of the policy
makers that said this is an
issue so
as chief I I don't see really an
issue with this with this being
brought to our attention by the
legislative executive on gps
again it's a learning experience
for the court as well we've
quite frankly see sometimes an
overreliance on gps and it ties
into this case management
ordered that maybe you heard
about yesterday the these
individuals are released on gps
in their own the community with
an ankle bracelet.
And everybody's worried about
what they're doing out there
it's important to bring them the
trial on the timely basis on
those charges and then a jury
can decide whether
that individuals guilt you're
not the the two things that
combined is if they're out on
two ps and it takes in one
district where we're about to
implement the keys management
order a year to bring that
individual trial those two
things are not acceptable.
So we are continuing to revise
our application of of gps i'm
aware of
the data question which is a
valid question
we won't be sure that data is
available to you and at the same
time we are not
identifying a
witness where a call defendant
will know where that individual
is that that's attention we have
on gps but
we continue to evaluate our or
application in use of gps would
I appreciate that the the risk
is which I think you're
describing the risk of that
information being used wrongly
um and at the same time the
legislature of course important
to us to know how how that
system is working and how many
individuals are are abusing it
and whether that remains in
effective way of pretty
attention to release you're
right and what would discovery
chair is if it and it's part of
training judges if you lean to
heavily on gps and they're not
being brought to trial to your
your actually setting those
individuals up for failure
because you're holding something
over them for a very long time
and and and they're
if the mistake is made now they
violated their conditions of
release so we train our judges
you know if you're gonna if it
just can be a broad conditions
are release you gotta be real
careful with that because you
may be saving that defending up
and you're not really
serving the public safety side
of it you're actually setting
them up for failure and when and
when you said the there may be a
over over utilization of the g
PS that's what you're referring
to there
are blast a couple interest
quick
the chair channel talked about
the pretrial did version
programs this was not part of
anybody's presentation this
publication that's in front of
all of you but I thought it was
so well done and important and
so full of data that I asked the
staff to make sure i'll have you
have it in.
Um in in represent channel and I
would just point out there's an
entire section here on the
underutilization really of the
pretrial diversion programs
what's interesting at least the
level ceased findings and
analysis is that the the program
is being offered but that a
fewer and fewer defendants are
taking advantage of that and i'm
looking back to the back at
money and been in others and
that's probably a an answer
question of presentation for
somebody else in a different and
later time but but i'm i'm i'm
changed to reps of challenge
questions in with you here and
at least the lfc data is that
the programs existent are
offered and defendants are
increasingly not excepting that
option we should ask themselves
why because I think we all
recognize it's it's pretty the
data suggested it's very
effective it's just being in in
a habiling theories about why
that may be the case probably
not and for this this program
the the other interesting thing
that you point out cheap is
I think it's important for us to
recognize too that a district
attorney may not want to pursue
a pretend to version program
because of that individual I
think to use your word goes
sideways I think we should
term chief if that individuals
offer to diversion program in
the neighborhood commit another
crime may be a horrific roam the
district attorney is going to
bear a political consequence to
that and that's interesting to
me because we talked a little.
The tools we give them which
means they file up pretrial
detention motion on every case
right because at least then they
can say I tried I file the
motion they try to hold them a
public and the judge said no and
so I get to wash my hands about
in I can't have a **** horton
moment in my future and
it's it's interim to me that we
have that we have thirteen at
least thirteen district
attorneys I i'm learning that we
have maybe fourteen brilliant
cause we've got one district for
members that has got two parts
to it in that's kind of
interesting these days and I
won't talk too much about that
with the chief aircus he's going
to get called into that one too
but we we've defunded I guess
one of the officers of one of
the days in our own political
uh process right so
in amazing how political that's
the the whole day role in in
criminal justices as well too so
that the last point that i'll
just make is I want to let the
members know and and I think
it's important that the chief
and I and all it was talk a
little bit potentially we have
these thirteen judicial
districts in the state but the
allocation of resources is
really not tracking with the
case look
in from my perspective and so
that's there should be
surprisingly but we have certain
of those judicial districts that
have very low case loads uh by
comparison to others and it were
running open efficient
government we should be
recognizing that there there's a
misallocation of the resources
that we just say there's
thirteen districts are going to
treat them somewhat equal each
when i'm having its own day or
one of them having two days etc
reach of them having a district
court judge etc and in the
solution to me seems pretty
obvious it's a big it's a big
issue
but it shouldn't be which is
maybe we should be looking at
redrawing the boundaries and
districts here of the thirteen
and maybe we should be maybe
consolidating districts or maybe
we don't need thirteen districts
that's always a a third rail I
think in politics because then
somebody's gonna say well which
judges are going to cease to
exist and what which district
attorney's officers are going to
sister exists which.
Which districts don't need a
full time court staff and a full
court boy though all of that's
political
poison I think information may
be been suggested raise but it's
common sense to me I don't when
we've got districts were very
low case lots and others
overwhelmed with a case loaded
and it seemed to me that it
would be responsible for us to
be open to that discussion cheap
you want to you want to have any
comment at all in that
suggestion
and our particular suggestion
i'll prefer I I will say
you are correct that there is
differences in
mischair in case loads in in
districts there is a larger
discrepancy in magistrate courts
are your structures to create
mad street according to every
single county
or state is shifted quite a bit
from direct original design
uh we try and accommodate the
resource issue we have a unified
budget system in the judiciary
so you're here a lot about don't
mess with the unified budget.
Which I think frustrates
legislators a lot that I
understand but it's a way in
which we can track.
The case loads by district and
make sure that when they go to
our budget committee that they
are asking for resources
consistent with their work load
dfe and lfc also has access to
that information to when you're
making the appropriation to
decision
you can look at the thirteenth
for example a growing community
or los crucism and say they need
additional debt they need
digital resources based on their
case
thank you well but long think
you're cheap anyone else with
last thoughts your comments
appreciate you come and all this
way and hope you and your staff
get a chance to enjoy them
beautiful setting in again thank
you for being here today thank
you chair thank you members and
I do hope you'll be able to can
you get us your written
comments to speech that get that
many we'll distribute that
doesn't work thank you thank you
we have our last presentation
coming up as we do that let me
take the opportunity to think
our staff
acoustics microphones a great
job
in in all of you nancy in the
everyone who is behind us who
packs up brings all of this here
i'm sure it's no small towns to
get on placard scenario
microphones and everything that
gets set up and done to to be on
the road like this but I I hope
the committee feels that it was
a useful opportunity to come up
here
the other thing that I would
like to do is i'd like to take a
moment we have a couple of law
enforcement officers in the back
of the room which you gentlemen
would you stand up real quickly
and come forward and introduce
yourself to us tell us who
you're here who you're here
representing and
come on up
we will not we want to thank you
we want to recognize you we also
have from the law schools as
police department
eric unit or in the common up
you're just real quick
introduce yourself to the
committee not on our agenda but
it's I think it's important that
you're here.
Thank you very much.
Thank you imagination again we
honor your service a great deal
I I trust that most of my
colleagues behave last night so
you all didn't have too much
trouble
the the the restaurant in the
bar closed down at nine so I
think that and and and I think
your way was in bed by seven so
so this is a good group for you
to have
for it very well very well
behave this is not your usual
ski ski see are you guys so you
guys on a duty here during the
case isn't your yeah that's a
different group i'm sure so
thank you in officer from las
cruises I want to take a moment
to recognize two year here you
told me a bit ago are with the
senator brand new you're here on
behalf of the chief of police
alas cruises and a appreciate
you being here III think it's
important to point out something
that the chief of police last
crisis
story in you
are really trying to do
something that I think is
exemplary which is to involve
law enforcement at this process
of the legislative process in
the community working with the
community very closely if you
want to learn how to run a
police department watch what
last chris has been doing the
last couple of years because
they're doing it right and
that's a message to all the rest
of them so and thank you for
being here observed telstra's
required your position in your.
The bill
i'm sorry what was that again
sorry distracted.
You in there for how on
the in center brantley's been
good about recognizer from time
to time that you all suffer to
the terrible loss
one force an officer in the line
of duty responding to a
relatively seemingly
inaucuous response right a
homeless person I think
transparency on property and in
the end of costing him his life
so fair summary.
Well we appreciate that and
please think the chief and the
department for having you here.
Um the the last topic on her
agenda I think yeah before we
have a little bit of free time
in and be done on time
concerns legislation that you're
you're being passed out this is
what was how judiciary coming
substitute for house bill sixty
eight
uhm I can't reserve a
representative of january
chairing at the time or was this
before you
what was he here this was passed
there
okay alright although I just
want to give the committee a
little bit a background and and
why this is on your agenda this
subject has been in the news of
late
there has been seemingly some
very public disagreement between
the role of dps in the law
enforcement certification board
and enforcement boards and so
i've asked because of that.
Seemingly public controversy but
also maybe a a question about
whether the the legislatures
intentions and enactment are
being given force it affect you
i'll hear me talk about that
yesterday this remains a big
subject from your great deal
which is we we spent a lot of
time and attention we're going
to pass a lot to do this are
going to pass a lot of do that
we pass a lot and then when the
people who are subject to law
decided to essentially ignore it
seemingly sometimes there's no
consequence at all and then as I
said yesterday I have to ask
myself where my going to have
something better to do than past
laws that everybody then ignores
so this was a bill this was an
omnibus bill looks like it's a
lot of information in here but I
thought it would be useful for
you all to have this again we
called it the crime home
neighbors at the time we we put
this together in the senate
judiciary committee but largely
with a lot of input from house
bills at the time we took a lot
of house legislation in the past
we put him into one on the best
bill and and I think it'll be
good because of the time to
legislature's accuse of not
doing anything on crime or or or
do nothing or or whatever it may
be this was a a well a great it
was it you're right it came back
as a house to be house built so
in any bet this was a this was a
big effort and remember putting
a lot of staff together from
sent it finance committee senate
judiciary committee and house
judiciary committee as well so
it's a good opportunity to hope
you'll take this home hope you
will be refreshed in memory
about what was a very big effort
but but in this very long
complicated bill was a reforms
that were addressed to uh law
enforcement certification
process on oversight this this
all came about about the time
that we were looking at the
civil rights act it was the it
was a george george white period
is really what it can came down
to and we were living that is a
country in his nation and and
there was some concern about the
training of law enforcement and
certification and and so whistle
with that background that's the
subject that's in front of us
today.
It seems unresolved to me at
this point time and very much
unresolved despite this
legislation so center masters
you were the prime sponsor of
this part of the bill and again
again this this this bill was a
lot of pieces the bills that
were open together one but this
was this was kind of your part
of that that legislation and so
I bought you to come and present
a little bit of that history and
where it stands today center
masters
thank you very much mister
chairman members were here in
beautiful tell ski valley at the
black hotel i'm joined with the
joined by a gillian ball who's a
member of the certification
board and it's a july first
twenty twenty five were here in
ccj economist mister chairman
economists they get to get the
incentives rate get the
incentives rate political
scientists say get the
institutions rate and we are
trying our best to get the
institution right as it released
to certification of police
officers initial certification
but also as a result of
misconduct allegations when to
suspend or even revoke a police
officer sortification and that
was the the prospects of the
certification board as you
mentioned
up
mister ployd was murdered in
that I think june may or june of
twenty twenty in twenty twenty
one
george winner center georgia
when your
did senate bill three seventy
five three seventy five was the
president was brought to us by
the municipal league and the
leadership of age fourteen that
leadership of the midst
on the house side then
representative bill reaman
myself did house built two
eighty six some of the
provisions of hospital to eighty
six were incorporated into three
seventy five it passed at what
was vetoed by the chief
executive in twenty twenty one
in twenty twenty two under your
leadership mister chairman and
and senate finance in a
judiciary and eighty five
percent roughly of senator bill
three seventy five in twenty
twenty one was.
Put into the house on the best
crime bill house bill sixty
eight and that's the document
that was passed out moments ago
on the right hand corner it says
you know how she shared
committee house bill for sixty
eight so it became law in twenty
twenty two however what was
unique about the provisions the
police provisions and in
hospital sixty eight is then
going to affect child july first
of twenty twenty three was very
unique we passed allow that gave
the executive eighteen months to
get itself organized we also in
twenty twenty three and if I
fight could ask the stuff if we
have a cynical nineteen if they
could pass that out as well we
did senate bill nineteen which I
was the chief sponsor in twenty
twenty three which did
amendments to house bill sixty
eight so we did something unique
as well where we amended an
existing statute that wasn't
lawyer
and so the provisions of
hospital sixty eight incidental
nineteen became law july first
of twenty twenty three and they
did the following
the what was what existed before
mister chairman uh was the law
enforcement academy the law
enforcement academy director
which was under the governor and
then the law enforcement academy
board which was chaired by the
attorney general the lawn for
some academy director was under
the uh
was under the board but we did
as we put the lawn force from an
academy in this director
directly under dps the law
enforcement academy trained
police officers and also dealt
with the sort of cation of
police officers what we did is
we made the lawn forcement
academy strictly training entity
and we created two new entities
the there are training standards
the standards and trainings
council which is
administratively attached to the
law enforcement academy and then
the law enforcement
certification board which kind
of like the way the bar deals
with law licenses you can pass
law school.
That is a make you a lawyer you
need to be certified by the bar
under current law you can pass
the law enforcement academy
better to make you a police
officer you have to be certified
by the certification boards on
page two mister chairman the the
duties are powers and duties of
the board primarily to deny
suspend or revoke a professional
license
oh thank you thank you among
this this document here the
power point
so on page two the powers and
duties of the board is primarily
to deny
initially deny a certification
suspend or revoke a police
officer's certification unlike
other professions hundred
percent of police officers are
government employees they're
granted a license to practice
that profession
and you need
you need to be licensed by the
certification board the
certification board is also a
pop empowered with conducting
investigations including
administering old superior
witnesses or records and other
evidence primarily the board
appoints a chief executive
officer to run the agency
and the chief executive officer
is is essentially appointed by
the board and runs the agency
and carries out its functions
and higher staff the board is
also charged with adopting and
publishing and filing its rules
in accordance with the state
rules act currently the old law
enforcement academy rules are
still in effect because the rule
making process has not been
completed and then of course to
issue or renew certifications to
the graduates who not only pass
the academy but also
you meet the qualifications of a
police officer the the
qualifications to be a cop
basically or and they're not in
the power point we're basically
twenty one years old you could
be a citizen or under current
lot just today july first you
can also be a legal permanent
resident uh uh whose whose
citizen of or rather a
residential mexico you need a
driver license.
Can't have any felonies within
three years you cannot have the
following misdemeanors again
assault theft d w or a crime of
moral two per two that those
magic words are still in statute
you cannot have been a rest you
can not have been disonly
dishonourably discharged from
the military and then obviously
you need a the physical health
in psychological health to to be
to be a police officer the
certification board is appointed
by the governor are with the
consent to the senate they're
these their staggered five year
terms and their own page three
and they're very prescriptive or
very descriptive rather as to
who conserve and so usually
mister chairman when we do
boards we have the the proterm
the minority leaders the speaker
that governor the supreme court
I think that's the best way to
do it I would ask ourselves if
we want to do it that way
because it's so descriptive it's
it's easier for one person to
make the appointments the
governor makes all the
appointments and it includes a
district court judge who chairs
the board a municipal police
officer a sheriff state police
officer or retired tribal police
officer or retired
telecommunicator a lawyer a
plaintiff's lawyer a defense
lawyer who's defended government
agencies and civil rights claims
criminal defense lawyer employed
by the public definite
department of professor of
criminal justice and then I got
all fashion citizen at large
police officers in addition to
up
to be a police officer
you have to have four hundred
hours of essentially basic
training four hundred hours of
basic law enforcement training
by a certified regional law
enforcement training center
there's the law enforcement
academy and sanity some of the
bigger departments have their
own training AP d berliel county
are santa fe last crucials up
but some of the smaller towns
and agencies are go to a
certified regional training
center primarily the law
enforcement academy.
In sanity
and so when you're a police
officer and you're certified you
need forty hours of of
additional education every two
years so lawyers need twelve
hours of clease continuing legal
education we need twelve hours a
year police officers need forty
hours every twenty four months
and if this is referred to as in
service law enforcement training
so a minimum of forty hours of
up academic instructions during
the twenty four hour period each
police officer sell provide
proof of that in service
training to their agency into
the law enforcement academy
director if you fail to do the
insurface training or failed
failure or fail to report proof
of your in service training you
could get your license suspend
you could get your up your
certification suspended agencies
that fail to report in service
training a requirements could
get a could lose or not lose but
could not be funded from the law
enforcement protection funds so
we're trying to create the
incentives for the individual
officer and the agency are to
ensure that every police officer
in the state receives their in
service training so it took a
certification can be reinstated
say somebody lapsed in their
training they catch up there
certification gets reinstated
and of course the certification
board at can audit law
enforcement training compliance
are in statute now these are
administratively attached
agencies and so on page for nine
dash one dash seven this is the
laws it relates to
administratively attached
agencies it's been the law since
nineteen seventy seven during
the reorganization under the
governor upon aka and a and an
agency attached to a department
for administrative purposes only
shall exercise its functions
independently of the department
and without approval or control
of the department they're
independent why are they
administratively attached while
they submit their budgets
through the department they
submit reports through the
department.
The department if mutually
agreed does some budgeting
record keeping relative
administrative and clerical
assistance
that department includes in its
budgetary request
submitted and without change the
eight the administrative
attached agency's budget and so
some of the examples is like the
the the border the the border
authorities administrative test
to the department of economy
development uhm
the public defender department
is administratively attached to
the courts so there's about
there's many administratively
attached agencies but here's
what we did mister chairman in
senate bill nineteen and I take
full responsibility as the prime
sponsor visa the magic words and
statute the law enforcement
certification board is
established and administratively
attached to the department of
public safety
it's there should be a period
there and there should be no
other words but in our infinite
wisdom who put it comma and we
wrote and the department shall
provide administrative services
for the board and the law
enforcement certification
office.
The standards and training
council there's a similar
deliver the new mexico law
enforcement standards and
training council is created and
administratively attached to the
new mescal law enforcement
academy of the department of
public safety and there should
have been a period instead we
wrote comma which shall provide
staff support for the council
one is I don't know if we can
attach I was told it that's what
we do but why do we attach it to
a division within a department
and not the department itself
and those are just things to
ponder as we approach the thirty
day session so so what happened
was determined what happened as
the secretary of the department
of public safety
and the
and the ceo of the certification
board
had a disagreement as to
what the structure was and so
it's my understanding that the
sector of deprivative public
safely felt that the imployees
of the certification board were
employees of dps
and that the
somehow was their boss but that
they
so for for example there's
there's personal codes and so an
administrative department say
it's six hundred and one and a
ministry with a task agency is
is appointed six hundred and two
and that's the way we budget in
house bill too that a prominent
public safety didn't do that the
f a didn't do that and so
because last year we we
appropriated to these agencies
this year we just appropriate a
dps so that further instruments
this notion that these offices
are part of dps and they're not
that is not the intent
it is not the intent these are
should be independent agencies
doing their respective jobs and
then just to wrap it up as
chairman the certification board
has twelve ftes and house bill
two they only have three
employees
there's nine vacancies nine make
it sees doing this important
work.
Dealing with missed conduct
allegations
and then of course the standards
and training council is
built has has vacancies and keep
in mind there is no co right now
there is no c o and this
document was provided by d PS
they call it an executive
director but in statute it's the
ceo and then there's no
director of the treatment
standards and training council
either and then as it relates to
uh the certification for
composition I highlighted the
word district we need to take
that word out it in my pin it
should should just say retired
judge because
we there's no district court
judge retired that has been
appointed so the certification
work does not have a chair
there's two volunteers that are
co chairing and we commend them
for that they're coming up with
their rule making as we speak
but there is some more drama
mister chairman as a relates to
citizen complaints somehow
within the law enforcement
community
and within certain elements of
this board they have come up
with this and with all the
respect they have come up with
this ridiculous notion that he
citizen cannot file
a complaint
to me it's shocking that a
citizen cannot petition its own
government per their first
amendment rights to deal with a
government issued license for a
government employee to carry out
very powerful and very important
functions of the of the state so
so that's a dialog that's
happening now I believe that the
board is seeking an attorney
general opinion citizen
complaints have always been part
of the process
through the law enforcement
academy but now this new board
and and there's reasons there's
there's reasonable reasons for
these for these opinions two of
the citizen complaints it it's
argued that they were
politically motivated the
the city counts are from up.
From alba kriki council louis
anxious former police officer
filed a citizens complaint
regarding chief harold medina
and then one of the standard and
training councils
members failed a citizens
complaint regarding sectory
bowie and and his
conduct with regards to being a
sector not really with regards
to being a police officer so
there is reasons there's
reasonable interpretations but
we need to get the institutions
right we need to clarify this
get these agencies fully fully
operational in doing their
functions within
within a house that statoria
intent so with that I will turn
over to miss julian balls who is
a member of the certification
board
good morning I am here because
our primarily I was the only
person who was available to meet
with you guys are advised chair
codi wages is in hubs i'd today
and tomorrow I want to talk
about first two of the big
issues that we are facing as
members of the board and then
some of the things that we have
accomplished
now there were eleven members of
the board but since our first
meeting which occurred the fall
of twenty twenty three so not
yet two years ago we've only had
ten members because the chairman
who was supposed to be a red
higher district court judge has
never been appointed to the
position.
So we have great infusiastic
volunteers on this board i'm all
excited to be a part of their
sport and one of the reasons why
is when I was first reported I
did some research looking at
other boards like this in other
states
across the united states there
isn't any we're the first and
this is one of the reasons why I
chose new mexico to call my home
and moved here haven't been here
for a generation but I chose new
mexico because of these exciting
things you guys think outside
the box the populist nature of
the government
listening to
people just off the street
that's why i'm here and that's
why people are very excited to
be on this board
which is ab includes members of
law enforcement as well as
adones.
Um and
we are so have I should point
out a public safety to tell
communicator on the board and a
hard professor
of an
one college
so it is in very diverse but
everybody on the board right now
with the exception of one person
has full time paying jobs where
are volunteers so we're doing
this on the weekend
without that chair who was
supposed to be retired it's a
none of us can take on the the
role of administrative support
our rate
so consistently and consensus
is difficult to achieve with a
board made up a volunteers all
of whom have a full time chat.
The
second.
Uhm issue that I want to address
is that
the board
has mere met for the first time
that quite two years ago but
we've only had a ceo for five
and a half months of those two
years
and
um
the other times we have been
assisted by the law enforcement
academy director
and so haven't had our own
person the sea ceo during his
ten year
hired no staff
so their vacancy is that we face
right now or critical
currently
the I gotta say the
administrative attachment is
very helpful right now because
as a small board we don't have
around hr we don't have our own
fiscal so it's very useful to be
able to use dps and say hey can
you post these positions
currently we have posted a ceo
position and you guys i've sat
here for two days listening to
everyone talking about how
horrible it is to hire
qualified individuals and were
facing that part because the
main law enforcement academy in
the offices are insane effect
which are is has the highest
cost of living in new mexico so
we have had that ceo position
posted for several months
unfortunately
the training council are so last
it's ceo so that's posted as
well as well as the general
council for dps so we're all
competing for the same.
Applicant pool we've decided to
take that search national and
expand the position this
position is not your it it's not
like the council ceo position
you need expertise in
management of course legislator
functions working with a
volunteer board which I can tell
you
right
you need law enforcement
experience legal experience it
is a very diverse and exciting
position for the right person so
we've decided to take that
national if that does not draw
an enough applications than will
consider taking a next step
which would be hiring a head
hand or something like that
also posted immediately by the
ho depot would have dps is the
position of office administrator
we need an investigator yet
yesterday and a complaints
officer slash staff person now
the organizational structure is
under review by the board I had
to repurpose the positions and
to better meet the means of the
the board in the sport over our
mission but we can't do that
until we get that our main
mission is to go through these
LA nineties
to review the investigation and
two determined weather law
enforcement certification needs
to be revoked spended discipline
rate so we have to get these
core positions felt first but
for a week on the huge task.
Of reorganization over the
structure of our staff forgive
me for interrupting but can they
have you try and summarise a bit
for us to be allowed enough time
for questioning at the case
thank you
that is our two main problems
that we're fac right now
and that
was it we stand ready for
questions right thank you
hands for those who have
questions rips of channel.
Others anyone else with them
alright robert recognized
repeated channel a bit will draw
some others represent chair
thank you mister chair and thank
you presenters this question is
maybe directed at you mess ball
but obviously i'm senator my
assistance welcome to chime in
I appreciate your summary of
your issues one of which is
obviously
the lack of staff or you know a
deficiency you know the lack of
a full staff and also a lack of
a full board I get there
but you know I guess what I what
prompted my interest in this
particular topic i'm very
pleased we're having an on our
agenda today is um concerns that
i've been hearing from our
constituents my constituency is
the perceived lack of
independence of the board a
certification board in
particular not for lack of
trying on behalf of the former
terminated ceo but for
impediments that have been
brought put up by dps and others
and I guess I would like some
comment on that
misball if you feel comfortable
and certainly use senator my
estimates might have an opinion
I know you attended the last
meeting which I watched a little
bit of as well so that's my
first question for you.
I I imagine you anticipated this
this is not like a novel idea
the.
I I
miss chairman and share
representative chamber
I guess what I would have to say
is i'm not
I don't see the code appendance
between the two I don't see the
influence that
dps
has had on the board
the
mission at the board we
have to have the cooperation of
law enforcement in order for
them to file the LA nineties
right it provides an offer ramp
to the thing blue line it gets
most of our officers wait and
nobody wants to see a bad law
enforcement officer but before
this creation had the board and
I I think sender my estimates
can agree then you had to fight
against your own
fellow officer to bring this to
the attention that
and this provides an awful ramp
by f
law enforcement does not trust
the law enforcement
certification board to be
independent and to do their
review the investigation
materials that have been
provided by the law enforcement
agency and to make it
independent decision than your
constantly pushing for them to
report
on the la ninety
so
the.
At the influence of dps I have
to say in my opinion as a board
member has been
inflated by the press
rely and I had to say is really
such thing as bad press this is
a new board and a new
relationship and this
questioning in a now is it I
think it's great it it tweaks
the board it at lets us know
what direction to take this
thank you thank you madame chair
thank you
I think a couple things what is
this could be a national model
have done correctly
we can enhance the
professionalism
and the recruitment of police
officer state why this is a
great state to be a police ups
are in.
Uhm at the at the very least we
need to remove the highlighted
wording with reverse to
administratively attached agency
or let's administrate taxes
somewhere else
take it away from dps and can
and because
because it's my understanding
that that it's a tough place to
work because of these
this tension of this
you know there I say toxic
situation in which folks have a
differing opinion as to whose
whose whose parts thank you
okay so just to
from my reaction to summarize
what I believe I heard from
those two statements senator
might myers that you point to
this language thereby and trying
there is a problem with it
in the problem that I didn't
hear really well articulated in
the in the discussion here is
there is a perception that
because d PS has taken the
position that although they
don't hire and fire the CEO they
hire and fire anyone who is
hired to support the
certification board and buy
inference that impacts the
ability of the co to act
independently in terms of thank
you and did I get that right
some correct mr children are
reserved channel that is correct
and if dps today treated the law
enforcement it got to be board
as a one hundred percent
independent agency nobody would
so everything would be awesome
that would be ideal
thank you cuz I was a little
concerned I wasn't understanding
what your point what senator
earlier on and I totally get
what you're coming from
thank you for that just one
other point I get the impression
having spoken with um you know
my constituents and the like on
this particular point about is
administrative attachment.
That it may not be isolated to
this particular board that it
appears there are we have other
boards in that we have created
where there is something where
there's an administrative
attachment in the belief of
those departments is they
actually control the hiring a
firing and so on and so forth so
this came up in the context of
that I think that really is
bored there is an in minute so I
think maybe we need to be
looking so broadly at what the
definition mr chair is of
administrative attachment in
make sure we we have a clear
understanding and it's clear and
all of our statutes mister
mister driven revenue channel
manager that no excellent
excellent observation excellent
point I spoke in with the
leadership of a list live
council to avoid the surprised
language and and i'm gonna go
through a we did it but we did
it twice the session we did it
with the performing art center
moving it from the state fair to
cultural affairs we added some
magic words in there and then
with regards to the
administratively attached agency
to the attorney general's office
with regards to child welfare
we we convoluted the word so we
should just say administratively
attached to the department
pursuing two
about return to the law and that
it's all it should say thank you
thank you message.
Representative.
Thank you message here and thank
you senator for the
clarification on the highlighted
words in particular being some
of the changes I was also
wondering
senator if something you pointed
out earlier
their problem with everyday
people binging question as to
whether or not they can file a
complaint and I was wondering if
that might be part of the
changes that you were looking
for as well.
Thank you mr chairman
representative and I have not
great point we if you'll notice
in in this document
this two page document here this
is actually the statute dealing
with certification board this is
current law we didn't put any
descriptive language in
denying revoking or suspending
licenses that that is a police
officer function that is under
rule and that is given the
parameters of that profession
the words and statute are just
cause someone could get their
license suspended revoked or
denied for just cause under
current law and current rules so
we don't want to micro manage
that aspect of the situation
however this this reference to a
la ninety that's reference to a
form that's used by police
officers
when they communicate to the
certification board
a letter suffices I mean if you
do criminal defense work with
chairman you get a letter to the
bar like once a month clients
and the bar deals with them
accordingly they either write a
letter to the plan saying no
that's that's not a whatever or
they do a full investigation or
they suspend you where they
revoke your license so the
certification board can do any
of that stuff the fear is that
that they're gonna get bombarded
with citizen complaints well
that didn't happen the previous
decade on the law enforcement
academy structure
and I don't think the average
citizen even knows about this
certification board they usually
partition their local government
but there is no there is nothing
to fear it will only enhance the
policing in this state but to
suggest citizens cannot file a
complaint that that's a notion
that it was in a thing until
until this past year.
The.
Thank you mr turn thank you
senator so I guess would that be
a yes that you were looking for
that clarifying language to be
put in or do you think that it's
just fine the way it is some
kind of this state where it's
not really interpreted thank you
mister chairman rosen right we
we may have to put it in it
would be a fight I think it's
unnecessary but we may have to
spell it up
thank you mister chair thank you
representative briefly please
thank you mister chairman
thank you sen and your gas
this war that you're talking
about
and I
I relate it back mr chairman to
the alba cookies civilian police
or a site agency which was
established partly in
in response to the court
approved settlement agreement
which is the casa
and there were a lot of growing
pains with that board while I
was counselor just mentioned
that and we went through a lot
of civilians that were part of
the board and left and you know
some executive directors that
came and left and
it's it's sort of firm
in a sands I guess at this point
sort of
maintained itself I guess
um and so I kind of look at this
and compare the two a little bit
it's it's very similar actually
and I and I really do appreciate
ugh you're a legislation
senator in terms of how
the structure and so on I guess
my question with regard to this
particular board because the
civilian other sideward is
basically they report to the
city council ultimately for and
that they don't report specifics
but they give an overall how
many cases ever heard and so on
and so forth.
So is there is this particular
board do they report to the
legislature with the yearly
report or something how how who
who manages the oversight board
in this case or or there are a
is there a report or anything
that comes out thank you thank
you mister chairman reps at what
I go we didn't put in statute
report
to the legislature
you know there's twelve thirteen
ft's assigned to this agency
there's a lot of work to be done
and and but they do have
cordially performance measures
as just told to be both by live
see
lfc is
you know keeping an eye on these
agencies essentially the the
the agency you mentioned the
forgiving what is the call the
public they oversight civilian
police or so the civilian police
oversight and and all that's
that's mainly dealing with
disciplining officers and maybe
even firing off
this is dealing with the little
professional license and we
really want every police officer
in this state it researched a
pity to really cherish that
professional license you can be
fired
and maybe go to a different
agency up but there's some folks
that just aren't meant to be
police officers and they they
and if that conduct is evident
they they should lose their
license and no longer work for
another agency and let me just
read the really quickly the
mission of that board a
complaint so
recommendations regarding
personnel but also policy
practices procedures
so those things are also part of
this oversight board so I just
want one I mention that
but I just wanted to know who
the you know who the civilian
oversight board in your case I
guess who you guys respond to
and that's.
Really what my question was.
And there are final reports are
online we do have on my
in
site for the law enforcement
certification board also as part
of the directive we weren't
create a website to
track
blah and forest made
issues that were a specific
officers and that has of course
now been start but that was
created the website um nap by
the ceo that we hired but by
sonya travels who was the
director of the law enforcement
academy before she went.
So
the idea was to have this public
website where people can look up
the status of specific officers
there
certification status any
discipline um
actions that will take in
certification actions
and tap a venturally moved to
wear their um yearly compliance
with online as well thank you
mister chair if I mean mister
mister chairman rose everybody
with a young everything is
public record except for
internal affairs
and other investigation
documents that are provided for
the investigation the any a
decision by the board is is
appealable to the district court
but it's it's a profession that
are that I don't think we should
be prescriptive and stay statue
with regards to the not simple
to that profession if if police
officers are professional and an
awesomely trained with all the
resources we have it at stay
government they can then deal
with any particular circumstance
or we have a tendency to do
those of us that care to
minister about civil rights
violations if we try to pass a
lot that you can't do this you
can do that if we just have
highly trained professionals
they can deal with any factual
scenario in
in a constitutional way to send
her in things to think
really one last comment I I
would strongly encourage that
you're ceo when that person is
hired that there be some sort of
a summary report maybe not in
specifics but just some
something too consider thank you
mister chair thank you bluebob
gone through the requested
speakers we want to um before we
get too much more down the road
I want to recognize and thank
center gonzalez for being here
today with our committee and
welcome as a guest and
I also thank you for hosting us
in a beautiful part of the state
and a great.
Venue and it's been lovely to
have you represent gozols you
want to say then.
Thank you mister chairman into
the member state it's always
home agreed honor in a two to
have as many of our legislators
visit this part of it
part of a state and of course
you're always welcome to come
back and I think this year we
probably have like four five
committees that are scheduled to
be some here and some in towers
murder again it's always a big
plus you know this is one of
them parts of the interim
committees that we travel
throughout the state and it
gives so a very eo
understanding in all of the
different parts of the state and
the uniqueness and how we all
have to come together to
to work you know with what's
best for our state but again a
big thanks for being here and
you know you're always welcome
thank you change center and
we're we're gonna see in los
cruises i'm sure in return so
we go north we go south we're
going everywhere I think i've
got through the speakers me to
take a moment committee members
of I I hope that part of your
satisfaction had been on this
committee is recognizing that
the chair and I share church and
learn I I really trying to deal
with topics that are of great
relevance and in the current
parliament's whatever is going
on the public discussions in
this certainly this issue
certainly all over the news in
the media and I thought it was
important for the committee to
have a a better background in
the opportunity some questions
about it then the challenge
recognize is that went when I
and anti in in chair channel
deal with issues that are timely
and in of high profile offered
as we have a great deal of
difficulty getting anybody can
speak about them and you look at
overnancy look at or not in her
but I do want you to know that
we did invite secretary board to
be here today he did respond
saying that he thought that
there would be others who could
probably address the issues
better than.
Then he could i'm kind of
dispointed by that because I
think it would have been useful
to have him in this dialog and
and that's all I can sometimes
do
in part because i've asked the
legislature through the
legislation I sponsor with years
to get this committee subpoena
authority which we are seemingly
don't want because and I know
why we don't want it because we
don't want accountability right
to say if we can't make people
do things than we can't be held
responsible for the fact they
don't do things and again that's
not a criticism of the secretary
of d PS right now but you I
think would have been useful to
have had him here and and I just
want to commit you know that he
was invited again sometimes i'll
take responsibility for that we
also invite the correction
secretary to be part of regional
sometimes i'm doing short notice
and I take full responsibility
for that and I understand when
their scheduled conflicts but in
this particular case of the
secretary advisor said it was
that up it's not a matter of a
scheduling conflict but rather a
matter of he just felt it was
maybe inappropriate for him to
be here and I understand that
because there's ongoing
litigation I guess right not
sometimes the issues well too
and so he's probably got lawyers
on him don't come here is
anything or don't be involved in
I can understand that advice um
taking that advice from a lawyer
at the same time I want the
committee understand it it puts
us in a challenging situation
that means the chair when I say
here's a timely important issue
the legislature and we do try
and bring in the right people in
the the response sometimes it's
yeah I they don't think I should
go and i'm so so i'm not you
don't have that background
I I want to think we should
recognize something that we did
well which is in this bill we
delayed the implementation for
as you said center that that was
important because we wanted to
make sure that we weren't
pushing the administration or
law enforcement or d PS or
anybody into something that was
unrealistic and at the same time
and to stand up something given
them the time and resource do
that so I think that was a smart
move and so worth and then
senator to your credit you
recognize that even with that
delayed implementation we needed
to go back and still tweak some
things even before the law
became effective and that's just
showing us that we're open to
learning things and advice and
suggestions in.
Realize that sometimes we can do
a little bit better I think that
the the comment was made earlier
it's the right one which is the
the circumstances that were
present before us in twenty
twenty twenty twenty one when
this month was the suggestion
that we that that it was did not
make sense to have police
entirely responsible for police
in the police
and i'll use the opportunity to
do that with a lot of respect to
long forcement here too I know
they want to have the best
people serving alongside them as
well possible to and and
sometimes we look at even you
look at albert turkey recently
in others he looked at internal
affairs in places and sometimes
the police are not the people
who should be pleased in the
police and and we see the
consequences of that in the in
the history of a lot of law
enforcement agencies just
because there are very few
individuals or are not don't do
not belong to law enforcement as
you said settle but for
fortunately for us that's that's
a training
and really big
outline number of people so for
it so
but that was the impetus of this
was to say we need we want some
we want some people them I I
think it's important that the
the the latest safer created
this board I I really do
appreciate
the former
state police chief johnson here
and others last cruises because
in our presentation yesterday
the he represented referred to
the fact that the perception in
reality the perception
unfortunately is that the
legislature is antagonistic to
reverse series to law
enforcement and III know that
perceptions out there and I wish
I wish we could disabuse that
and I hope that people get in
the room here where this fles
couple days can help us do that
I know I know where some of that
comes from because i've been
part of some of the legislation
that lead to some of that so for
example when I pushed for body
cameras a law enforcement
consider that to be in the front
to law enforcement at least some
long forcement did a some of
them very aggressively including
the at the time the the
share if I guess if brilliant
county right and so it becomes
like when we push the body
camera legislation well we're
against law enforcement well
i'll i'll just say I used to
prosecute criminal cases and we
have a represent reviews here.
There's nothing better for a
prosecutor than have a video
when i'm doing those little
small DWI just like that case
gazed over here watch this in
and okay we're done so so the
notion that body cameras was
adversarial to law enforcement I
think was a misconception but it
it but it's part of this whole
nearer to the legislatures
against us right the same
attitude with regard to civil
rights at and you can we heard
the presentation some may
consider that uh law enforcement
consider that is a personal
liability that we're going to be
sued they're going to lose
everything they own all of that
was just false right that's just
not true at all number one in
number two with a lot of their
civil rights I put caps on
damages so they're thinking
there was for brex in some cases
limiting liability for a long
forcement we had that we've had
we give countless examples where
we think that we've tried to
partner with law enforcement to
provide safer things and that
was our goal yesterday remains
our goal today to and I I can't
help it on this particular topic
there's some thinking that that
there was again
adverse reaction to this
independent board doing looking
at certifications and
replications and suspensions and
so that once again is the
legislature being adversarily to
law enforcement and in and I
can't help but think that
because it seems like there's
been pushed back on this from
the inception it seems like the
push back is still going on out
rate is to not send up the board
not get it
find their night let it not get
the administrative support I get
ceo's and so forth and a so I
want to thank you miss ball for
serving case as you pointed out
like us you're volunteer we're
volunteers to and and it's
sometimes hard to be a voucher
when you feel like your service
is not appreciated but but your
service is appreciated and I I
hope that this board can all
thought of be successful partner
to law enforcement all
understood the the good example
of that in some
of the bar you've been some
commercials to serving as a
lawyer.
We have a very good bar very
active are there they're pretty
good about kicking out lawyers
who are bad bad seats and they
they don't really hold back very
much there and any citizen can
file a complaint against me or
any lawyer there is a hotline
complaints or are encouraged and
the board acts on the very
promptly and I bet you ninety
ninety something plus percent of
cases if I know offense by their
lawyer to the laws or to the
rules of professional ethics
that you're very stricten so
worth and and more often than
not those complaints are heard
the person feels they've had the
opportunity to be heard in in a
letter probably usually and the
board rate promptly dismisses
those complaints finding no
basis for that but I think it's
a good system and and again it's
easy for any citizen to file any
complaint against any lawyer and
and it's good to have a board
like we would have here
reviewing those in deciding some
lawyers need to be out some laws
are
people who don't belong in the
profession and so I oh I want
folks in all that customers
lawyers get some criticism and I
appreciate the cut their claim
comments yesterday from center
thought and others may be at
least recognizing that I
understand those criticisms the
lawyers but I also believe that
we should live by the same
standards that we expect others
to so if we're going to view and
ice and you're going to say law
enforcement should have
oversight board and had should
have people looking at their
repair replications and
suspensions and their license
and complaints I should be
willing to have the same in my
profession and I do in some
accustomed to that so I I do
hope I I think that the language
that you're talking about here I
think you called it superfluous
and center I don't know it's
really supervisors I think it's
frank is being used as an excuse
do not do what some people don't
want to do and and that's all
that is and so yeah we cook at
the language out but if the
people drag their feet and one
abstract and and don't want to
do this
that that's not the solution is
cutting that language for making
that language though the canada
the buggy man if you will write
we can't do this because of this
language
that's not what's going on.
I mean that's what what's beyond
us what's what's really going on
here and people don't want to do
this
and in the probably don't want
to do it when we enacted iteming
it evidently found a way to this
became affected within twenty
twenty two is there a twenty
twenty three
the two year anniversary july
first twenty twenty three yeah
so they managed to delay the
implementation for two years to
to the intent the owner's
legislative they know was on the
books i've been march of twenty
twenty one him and in just a
question real quick center if
you know the answer to wrap up
and I bought a long though we've
been budgeted funding to this
board into the positions and so
forth because because they're
not filled the but the funding
has gone to dps is that right
and and do you know where deep
would do a d b s is done with
that funding
mr chairman if I may be
different of c staff
out of his up
is let's find out if you don't
see we'll let's find out because
if we're finding this board and
they stap position so for it to
d PS in the aps is using that
money for something else than
they clearly haven't a
disincentive to ever standing up
this board in those positions
right and that's not working
well either and again that's
that's natural they can use that
money in a way they rather use
they're going to continue to try
and keep this board from forming
and and becoming effective so we
should probably figure out where
that when he's going
that's all the questions I have
for everyone else again I i'll
just end on the fact that I I
hope the board understands that
I think with with them represent
channel we're going to continue
to put issues in front of you
all that are somewhat
controversial at times and them
it's going to sometimes present
a challenge for all of us and
for us to lead in the committee
so
synergized this yes a center on
a sort thank you.
What's that is that there is a
secret thing on our microphone
set we didn't know about
that so
so mr terminate I appreciate
that changes that we've been
talking about
my question is
who has tried to reach out the
governor to fill these positions
because we you know we have a
lot of words and commissions
for many of them we have the
process that center my **** just
laid out originally where I have
an appointment from the speaker
has one the minority leader in
both chambers etcetera that sort
of seemed to work better i'd
take that responsibility theory
seriously since i've been a
protemival pointed three hundred
people I mean that's how many
boards and commissions we are
but most of them are through the
judicial nominating commissions
which I have almost every month
there is some attorney some
judge that has stepped out so
have you thought of if we are
going to make changes perhaps
you could do a hybrid but where
the governor points perhaps for
and you know the rest of us
appoint the others and I don't
have any issue with you telling
those of us that do this what
kind of person needs to be I
don't have any problem with that
so I I just suggest you think
about this because top to sooner
apparently a little bit about
this both concerned about these
you know the governor I think
has too many I mean i'm burdened
by them i'm sure she has many
more than I do and the process
had finding people and
interviewing them and finally
people who would are willing to
do it that set the.
Bill that's a lot of work so so
I think you need to maybe a
change that a little bit so that
it's just not on her because
it's obviously not being filled
so that's that's all I have
thank you thank you center in
about your could just take a
moment the quickest indulgers to
expand a little bit please look
at that composition board
because again we long forcement
here in the room and listening
in i'm sure and hopefully
finance the legislature created
this board for review and end
any suggestion that this is
adversarial to law enforcement
ignores the fact that the the
second person on the list is a
current or retired state
certified municipal law
enforcement manager in command
the third out of the ten
positions are retired share of
certified or current share of
certified law enforcement for
position as crewn or retired
state or locally makes state
certified law enforcement
officer number five criminal
retail travel law enforcement of
the that's just the first five
in the ten I mean this board is
comprised of law enforcement
people either former retired and
so with this any suggestion that
this is urgent and effort to get
to law enforcement in the
adversary way ignores the
composition to board entirely so
I i'm i'm like the center
student I don't understand why
the governor has not seen fit to
to a point of this board
accepted maybe there is
something that knows an effort
to make sure this board doesn't
exist or doesn't become
effective because it first
position i've heard used there
saying well the first thing we
can't find is a retired district
judge
really is a lot of retired
district judgements out there a
lot of them and in
maybe they're all turning the
governor down but maybe we're
not even asking
it in my suspect it's latter
that we're not even trying to
they would imagine I know a lot
of former joses who would
welcome the opportunity to serve
on a board like this in hinder
that so and if you look at if I
keep going on a list even when
you get to the certified public
safety telecommunicator I assume
that as a person is going to
come out of law enforcement
background.
As well does I can keep doing it
on the list but for from for the
for those who were always
questioned perhaps the the rule
of the trial bar I only see one
out of the ten who's an attorney
practices as a planet's attorney
and civil rights and that's the
only position I think that
arguably could be somebody who's
trying to take a trial lawyer I
hit to this thing but everyone
else here seems to be a very
closely involved in one
forcement thank you anyone
thank you for let me add onto
the center uh presentation good
wouldn't follow up and look
forward to your continued work
in the area and again I want to
appreciate all the law
enforcement here today former
law enforcement current law
enforcement you're invaluable
you're i'm sure you're going to
talk to us afterwards and will
continue talk to you and learn
from you too so we have just a
few minutes and I want to try
and get everybody's sort of on
the road we got a long way to go
but i've always left a little
bit of three times so I want to
hear from you now about topics
that you heard today they think
require some follow up or things
you want to bring to our
attention it we we develop work
plan as being of a very interest
but my experience is that an
answer and rips out challenge
it's my practice p rethink in
the work plan month a month all
times because of things like
this this topic that come out
anyone else with anything else
they'd like to add before we
recess representative and then
reps
thank you mister chair I know we
didn't go in it much with the uh
judge but I definitely like to
get into the c m o issue more
at the rate time and really talk
about that issue because like in
smaller situations we don't need
cmos and so you know I just
would like to really dive in
that a little bit more I did
know that what I thought we
might do with the justice but if
not that's a data I would I
would like to look at that.
Thank you
represent the home I think he
was a chair I just would like to
as we're going month to month or
within the work plan if we're
gonna have a more followed with
with theoc with
the with the justices about the
you know continued efforts as
we were getting into the
behavior health plan that
they're working on and also in
the competency legislation we
pass because this is just a
preliminary today I think we
need to set up some are allowed
for some time for them to really
get their planning in place so
that we can have a follow up to
that's what I like thank you
thank you others observed a day
hot when the hill mister
chairman
I would like to have some more
information and perhaps that
more in depth session on the
underutilization of the
specialty courts
and you know what policy changes
we might consider to kind of
help expand that utilization and
then I second everything that
representative haunt said maybe
we could ask for an ongoing
update on the implementation of
senate bill one two three as the
planning committee is continuing
thank you mr chair thank you
good suggestions others yes
center figure off
thank you mister chair I would
reiterate every single item and
it's been brought up so far and
add government and elections and
modernization issues
we will want to say that last
very good government elections
modernization issues that we
might be looking at in the next
session.
Alright others anyone else
need to get anything off your
chest
alright thank you for coming
along with it's always serve
with a very satisfied to see a
full participation that the
committee and I hope will
continue to attract your
attention interest in your act
of participation so thank you
for being part of a good process
thank you
we're in recess.
