To read also and miscale it's
nice to see everybody here on on
time I guess most of your came
in last night and I understand
so have the money left so that's
good
we have a real good turnout for
the committee here today and so
we have some opening remarks and
we'd like to be welcomed here
she understand we've got we have
someone on the agenda for that
other year i'm sorry
i'm not i'm looking around the
room good morning yes we're
looking for you
uh miss pidea president for the
misclearer patch of tribe good
morning to you thank you for
hosting us.
Good morning give me a while to
figure out the technology
well I just want to welcome the
courts corrections and justice
committee here to the mess
cleripatic reservation I don't
know if you know it but there's
enough advertising around right
now we are celebrating the
fiftieth anniversary of the
innovative mountain gods which
opened in nineteen seventy five
and I actually started working
here after I got out of high
school I graduated in nineteen
seventy six I worked here for
about a year and a half two
years and in offer none when I
was going to college so it's
kind of a a bit of a sweep kind
of celebration here.
But we have come along ways in
just a little more than a
hundred years our reservation
was established in eighteen
seventy three but a patchy
people have moved about and
lived within this region for
many millennia.
In the early eighteen hundreds
tribes were overseen by the war
department and then in eighteen
forty nine indian affairs was
moved under the newly created
department of interior and their
primary responsibility was land
management.
So I think that in many ways
shows
the inseparable connection the
patchy people have always had
with the land so this is why the
patriot people have been able to
not only survive but thrive and
what is often described as a
rugged and harsh environment.
So now fast forward to today
and consider what kind of an
impact we are seeing from the
modern day disruption of our
patchy way of life we see
impacts now to physical health
do due to a vast change in our
diet adapting to a more
sedentary lifestyle and a sense
of disconnect with our natural
environment we have been
adapting to an entirely
different lifestyle language and
culture while still trying to
actively preserve our identity
as a patchy people.
So we are working towards
addressing the needs of our
people by exploring the root
causes of our social and
economic needs we are currently
in the process of completing a
ba operated detention center
that will open an fy twenty six
but we are also working towards
a rate of tort expanding a range
of rehabilitation and support of
services so we aren't just
throwing people in jail that
have other needs
we do have an alcohol
rehabilitation center that has
operated for many years here in
mascala we are currently
completing a permanent permanent
permanent support of housing
project which will provide forty
small homes for people working
to overcome substance abuse as
well as people that are homeless
from the state this year we also
received funding for planning
and design of a detact center
that's very important to us
because based upon input from
the f b I they handle a lot of
the major crimes that are here
on the reservation all of the
major crimes that occur here are
related to alcohol and substance
abuse so so that's a big thing
that we really need to pay
attention to we also need to
improve our court system to
provide greater equity and
consistency and in how the laws
are late down.
We also are working to
strengthen help strength in our
families and we're doing that by
building more homes trying to
provide good education and
health care opportunities so all
of these things we are working
towards weaving them together
into a holistic approach to
bring justice to our people and
I mean justice and every sense
of the true meaning of that word
so I just want to thank you for
coming to visit our lands and I
hope you have a good day but I
just wanted to share a little
bit with you of of what we are
working on the kind of things
that relate to your committee so
thank you very much have a good
day like I said
take a moment please we may have
some questions for you if that's
alright and just a quick
opportunity for you to and won't
go through the committee to have
everybody introduced themselves
you can get kind of get an idea
of where based from right now to
so anyone have any questions by
chance.
No will update representative
hole and then center city live
is.
Madame president and you're not
the only one with technological
how many enrolled members are on
the hickory and
mescaler has five thousand two
hundred and seventy three
enrolled tribal members agree I
have no idea i'm sorry my
scholar I live in live up near
the high courier yeah yeah I
understand used to come down
here to help with indian country
and retired fbi but I was just
curious what the enrolled
members were here.
Excellent thank you for being
here mister chair thank you
seriously a lot of us question
thank you madame president and I
want to congratulate you it's
great to see female leadership
so i'm i'm very excited to meet
you I wanted to ask about the
alcohol treatment um we've been
working on raising an alcohol
tax for a while and when the
things that I learned with that
was most disturbing is that
indian people in new mexico and
this is according to new mexico
health data drink less than
other people but their health
outcomes or are too hundred
percent worse than other health
outcomes and so i'm not even
talking about necessary why i'm
talking about seroices of
deliver in all kinds of health
outcomes related to to drinking
and we had a meeting with the
indian affairs committee to talk
about this bill and one of the
things that they said
is binge drinking is the worst
kind of drinking that you can do
for your health and because
there's no alcohol on
in indian country though alcohol
able to just to be sold people
have to travel a long way they
tend to bins drink and then of
course that gives rise to being
strinking and also to
the risk of accidents on the way
home and I have found that
interesting i've never heard
that before and I wonder if you
had some thoughts anything I
would be very interested in any
of your thoughts about about
these issues so we do not have a
closed reservation relating to
alcohol and I had I started
working through the tribe I had
worked for the ba is a timber
sale forester prior to that but
in nineteen ninety four I
started working for the tribe
and I worked for for a four
years under the late window
chino before he passed away and
I do remember he would just have
a little random.
Tibets of wisdom he would share
with me at different times you
know and literally
and and one of the things he had
mentioned is he
allowed alcohol to be on the
reservation because about
exactly that we had a bar called
I think it was called eddie's
bar just on the west side of the
reservation where you come in
from tillerossa and they were
notorious for taking things
like our fees addresses or
cradle boards or are different
cultural items for pawn for
people to drink there was also
people that would go the other
direction that lived a little
further up this way and they'd
be hit triking into read also
and there was a lot of accidents
people killed on the highway and
so forth you know walking along
the highway not so much back
then
the device caused not a whole
lot of people had vehicles but
that is why he allowed alcohol
to be on the reservation because
he figured if they're going to
do it anyway it would be a
little safer so they're not
getting hit on the highway are
being taken advantage of by
people that would you know by
the items so they could you know
give them money for boots so
that was his outlook over the
last
fifteen years or so now it's
kind of going back to the other
direction you know and and we
are aware of other tribes that
do not allow alcohol on the
reservation so it's been moving
in that direction in.
Yes we don't want to to be
enabling our people to get
alcohol but at the same time I
mean it's hard not to and we've
even had problems with
bootlegging of alcohol back in
the early days because people
want it to make profit off this
you know so I I think it's
it's kind of a double edged
sword a little bit but I am
leaning towards allowing alcohol
to be sold like in our tribal
store down in mescaler tribal
council at this time doesn't
want to prove that.
But I don't want to see our
people traveling all the way up
to read also we have people that
hang around by the wall greens
you know bootlegging are not
bootlegging but whatever you
call that where they're trying
to get money we also have down
until the rosa there is a park
near the lows grocery store and
we do have tribal members that
hang around down there so we are
trying to discourage that kind
of behavior and find a better
way of dealing with it here on
the reservation
handling that's what it's called
yeah yeah
and yeah
that's a huge thing because that
like I said.
All of our major crimes are
related to some sort of
substance abuse and so that's
why we're really trying to to
work towards the root causes and
try to address those directly
I really admire that and I
didn't know that it will of
course I guess for here I guess
I should have realized but yeah
that if that statement was made
in the individual in an indian
affairs comedian it was it was
fascinating to me
and
the alcohol problems and it
mexico are very very complex but
they hit native people the
hardest and it's not that they
drink both that was what was
interesting they've drink less
however the outcomes are worse
and we have
seen a lot of fairly young
people dying from alcohol people
in their thirties and forties
this isn't you know like sixty
or seventy year old people it's
our younger people and that
that's rurally distressing it
is.
Well I would i'm not going to
take up more time down but I
would be happy to talk to about
some of these issues and get
some input about these issues
offline thank you madame
president.
Good morning madame president
thank you for having us
I
met a young man last night at
dinner
who lost his home in the flood
he was a waiter you know
probably not and make a lot of
money
and he was telling me that
a number representative borrega
from albuquerque's west side and
he was telling me that
the he's been house here at the
hotel which is really
commendable I just wanted to
express that because I was
really he had a young daughter
and he had planned to spend the
day off with his daughter
yesterday but
he had to work and so his
daughter was kind of hanging
around
but I just thought that you know
it was it was refreshing to hear
that you guys are sort of taking
care of your own and he was
hispanic he was not need an
american but I think erm I just
wanted to point out that that
that was really refreshing to
hear that he was able to be
housed you know in a different
location and i'm sure you've had
a lot of stories of people
and as I was driving in
yesterday I was looking around
to see the devastation you know
with the fire and then now with
the floods um so I just do do
you want to comment on them
we've seen a lot of the
low income trailer parks in read
also in rid or some downs and
and that's where I really feel
for the people that are living
in those trailer parks you know
especially ones that aren't
necessarily from this area and
am not aware that these are
old flood planes they really are
I do I have seen pictures
floating around in in the
original.
Fire team meetings we had last
year for the fires there were
pictures that were brought forth
from the forties the nineteen
forties showing vast floods in
the area and and even in the
read also downs area where the
track is that was up of a huge
wetland swampy area you know and
in its it is really sad to see
that people are losing their
entire belongings we we had the
national guard we were out with
general acular that one day
looking at some of these trailer
parks and there were literally
people that just had one walmart
back and that was everything
they owned that was left you
know so it it is really sad to
see that and in finding places
to build a forwarding portable
housing has always been a issue
in read also so i'm not sure how
we're going to be able to
support our economy if we don't
provide more housing in safe
areas for low income people with
we see even in mascalero we had
in the nineteen thirties there
was a civilian conservation core
project um upset to a roaster
canyon which is where we have
the most recent flooding old
fires cars also from the early
two thousand at least twenty
plus years old and
those wetlands we have a lot of
springs that originate in that
area and those where the springs
that also feed our fish housers.
But those flood planes were
terrorist entitled drained and
so over the years we've become a
little bit complacent about we
actually do live in a flood
plane down in that area too and
it it's hard to get people to
understand that we probably need
to back out of those flood
planes and get back up on those
alluvial benches you'll see a
lot of the older homes and mask
larrel are up on those little
areas that are just out of the
flood plane and it you know
development has been allowed to
go down into these flood planes
so it's it's going to take a lot
of work in in
I don't know how we're going to
be able to do it but we are
going to work towards zoning to
prevent that in the future but
trying to help some of these
people move out of the floor
plane and mister thank you for
the time I would love to invite
you to alba be my guest I served
on the flow control board for
six years and i'd love to take
you around to cease how we
control our storm waters i'd
love to do that.
Here in at the time I was told
that we hadn't had a legislative
committee here in at that at
that time probably four five
years so we're glad to be back
again your hospitality is always
very gracious and it's a
beautiful
beautiful time a year to be here
this committee focuses where
their courts corrections in
justice community so I want to
focus just a few questions with
you briefly on a couple of
matters and amazing chrome which
has been our focus as you know
at the state level of focus of
the governor in this committee
can you open a say understand it
there's an intersect here
probably between federal law
state la and then is there
tribal law here didn't do the
mescal areas have their own laws
and their own court system yes
we do have a tribal code
we are in the process of
starting to do some revisions
and some updates to its to stay
current
we do have a court system it is
funded through a ba public law
ninety three six thirty eight
contract so with the funding
does come through.
It's taking a while to bring us
up to current standards we
are getting one of the things
we're working on and it's really
a basic thing is a digitizing
all the files you know for many
years it was totally run by hand
paper files all of these kind of
things so one of their big
initiatives right now is to get
all the files digitized into the
full court software it's a huge
effort um
we're working to we have had a
few tribal court assessments
done in the past ten years and
so we are following up on those
you know I we did have one done
and twenty twenty when covered
wasn't full force and so it
didn't really go anywhere back
then but we literally pulled
that out last month and we're
going over the findings one by
one and working towards
correcting all of those you know
getting our court system up to
modern day standards is a huge
task
it's really hard one of the
problems we do have is non
tribals we don't have any
jurisdiction over non tribal
members but we are seeing people
moving into the reservation we
hear about drug dealers that are
associating with our ladies and
living in homes with them and
and dealing out of neighborhoods
here on the reservation so we
would really like to develop
some sort of memorandum of
understanding or something with
state police.
We are only way of dealing with
them now is to take them to the
reservation boundary we we have
no ability to prosecute and so
if we don't have a strong enough
case through our ba law
enforcement there is there's not
much we can do so that's a huge
gap in the system here that
we're really trying to overcome
do you do you have your own
criminal laws or you enforcing
of federal laws.
We do have some but it does
depend have a lead on.
The interaction with the fbi and
the US attorney's office and
then as anytime you tell me when
there's a crime committed on on
the miscarlo lands within within
your territoriatorial
jurisdiction the the cran that's
going to hear if it's committed
by somebody who is not miscalero
you or cannot enforce that is
that we choose
we can't do anything to them we
we can work with our ba long and
push those sorts of things.
But it it's a little bit of a
gap that we fall into when we
get to non tribal members and
you said you've been trying to
work in cooperation with perhaps
state police can you just is
that going anywhere else that
have any uh potential so for
example we have a cap ground on
the southern end of the
reservation near clark craft
it's called silver lake and so
it's a very popular recreation
area we have right now the
fishing we're having issues with
a whole of our water right now
but the phishing is part is
close but we do have a lot of
camping that goes on there and a
couple of weekends ago
it got routy and there and and
it was a whole lot of indians
literally they were they started
drinking and and you know little
neighbors in the camp area
started arguing and so forth and
it took we did call ba law
enforcement and state police I
do believe state police came but
the
really do much do ba have a
presence on the reservation or
the yes but we are very short
staffed I believe we are are
fteeze we have six full time
equivalents here plus the chief
of police.
Quite often once we are fully
staffed then they sometimes
detail them to other agencies
other tribal reservations that
that have need and so it's a
constant revolving door pretty
much it is hard to retain people
here
we have a lot of tribes like in
the album kirky area
the law enforcement officers
would much rather be up there
and i've been told by some of
them that the work load is a lot
less and some of these other
areas I mean they're busy down
here we have a lot of things
going on there's a lot of
different kinds of activity
influences like I said from drug
cartels and so forth that come
into the reservation so it it's
a fairly complicated kind of
system we're working with of who
is in charge of what and that
think makes things really hard
and just one last subject
because we're going to move on
to our next topic which is gones
would it with the laws regarding
the use in ownership possession
of guns on the reservation we
don't have anything specific in
our own tribal code regarding
that there there are the laws of
you know using guns for
crimining crimes and so forth
but as far as purchasing or
anything we just completely
deferred to state last year um
we do have a lot of people here
that have served in the military
we are very pro military i'm own
army brap through and through
you know I my dad was military
and intelligence in
one of the things I really
appreciate from him is that he
really taught us
what a gun is he made sure he
had three daughters we all
learned when we were quite young
I was.
Learning from my father when I
was little and when I got a
little older when I was ten
years old I took an n r a
sanction class and learned he he
taught us respect for the the
guns in the house there is no
point in having an unloaded
weapon that's how he looked at
things so that tower was raised
you know but I see some of our
young parents nowadays I was
aware of a shooting that
happened here and I had talked
to the mom of one of the kids
involved.
And she had I had asked her will
how did the kids get the guns
you know did they rate the gun
cabinet or something and she's
like oh no I I make sure when
they turned eighteen that each
got a conceal carry permit which
is all well and good but
teaching them the respect for
these things how you handle them
they're not things like you know
how we see in the movie and
everybody's waving them around
and doing all kinds of crazy
things like that there's a whole
lot of influence from social
media and and the tv itself but
I I think that's a lot of what's
lacking is
the young people aren't being
tough the respect I mean guns
for us are used for hunting you
know we go out and and we do
like to have dear meat fresh
dear meat I my family we get a
cow elk every year and we we get
it butchered up we learn we were
starting to do it ourselves now
because it's kind of expensive
but that's what our meat is for
the entire year so you know it's
not just about what was the one
tv it's part of survival it's
part of providing for our
families.
So that that's a big difference
in a shift that's happened I
believe over the years
using
we end up talk to fast thank you
madame president anyone else.
Thank you.
All right welcome everybody i'll
see if I can do this without
continuing off excuse me.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Um I want to give everyone a
little bit of a roadmap for you
started today.
And I will earn being deferring
to represent challenge for a lot
of today's meeting to have a
hearing and santa fe that I have
to make swapping with a little
bit this morning and we'll get
starting from there as well
thanks me take you off for
coming a long way welcome you
know my my habit is i've kind of
described to you back in towers
was to try and take us to places
where we're sometimes isolated
from distractions gives us a
chance to really get to know one
other and have think some more
open dialog so we've left time
on the schedule for the end of
the day to counter just left
everybody have added in the good
news as I won't be here for it
so
so I I can assure the so the
seeds of you know mal content
disconnect and chaos and then
leave right so it's it's a great
way to do things
we um we have we hope a
initially agenda for you we're
starting with with the topic and
again represent channel and I
would answer this developed the
agenda really as soon as we
finish our last meeting we try
and start bouncing around ideas
in topics that we think will be
of interest one of the issues
that continue to come up
repeatedly is the issue of guns.
And that's why I ended up with
the president the last subject
as well too
the day before yesterday we had
a just the latest of tragedies
of course the law enforcement
officer lost his life in new
york city uhm sadly and father
of two boys
were the third on the way
and immigrant who came to new
york city and kind of live the
american dream the the the part
among them and the we continue
to see these tragedies one of
the things that was entering to
me I had a talking to brandon
but before this meeting this
morning the mayor of new york
went on tv and let a press and
so forth entired repeatedly
about and the fact that the the
killer in murder in that case
was brandishing an assault
weapon
and that's not true which is
unfortunate because the mayor
does not seem to understand what
an assault weapon is an in most
people don't and so my goal in
having the presentation this
morning is particularly for this
committee because we've heard
this presentation in variations
before but I think it helps us
to continue to hear it
particularly when you remember
is because we talk about trying
to ban a saw weapons or control
of bins or whatever it may be in
most people don't understand
what it's all weapon has an
include the mayor of new york
evidently on a pretty high
profile a murder.
So the goal of the presentation
today is to do a few things one
as we continue to see in our two
committees uh gun legislation
frequently and it's important
that to us I believe that the
sponsors of that legislation the
public at large understand what
these terms mean and more
importantly where the courts
leave us today the you are
supreme court for a long time
was pretty silent on the second
amendment and then of late has
had come back with some very
strong rulings that are that are
regarding us really at the
stateway level and is other
states are trying to enact laws
that relate to guns gone safety
or or even freedoms regarding
guns those are constantly being
challenged in the courts and so
we have the your supreme court
with their case law and then we
have now below them to circuit
courts which are the the next
level of federal courts below
them and they're all over the
place there there each coming up
with different results for
sometimes the same questions and
so we we have a really difficult
time here at the state level
trying to pass laws that it will
meet must.
I will tell you that you'll
those of you that no no brand
name brandon is my legislative
egg but he's also staffing the
committee during the innerman
and he's available to all of you
I hope you see him as a resource
because over the last several
years we've really kind of
pushed brand in and in these
didn't need much pushing but we
are committed is really tried to
start top of these laws and and
i'll just point out that the
response are with others of you
for example recently the waiting
period
that we just passed recently and
of course when we when I
sponsored I was told as I am
often told red flag or whatever
i'm told that might be soon
we're going to be challenging we
have a lot of people in the
audience and everybody's upset
and and in fact we do get soon
and
here on this waiting period a
federal judge in albert turkey
probably the most conservative
hope he's not listening probably
the most conservative I think of
federal judges which is a
federal the federals are federal
courts usually pretty
conservative and we have most
conservative probably more
thoughtful judge browning of the
federal charges upholding the
seven day waiting period.
Would that tells me one thing is
that we did a good job as the
legislature to try and make sure
that we stayed with him the
lanes of the law now that case
has been appealed to the circuit
court and it may or may not
survive there I think it will
but
it's just an illustration I
think of what we're trying to do
as legislators is to pass laws
that really just don't buy
lawsuits and
feel good about things and then
the movement will not so that
the point of the presentation
this morning is to ask brand
into spend about thirty minutes
or so updating you on where the
supreme court has been that
where the circuit courts are at
a little bit of what we've been
doing here in new mexico and
then in the internet over to
your questions and give everyone
an opportunity to learn more
about what we can cannot do when
it comes to the issue of guns.
All right alright mister
commission.
Thank you mister chair
moment to go through your can
actually probably repeat some of
the things you just said.
So two years ago we did a gonna
update we did a framework for
what the supreme court has laid
out and we're gonna redial some
of that on try to be refunds are
synched and keep the jargon to a
minimum.
Oh we're also talk about other
medication going on.
In the firearms world as well as
new mexico legislation that is
passed and that is that is
likely to be brought back
so in reviewing gun.
It's largely driven by what we
call judge made large which is
to say that the courts are
interpreting the second
amendment of the constitution
and setting boundaries for what
the legislature legislatures can
and can I do.
Um.
The.
The chair mentioned at the
federal court structure which
bears mentioning again I think
federal courts are all or part
of a the federal district courts
are all or part of a state they
are overseen by developing the
court of appeals which they call
circuit courts each circuit
court has several
sometimes mini
district courts within them and
then everyone's overseen by the
supreme court but the supreme
court doesn't have to hear a
case the supreme court chooses
which cases it will or will not
hear each year.
And it only hears about a
hundred and fifty in an average.
So the.
We talk a lot about and we will
talk a lot about brewing and of
this in all future legislation.
But the cornerstone case with
regard to second minute laws
actually dc versus hella.
Nr district column district of
colombia versus hello which is
decided in two thousand eight
for the first time the us
supreme court decided that the
second amendment was an
individual rate.
Prior to that there was a a
split between circuits over
whether or not you had an
individual right under the
second amendment or whether that
right belong to a collective
group the malicia.
So in two thousand and just to
send an inscaliate
road for the court five four
opinion that the.
Second american convert an
individual rate.
However that right was not
unlimited the opinion specified
that
nothing in that opinion should
be read to say that the
legislature is in various states
or the federal government could
not restrict the rate of felons
or minutes the ill persons to
carry guns order.
That the opinion would block
outline guns and sensitive
places and they the examples
given were schools and
government buildings.
Hello also made clear that.
Dangerous and and unusual
weapons were still fair game for
regulation.
The dangerous and unusual and is
probably the important part
because all weapons are
dangerous so the example that I
give of the dangerous and
unusual weapon would be flained
or.
That's the one that there's a
lot of consensus on.
Um after hello was decided dc is
a federal district it's not a
state so there was an amendment
question regarding whether or
not the supreme court would
apply that same analysis to
state law and mcdonald versus
city of chicago was decided in
twenty ten.
The seventh circuit.
Refuse to straight a chicago law
banning handgun possession
almost identical to the dc while
there had been struck down in
heller the supreme court was
very clear.
And just sent a black but
slightly that the second minute
right is fully applied to the
states so states and federal
territories and dc are all found
by the heller decision that
each individual.
Assuming they're not in a
prohibited class each into each
individual citizen has a right
to be.
Thirteen years later we reached
the brew and decision.
That's new york state rifle and
pistol association versus bruin.
In that thirteen year period
states
district courts and circuit
courts across the nation had.
Made a sort of a mismash of
everything there were literally
circuit splits on almost every
issue to do with gun regulation.
So
just as thomas writing for the
majority in that opinion.
Determined that.
When the second amendments plain
text.
Covers conduct which is a fancy
way of saying.
When the conduct at issue in a
piece of legislation is keeping
or bearing arms and the thing
being regulated is an arm.
Then first of all there will be
a presumption that the
regulation is on constitutional.
Once that presumption is reached
the obligation beyond the state
defending of are to show by
historical analogy.
That there is a tradition of.
That type of regulation.
So
in order to
in order to defend a law when
challenged that regulates arms
the state must show as
sufficiently relevant analogy
analyst at nature gs historical
regulation.
Um.
I tried to break it down a
little sent a little more
straight forward and came up
with a file if the second moment
playing text covers the
individuals conduct then the
conduct is presumptively
protected and the burden is on
the state to justify the law and
considering the states attempt
to justify that law the courts
must consider whether the lies
consistent with our historical
tradition of gun regulation
there are gun regulations in the
united states that go back to
and even predate the
constitution
we had in new mexico a law
regarding safe storage of
firearms.
And it turned out that there was
a regulation in the colony of
massachusetts that was
specifically about the mechanism
and where firearms including
handguns what they would have
called the hand and at that time
could be stored so where there
is an analog law regulating
behavior.
Um
the adoption of the constitution
then that regulation will st.
Following the decision in bruin
great deal of litigation was
focused on what restrictions
could be placed on the rate to
keep in bear arms for persons
who are not convicted
eighteen usc nine twenty two g
is the federal law that that
it's it's free when they refer
to as a felon in possession law
but it actually restricts
several categories that aren't
just it's not just limited to
fellows so one of the categories
that are restricted under nine
twenty two g is persons you have
a domestic violence restraining
order taken out against
if you are the subject of a
domestic violence restraining
order federal law makes you a
prohibited person during the
time that that restraining order
is in effect.
Um
prior to the reheaming case
every court that had considered.
The constitutionality of that
under nine twenty two g
upheld they said it is
constitutional.
But in your united states be
racking me the fifth circuit.
Determined that any limitation
on generates for persons who had
not yet been convicted.
Ran a four of the constitution.
The united states supreme court
accepted accepted the case
determined to hear it and they
over returned the fifth circuit.
They did not change the bruin
test in doing that.
What they ruled is that there
were sufficient
analyties historical precedent
in in the forum of sure it he
lies and lies against people
going armed in public.
That the restriction for persons
facing domestic balance
restraining orders why is
historically permitted
so ultimately the court ruled
that yes you can restrict gun
rates for some for a person who
has not yet been convicted but
in so doing they relied on
finding a historical and now
analy.
Following where he meithers ben
a great deal of.
Litigation and legislation
regarding the assault weapons
band.
Umm the most resent supreme
court action was a denial of
certain which means the refusal
to hear the case
and that case is called snow
snope be brown head involves
maryland's assault weapons ban
which was passed in twenty
thirteen
the maryland legislature inacted
it specifically referencing the
sandy hook shooting.
In
the court found that tens of
millions of americans own an are
fifty and so that's going to be
rolled based on the fact that
when we went back to heller
hello told us that you can
regulate dangerous and unusual
weapons
but weapons in common use for
defense are not subject to
redigit are not subject to
regulation those are protected
by the second amendment.
So the challenges to the law
argued that maryland violated
the second minute amendment and
passing this ban
the fourth circuit which
overseas the district court in
maryland upheld demand then the
circuit court is determined that
are fifteens and other similar
rifles are not arms within the
definition with within how that
term is used in the second
amendment.
The supreme court as in as I
said determined that they would
not hear this case.
In order for the supreme court
there's nine justice is on the
supreme court in order for the
court to hear a case for
justices have to vote to hear
it.
In this case six but justices
voted not to hear it three would
have heard it but the fourth
which is just as cavana.
Road a concurrence to the
decision not to hear the case
which is unusual generally
speaking the decision to hear or
not here a case is one line we
aren't going to hear it or we
are or regret so sure we argue
here
cabin are
wrote specifically that
the issue should be heard and
would likely be heard in the
next year or two but this case
wasn't the case to hear
he also listed
nine or a dozen cases that are
pending in different courts that
are going to bubble up to the
supreme court
because of the fact that he
would have been the fourth boat
to to hear the case and that it
only takes four votes to hear
the case I think it's likely
that
a case of this nature will be
heard in the time frame that he
sat.
Just as thomas who was the
author of bruin
wrote a descent to the decision
not to hear that case and makes
it abundantly explicitly clear
that he would overturn
maryland's band
justice is cake and so to my ear
and brown jackson have in
various descents in other cases
and in their sent to are in two
of their descent to brew in made
clear that they think bruin was
wrongly decided and would uphold
the band would overturn
that room that lives just as
chief justice roberts and
justice convert
and then cabinet
as the deciding factor in
whether or not and assault
weapons band will be upheld.
In in june of this year that
just the department of justice
file and america's brief and
another assault weapons band
case illinois that's bernapy
rowell and
unlike the position previously
taken by the department of
justice for under the last
administration in this instance
they department of justice filed
and meakes brief there's a
friend of the court brief
which requires that you ask the
court for permission tell them
that you
haven't you have a presentation
that you think the court will
benefit from and you are a
friend of one party or the other
in this case the district the
department of justice filed in a
much brief as a friend to the
plaintiffs the people that are
suing to strike the law so that
say change the position from the
department of justice in that in
the worth case which is the case
that the supreme court just
refused to hear
if this is one of the cases that
just as cabinet listed as
pending and when he said that we
need more decisions from circuit
courts and district courts so
that we can be a prepared to
make a decision in a future
case.
Outside of a sort weapons ban
there has been a great deal of
litigation about eighteen
nineteen and twenty year olds
purchasing and possessing
weapons
worth vehicles in is a case that
was presented to the supreme
court minnesota like new mexico
only grants concealed carry
permits to people who are twenty
one years and older
three eighteen year old nineteen
year old and twenty year old
minnesotans and two nonprofit
organizations follow our suit
the district court found that
the restriction of legal adults
people who are under twenty one
but over eighteen was
unconstitutional under the bruin
analysis
the eighth circuit which
overseas the district court in
illinois upheld that decision
and said
it is the constitution and
second amendment to restrict gun
ownership or concealed carry
permits to people who are
eighteen nineteen and twenty
the supreme court without rating
any concurrences are descent
refused to hear the case
which means that
in minnesota it is
unconstitutional it actually in
the full eight circuit it's now
unconstitutional not to issue
concealed carrier permits to
people who are eighteen nineteen
or twenty
there is
a great deal of litigation going
on regarding the sale of hand
guns federal at present
restricts the sale of hand guns
to people who are twenty one and
older you can buy a long gun a
rifle shot gun or a revolver at
eighteen
i'm sorry not a revolut
or our shotgun when you're
eighteen from the federally
licensed firearms dealer but you
can't buy a hand gun until
you're twenty one so recently
atfas are fit circuit case in
which the circuit held that
federal box prohibiting the
sales of handlings from eighteen
nineteen and twenty year olds.
Was unconstitutional
the
department of justice appealed
that decision to the supreme
court and then I think last
month the department of justice
withdrew that appeal so that law
now stands and in the fifth
circuit it is unconstitutional
not to allow sales from the arms
like a licensed farms dealer to
eighteen nineteen and twenty
year olds for hand guns
it also means that
presently the fourth the tenth
and the eleventh circuit we're
in the tenth circuit have said
that it is constitutional to
restrict sales of hand guns to
people who are twenty one and
the third fifth and eighth now
see it is not constitutional to
restrict hand and sales to only
people who are twenty one and
that take a type of circuits but
usually means that the supreme
court will look at it.
I like to turn to you gun
legislation that new mexico has
passed or has considered
some of this would be
very recent in some of its a
little older in twenty eighteen
the new mexico legislature
voted for passed in the
governor's signed orders of
protection and firearms which
was sp three twenty eight and
that was our law saying that
persons who are subject to
domestic violence restraining
orders could have their gun
rights restricted if the court
found that they were a danger
with those weapons
in constant in determining the
constitutionality of that bill
reheaming would be directly on
point me would tell us that yes
you can legislate that you can
regulate in that area
spate in twenty nineteen was
firearm sales background checks
specifically private sales would
require a background check done
by an fsl
dability truck that bills
chaptered and
not challenged
in twenty twenty the legislature
passed asb five which was the
extreme risk fire on protection
order bill sometimes called the
red flags bill
once again reheat me as likely
applicable and determining that
that lies constitutional arm it
was at that but that was also
updated in the most recent
session to explicitly allow law
enforcement officers to file for
orders under the under the earth
post atche.
As the chairman should we pass
the firearm sales waiting period
as before twenty seven and
twenty twenty three that was
challenged in the
district for the district of new
mexico are judge browning wrote
a
I want to say a hundred and four
pages
that they get the number wrote a
hundred and four page analysis
finding that the fight they're
waiting period was
constitutional
judge browning is indeed a very
conservative charge and also has
a
as a reputation for being
extremely thorough and very
rarely reversed
on appeal they case is pending
in the tenth circuit so we'll
wait to see what what happens at
that point
we pass to bill sp five and
twenty twenty four fires near
pulling places
firearms in the unfair practices
act was both in twenty twenty
five and previously a bill has
not passed
sometimes called the assault
weapons band the gas operated
semi automatic rateful band was
was brought again last session
it had been filed previously and
it has not passed on to talk
about those two
near go safe bill or gas
operated semi automatic firearm
span asp to seventy nine
after a minute would be on any
semi automatic firearm that is
over eight and a half inches and
lengths with a detachable
magazine
semi automatic mechanism of fire
is not with the new york press
has been talking about as
automatic weapons semi automatic
means when you pull the trigger
one time one bullet is fired and
the gun reloads to allow you to
pull the trigger for the next
round.
Automatic fire would be pulled
the trigger and as long as you
hold that trigger down the gun
will repeat firing
so this bill would happen wood
band all
semi automatic
weapons larger than eight and a
half inches in size
including that use aa removable
magazine
it was pattern after senator
hyneric's proposed federal
legislation by the same name
I was passed through as this
senate judiciary committee I was
then sent to senate finance
committee and it was not heard
instant finance committee
with regard to its footing under
federal constitutional law that
would basically turn on that
snow's case which is the
decision not to hear maryland's
band so it's extremely unclear
what the supreme court mayor may
not do at this time with that
wit with it within a salt
weapons band.
The
sport twenty eight filed in the
last session and also previously
addresses or or would have would
address
persons in entities in the
business of selling firearms
related items
who make the decision or
otherwise are selling illegal
items illegal weapons
or weapons through the internet
without complying with the fell
process as well as weapons parts
that are otherwise illegal
the easy example of the most
discussed is our clock switches
devices that can be attached to
and otherwise legal semi
automatic crystal to make that
pistol fire in fully automatic
form
as before twenty eight is
attempt to work
and say around but with
a federal statute called the
protect lawful commerce in arms
act
plc aa was passed in twenty two
thousand five by congress with
the explicit purpose of ending
lawsuits that were then pending
against several gun manufacturer
factors by different cities and
states
it does allow there are
exceptions so essentially the
the plca
for bids last suits against gun
manufacturers going dealers can
distributors unless the act that
they're being sued for falls
into specific exceptions
the exception at issue in asked
before twenty eight is when a
sale or advertising or
distribution of firearms
firearms related items violate
state or federal law
knowingly violate state or
federal
debit aa also
cases interpreting it also limit
any actions that can be brought.
Under those exceptions so that
states can't simply pass laws
that say
the commonly standard is a
reasonable person or a
reasonable seller if you are not
a reasonable salary violate
statement it has to be a
specific and numerated act.
Which reason to the end i'm
trying to shoot for less than
half an hour
the overall.
The overall synopsis of word
where this where the state of
the wires federally speaking
with the supreme court is
statutes my regulate weapon may
not regulate weapons and common
use but they may regulate
dangerous and unusual weapons
i'll legislation is judged by
the historical analog test I saw
weapons band in maryland stands
at present where the supreme
court seems likely to hear some
a similar band case in the next
year or two
the other area of compare area
of of question that I have for
the or that to legislature may
want to consider is
new mexico
does presently prohibit the
possession of hand guns for
people who are eighteen we allow
your possessing hand going at
nineteen but not at eighteen and
we only had and we we we will
refuse to issue carry permits to
anyone who is not twenty one.
And with that I will stand for
questions authority alright
thank you branded so I imagine
it will probably get some dialog
in discussion going on get you
first up represent block would I
do appreciate that continuing
effort to hope you all
appreciate branded is making the
trying statement topic laws as
they changed really seemingly
weekly monthly yearly
dm
the other states are doing
various things and we're trying
to figure out where our limits
and our lanes are at too so
represented block and then
center several opens let me just
get an idea who have
really
represented a script of channel.
Loose brantley.
All right we'd be a temporary
take five minutes that no
resident block
thank you mister chair thank you
so much for the presentation so
I actually was taken it back at
your last slide talking about
final thoughts and my question
was pretty much it says the
weaken ban as a state unusual
weapons is that pretty much
would I understand when it comes
to unusual and dangerous because
I guess my question would be
the most commonly owned firearm
in the entire country is the are
fifteen which I own many of them
and i'm proud to say but i'm
just wondering how could that be
marked as unusual or
not a usually used firearm since
most people do indeed on them to
try
better check representative
you hit the now on the head so
the present dispute first of all
I would emphasize that the
weapons I can be regulated under
heller have to be dangerous and
unusual all weapons that
everything we're talking about
or dangerous unusual by itself
is also not enough dangerous and
unusual
not in and that's not to
disagree with you it's just to
emphasize the end
presently there is a split
between circuits and
have just as cabinets correct
there will be an increasing
split over whether or not the
air fifteen is a dangerous and
unusual and unusual weapon so
the fourth circuit in the and
considering the maryland band
got too dangerous and in usual
by saying that it is a
militaristic weapon and
militaristic weapons are
dangerous and unusual in the
context of what civilians should
own and therefore.
It falls outside the definition
of arms under the second
amendment.
You can and if you produce a
second ribson so just for the
clarification because it comes
up in this appointment made
earlier and a r is and sometimes
called them a sort weather but
it is not an automatic weapon
etc
miser chair and they are is not
an are fifteen is
definitionally not a
automatic weapon and so in are
fifteen is the civilian semi
automatic weapon it fires one
bullet per poll of the trigger
and automatic weapon which is
been a term that's been thrown
around in new york together with
m four which is a different
which is a similar looking gun
but fires in in an automatic
fashion and i'm sorry to repeat
representative it's going to
clarify that you're fine mister
chair now I won't reclaim my
time but
I am I am wondering because I
know when when the second
amendment was put into effect
it was to give balance to the
people in case the government
became tyrannical whereas we
would need
something that could be
effective such as in
militaristic use of arms so i'm
just wondering how the argument
could stand when it comes to the
maryland band mister bring
literature representative that's
the
that's the common defense theory
of the second amendment which
some courts have adopted at this
time the supreme the supreme
court focused on individual
right over common defense and
hello specifically referenced
firearms used for the defense
itself self her family so
the court may go there in the
future but as of right now as
supreme court has not addressed
the
collective defense idea which it
would say that militaristic arms
should be held by civilians so
that they can all join together
in the common defense of the c.
This.
All right thank you mister chair
thank you thank you so much
brandon so i'm still drinking my
third cup of coffee so bear with
me here so i'm just wondering
cause
hello
i'm pretty sure that hello
it did indeed uphold individual
rights but did it say anything
specifically about militaristic
arms
not not in the sense that you're
talking about it dead
specifically say that
so hello was two thousand eight
and written by anton in school
here in the heller decision he
specifically writes that note
that a restriction on for
example in sixteen is
constitutional so he doesn't
address the common defense
theory and and and arms that are
otherwise legal he specifically
addresses a military arm
that while legal is very very
difficult to acquire and
requires
a
class three
transfer and background check on
a good stuff so you can actually
purchase an automatic weapon in
the united states the automatic
weapon had to be manufactured
before
may march or may of nineteen
eighty six and be registered
with the federal government as
an automatic weapon in private
hands at that time no new
automatic weapons are allowed to
be
imported or manufactured for the
sale for sale to the general
public
but there are there are some
automatic weapons it can be
purchased outside of those few
weapons however civilian
ownership is limited to semi
automatic one pull of the
trigger for one boat
thank you mister chair but a r
fifteenth or not automatic so
they are an income and use in
there for.
In my opinion from what i'm
reading the state cannot
regulate them so I I just want
to stand with that and I am very
interested in the dialog so i'll
give it back to the chair but
thank you for your answers thank
you mister chair.
Thank you mr chair
and thank you for always being
an expert in this case of your
rate it changes every uh the
chairs rate it changes all the
time I have a couple of one
question that has to do with you
and domestic violence the
incredible thread has you know a
lot of the advocates are
concerned about the fact that
credible thread is not defined
in our statute it's good I think
it would comply with prohibit
because there's a hearing and a
judicial determination that the
individual does not or poses a
credible threat so I think that
those satisfy rehearing but with
the advocates are saying is
giving the judge the discretion
has resulted in cases in which
some judges say okay there's
domestic violence and there's a
gun in the home that's a
credible thread i'm taking the
gone away and other judges are
saying
he didn't threaten her with the
gun so i'm not taking the gun
away and that inconsistency is a
concern to the advocates do you
think it that concerned would
rise to a constitutional concern
under rainy in other words
should we defy incredible
threat.
Um well first I would note that
credible threat has to be the
most frequent in the use term in
that decision and it played a
huge role in the supreme court's
decision that you could restrict
gun rights to a person who has
not yet been called
california headache domestic
violence restraining order to
statute that did not require a
judged or actually should say
the other way automatically
restricted gun rates if
a domestic violence restraining
order was entered or even
restrictive
and that law was ultimately
determined to be on
constitutional
my concern would be with that
that guides on what the standard
should be likely does not run a
foul of
depending on how far it goes if
the guidance becomes in effect a
defacto guns will always be
removed with without any actual
determination of credible threat
dan that would likely fall
found the reason I think this is
so important is because the
judges seem to might be able to
distinguish between credible
thread credible fear
the data the data shows that a
home with a gun and domestic
violence
with domestic bands and again
present is five times more
likely to result in a in a
in a killing in that whole and
so.
And my understanding is new
mexico's even higher
and are intimate partner in a
intimate partner death review
team reports every year the most
common
way the interest intimate
partner death the most carmen
method of death is a weapon it's
a it's not is a weapon over my
weapons but is a gun
and in the vast majority of
those
the person was it was prohibited
under federal law from having a
gun because they had a domestic
violence order in place like new
mexico had not survived that
they were a file of their about
running a fall with federal law
however the state court had not
removed the gun
and so I think I think it's
important to give judges
guidance and I think if the
judge could have criteria
because I think judges are
afraid both ways they don't know
what to do both ways is this
unconstitutional
so i'm just gonna let him have a
gun or it or my god what if
there's a murder in this hole
i'm taking it out because it
scares me that he has a gun
emphasis and then which is level
of abuse in the home so my own
feeling is I think it's correct
as you know we have an update to
the whole
um
an update to the whole family
one of the protection act but I
think we could limit cutting in
three parts and deal with the
credible threat peace and I
think it's important that it be
constitutional so mister chair
with your permission i'd like to
work
with mister comings to to look
at that very closely because i'd
hate
I think it would be helpful to
have consistency on our state
law and I think we can do in a
way that would run file over him
check
it at all I I did have this
historical analytic a little bit
confused about this.
Their historical analog
and I run this down cause the
historical analog was and you
know they didn't have half of
the kind of far power I mean
our firepower that we have now
so so how do you
I mean i've always advocated for
bringing the constitutional into
present day but justice can
learn specifically said no um so
i'm very confused about how to
use this term and this concept
of historical in one
justice schillia was not around
for the historical analog
which given his very string
but then I think unfortunately
just as
tomorrow
thomas did it you know pulled in
escalate a concept in a place
for justically I had not very
problematic yet so I think it
and it's confusing but it's also
so in in determining that the
way to consider these lies is
solely historical analog
you can find a lot of analysis
laws in either direction for
example I mean must get clearly
are not we're not up to the
level of
dangerous dangerousness that a
or that any pistol modern pistol
is on the other hand there were
private individuals that honed
warships because we issued
letters of market reprisal that
allowed them to go hide other
ships in the ocean so they're
worth people who owned serious
military hardware and
that's part of what makes the
prediction of what what the
court will decide as a
historical analog very difficult
so my confusion is well placed
okay thank you thank you mister
chair
and the courts are very
confused.
I think that's a very fast one
representative very difficult
standard to thank you mister
very difficult standard to apply
admin to bring up this question
about what an are is it an arm
it's a little bit like what
senator city locus was talking
about there when and how in what
context were a r developed
fifteen was developed by
I think it was an it was
nineteen late nineteen fifties
are early nineteen sixties are
by eugene stoner the air fifteen
was developed up he had been he
had been a soldier and career
and they had seen an issue in
korea where you would have a
dead soldier holding his rifle
with one round missing and it's
because her thought to have been
because when you
entrench warfare your face to
face where the person that
you're shooting they would
firable it and they would freeze
and then there would be shot so
the first generation are the
first design was the military
weapon and that was specifically
designed so that it could fire
could be light to could carry
sufficient rounds more rounds
than a previous rifle it carried
and it could fire in a fully
automatic fashion so if you were
confronted with that
circumstance again the soldier
who froze with his finger pulled
on the trigger would continue to
fire the air fifteen was
divorced from that
asa civilian legal version.
Even though at the time that the
air fifteen was developed it was
legal to manufacture and sell
for the automatic firearms the
are fifteen was developed as a
semi automatic weapon which was
start to be more desirable in
the civil in.
We developed for the military
yeah
and you under the announcement
that we vicknowledge the
circuits or split on ****
there is a case there is a kind
of a line of analysis that has
deemed and they are not an arm
are an arm of firearm as the
constitution refers to it
we went over that brand and
appreciate that
so then the question is can the
presumption on apply if the
court deems it's not what under
the clear language of the
constitution then the product
presumption won't apply and
there are courts saying that the
**** are not arms as that term
is used in the constitution so
that takes us out of you know
presumption on the violation of
the second amendment
and so so I just want to
underscore
it when we can all predict
armchair lawyers and real
lawyers
can predict what it is and how
the supreme court will land but
we are not there yet sat affair
statement
mrperiod chair representative I
believe that's a first statement
and your synopsis is very good
the reason that the arm for
circuit maryland court said this
laws okay is because they said
since this is a dangerous and
unusual weapon it is not
therefore an arm and thus the
presumption that the second
amendment protects it is not in
play and we're therefore able to
regulate it and I think some of
the case is also tired to its
original military explicitly
that's that the the dangerous
and unusual finding was based on
the fact that it is in
militaristic they did not say a
military arm but they did seem
monitors
so now moving on to just a
little bit different topic you
did not talk about magazines and
regulating m.
Magazines so let's talk a little
bit about that where is the case
law in terms of magazine sides
and whether or not there's some
lattitude than acknowledged in
the courts on regulating
magazine size for a hours there
are
district in circuit splits and
the snopes be brown case that
they just denied seardon also
addressed magazine limits so and
the fourth circuit and maryland
magazine limits our
constitutional and the fifth
circuit magazine limits are not
constitutional in the which is
the fifth circuit is taxes
louisiana are consign
and
does any eye through economic
top of my head for the fifth but
the seven circuit which is the
illinois case also addresses
magazine limits in addition to
generally speaking a salt
weapons band and magazine limits
bands go hand in hand the
exception is california they
litigate those they passed them
separately and their live being
litigated separately
in california
the quartet frozen seemed to be
ruling that the assault weapons
ban is not a constitutional but
the
magazine band is so magazine ban
of ten rounds has been going to
be constitutional and several
districts in several states and
several circuits it has also
been found to be
unconstitutional in some
circuits and some states
magazine bands of less than ten
our jet have been found to be
unconstitutional and some pretty
liberal circuits and that's the
courts found that setting the
number less than ten was I can
to banning the weapon because if
you keep moving the number down
eventually you would find a
place where there were no
magazines and that would
therefore render the weapon
usel.
Thank you brand what is the
common number on in terms of
limit on magazine mr chair
representative of ten seems to
be the most common number by far
oh i'm sorry did were you asking
the the the limit yeah okay yeah
ten yeah okay great I think
that's all I have mister chair
thank you
thank you mr chairman thank you
brandon for being here today I
think you gave a great
presentation you've been very
helpful to those unless I know
at least on senate judiciary and
coming in not just starting
legislative session but all year
I I this is beyond your control
but I am a little bit
disappointed to see that on the
agenda you were I agenda item
number two remains listed as tba
up until just a few days ago a
couple days ago that's I I hope
that was an oversight and not
intentional because your
presentation was important and I
think we are here to do the work
of the people in the people
deserve to know that this was
going to be a hot agenda item
conversation here today and
could have otherwise tuned it
regardless of what size they
decide to aren't I have said
this before and and you know
this I think that all of us have
a role to play and how we're
gonna address violence and our
communities including gun
violence and that includes those
of us that are responsible going
owners because the reality is
nobody whatever side of the
issue you are when it comes to
the second amendment agrees or
wants to see another mass
shooting happen not a score not
in a community not a park we all
have a role to play and push it
back where we tend to to
disagree as an all these
definitions and it sounds like
in your presentation you said
while we're headed to the to the
courts and I don't enter the
courts and providing a
definition of what an assault
right for lists are really even
what dangerous and unusual yes
but I know what the definition
is it and in one of the in one
of your your presentation you
liste.
The bill on the at week we we
referred to it as the go saved
act a blanket ban on any gas
powered
assault assault gas powered
weapons we agreed that included
in that definition would include
world war two era weapons
certainly not something that
maybe we were intended to target
and so blanket legislation is
not an area where we can agree
on categories where do you we
agree where the areas that we
can green cut confined comment
ground not included on your list
of brandon was actually an
attempt and I believe it was the
democrat lawmaker that brought
forward legislation that would
lower the age for considery
you're on the state of new
mexico we can open carry at
nineteen years old you cannot
conceal carry until twenty one
what are the reasons why I
supported that legislation is
there is a difference between a
legal gun owner and a
responsible and one thing we can
do is lawmakers is promote
responsible gun ownership very
different than legal god
ownership and requiring someone
to go through an extensive gun
safety training I would rather
run into a nineteen year old who
was a responsible gun owner who
has gone through safety than any
twenty one year old who maybe
who hasn't had courses and got
safety but then it comes back to
this when we talk about obvious
loss is continuously in this
committee I hear that we don't
need any more loss and in this
case I think I would agree
because when I look through all
of these highlighted super
predator cases in new mexico
there is an a single gun more
that would have prevented these
tragedies not a single one
because all of them were
breaking the law all of them
were breaking a current law it
was in place all of them could
be behind bars today and nothing
no gun law today that we.
Past moving forward could have
preventies and so it comes back
to the fact that new mexico has
dangerous and unusual criminals
that are playing this this state
and instead of focusing once
again on how we target law
abided and even responsible
going owners the conversation in
this legislator needs to go back
as to how we target criminals
and unfortunately none of these
proposals that you brought
forward with a darn thing to
keep new mexicans
thank you branded for your time
today
mr chair if I meet just one
point
million point one actually we
allow open carrier nineteen
carrier at nineteen four pistols
but open carried for rivals and
long going to eighty
so there's a number of things
there we've got a little bit
time hopefully help maybe
provoked more discussion first
of all the center brandly
brought the tv determined on the
agenda until late I take
responsibility for that we were
still developing some of the
agenda that was not anything
deliberate we began in the
morning with the comments from
the president of the mesquarium
reservation and striked about
the respect that she grew up
with home as guns again owners
child about taking them close
class nine years old stuck about
her dad teach near how to use
guns and in the importance I
grew up the same way
farming when she family I had
gone they have guns
and would start the same way to
have a great deal of respect for
goods and as a result of that I
continue to be going owner I I
think that it's incumbent on the
those that are gone owners and
we have some very strong
advocates here as for gun
ownership you're in the audience
as well too I think it's
incumbent on this to be the
leaders when it comes to smart
intelligent discussions on guns
which is why I began trying to
drive the distinction with what
is an automatic weapon versus
what is an assault w.
Commonly misunderstood things
the last comment you made a so
brantley about the concealed
carrier bill you know that I
sponsored that this last session
because it seeming it seems to
me that the the gun violence was
in these days and i'm glad to
see our chiefs of police here
they're the good gun violence
that we're seen these days is
best I can tell is it to your
example what are we trying to do
to really solve some of these
problems it it seems to me that
what we most often see are young
people who are taking guns to
parties on friday nights rate
when I was growing up it'd be a
cager and the radio these days
it's a nine millimeter glock as
a badge of manhead or youth or
whatever it may be so taking
guns to environments where when
somebody gets upset
they should somebody right we
had a fourteen year old killed
this last weekend in the dorm
and you and them didn't escape
me that they were playing video
games beforehand
I I not a good video game player
but i've seen him and the point
of the game is to shoot lots of
people kill out people who have
lots of blood and gets speed
across the screen so it
unsurprised me that the kids who
have a gun at a party who were
playing these games and a
shooting sorry
and so the purpose of my
buildings last session was to
increase the penalties for
carrying a concealed carry
weapon without a permit and to
try and create more people to
get a permit and to go through
that process unfortunately that
that bill didn't pass through
but
it's an illustration of what I
think we should be doing as gun
owners which is to be showing
the right leadership on that and
that's why I passed the
background check law that's why
passed the seventy waiting
period that's why I passed the
red flag bill as a gun owner
because I don't want to be one
of those gun owners who save
i'm not going to take the n r a
position which is no gone lost
we can't give any quarter at all
because to give anything at all
is the is a concertion
in all notes in a brandly as
well to that you talked about
rightly so the go safe assault
weapons or call the software and
build this last session.
Um didn't pass and but it did
pass our committee the senate
judiciary committee although you
will also remember that I was
the only democrat in the entire
legislature voted against that
bill and voted against that bill
even in my own committee even
though it passed because it's
partnerly unconstitutional
unquestionably on the
constitutional and i'm not the
kind of guy who wants to make a
headline and say I got on board
with the party line to say we're
going to pass and assault weapon
band just to say that we did it
and then have it structure in
the same way that when the
governor couple years ago passed
in executive order banning
weapons guns in albert kirking
the next day I came out so
that's one constitutional and
it's a waste of our time and I
went to the federal hearing and
it was struck down immediately I
I don't see a point in us
debating and passing laws that
are really just for shell then
that's just not what i'm about
to
that that hopefully explains a
little bit about where i've been
on some of these votes and some
of the things that were
introducing and why I think it's
important to be here today
i'd like to add just a couple of
things really quickly here at
the end again i'm recognizing
the chiefs of police here today
when we were in touch last
meeting one of our presentations
was on and I I don't think any
of you all were here
unfortunately but at a tower but
one of our topics was why were
having problems with recruitment
and retention law enforcement
officers in
that surprisingly the response
usually from law enforcement
from the municipal league and
the socialist counties will we
need more money to pay our
office of more money that's kind
of typical hope you will
understand that's what we'll go
is here in government right is
we need more money when you pair
people more money what never
gets discussed and and wasn't
discussed then
I understand as a male
forgive me ladies and the rest
of you for taking a moment to be
a little bit gender specific but
the blood worst would never say
the reason they have trouble
with recruitment and retention
is an honest answer which is I
think they're scared
that's it's a scary job
it's it's a scary thought to go
out there on the street.
And like the law enforcement
officer who was killed in new
york a couple of days ago or
anytime we lose the law
enforcement officer it's a it's
a risky job it's a scary job and
and I think it's deplorable that
law enforcement are on the
streets and outgunned and
outmatched or that their
adversaries have weapons that
are superior to their own and
greater numbers we would never
accept that from our military
we've never allowed country to
go to war where have a military
that
lesser than than our adversaries
and yet we do that with police
all the time we said you get out
of the streets and you're your
adversaries are are better armed
than you are sometimes
that's deplorable so that's part
of why i've been a big advocate
of trying to get some
restrictions on some of these
weapons it's because I I do
think that that there were been
honest that's a problem with
recruitment and retention and I
don't I wouldn't blame I
wouldn't blame anybody they were
being honest I said that's why
it's it's kind of a male thing
we're never going to say well
priorities and we don't have
retain and re- retain the
recruit waller's office because
scary those guys are never going
admit that we're never gonna say
that's why we not want to do the
job at I I think that would be
honest I think it'd be a more
honest answer to see up we have
trouble getting people that who
don't want to get shot don't
want to go up with much of a
knuckle heads who have guns and
so we ought to say
and i'm i'm addressing those
comments to you all i'm i'm
hoping for the day when law
enforcement becomes the leaders
of gun safety loss when they're
the ones that we don't want to
go out there and and we don't
want to retain we don't put our
people out in the streets
and and I would blame them and I
say we're going to be the
leaders for for gun safety loss
and for infrastrictor penalties
and for maybe restricting the
ownership of of people who have
these these weapons so i'm i'm
hoping that those comments are
mostly addressed to you
gentlemen in the front it's a
it's something i've never seen
before i've never seen long
force to see how we need to get
restrictions and controls on
guns because you're making our
job impossible to be out there
and I I hope we will do so so
again I appreciate the the
presentation i.
I had the build to increase
penalties on conceal carrier
because III just think it's
the what we're really seeing or
not the big mass killings so
brought that that's those are
the ones to make the headlines
their sad their tragic but there
is not the the the common
problem that the common promise
had raised out again
and every staring around and if
we may be made that a little bit
more smart strict for young
people to to realize this
consequences to do that without
permission without a permit we
have to do so in the build a did
a number of things that increase
the penalties for carrying a
weapon without a permit
number one which you supported
my appreciate that it also
allowed us to give conceal carry
primitive to a younger people at
eighteen rate and the goal there
is to get get him to go take
that weekend long course and
i've done it i've taken the
course and have been more young
people take that course maybe
gets that greater respect for
them to do so so we increase the
penalties for nightcaring with a
permit and making it easier and
more attractive to have a permit
I think that might do some good
with young people out I don't I
don't know but I would hope so
so that's the id behind that
bill I wish we were to passed it
and we didn't
I think that covers where we're
at with the laws who appreciate
rips and channel it sounds like
we might be able to get a
magazine bill to they'll just
add on the end the last thing
that's hard for me as a lawyer
in there of some lawyers in the
room it's it's hard for me to
sit here with many of you all
her knowledge and go how the
hell do we have the supreme
court on a five to four vote
can't agree and what the
constitution says it's right
there in front of us and how do
we have all these circuits aids
or get fifth circuit ten circuit
really smart judges I got to
tell you those the people that
are on those courts of generally
pretty damn smart good lawyers
and they've been around for a
long time and how can they all
disagree with the second
amendment says and it's kind of
it's kind of embarrassing from
his lawyer to say our all these
smart wares and we can't agree
with something serves.
And we ought to at least
acknowledge that it's politics
there is a political component
to this and the supreme court is
very political though you talked
about one circuits got one
interpretation well
doubt I put back six and action
so no doubt the circuit that
says that is texas and louisiana
and the circuit that's going to
be california or new york is
going to have a different
interpretation and it's on porch
and unfortunately that that the
political a leadings are
influencing something this
important and some simple
language but we are at least
acknowledge and well acknowledge
that new mexico is what it is
and we're counting to not be
among the more conservative
states and swice I spec will
start seeing some of the
magazine
legislation and we'll see some
of maybe some more efforts at
what so called the sort weapons
and will probably pass them here
in new mexico would be my guess
and will wait to see where the
feds come down but I even when
the feds do come down the woman
the spring comes down I i'm not
doubting for a moment that
that'll be a penguin that swings
right and is the supreme court
perhaps changes will perhaps not
seem a different interpretation
the second moment like you were
saying what is an arm and at the
second
what is a welldashregulated
militia where is the right of
the people that's the right of
the people that society as the
whole or is it each one of us
individually
I don't know but we've had a
problem in our country and
we had to try to figure it out
I do them after under the next
subject I have been hearing
increasingly that there's a
prospect for a special session
I think the dear the purported
and reason for us coming is
going to be the big beautiful
bill consequences and what
that's going to mean to our
state but I also been told that
that the crime agenda will be
back potentially back into the
special session again.
I've tried to let the governor
staff know that if that's going
to happen again this committee
played a pretty critical role
than the last special session on
that subject in i'd like to know
what they intend for the coming
special session of those can be
crime legislation so we can
begin to maybe try and tackle it
here a little bit too so so the
next presentation that we're a
little bit early because I think
she's a pretty remotely but i've
asked the governor's general
council that to be in front of
the committee only because again
I had heard and that's part of
white senate brantley you're
seeing the agenda changing a
little bit right is is i'm here
in that we may have a special
session on chriminated
legislation so we're going to go
there next if she's ready looks
like she is good that's the next
agenda as I explained all of you
i'm going to have to be leaving
you for a court obligation to
have in santa fe but i'll see
back tomorrow and will be we've
got a a good agenda to some
enjoy your evening tonight if
you all are up late tonight let
me know and i'll i'll be back
from santa fe about nine nine or
ten o'clock I know someone who
will probably still be up so
i'll see it and see if the
slides and the other ways
represent channel it's your
meeting.
Yeah.
The.
Holly can you hear us.
I can hear you near me
yes we can hear you
holly okay so here we are ccj
were in lovely rodo so in it
looks like you're in your usual
office is that right
that's
and so we have holly again
chief general council office of
the governor only really
appreciate your willingness to
come us come in brief us on
governors thoughts on potential
crime legislation going forward
so the floor is yours holly.
Thank you very much good morning
everybody are nice to see you
all the virtually and I i'd like
to thank.
The chair and the vice chair for
allowing me to appear remotely
for this it helps me
greatly in terms of other
responsibilities that I have so
thank you very much I did not
get to listen to the
presentation this morning I only
was on long enough for senator
savantas to promise to leave
before I started talking
but I I suppose we can eight
eight I can live with but
I did too near about ten minutes
ago or so so I I heard the end
of them.
Of
the discussion with with senator
servantes what i'd like to do is
talk to you a little bit about
the special session
topics that would be potentially
on the call for the special
session and then what I want to
do is talk to you about other
legislation that the governor is
looking at considering for the
next last for her thirty day
session so yes the two questions
will there be a special session
the answer to that question is
most likely definitely yes then
that's question always is when I
don't have an answer for you on
that one my gas would be late
august early september obviously
that's something that we need to
sort out sooner rather than
later but that would be my best
my best guess.
Items on the agenda for special
session.
I senator servant case said it
is things involving the big
beautiful bill ways to reinforce
our health care system our our
snap system other other topics
like that certainly would be
things that would be of interest
so that we can just make sure
we're not leaving the most long
roll of us behind that we can
keep our public education system
running and and the like other
issues that the governor would
put on the call for a special
session as related to the
federal government governor is
willing to have a bill on the
call that would be in the
presence of immigration
facilities in the state of new
mexico that is not something
that we have previously had come
up to her desk before and I know
there's been a lot of back and
forth on it and III do believe
that she is at this point ready
to put a bill like that on the
car
in terms of.
Other criminal legislation I
think what you should expect to
see are things that you've seen
before the danger to self and
others fell on in possession
bill and
I add my understanding from the
chief justices that he spoke to
you it's house about a fixed to
the confidency bill from last
session.
Okay great so that would be on
there as well and my
understanding is that one should
be a a pretty easy one it's just
a fix involving
whether confidence the all
competency proceedings need to
be exclusively in district court
or whether they can
do both worlds as they were
doing before.
I don't think that there's a
need for me to talk about those
bills to you again I think
you've
all all heard me talk about the
danger to self and other bills
many many times I don't think
you need to hear me talk about
it again we've all talked about
fell in possession many many
times I don't think you need to
hear me talk about it again
so what I thought I would do
with the next bit of time that I
had is to talk about other bills
that the governor is interested
in
potentially for the thirty day
session that's coming up.
So.
To that and.
The first bill that that we
would put on the call for a
thirty day session is a bill
that would
amend our aggregated burglary
statute for those of you who who
watch such things our state
supreme court put out an opinion
a week or two ago I believe it
was state person's jones
that case vacated at the
conviction of a young man who
killed robert romero here in
santa fe who is admittedly
somebody that I knew adjacently
I would not call rap friends he
was very very good friends with
many many of my good friends but
so rob.
Walk up one night in twenty
nineteen to find heard somebody
on his portal in his backyard
the person who jumped a fence
and was in his backyard trying
to break into his house
through the back
doors and robert confronted this
individual on the portal to his
home where he was shot and
killed the supreme court will
the the offender was charged
with a first degree murder as
the result of an aggravated
burglary which had an
enhancement to it.
And long story short the supreme
court reversed basically saying
that the portal itself does not
count as part of the dwelling
place for purposes of this
statute so the fix that is
proposed is to amend that stagic
to make clear that a dwelling
also includes attached
structures such as the porch
such as a portal.
That would be
one of the first items for the
call in a thirty day session.
The.
Additionally
there are some other crime
related bills that the governor
is considering one of them is
this could be done either
through rural or through
legislation but I suppose or
both which would involve
the parents are guardians of
juveniles who are charged with
offences relating to firearms
to be added to the complaint as
parties now to be clear this
isn't I think it's bennies law.
This isn't about parentals whose
whose children use their weapons
I suppose that that could be
part of it but it it is really
more the situation of a i'm just
gonna make up a hypothetical
right at a child bicycle at
school and uses it or gets
caught with it at school and
then is in front of a judge on
this weapons possession charge
in those cases it would be it
would be more like that where
the parents would be added on to
the caption for these juvenile
proceedings so that the parents
would have a level of
accountability going forward
with me guards two things like
ensuring that the child is is a
complaint with the court orders
either for treatment or
therapies are community services
or what have you.
So that is that is that's
another one that would be on the
governors
list for the thirty day one
thing to consider there and
again this is you know i'm
socializing kind of these bills
with you all and and working
through this at the same time
one question that I would have
in that and for a lot of folks
would have would be what do we
do in the foster parent scenario
do we want to have an exception
for foster parents
because again that these maybe
kids that they don't even
particularly know very well or
or even have the ability to can
advert supervise in a lot of
ways but that's just something
for us to put a pin in and talk
about a little bit in in
addition.
Another related to guns and kids
and schools again we're talking
about this juvenile justice
component is it.
Perhaps a penalty enhancement
for selling a gun near on our
near school grounds and I don't
mean legal weapons I don't mean
that there are farm dealers in
that sort of thing what I mean
is
when we were speaking to a
district attorney relatively
recently and asked them you know
where where kids getting these
guns the answers they get I
think that been doing the
transactional part of it
probably on their phone somehow
the way most things are done
these days and then the actual
exchange they hand off of the
weapon is done on school grounds
normally so I would say that
there's the sailor transfer of
these guns on or near school
grounds and they don't just go
right across the street
would be another issue for us to
consider adding an additional
penalty for to do that.
Continue to scroll down here.
The governor is also out in
terms of the juvenile justice.
Matters again an issue that came
up in the last session this was
part of a larger bill I know
there was a lot of.
The.
Can a construction about the
general justice issues in the
last session one part of the
bigger bill that was presented I
believe ID a pregnant was the
the component that added second
degree murder takes it from me a
useful offense and moves into
the categorially serious you
fall offense
so the governor would would be
wanting to do that as a stand
alone fix just that one thing
you know if there was applicate
or desire for a larger juvenile
justice package of course we're
always more than willing to talk
about and think about those
things but as a standalone issue
at the the notion of having
second degree more account is a
serious you full offences wonder
that the governor takes very
seriously and would want on the
call as well
as it relates to to firearms I
did two injustice in time to
hear some discussion about maybe
i'll legislation related to
magazines and i'm assuming high
capacity magazines but I didn't
I didn't hear more than that I
got I I too about a bit too late
to hear that i'm sure that that
would be something the governor
would be interested in as well
ghost guns three d printed guns
those are also issues that the
governor would like to take up
as well in the thirty days
prohibitions and restrictions on
silencers and a could continue
to work on the assault weapons
band are all.
Topics that the governor would
like to
to continue to have.
Additional conversations on
get legislation about and have
them have them on the call I do
want to know in the in my
apology they didn't get to hear
brandon's presentation this
morning but just to put a little
pain in this as well.
If I can get her brain as
presentation so it's possible
that the he was maybe but maybe
one more new ones in the way he
presented it I did get to look
at his slides that he put
together and I just want to know
two small things to little again
that we're or not quite
corrections but just just things
to not so first of all the the
eight circuit case that was in
the slides worth versus jacobson
on page fifteen what you could
see is that it it strikes down a
ban on any public carry for
anyone under twenty one it
wasn't just a ban on concealed
carry so I think that that's
that that's a nuance worth
noting the other portion of it
was that our name the go safe.
Bill just to be really clear the
go safe band that we had it was
on a firearm over eight and half
inches long with detachable
magazines what I just want to
make clear there is that
there's something that in the
slight presentation that says it
doesn't include historic pistols
that are smaller than eight
point five inches on on the bill
in the bill SB two seventy nine
there's a whole list of
exceptions and included in
theirs that the bill does not
regulate firms that shoot that
they're the twenty two right
that are
twenties or less or the
requiring based pistols that are
the most part of the kind of
pistols regardless of like so I
just want to clarify that those
weren't part of the ghost if act
before a before I leave my train
a thought and forget other.
Other issues related to guns
that the governor is considering
have to deal with issues related
to reporting a duty to report
stolen firearms
a
eight the possibility of having
a state regulation for gun
dealers to.
To help them be license and
regulated by the state as well
and see there's one more pot the
the possible addition of a
conviction for a misdemeanor a
hate crime to be added to the
list of the prohibited possessor
this is going to be up to twist
of made up the prohibited
possessor statute there are a
couple enumerated mister meaners
that are already a part of it.
So topic for consideration would
be the the addition of a behave
crime to that so that is the uh.
What is it the fifteen or twenty
minute version of topics that
the governor is is looking at in
terms of juvenile justice in
terms of crime legislation got
legislation and other
legislation for the special
session so with that I I mean I
see it's just it's eleven now
which is probably when I was
about supposed to start but I am
here ready for any questions for
anybody that has any questions
comments or or concerns or
additions
thank you i'm I will take names
but I think german survived has
wanted to make a few comments
and questions before you have to
take off thank you all and I do
need to get out of her highly
nice tried to get me out of here
before and
will make this easier than your
use to perhaps and i'll have the
committee asking most questions
you did mention one thing
potentially for the special
session that I think was
important to point out for you
in the committee which is the
governor seems to be interested
in perhaps I think used to work
banning immigration facilities
in your mexico we've had that
legislation and the last several
sessions which would
be local governments from
operating immigration detention
facilities in any way at all I
just want to let the committee
know before I leave madam sure
that my maintenance is our next
meeting will be in los cruises
we're going to try really hard
to have you all come down to one
of the only two facilities that
is doing that so terror shaperl
operated facility I just saw
exact cook here when when it
goes at cook was a former
representative and he represents
them and he's told me we can get
in now again there is there is
act
for those of you don't record
for those of you don't know
former representatives that good
and zack and I have talked about
trying to get into cd o terror
detention facility holly I
wanted to let you know that
we're gonna try and do that and
go down there to see it a zack
is that still something we you
think we can do all right III
asked because increasingly what
I see congressional and senator
people trying to go to some of
these facilities they're they're
turned away they're told they
can't go in there arrest it
through to the ground all that
kind of stuff so you all bring
some.
Bring a tooth brush and
hopefully will be able to get
out of there but the zack you're
going to help us make that
happen I think it'll be next
month so I wanted to let the
committee know that encourage
you to come down and encourage
holly and and the governor's
staff to perhaps join us at the
end
and bargains again
twenty fifth twenty seven is the
plan dates for that meeting down
southern it's going to be it's
going to take some doing to get
everybody there and get bust
from las crucials where the
meeting will be out down to it's
about a thirty forty minute
drive so there's going to be
some transportation issues so
before I left I just want to let
you all know that that's going
to take some cooperation help
from you and appreciate zack
helping us do that human I
talked about this about a year
ago and and the reason for that
is because i've resisted the
efforts to try and ban
the state and local governments
from doing this and i'll just
give you my reason pretty simply
which is the the groups who have
been promoting this seem to
think that if you shut down the
new mexico beds
that the fence won't be
detaining people and my attitude
for the last several years and I
think we're seeing that now with
the new administration is if we
shut down the new mexico beds
they're just going to send him
someplace else and and you know
texas serve alcatraz or
alligator alcohols or you know
some other deplorable places and
i'd rather have new mexico
where we're I think a little bit
more humane perhaps in a little
more civilised as a as a state
having those people detained
close to their families and
close to a state and a culture
and the people that the perhaps
don't see immigration quite the
same way as others do to so
that's been my reason for
opposing those bads and i'll
tell you some of those detention
facilities are in all parcel and
they're in their disturbed
putting up overnight their tents
and so i'd rather see folks but
let's go find out let's go down
to shop around see what the
facility looks like i'm sure the
probably exactly hopefully the
letter s.
Commit
anyone questions on that before
I take off
five tried many times to get
into those facilities
unannounced senator I mean
representative I want going to
ask me to go several times to
grants and I said i'd like to go
but on and out
and that concerns me because the
facilities what I hear from the
people within is yeah they do a
nice dog and pony show when it's
announced but the cruelty and
the nasty the the
like the feces in the in the
jails at least in torrents
county or in the
area happens when we're not
there
and so I mean yeah that's great
that we can visit but I wish and
I hope that we're able to talk
to people within it
confidentially in privately that
would be helpful
i'm glad you heard maybe you can
talk to all of us a little bit
i'll say the big i've kind of
hijacked the meeting from holly
and I don't mean to do that but
on a different type exciting I I
don't want to get us after that
but but at the zack has been on
this committee's act was on
judiciary I work together many
years on the things and i'll
just tell you we have the
correction secretary coming a
little later during our meeting
in former administrations and I
think she said she would do the
same thing legislators were
given express authority to come
into any state facility on
announced because because your
point is right center we know
that everybody puts on a fresh
go to paint when we're showing
up and we used to be able to do
that in the correction secretary
and given us that authority to
show up on announce at any for
selling the state now again this
is a little different the
celebrity
specifically i've cited the
statute and they said nope we
are not a state facility there
are great so so you'll talk to
the correction sector about that
and other state facilities
that's always true of this
committee but when it comes down
to this facility it not being a
state facility and perhaps with
federal laws over overraidness.
It be may not be what we'd like
may not be able to show up on an
outside paying your saying your
point but we're we're in this
case we're going to give you
notice right so due to paying
brush that
and I did he's the chairman
about
what we're giving him enough
time to clean the place up
before we go out there
so and I think he's known this
for a few months now hopefully
that's enough time to get things
all repainted and tidy
and me madam chair by making the
senators to deal with I will
tell you when my neighbors in
las crucials is a administrative
law judge and immigration light
judge and i've known for a very
long time and I call him a
friend used to be a district
court judge a state discrete
he's now the judge who hears
these cases at I trust him and
i'll try and get him to come to
our committee and speak to us I
think is a very honourable
person and he gives me his own
report and works in that
facility on regular basis
good luck hearing
okay taking the names folks i've
got senator
to heal
block
anyone else
about this
oh okay so because all right
that gives us a few to start
with we have some time so i'm
senator to heal
thank you madame chair thank you
holly good to you I was hoping
they get to see you in person
I am glad to hear that juvenile
justice is not one of the
matters that has been considered
for a special session I am
working with a a fairly
significant group of legislators
both senate and house and local
days as long as as well as a
local county and law enforcement
so would love to have a
conversation with your team at
some time probably closer to.
October
i'd get some travel going on so
that we could can have come to
some agreement on
a bigger package than the small
package that you said that the
governor's interested in
that being said I would also ask
that I didn't hear you mentioned
the hemp issue the delta eight
and I would like to see that
added to if not the special
session there was there is
pretty good support for that
bill it just didn't make it
through the last leg arm on
concurrence in the house so I
would like to see that as a
public safety issue particularly
for our children added to a
special session session if not
at the very least the thirty day
session thank you.
Are we talking about the
synthetic can of annoyed bill
that didn't come up the last
time
madame chair holly that's
exactly the one.
Okay holly you're freezing up a
little bit it's a little if
you're speaking right now we
don't hear you
I was not speaking okay
anything else in your welcome
representative block
thank you madame chair thank you
holly so I I actually wanted to
thank you and appreciate you for
taking time out of your busy
schedule for this committee and
then also you've met one on one
with me with representative lord
about certain issues so I do
want to appreciate you for that
I just had one quick question to
begin with madam chair I just
want to make sure this special
session are we going to be
working around at the interim
calendar for the legislature
because I know that the staff
works extremely hard to put
these different venues together
and I just want to make sure
that we're not going to be
interrupting any of that can you
give me some inside on that
manifer and holding.
Thank you very much for
representative it and nice to
see you so I didn't get to see
one person as well and and and
we have met together person and
I will reiterate to you into
everybody else on the committee
always happy to meet at at any
time.
My door is always
is always open
it's a great point about the
intercommittees I did take note
of the august twenty fifth to
twenty seven date that german
servant tastes noted I will
absolutely make sure that those
dates are are considered when
these things are being are being
scheduled I know when the
governor talks to legislative
leadership about it that those
things that do typically come up
in our address but you have my
you have my word that i'll make
sure that it's something that's
considered.
Thank you madame chair thank you
so much holly and then a next
question I know we were talking
I had to step out for a phone
call I apologize at the
beginning of your presentation
did you say when I am sorry if
if you're going to put any
firearm specific legislation on
the special session docket such
as the.
Any attempts to ban capacity
magazines or go safe was that on
the general thirty day or was
that under special manager.
Manager representative that
would be for the thirty day
session those of those are going
to be bills that we want to make
sure we have plenty of time and
consensus on.
Perfect thank you so much
manager thank you holly
purchase.
I can't senator said the locals
thank you madam chair and I am
really happy that the government
is open to the idea of bending
the detention
i've had the opportunity to talk
to individuals and also to the
lawyers who go in there
and
I
I think that the government
should not be complicit
with the detailing people like
this way especially new mexico's
government
what happens is because these
detention centers contract with
the counties they don't have to
go through the review process
that they would if they
contracted directly with the
federal government so the
federal government has a built
in review process and
contracting with the counties
allow these had allows these
private facilities to evade that
process the other thing about
these private facilities is
because they're not state or a
county
or a state facilities they don't
have to comply with an announced
visit
and they're also night subject
to the same kind of scrutiny
that our state facilities are
and so what we hear about feces
in the floors and and the
detainees having to clean it up
in those kinds of stories
is always denied
yet attorneys have told me they
can smell the feces for when
they go into visit the clients
so i'm i'm really delighted to
see that the other thing I
wanted to uhm to mention since
you're talking about the thirty
days and we're talking about
criminal justice reform
of forty states in the country
have a compensation frameworks
for people who have found
factually innocent after they've
been wrongfully imprisoned in
and that might be something that
the governor thinks about um
we're one of the ten states that
don't and I recently looked into
this and the civil right statute
just don't.
Statute of limitations problems
all kinds of problems so that
may be something to think about
and in addition we're hearing a
lot from librarians from around
the state I just have a meeting
including library from clovis
about
people out people who are not
part of this school communities
trying to band books in the
school libraries
and that might be something that
the governor wants to think
about the environment for that
is not pleasant and the scary
thing to me is some of these
people don't want to be public
about talking about which is
already which is another concern
that they are fearful of being
public about these attempts and
so III don't know if the
government be interested but i'd
be happy to connect you or
anyone else with librarians who
have personal stories about
what's going on in the libraries
in the school libraries
but thank you so much for that
overview that's really helpful
to us to know what's on the
governor's mind and to
enter work collaboratively too
to improve our state thank you
manager thank you senator
representative and I
thank you madame
thank you holly for the
presentation i'm also really
glad that we're going to be
talking about the banning of the
ice facilities and really
appreciate the back I know
earlier in your presentation you
mentioned you know as we were
thinking of special session we
were trying to address the
federal cuts to health care in
particular
i'm wondering because that is
now on a rollout basis
will we be addressing not just
the cuts but any other
healthcare legislation either in
the
special or in the thirty day.
Thank you manager representative
yes and that is a fantastic
pain of a reminder for me I I do
know that we're also
going to be looking at draftings
at a state version of antalla
and an
use acronym can we can you tell
us what that acronym means sorry
it's a fantastic point in that
and now i'm sitting here.
Going to turn right now I can't
remember what it stands for but
it's the emergency room
treatment act
something something so basically
what that is is it's a lot of it
that states that there's a
federal provision on it now that
is it mayor may not be adjusted
by the current administration
that has to do with.
The emergency room and emergency
room treatment for people that
need assistance with the
reproductive care so you know
somebody that might need to
unabortion in the emergency room
and to protect the rights of
people who who need that type of
service in an emergency room and
to have that law called fight at
a state level given the
uncertainty of it at the federal
level.
Great and then i'm imagining
that would be the only piece of
health care legislation um I I
mean this is also baby
transitions to my next question
which was about um home to sell
for others I know we've spoken
about it before but I was
wondering if you could talk
about maybe the differences and
the similarities
when it comes to hermes to sell
for others the bill that would
be proposed uhm this session and
its differences and similarities
to the the new executive order
from trump
and that's a fantastic question
representative and i.
So the bill just to be very
clear madam chair representative
the the bill itself with the
definitions of danger to self
and others I would would very
likely be the same bill that we
that we ran in the last session
that make it through the senate
that did not make it through the
house always again willing to
chat with you or anyone else
about those definitions
adjustments and the like
now that the trump executive
orders a little bit different
than that the trump executive
order is one that is aimed at at
homelessness I do understand
very much a question in the
intersection between the two but
here is the very very pointed in
and important distinction the
governor in the president
actually agree we have a problem
with homelessness but unlike the
president
the governor is interested in
and committed to making sure
that we continue to have
increased services for people
and not decrease services so
it's a very hard thing to say
and we want to help the homeless
problem but we're going to start
reducing snap benefits we're
gonna start reducing housing
benefits those things aren't
aren't policies that help reduce
homelessness the governor is
continuing to be committed to
those policies as well to mental
health treatment to rebuilding
our states mental health system
that was dismantled during the
last governmental administration
to make sure that there are wrap
around services for everyone and
and whatever services that they
might need metal health services
housing services you drug
treatment and the likes of the
difference again between the
governor's position and what
appears to be the president's
position is that the governor
realizes and is committed to
funding and maintaining an
improving the services for books
to give them every opportunity
to get themselves out of
homelessness.
Thank you how do you know what
that is on question they know
that the vision is to make sure
that folks are getting the
treatment that they need I think
I was a little bit more
concerned with the definition
itself of harm to sell for
others
and I I know we can keep talking
about that as well as it comes
up when my understanding is that
they're incredibly similar so
thank you madam chair
thank you representing
representative of it
thank you manager
holly I have a maybe sort of a
clarifying question you talked
about for the thirty day
session penalty enhancement for
selling guns near arm schools
is there
data that you can share with us
that shows that that's what's
happening my sense is that maybe
kids are getting cons from all
kinds of places so I would
really like um any data that you
might have that that support
supports that
sure thank you representatives
how is madam chair as I said
where that comes from is is from
the conversation with with a
specific district attorney when
asked where are these guns
coming from where the kids
getting the guns in the answer
that we got from this district
attorney was them getting them
at school that is where the hand
office taking place but I but I
understand your question and if
I if there's a way for me to
track down data then I will
absolutely get it and provide it
to you in the rest of the
committee that would be great
thank you
anyone else oh representative
borrego
just checking manager thank you
thank you for the moment
thank you holly for your insight
you're I mean I I love talking
to you because you're always so
great and I don't see enough but
just a follow up on a and I was
thinking about this before she
asked the question
representative of chavers.
So you know we all have friends
in high places but we also have
friends in low places and
just recently I was talking to
someone who was in prison who is
a fourth degree fell in and went
to prison because of a drug
charge but one of the questions
that we were talking about was
had a kids get guns because you
know albuquerque so prevalent
and it's not just alba kirking
anymore it's everywhere
and I agree madam chair that
video games has a big influence
on our kids and you know a lot
of violence in those some of
those video games that after
after go and regulated
but
when i'm thinking about you know
regulating sale of guns in areas
or vicinities of schools I think
those guns are being and from my
discussion with this young man
and he's younger than me so I
call my young man but he was
like you know if we could stop
sort of the the
access
the sale of these guns
and and I know sometimes
criminals don't care if there if
we increase our laws or whatever
but I think that we need to
really be thinking about
those and and I have law
enforcement sitting right in
front of me here
you know those guns being sold
out of the backs of the trunks
or at wherever a car you know at
a friend who sells it to another
friend and this is the
discussion that I had with this
fourth degree fell in mountain
chair is how do we prevent that
sale because that sale I mean
we're talking we can we can
regulate the size of a gun and.
So on and so forth the size of
magazine but if we're not
preventing the sale from
happening to a fourteen year old
or it err sixteen year old or
whatever
and I think that you know and
you know that I served on the
city council I start as I know
regular basis.
How do we stop that I mean and
how do how do we increase our um
you know the penalty for people
to be aware that if they make
that sale and they receive that
gun there is going to be
consequences for that so I I
just want to throw that out
manager because I think it's a
big in my mind it's it's a it's
something that we are we can
change the size of a magazine we
can change the size of the gun
we can do all these things but
if we're not preventing that
sale then are we really doing
what we need to be doing to help
our line forcement and that
would be my question thank you.
Okay.
I'm sorry I had some feedback
representative i'm.
I'm thinking it's probably a
rhetorical question but
you know.
I think probably everybody can
agree rate that that stopping
the the truck you know the
selling a gun out of the trunk
of your car though sales mostly
legal sales or something that
I think everybody could agree
that that we want to put a stop
to and I think if there was a
way to figure out how to stop
those I was going to see magic
board and then that seems like
it like a bad convert didn't
mean it but like if there was a
way to.
To actually solve that problem I
mean again I I think.
Probably would have think
they're figured that out by now
always willing to listen right
but but of course that's that's
the big ticket I don't right
there how do you stop that from
happening to begin with it's a
great question and I and I think
we could ask twenty people that
question how do you start people
from selling you let you don't
guns illegally you guys twenty
people and you'll get twenty
different answers but I think
that everybody would agree that
that's something that that we
should work for work towards and
that is something that
you know let's.
That we should as a whole all
agree we should be trying to
figure out how to plug that out
it's just
feel like kind of playing
rackable sometimes manager and
mountain chair I just want to
say that i'd love to have that
discussion with you hardly
because I would be willing to
carry that legislation to plug
those holes if possible because
I think it's a bigger issue um
that the police see on a daily
basis and we're trying to figure
out how to how to prevent our
youth from especially or youth
from receiving them but
obviously there's other people
that are not just you there
involved in the sale so
let me know if I can if we can
sit down thank you manager.
Anyone else.
Rip a representative read
hi how are you hollywood
thinking madam chair
so I I just had a question on
the snap changes and when would
that take effect madam chair
man to represent it do you mean
that effort at the federal level
when they would take effect at
the state level that well the
medicare changes that would take
effect with the state level
sure so
that's that's a tricky question
madam chair representative but
here's here's here's my best
shot at answering it a lot of a
lot of these cuts and changes
are the subject of litigation
right now there are a lot of
preliminary junctions in place
money is still flying the money
stop slowing the money starts
flowing again
so my best answer to that
question would be that the money
the state money would
begin to move when the federal
money.
Stopped again sort of assuming
that that is something that
happened it would either act as
a backfill while there's any
freeze in place and or when it
actually is I I use snap as an
example right you know it if and
when that cuts to snap go
through and those numbers
actually go down or that the
benefits actually go down and
that is when the the state what
money would kick in I know
that's a simplistic answer but
it's sort of the best they can
do I apologize a representative
manager madam chair holly note
that's not a problem I just did
I had read that
they could be bumped out to
december thirty first twenty
twenty eight
which you know basically which
you know good effort to comply
and so I guess i'm wondering why
this would be necessary a
necessary issue to definitely in
like a special session
representative there are more
probably getting I probably get
it's trickled down now I
probably get two or three calls
a request today
from a state agency that says
you know what do I do about this
thing from the vets
it's that's down from your maybe
ten a day for a while there is
there's so much in flocks and
there's so many different
funding sources that are influx
so i'm not exactly a hundred
percent sure madam chair
representative which one you're
saying the twenty twenty eight
ceiling
versus the other ones I
apologize I I just kind of lost
track of them all at this point
there there are probably
i'm gonna
ball park you fifty other than
i'm tracking at any given time
so so it's a difference use me
but it but again the idea just
to circle back the idea is to
use any
any of the state funded sort of
to supplement a loss that has
already happened to hear what
you're saying I I don't expect
that the notion is if there's
funny that we think is going to
dry up in three years that we're
going to start putting state
money into that money now three
years early I don't think the.
That's the plan okay if that
helps thank you madame chair and
holly debt can help to me with
that train about I was thinking
thank you thank you venture I
thank you represent anyone else
okay a couple of things happy to
hear that you're looking at
magazines and size cause I
actually think that is
for the thirty day let's be
clear
because i'd actually think that
is an avenue to kind of arm
we've are way through some of a
very confusing case law
and so I I think that is
something that's a very
appropriate thing to be bringing
up as a way to try to save lives
you know
I respect people's right to
carry arms but I don't really
respect people who are using
those arms for mass killings
and that's what semi automatics
have the ability to do
large magazine capacities on
those who are
well versed with the gun and
there certainly are some that
who are like that and some that
are not murders
can can can change out a
magazine I recognize some
quickly but they have found that
there is that break and there is
an opportunity for law
enforcement or others to take
the the shooter down so I do
think that's something we should
be looking at and i'd be very
aminable I I would recommend it
not be tied to another bill that
it we do it as a stand alone
because I think we'll have
issues with some of the other
gun safety legislation that
might create more ampic have
more ambiguities associated with
it in terms of constitutionality
and and the likes of just a
point there in terms of the
immigration attention facility
issue really happy that the
governor's looking at that for
the special.
Um I was one of the co sponsors
with some my colleagues here and
and in the house and I take a
senator servant to its point
about well then they might send
our sendy cheneys but some of
the information we received on
this particular issue we learned
that you know like everyone ice
prefers to have easy things to
do as opposed to heard things to
do and that they tend to do more
of these mouse round ups and
that's what i'd call them mouse
round ups and
terror drinkley you know terror
on our residence
in places where they have easy
access to facilities
and we have easy access here and
in certain parts of the state
and you know I think it may be
something to look at in terms of
at least providing a little bit
a bit of a barrier to some of
the activities that are
happening so
just wanted to make that point
immediate in committee when we
were looking at this particular
bill but just one make sure
there is a balance in terms of
kind of the different points of
you when we are talking about
here in this public meeting so
just wanted to thank the
governor for looking at outing
and caring about individual some
of whom have been living in the
state for many years and our
productive citizens here
any comments any closing
comments holly
thank you madam chair and and
thinks everybody on the panel I
I want to think you all again
for letting me appear remotely
today and I want to I want to
take a moment I don't know if
i've done this before in your
committees but it's something
that I just and so constantly
impressed by your staffers and
how responsive and wonderful
they are and just pleasant nancy
you're amazing I would sell you
from them in a heartbeat if you
let me.
But really you're your staff is
just always so good and they
work so hard so I just really
wanted to to say that publicly
and make sure that that they all
know that that we see it that I
see it and then
thank you for that holiday I
think everyone on the committee
whole hardly agrees with you and
we really love working with all
the folks that assist us and
especially nancy site she's
really is great on the follow up
and we want to thank you too how
are you for you know you're
willingness to participate and
getting back to us promptly in
and working with us on as we go
forward on some of these pieces
of legislation so hang in there
will i'm sure we'll be talking
some more take care that was
good thank you very much.
We have a couple of options it's
about eleven thirty we had
planned on recessing for lunch
at noon we could we could recess
now apparently the lunch is
available or we could do the
next presentation and then have
lunch at about twelve thirty you
know quarter to one well
probably around quarter one and
i'm just trying to get a
consensus here just people have
a preference
okay we have people who have
driven down who are here so in a
way it's probably more
you know greater consideration
temp if you're ready to do are
you both ready to participate
now allison
who is the other are you the
other person okay i'm sorry I
got confused are you ready to do
it areas are not like surprising
you or anything
all right ambushing you house
out so if that works for folks
you know if we want to take in
five minutes to use the restroom
or whatever but
um
okay okay let's do the next item
and then we can we can break for
lunch
and.
The.
The.
Apparently there's some handles
okay
thank you.
The.
Just give us a minute while we
get some handouts.
Okay well do we have enough
people here okay
yeah while we're doing handouts
let's let's look at the minutes
and I approve the minutes so
that's one thing off our plate
do I have a motion to approve
the minutes from our last
meeting
okay second it made by sending a
local second and by represent
every any opposition to
approving the minutes
no opposition we have a set of
approved minutes.
All right
so the next item which were we
bumped up a little bit is fair
access to insurance requirements
that's the fair plan update and
approximate cause insurance
coverage we have superintendent
alice cane and we have a melissa
grandmother is that right okay
vice chair of the governing
committee of the new mexico
property insurance program all
right so you are first I believe
superintendent if that's your
preference
well a madam chair
representative senators thank
you for allowing me to come and
give you this update
the first page really gives you
a history of the fair plan act
in nineteen sixty nine the fair
plan actually
was originally enacted in new
mexico it was a reaction to
title eleven of the housing and
everyone development act which
really was to a provide
insurance which wasn't being
issued during the urban riots
which I remember but none of you
do
and it was beyond los angeles it
was in the major cities in
nineteen seventy eight to eighty
four it will are fair plan act
in new mexico was amended and
extended with the number of in
the number of years it really
became a true residual market
that we know of today it's a
market of last resort
established provide access to
home owners insurance to people
unable to obtain insurance in
the voluntary market the open
market the traditional market we
have all different pieces that
come up but it really is the
insurance company's issuing
policies
the latest version of the fair
plan act was enacted in nineteen
eighty five
the new mexico property
insurance programmer of which my
co speaker here is vice chair
was authorized by the fair plan
act.
It's an industry underwriting
association authorized to issue
limited residential or
commercial property insurance
it's not a state agency uh it's
funded by assessments of from
the industry and also by
premiums that the uh policy
holders pay every license
priority insurer in new mexico
is required to be a member of
the plant of the program and
contributes to the assessments
when they're necessary I again
too it's not just industry
assessments the policy holders
do pay premiums
it is
it there are thirty three other
states that have some former
fair plan they vary by state and
uh the residual market policy
counts across the nations due to
a insurer's you know non
renewing cancelling and moving
from markets has doubled from
twenty nineteen to twenty twenty
four
just to give you a picture in
new mexico the only color I
really have in this period on
page five is we're trying to
show the primary carriers and
how the non renewals have
accelerated in the wildfire
areas are just to focus you
because I couldn't find it on
the chart to make it easier the
top through counties for non
renewals are linking shop is and
burn
osi expects to update these
numbers in the next two quarters
we're gonna be doing another
data call with the industry to
see where where they are
the new mexico fair plan
developments and i'm sorry this
is a little small on the left
my predecessor acting
superintendent cataches
requested an increase in
coverage and the addition of a
consumer advocate and an osi
representative in twenty twenty
two I think it was and it was
enacted late in twenty twenty
three right before I came
the plan re evaluated its
premium rates when we looked at
it when I first came and this
has been a dispute because
people sort o.
Go when is where time but
the chief actuary that I have
initially thought there was a
twenty percent we were twenty
percent below market are the
government committee took a ten
percent increase and to be fair
the government committee an in
our latest meeting because this
is an update for our meeting
this this was being utilised
largely as a low income plan
my predecessors were looking for
premiums to be kept low because
of the need for residual for for
insurance coverage you know the
increase to two fifty to three
fifty was good but in my opinion
and
with support for you know
with the some factual data that
we got from guy carbon to other
places we thought the limits
should be increased
so let me before I move to that
in twenty twenty three and
twenty twenty four there were
there hadn't been industry
assessments for about ten years
but there was a major hail storm
which required a two and a half
million dollar assessment for
the industry to cover the claims
and again when the rear does of
fires came frankly they couldn't
even pay claims I think we got
an emergency check from state
farm to claims and that the way
I mean the fair plan and they
estimated the rid when they did
the assessment they estimated
the readers of buyer license
would be five million and they
wanted a custom so that there
was a three million dollar
cushion put into the fair plan
to pay client so there has been
some disputes from august
probably told july but we had a
very good meeting in july I too
and came to these conclusions
and that was that's what this
update is about
there was a governing committee
meeting on july seventh that I
called in our in the o si
officers and alberta.
And the the government committee
head increased had had a agreed
to increase the residential
property coverage to seven fifty
they we agreed after
conversation that we'd be
committed to accurately
justified rates so there
wouldn't be that we hope there'd
be less of a need for uh
assessments and for there be a
and they're beat concerns about
paying claims at governance we
agree that that
there would be one new member
appointed by the superintendent
with expertise and catastrophic
risk to find a finance data
actually science experience
I have a appointment duly
rockman she's a climate expert
and former president and ceo
again ibhs and I behind the
insurance industry international
building thank you
international bill
international doing this
together but they are the there
are a a non profit funded by the
industry and they have really
come up with the standards for
up protecting initially a south
eastern states on hurricanes and
now they've moved to wildfires
and they have uh standards for
wildfires that we're going to
talk about later in so far as
looking at mitigation and
luckily I truly move to albert
kirkkeep at five or six years
ago and so she's agreed to be
part of this and the number of
the industry members were
reduced from seven to five
residual market requirements
were going to be
focused on for eligibility the
applicant should be denied
insurance and the traditional
market and we
know and also we're gonna have
the application submitted by a
licensed producer
we're looking at working on our
premium discounts for
mitigation.
According to the ibh standards
and still under consideration
the government committee is
waiting is is evaluating a
report that they got shortly
before the meeting from guy
carpenter about the impact of
increasing the commercial cover
coverage from one million to two
million
actually I I we've thought the
osis thought this was an
important
issue and I frankly I was in
california last week with
commissioner larra showing us
the various areas that the
wildfires that were hit in
california with others with
other commissioners and it
became very even more clear that
the commercial area commercial
properties are not as protected
as a residential and so far as
cleaning up is concerned and the
ability of the market to come
back we want to outer deaner
which are you may recall was the
worst hit area in those fires a
small community and you can see
some of the home sites that have
been cleared from toxic waste
but the commercial sites have it
and things really haven't been
opened up so I think uh uh
that's just reinforced my
concern about commercial
properties and they're need to
have insurance
now that as we mentioned are
ibhs does have standards and
we're looking at a grand program
the osi
was given ten million to look at
a grand program as part of the
fair plan
and this is where we are and
there was also I too many dollar
study yet kinds to look at
wildfire
issues as well so we're trying
to do both at this we're working
with the wildfire test worse
which we were
by legislature you know
permitted to join during the
last session are to implement
these mitigation standards that
ibhs has issued.
And to develop a grant a grand
program there's been there's a
really strong grand program that
everybody in the insurance
industry keeps on hearing about
it's called strength and alabama
and it was where they basically
got grants to change the roofs
to limit the losses and
hurricanes I think they think my
numbers apologize but I think
i'm pretty close cause we had
the person who developed it are
at in new mexico about two weeks
ago with us whose now at the
naic they given our ten thousand
grants
and but it's also what they call
culturalized this this idea to
strengthen your home so there
are ten thousand grants that
were given an additional fifty
thousand homes now have the
strength and ruth guidelines
from my bhs and that's what
we're really hoping this will do
even though it's it's obviously
the standards are different from
hurricanes to to wild fires
as they said we're consulting
with brian powell and we
actually were we're working with
the university of alabama that
has a whole
platform to be able to issue the
grants do the valuation and
we're hoping to set something
more concrete in the next few
months and hopefully start
issuing grants we're going to
have a memory the grounds are
going to be issued through osi
but we're gonna have a member
random of understanding with the
with the fair plan so we can
sort of marry both concepts the
you know the grant program along
with the fair plan policy
holders
and then the strategy of the
fire insurance market at a big
part of this and we're working
with the task force on this is
really to get mapping to
identify the high risk areas and
that
so we can focus on where we need
mitigation we're also going to
use working with the fair plan
going to do it data call again
to get that updated current
information from the industry.
And we're going to look at the
other thing that when you so I
think senator hinert there was
an article I guess in new mexico
source that he enough and at the
montana senator have introduced
a bill but new mexico was one of
the largest uninsured has wanted
the largest number of uninsured
properties in the country so
we're trying to figure out how
we could maybe address that or
work work on that as well
so that's the fair plan and
mitigation and where we the
governing committee is and I
think we we are going forward
and an incredibly positive way
the other the other issue that
i'm that I was I and I am
concerned about especially after
what happened a few weeks ago
wildfires as a prenominated cars
of flooding
I am focusing you on the them
after she cause I figure maybe
can all agree a famous as it may
be it's true
that weep or we can agree on it
so let me let me stop you well
so I had an idea structure at
the meeting yet so the fit your
misgrand a nearer heart on the
fair plan and so my question
would be where it makes sense
for you to wait and on that and
then we can talk about the
flooding issue you're not
involved in the flooding issue
i'm assuming
does that make sense okay so why
don't we have your your your
input on the fair plan stuff and
then we can talk about the
flooding and then what questions
okay
appreciate it thank you and i'm
check thank you representative
senators my name is miller for
granded I really appreciate the
opportunity to come and percent
in front of you
i'm thank you for coming to our
area I actually live until the
rosa so it's nice to see you
right down here
we the fair plan is the history
of the plan is a superintendent
came talked about.
Uh the new mexico fair plan
became effective nineteen sixty
nine what the fair plan does is
we authorize the operation of
new mexico property insurance
program which is an underwriting
association made up of insurers
that rate property insurance in
new mexico all insurers are that
are licensed to right
and writing essential property
insurance are required to become
an remain a member of the new
mexico fair plan and new mexico
property insurance program which
is the mpip what we do is we
provide essential property
insurance
to qualified applicants in the
state of new mexico who are
unable to secure such insurance
in the normal market quickly
i'll give you an example of some
houses where for example an
insured home owner may have
start out with
mobile home and then decide to
add on a couple of rooms and
their building a frame and it's
very unique
design and so it's one that
won't fit into a standard market
so it may get rejected in the
end fair plan will be able to
come in and and help with that
type of his head structure
new mexico
pip operates
we're not authorized to appoint
agents were not an insurance
company so what we do as we have
the applicants go through a
local agent and the agents are
licensed in new mexico
the producer then submits an
application to the insurance for
the coverage and the claims are
meant managed and utilized by an
independent adjusters throughout
the state of new mexico so
they're here on and on the
ground
coverage provided
new mexico proper insurance
programmed stalling our fire
policies and the written on a
insurance standard form which is
the dp zero zero zero one for
those of you that are not
insurance nerds it's just a.
Standard form
and it is based on actual cash
value basis so
I use any even though it's not
home itself but I used to kind
of help insurance understand
actual cash value if you go to
the store and you buy a shirt
you're going to pay retail price
for that shirt but if you turn
around and have a yard sale
you're getting you're gonna sell
that shirt for an actual cash
value it's not going to be the
retail value it's going to be
what the value you may have been
at the time after it been used a
little bit so that's why the
fair plan is a very basic plan
and most of the agents are going
to encourage their insurance if
they can to go with the standard
market which provides a
different type of coverage same
thing with the commercial
policies but they're written on
a form c p zero zero nine nine
limited perils of insurance so
it can be called limited perils
you may also hear free
basic or named peril and it's it
covers fire lightning
intentional explosion there's so
extended coverage for with the
windstorm or hail which super
ten cane talked about the fair
plan covered out with the storms
couple years ago explosion riot
or civil commotion aircraft
vehicle smoke volcanic
corruption knock on what we
don't have that one vandalism
melissa malicious mischief
the perils that are not covered
or water damage and that
includes not only flood but also
if the if a pipe in the house
breaks those are not going to be
covered under this policy theft
liability ordens and law or
earth
reads and assessments all rates
are charged by the new mexico
property insurance plan are
subject to prior approval by the
superintendent so we submit it
to the superintense office they
review him per actuary team
looks at it and and gives us the
green light or.
Tells us to go back and try
again member insurance or
subject to assessments for any
short browse in funds to run the
new mexico property insurance
program so as superintendent
said the plan just fyi if the
fear plans been running for many
many years and state without an
assessment there was one in the
nineteen eighties which is
before my time and then of
course these last back to back
caused an assessment new mexico
proper insurance plan has
had three assessments there
would go back in the past two
years and that that's been the
most recent
current coverage limits is super
turn it said right now where
it's seven hundred and fifty
thousand for home owners
residential and a million for
commercial on the commercial is
being reviewed to a look at
increasing at review coverage
limits we just talked about at
the last page at are the contact
information the executive
director for the plan is
analysis she's wonderful she is
amazing she's kind of
a super nancy so we looked at
her and we really appreciate
everything she does and then
there's the contact information
thank you again for your time
why don't we talk about this
flooding as a extension
approximately
by fire so and then what will
have questions and so on
thank you mature
so up totally different from the
fair plan there's another issue
that i'd like to discuss a
wildfires as the pedometer or
approximate cause of flooding
on here on page twelve I took
extracts from a them a factual
and it basically says while
fires leave the ground chard
baron and unable to absorb water
creating conditions right for
flash flooding and mud slides
a flood risk remains
significantly higher until
vegetation is restored up to
five years after a while fire.
Flash floods particularly common
after wildfires can occur within
minutes after the odd set of
marine storm flooding and flood
damage after fire is often more
severe as debris and ash left
from the fire can can form the
mud flows and we all know what
happened last year and read or
so there were eight hundred
homes lost by the wildfires
there were two hundred more last
bay buyer the mud slides so that
this is an issue two states have
had
this approximate cause of
legislation california had it
and they had a lot of case law
that defined it and then they
issued a statute but we gave you
one of the key cases from
california are the private owner
presented expert
testimony that the landslide
occurred due to a fire which was
covered under the policy in
which destroyed legislation on
the smoke the summer before the
land side are so I was here a
few weeks after the rear does so
fire and after some of the
floods and this place looked
like a moonscape I mean there
was nothing there was nothing
but black I wouldn't even call
it earth but black charred
mouse on the land and when the
rams came it just came down it
the vegetation as they say takes
a while to come back so that's
really what we're discussing and
then
course we had the fires i'm
sorry the floods are a few weeks
ago
so we go to page thirteen and
new mexicans have experienced
significant flooding following
the hermit peace peak caf canyon
salt and south board fires under
current law typically home on
her policies exclude landslide
flooding much low under reflow
california north of code as I
mentioned have specific statutes
that covered this
efficient cars means when a
losses caused by a predominant
cover period such as wildfire
the excluded paris such as flood
will be covered because they're
linked.
Again I were pointing out some
of the the background on the
california fires was california
had a general statute in
nineteen thirty five and the
eight the eighties or twenty ten
the approximate cause was to
find under case law and then in
twenty eighteen after the thomas
fire and monacido mud slides it
was clarified and statute north
dakota has different perils but
it's the same concept that if
there's a covered peril that's
predominant really is the cause
of the secondary peril it's
covered
we did introduce a sign
introduced a bill last session
it was speed to fifteen the
sponsor was a senator leo armio
it it did pass
unanimously it when I should say
that by partisan by the people
that were there three people
weren't there in taxation
business and transportation and
it didn't get out of the next
committee we we want to give you
we wanted to give you the
background on it because I think
it was sort of that sort of
buried and everything else that
was going on unless session
understandably but when we saw
the next set of floods come here
we we really are going to
reintroduce the bill and we want
you know people to understand
what it really does and why we
really need it so that's speed
to fifteen mile session I don't
know what number will get this
session so thank you for
literally
short session
all right happy to entertain
questions from fox
we've got block
anyone else and i.
Okay that will get us started
all right represent a block
thank you madame chair and thank
you madam superintendent good to
see I think it's superintendent
secretary
I don't know but thank you how
is so you mention there is a two
million dollars study and i'm
not sure exactly what that
pertained to could you go a
little more into that for me
madam chair representative it
was it it was a surprise to us
as well
was a two million dollars study
to look at the cars of wildfires
that
was going to to osi and the task
force to
understand what what's causing
it there's there's a
you know there's questions of
climate change managing forest
you know there are many things
that contribute to it and we're
trying to look at it one of the
first things we are as the task
force were doing with the money
osis working with the task force
to really do the mapping so we
really understand we are a
really clear where the high risk
areas are we seem to know but we
really want to scientifically be
clear because if we're going to
start doing a mitigation and and
protection we want to make sure
we're doing it in the right
areas and we're not asking
people to do mitigation where
they're not the where there's no
well there's never no thread but
where there's a reduced threat
of wildfires
okay thank you so much madame to
thank you colleague alice it
fills in proper but i'll call
you outside so odd
I have an adjusting better
change that's still out for like
an RFP or is that a private
grant or can you tell me a
little more about that
made i'm sure it representative
we're working with a group
etsy it's been used in other
areas it's a industry recognized
which we want the industry.
To agree where we're going to
build it out for me I apologize
it's not they are like I just I
can do all the details of the
committee on the background of
it because I
I see anything else then get out
of the committee
great but but the whole but the
the good part of it is the
entire test force with forestry
and everyone seems to think that
I personally did not pick it
they seem to think it's the best
place to go when I honestly
haven't been sitting in those
meetings but I have heard about
it
thank you so much manager thank
you allison thank you most were
neighbors i'm in almost order
you're until the road is over
fifteen minutes away from each
other up to come up there and
say hello so
another quick question when it
comes to what you've said
previously about case la i'm
wondering if there is any kind
of previous caseloader state and
is that why we need the
legislation madam chair
representative this so far as
i've seen and I have not done an
extensive nor my staff extensive
research on it but does not does
not seem to have been an area
that new mexico is focused on
it's really been more on is the
peril included or excluded uh
you know but approximate cause
uh legislative case light is
mostly in california because
they had the statute early on
and then thought they had to
re clarify it by the most recent
statute after the med slides in
california thank you madame
chair that's I had I really
appreciate both of you thank you
so much and I will definitely
come to you until there are so
thanks manager you're welcome
representative and I
thank you madame chair and think
you both for the presentation
superintendent can
i'm really grateful for the
consumer advocate piece of what
you all are working on I feel
like not just here but of course
the many different realms we
really need a consumer advocate
to be able to
uphold people's rates against
some of the insurance companies.
And I think that also flows into
my questions about medication
like risk mitigation I know you
talked a lot about that
it's my understanding that
blackstone has now or is about
two acquirer pm and it's
something that is that has been
weighing have you on my mind
because blackstone is a private
equity company and they have
many
did they have a long history of
being really sloppy for lack of
better word
they have many cases against
them with the department of
labor for child labor in swather
houses there are chemical burns
happening and they're also
buying up housing private equity
housing raising rents on folks
there is essentially there are
not in the energy business right
they're kind of there to turn a
profit and so I am actually
really worried about this
transition when it comes to risk
medication and because as we
know right now right like we are
power lines that could go down
the event
and cause these while fires and
so I was wondering if you might
want to comment on that or if
any other folks in the wild's
fire task force might have any
concerns about that and just to
add on to it blacks don't also
owns the
disaster clean up company called
serve pro and so I just want to
put that out there as something
of concern when we're thinking
about real community is when
we're thinking about while by
our disasters where you're
thinking about risk mitigation
and also the clean up portion as
well because black son would
profess off of book
thank you madame chair
you're welcome representative
represent sorry senator figueroa
sorry your friend give me adam
to my questions
like nine primarily and the
mitigation grant program and I
wondering if you have can.
Speak a little bit to the
tentative timeline the
aspirational timeline for
getting this in play and whether
the ten billion
is close to sufficient
or madam chair senator
this is a beginning ten million
you know is the one year to get
us set up and then hopefully
we'll get recurring because it's
not recurring so that's one of
the things we're looking at
we're hoping to be ready
we were just on the phone with
the university of alabama with
their digital program that they
set up for a straight and
alabaman how they could modify
it for the wild fires yesterday
we have to get in our p out and
or sell sort sole sources what I
would be saying to get them on
board so that i'll take thirty
days and then we're looking at
the the etcetera so far as the
mapping is concerned I would say
we'd have something concrete by
december and hopefully in the
spring we'd be able you know
we'd be able to start issuing
grants that's my aspirational
time
madame chair thank you I
appreciate that the spring
target is something we can help
for I hope you will speak before
this committee again or before
the session if there is
something that is statutory or
budgetarily needed to hit that
target because it has the
potential to benefit
all of new mexico and we need to
help move it forward the other
question they have is the
approximate case legislation
are you planning on presenting
that before the revenue
stavilization and tax interim
committee
madam chair senator my
understanding I think I have to
be invited.
So you know I will go wherever
i'm invited and present whatever
is relevant
thanks matter
a representative
think amount of
thank you for your presentation
so one of the questions I have
as it does always have a
mouthing gsi mouping um
capability
you guys use gs madame chair
representative we use this
system where we can look at each
home I can't swear if it's gsi
mapping but it we do have that
capability and we actually work
with individuals when they're
being are non renewed to sort of
look at the individual property
and sort of tell them why they
might have a mitigation problem
and if they fix it they might
have a shot at getting you know
getting a insured
and I am certainly not an expert
in in insurance but had to pay
my dude do share of automobile
insurance issues
over my time in a you know so I
am not an i'm not an expert in
that but I do know land use and
I just wondered about
whether or not
if if if a property is developed
enough like in a flood area
do you guys
how does that affect your
insurance management chair
representative that that really
turns into federal flood
insurance it's it's if it's in
they would have to hit the the
person that's building would
have to pay more money to deal
in that location manager
represent it's a different
policy traditional home
insurance policies don't cover
flood so it's a completely
different policy and if you go
on the famous site which I
didn't put in the pieces they
recommend if you think this is
going to happen to you go get
flood insurance.
But but the problem is you can't
get flood insurance once
something like this happens
hence why we're sort of coming
here with the idea of the
approximate cause coverage
manager one one other thing is
does
does the osi work with counties
across the state to determine
like where to build or not to
build or if it's a flood plane
that might not be recommended do
is there a planning process that
occurs with that madam chair
representative I think that's
what the test force is trying to
do it's and we don't we've gone
to meetings and presented to the
county you know heads and and I
think there after the readers of
fire I was in one meeting and
las vegas where they basically
usually they didn't want
building codes but now they're
starting to think that they
could be really helpful so I
think there's been a sadly
unfortunately
they're often has to be a
tragedy for people to change
and I think that's what we're
finding with the task force
we're getting a lot of people
involved I i'd also like to
respond to representative and
now is question
we are concerned about the
the utilities
it's nothing within my perview
with been a big issue obviously
in california causing the fires
what's recognized at least in
the task force within and some
the hearings this has to we
can't just fix one property that
works with hurricanes it doesn't
work with wildfires with
wildfires it has to be a whole
system top down from new homes
and building codes and that
forestry trying to greet the
barriers around the areas and
the individual.
A communities have to have a
concentration cause he fixed one
house and the extra house
doesn't get fixed and it's not
going to work this really has to
be a that's why the test worse I
think it's been so helpful for
us to really see all the
elements and it's sort of like
that child game of you know
policic out and will offer down
we really need to have all the
pieces in place and it's really
a system and we're just one
piece in that system
and madam chair the reason that
I brought that up is because um
you know we all know that money
motorbits land development
sometimes unfortunately and when
one of the issues that we had an
albuque in the northeast heights
particularly in the county was
when
you know they got their
approvals then they would build
sheds are walls and the whole
drained system changed because
sometimes they built those those
while in those sheds without
permission so I am just looking
at the regulatory part of it I
think it's really important that
you know especially and and what
sparked by interest manager and
an secretary was when laura the
president this morning have the
mescaler or tribe washed pideo
spoke and talked about you know
these mobile home parks that
were built in actually flood
planes and how are they when
when it flooded it just moved
him out I mean it because they
were not built in a in a proper
area so drives up our insurance
costs but I just wanted to
mention those up the need for
the planning and the gist system
in these sorts of things thank
you
thank you representative senator
said deal opus
thank you so much and I
appreciate all the work you do
after one of the presentations
last time.
Got all the pine needless
out
so you know I don't learn
the
the secondary insurer insured or
not the secondary but the the
fair program kicks in after
someone's been denied insurance
so they they have to prove that
they've been denied insurance
and then they apply through with
with the insurance agent is that
correct
manager senator yes and actually
we've been working with the fair
plan in the needing about how
there be
proof strong word but station I
think we're going to take from
the producer that they've gone
to the open market and they are
the
potential policy holder hasn't
been able to get insurance we're
not going to wait for life
pieces of paper from the
insurance companies we're going
to have the producer given out a
station and frankly that makes
me comfortable because there
also the producers are also
licensed so we assume that you
know
you know do you know what a
producers it's insurance agent
so the insurance is what most
people call the so the insurance
i'm
supported through so the
producer slash insurance agent
then says all we've been on the
market where unable not that not
that this person can't insure
what's on the can't afford
what's on the market it's that
the market refuses at any price
correct correct so then on page
five
these are primary care
primary carriers excilerated non
renewals
actually could you explain this
line I I think when I I don't
know if I blinked or something I
should I I would understand I
think I understand the numbers
of people that have non been on
renewed.
Which is pretty significant I
think where I
don't understand this is percent
the
top three counties for non
renewals and says linking four
hundred and forty three percent
and I just didn't understand
the percent change
I guess what is that trying to
tell me me
madame chair center it's trying
to show you that the numbers how
much they've increased since
twenty twenty one and which
cumulative and really to give
you
which we you know gotten through
a guy carpenter study you know
the areas that really are being
hit the hardest by the non
renewals and the cancellations
and they pretty much carlied
with the wildfire risk and it's
trying to give you a picture
that like you know some areas
you're not hearing any problem
in other areas it's dramatically
increased and see so it's from
twenty twenty one to twenty
twenty three and cume that up
that helps me I didn't under you
know I was trying to figure out
the mouth and I didn't
didn't understand the cumulative
nature of that number so that is
pretty significant linking
county chavis bernie that's a
lot
in of course berlin's more
people because there's just more
people there but this percentage
it's always look at both numbers
and percentage because in new
mexico something can look like a
huge percentage and we're
dealing with such more numbers
that it
it
so
I appreciate that and I think
it's really important and I I
just want to thank you for all
the work you're doing on the
fair plan so the people can get
insurance and I really like the
idea of this proximate cars
because yeah you have a wildfire
which is and then you don't
because you don't cover the
flood which was gone as well so
I I think that's really a great
idea that pledge or pursuing
manager senator thank you and
it's really when you link it
with the flood areas we're not
saying cover the flood areas
we're saying cover where the
wildfires are in the flood
areas.
As a we even remember in the
texas story though you know the
those four little girls in those
cabinets were in flood areas so
having again
at the representatives point
about allowing things to be put
in places of danger is is an
issue beyond our size ability to
fix but certainly it's something
that should be on the radar of
course and we all know who ends
up building there thank you I
really appreciate the
presentation is very helpful
anyone else
may have have a few of course
then i'm chair and committee i'd
really like you to know that I
think there was consternation
and tension between osi in the
government committee and I think
we really come together in that
meeting in july and I I think
it's going to be a very
productive partnership so I want
to thank the government
committee for working with us
and thank you for that
opportunity as well appreciated
sorry to say this but I have a
few questions
that's why we're here i'm happy
though that you are the
communications has improved and
I think that will benefit the
whole state so that we can come
up with reasonable solutions to
some of these issues I
have constituents in sand of all
county they live in a hemas
mountain area so you can imagine
I get routinely get emails from
people who are telling me that
their insurance has been either
canceled but more often not
renewed but since we renew on an
annual basis it's you're not
pretty regular right
so i'm pleased to see that we're
developing a program that will
be more um helpful to those
individuals who are struggling
to get
house insurance and I want to
point out something that I
didn't realize until it was
pointed out to me you can't sell
your house if you can not get
insurance because as you know
all of the banks.
Slending institutions what were
require insurance so this goes
beyond just I wish I had
insurance i'm hoping we don't
have a crisis if you want to
move or there's some issue there
it spirit people are in the so
i'm hearing from real orders to
right because that's that's
backing up their business
on page seven of
your your sly hours um
a number of these things I think
I don't I I didn't memorize the
law that a center worth was
carrying were at least some
version his his proposal is that
right his in yours I guess he
was working with you on page
seven governing committee
meeting there's a list of things
that were agreed to okay were
all of these things in center
worst bill or
in some verman chair
representative there were
compromise but the concepts were
of all the concepts
so the question I had is how
does this how can this govern I
mean my point being there is an
agreement between the office of
insurance and the board is this
going to be in a regulation
you see where i'm going with
this medication we have laws and
we have regulations post things
bind us how is this binding
madam chair
committee representative centers
there's these
the fair plan operates under by
laws and a plan of operation and
this is amending the bill us in
the plan of operation the
statute for the fair plan is
rather
short without much guidance in
it right so
this really is a
at the governing committee is in
charge of has a changing the
buyer was and changing the plan
of operations.
I am permitted to ask request
for changes in the buy laws and
plan of operations I think it's
in the biolog or maybe it's in
the statute I can't remember
which place that is certain
certain ones were added to the
bilos and other for added to the
the guidelines for the
but I am from you I do supervise
the pet fair plan under statute
and I am permitted to request
meetings so we are we are in a
well negotiating I I have feel
greater comfort if there were in
at least a regulatory document
treatfully I appreciate the fair
uhm it's not the fair plan board
it's the other name that you
have mexico property right
willingness to work with us but
this could change
you know with a meeting in the
end certainly there be some
controversy around a meeting but
you know I take some covered
that we've got some release for
our people but this is and I
appreciate the work but it's
still not a complete solution
for you got but millions that
feel freedom yes I
when you get into changing the
statute you're
it's a olympic event you know to
try to get modifications within
the statute but we are tightly
obligated on the buy laws and
the guidelines to operate and we
it is overseen by the
superintendent so
yet you know it's it's it's not
a perfect but it is it's it's
there's accountability
I hope so
because there were so much
resistance from the fair the
board I don't want to call fair
plan board because that's not a
correct
to the things that apparently
were able to be compromised on
and you know I find that I found
that a little disappointing and
it's a it's an olympic thing if
there's a lot of opposition and
controversy stirred up around
changes to a bill for sure no
question about that.
But if there's agreement often
bills get through especially
when it's disassist our
residence to get the kind of
protections that I think they
need and our entitled to
so little disappointed that
we're not seeing something
firmer
how many members are there on
the board exactly
nine and so we have now five
that are part of the insurance
industry as opposed to seven
the five for the industry and
then there is a consumer
advocate and then the person
that you just appointed correct
and then there's a
you have to so
and you have a consumer advocate
and get some give you
compression to seven so three
seven as far as six industry yes
we just change it i'm sorry so
there are six industry five
industry but there's the
consumer advocate insurance is
the word
matter chair we're talking about
this is the problem without a
lot right now but we did you but
it's a points that is what we've
been looking at ahan the
industry appoints
the
five in from the companies which
are that usually some of the
largest writers and then they
appoint a consumer advocate and
so now I appoint I have a member
of my deputy is a member of the
board and now what we've just
appointed
at a person with that expertise
in climate rep
in one of the ones that is the
eight from the industry is
actually
a representative of the
independent agents so it's not
so there's six no there's far
inclusive of the independent
okay and the industry members
appoint the consumer advocate
well correctly.
Good to know that the insurance
in the shoot is deciding who is
advocate for the consumer
an issue one I think my cut some
of my colleagues are picking up
on that okay
madam chair committee you know
there have been the the points
you're raising work raised we we
raised last session but I will
say that I think
whether it's I think we've
really moved very far to give
the governing committee
credit but I and I do understand
some of your concerns as well
okay well I i'll be letting you
know if I hit sir hearing from
constituents because I do get
regular emails on their
inability and some of the
problems that they've been
having
so in terms of the approximate
cause legislation is the
industry supporting that bill
madam chair committee I have I
have not
reached out to the industry on
this I can I don't know
what actually happened the last
session
so when you filed the bill you
didn't hear it from any member
of the industry about whether
they supported it or not okay
I guess maybe i'll ask them when
the bill comes up and i'll let
you know it would be nice if
they'd like you know
but if I hear about it i'll let
you know okay any other
questions on okay really
appreciate both of you i'm
joining us I think this really
is an important issue for so
many parts of the state so I
think as because being better
and formed helps us when we're
communicating with our
constitution so thank you very
much appreciate it you're
welcome to join us for lunch
which we are going to break for
right now okay and let's come
out
let's come back up one
