We'll introduce yourself. I know
we've met, but I'm I'm sorry.
I've forgotten your name.
I think you Madam Chair. Yeah.
The mics are tricky. Yeah. Fire
Chief Jason Smith. Well,
welcome. Uh, chiefs. Smith,
who's gonna go first?
Good afternoon, Madam Chair
members of the committee. My
name is Jeremy store. I'm the
police chief for the city of Las
Cruces, Police department. Oz
just want to acknowledge that we
have our city manager Yani Toma
Pale here, our assistant city
manager Sonia Delgado, Our chief
administrative officer, Barbara
de Leon. I'm sorry, Barbara
Bencomo and our housing and
neighborhood revitalization
Administrator. Uh, Natalie
Green. OK, welcome.
Um, first and foremost, Madam
chair. I appreciate this
opportunity. This has been a
difficult year for my agency at
very two officers in the first
six months. These issues that
I'm going to talk about were
important to me prior to those
events and
They've really only reinforced
my commitment to, uh, being the
best advocate. I can for the
changes I believe we need for,
uh, my city and for our state to
make things safer.
I gonna cover in this
presentation.
Three main things, one the
severity of the problem.
That we're seen in Las Cruces as
it relates to competency,
criminal competency, the
resources and capacity in doing
a county as it exists today, the
gaps in existing services and in
some case examples how it all
comes together.
Course of foremost. I want to
start with the severity of the
problem. This committee has
heard, um for the past two days,
and then the committee meeting
prior to this A lot of
information about how the system
is currently some proposed
changes and that's not my
purpose here, although I
certainly have an opinion about
those things. My purpose is to
try to paint a picture about why
I feel this is
Is such an important topic to
address
Um, I'm gonna try to deal with
that as much as I can to paint
the picture of the severity of
the specifically the criminal
competency problem.
And then although this
information is specific to Las
Cruces and Dona County, I do not
believe we an anomaly when I
speak to police chiefs
throughout the state, we have
the same issues are very similar
issues. So what's happening in
Las Cruces I believe is
happening throughout the state.
I'm gonna present a series of
slides with data. Uh, Several of
these slides come from the Las
Cruces Municipal Court
specifically when they don't
I'll try to make sure it's very
clear so I don't make it
confusing.
This chart right here. This
table shows the total number of
cases per year for the Las
Cruces Municipal Court.
The number of cases dismissed
due to the defendant being found
incompetent with the percentage
of cases is
You see 2018 and 2019. That
percentage is fairly low. And if
we were in 2018 or 2019, I
wouldn't be here and the
committee probably won't be here
discussing these. These matters.
Something changed.
In our state and in Las Cruces
in the last few years.
Um
And as high as in 2022, it's as
high as 14.2% of cases that were
dismissed due to the defendant
being found incompetent, which
to me is significant.
That means all those cases were
dismissed. There's no treatment,
There's nothing that occurs
other than the dismissal.
So nobody wins. In that
scenario, the community the
individual, the victim.
One caveat for 2023 is that
those numbers are incomplete due
to the time it takes to get an
evaluation. Sometimes some of
those dependents are still
pending the competency
evaluation so that number will
likely grow. By some degree, it
might go from 9.6 to 10%. We're
not sure. But even at 10% again,
that's one out of 10 cases being
dismissed due to
The defendant being found
incompetent.
Now what changed?
Many factors contribute to the
increase we've seen in
competency issues. We've seen
the same increase in crime, a
drastic increase in crime in Las
Cruces from 2018 to 2022.
Um, and a lot of these things
overlay with each other. The one
thing that really changed in Las
Cruces and I believe the state
as a whole And really our
country is the arrival of
fendall in our community.
So this chart right here, um,
just compares heroin seizures by
metro narcotics and Metro
Narcotics is a joint task force.
So it's the whole the whole
county.
And the rival of fennel,
there'll be a chart that makes
it a little bit easier to
visualize at the end. But 2018
is the first time we see any
fentanyl in Las Cruces.
A fairly small amount.
We start to see those seizures
increase.
In 2021 is where it went from
seeing fennel occasionally to it
being everywhere.
And from there, it's only
increased.
2024 so far year to date. We do
not have a heroin seizure, so
fentanyl has completely taken
over as the illicit opioid, um,
on the streets, and this
represents a blue line is heroin
seizures and grams. The orange
line is fentanyl seizures and
pills.
Um, but it really just paints a
picture of how we've seen them
cross over and
Take over.
Um, one of the things I thought
would be on my list of things I
would never say is that I would
take heroin back in a heartbeat.
Uh, fennel has it's been a game
changer, and it is destroyed
more lives and families in our
communities. Um
Just a a whole another level
from what we saw with heroin.
I'm gonna transition instead of
overall cases looking at our top
four defendants, and there'll be
a lot of information presented
about specific, uh
Top offenders.
The my point is not to to
highlight any person because
this is a system problem, not
the individual so
Um, but I think it helps
illustrate the problem that we
face. These are our top four
municipal court defendant, So
these people also have all four
of them have Magistrate court
cases and felonies in District
court. So these numbers are just
their cases in municipal court.
Um
For three years. 100 and 24
criminal counts in three years.
I think it's problematic,
especially when all those cases
are dismissed due to the
defendants being incompetent,
and there's nothing that occurs
after that again. There's no
treatment. There's no programs.
There's no services. They're
just dismissed.
Apologize ahead of time. This is
a fairly uh
Busy chart, so I'll try to just
highlight the most important
things. These are our top 20
offenders in municipal court
over the past six years.
And if you look
In this column. This last column
of each color is
The number of cases dismissed
due to incompetence.
And so in 2018 and 2019 again,
we we see that it's not really a
significant problem.
We see that jump drastically
starting in 2020.
And then again in 2023. We still
don't have complete numbers, but
it's still much higher than it
was 2018 and 2019.
And really, this bottom number
is is the important part. Just
these 20 people. These aren't
all cases dismissed. We saw that
on the first slide.
But just these 20 people have
that number of cases that are
dismissed due to incompetence
again, with with no options, no
mechanism to plug them into
anything. They're just
dismissed.
Now I'm gonna back off from just
municipal court.
This slide is our top 10
offenders for the Las Cruces
Police Department, and this is
for all charges in all courts.
So municipal court Magistrate
and District Court
Um, number of arrests and number
of total charges for the past
six years.
Again. That number is
significant. This these 10
people account for
disproportionate amount of
amount of crime. I can zoom that
out to top 20. You're still
gonna see some concern, but
obviously the the more you
narrow it, the more you can
focus in on on where we're
really missing the opportunity
to intervene in our communities
and crime in general.
And again all these people or
not all these people, Most of
these people also have some
felony offenses, although a lot
of these are misdemeanors and
petty misdemeanors.
Um, and most of them have
competency issues. Some of them
have had all their cases
dismissed due to competency, and
some of them have had
Hit or miss on and off
throughout the last six years.
I'm not gonna leave these slides
up forever. Um, cause I know you
all are on a a
Timetable here.
But I wanna give a case example
of how the system has failed.
Um, and this person, although I
have others, Unfortunately he's
not necessarily the exception I
had. He's part of the rule.
He has a lot of cases.
And I'm gonna start they really
started in May of 2021 the red,
the ones that are highlighted
red or felony offenses, the ones
that are orange or misdemeanor
or petty misdemeanor offenses.
In the right column. You see
what the the right disposition
of the case was?
Now. Most of them were dismissed
because the person was found
incompetent, the ones where it
was not like a failure to appear
by the prosecutor or the
officer.
Their bookmarked by cases that
were dismissed. So even if we
didn't have a dismissal for
another reason, the end result
reasonably would have been that
it would have been dismissed due
to the defendant being
competent.
So I'll just go through and just
highlight, uh, let you just kind
of take a A glance at obviously
you have a copy of the handout
the PowerPoint if you want to
look at it further, but
significant amount of cases for
one person over the past really
three years because they started
kind of mid
Uh,
2020
And even when I prepared this
slide from the time I initially
prepared this for another
purpose till now, I had to
update, um
Seven offenses that had occurred
from the time I prepared it
before.
And so here's a summary.
It's 60 total criminal cases.
That's 71 total individual
charges. 24 of those are felony
cases.
Um
Most are dismissed due to
competency issues.
And the bottom line is there is
no answer for all this crime.
This person has not been sent to
Mexico Be Health Institute
because
We don't send hardly anybody
there that it's a very small
percentage of our criminal
cases. If there's not a finding
of dangerousness, then they
dismissed regardless of the
level of crime, felony mime or
petty misdemeanor.
And ultimately my officers are
left to interact with this
person over and over and over.
Um, instead of trying to do
something different
So the implications from the
data I presented
A significant amount of crime is
committed by a fairly small
percentage of people or amount
of people that have been deemed
incompetent.
Citizens are also repeatedly
victimized or are victims to
The vast majority of these
crimes to some degree
And this group of people who
need needs help the most, or the
least likely to seek the
treatment.
On a voluntary basis, but
there's not really a mechanism.
Or good mechanism to plug them
into treatment.
Even though they're committing
this volume when we talk to a
lot of our citizens and our
businesses and our groups, you
know, Although many of these are
petty, memes and misdemeanors,
they're also frustrated and
angered at times about this type
of crime we're talking about.
You know our businesses where
their windows have been broken
out six times in six months for
no reason whatsoever.
They've had, Uh people expose
themselves to their customers or
assault or batter their
customers.
And people not being able to go
to parks because they feel
unsafe because of these types of
crimes that are occurring in the
parks.
So it's It's something that
needs to be addressed for
everybody, including the people,
obviously that are involved in
the system.
It is clearly a difficult task.
I do not envy this committee or
the Legislature as a whole
because so complex there is no
easy answer, and it's going to
require a very thoughtful and
multifaceted approach again. My
point is to to try to stress the
importance and the severity of
the problem.
And why, regardless of how
difficult it is, Uh, it's
something that
I believe we need to accomplish.
And the silver lining is right
now, especially when it comes to
criminal competency. We're
essentially doing nothing. We
dismiss the case. We have
several programs, which I'll
highlight again and and talked
about over the last two days,
which are certainly part of the
solution.
But we have to do more. On top
of that.
It's in the
The bad news. Part of this
presentation, looking at
recidivism specifically in Los
Cruces again, this is for all
types of crimes. All courts, um
The first three categories. One
time offender non chronic and
chronic come out of multiple
studies going back to 1945 Jerry
Radcliffe. He's a criminologist
and researcher uses these
categories in in many of his
studies.
We had to add 1/4 category
because we had so many people
recently with 11 or more
arrests, that they really need
to be broken out and
highlighted.
So if you look at that last
category, it's a number of
people that have had 11 or more
arrests in a single year.
And again in 2018 and 2019. We
probably wouldn't be having this
discussion, but something
changed and we see that number
drastically increase in the last
couple of years.
Um, to where it's a significant
problem. Having 24 people in Las
Cruces with 11 or more arrests,
um, is a problem.
And one thing that is important
to note too. When I say arrest,
I should have mentioned this
earlier.
Uh, the term arrest is used to
denote any criminal charge. So
that's not just physical rest.
That doesn't mean everybody's
going to jail for all these.
These charges. The rowdy New
Mexico is for a nonviolent
misdemeanor. Most of the time
they're issued a citation or a
summons. They're not going to
jail, but they're still being
The end result is a criminal
charge that puts them in the
criminal justice system. So it's
a combination of physical re
Criminal citation and criminal
summons.
So hopefully some good news. Um,
after that.
Some of the existing resources
that we had and capacity that we
have in doing accounting. Um,
obviously, a lot of the concerns
about whatever is done, Um
By the Legislature to try to
address this is we do have
resource problems in New Mexico.
We have provider problems.
And what I'm about to say,
certainly does not apply to
everywhere in New Mexico, the
rural areas This is probably not
true. But in doing Anna County,
I believe that we have the
resources in place and the
capacity.
To do something, even if it was
done to, so I'll start with
crisis management. Um, I have
obviously Chief Smith here from
the Fire department who started
the light program, and he's
available, of course to answer
any questions regarding that. It
is a correspondent model. It's
different than most in that. It
sits in the fire department and
not the Police Department, a
firefighter paramedic and a
licensed social worker respond
to those crisis calls along with
L CPD.
Once we determine the scene
safe, we back off and let them
do their work or we leave
entirely. Um, and it's been
A resounding success and you
have a police officer that's
saying something positive about
fire program. So you know I'm
being genuine.
Um, our officers trust these
teams. They ask for them any
opportunity? They can They look
at the notes on the dispatch. If
they can see that this might be
a good call for light. They'll
step in and ask it for them
before they even get there. So
this is definitely a success
story and something that we
should celebrate, Um as positive
news.
The crisis stabilization unit
formerly known as the Crisis
Center in Donna County, was
closed. It is approximately 45
to 60 days from being reopened
under peak behavioral health,
which is great news.
And one thing. This was a really
good resource for us Prior, but
we can only take people that
were voluntary.
So earlier today, we talked
about 43-1 Dash 10 emergency
mental health evaluation. That
is something that we use all the
time.
Um
Far, far too often.
But it
The problem was, I could only
take those people. My officers
can only take those people to an
emergency room under our current
resources, and, um, the way the
licensing was for the crisis
center, which is definitely not
the place to take someone who's
in
A mental health crisis because
that's not where they wanna go
and the S don't want them to be
there, either. They want to deal
with medical emergencies when it
reopens the Christ ST
Stabilization unit will be able
to take both voluntary and
involuntary under 43-1 Dash 10,
which will be one place for
officers to take anybody who
needs the help, which is a
A huge one is something I've
been asking for and trying to do
for years.
So follow up programs that exist
again. Chief Smiths here our
mobile integrated health care is
a huge component here, dealing
identifying people, um, that you
use the 911 system excessively.
For the medical side of things
as well as the mental health
side of things on the mental
health side, they pair with our
crisis intervention unit and
they do what we call project
Bluebird, which is follow up and
these are generally people who
are not in crisis right now.
Who either were or appear to be
escalating towards price and we
try to intervene and plug them
into services before we get to
that point.
And MIH does a phenomenal job at
that.
And again. MIH is a firefighter,
paramedic and a licensed social
worker, uh, per team.
We also have our police
community advocates. These are
civilian positions, generally
with a background in either
sociology, social work, or, uh,
mental health, and they act for
follow up program for community
care. So, for instance, they do
a number of things, but let's
say there's a child suicide.
In a neighborhood. They'll go
into the neighborhood. Talk to
the other kids that knew him
that are impacted by it. The
families and tried to plug them
into any services that they may
not know exist in the community.
I want spend a lot of time here
because you heard all about a
OT, uh, as well as act teams.
I will say that we have three
act teams, Um and Donna County.
All very active that one of them
is dedicated to rural
The other two that cover Los
Cruces. Both have about 87 out
of 100 people, which is the cap
by statute.
Um so they're very active about
20% of their patients Come to
them through a OT. So that gives
you an idea of what percentage
of those patients are being fed
to the act teams through a OT.
Um and we also have a lot of
great resources, which are
expanding for medication
assisted treatment, which I
believe is one of our best
options for substance use
disorder in that which is a very
difficult thing to address, But
It's encouraging to see these
resources in that area.
Another thing that's discussed
is inpatient capacity, uh for
behavioral health or mental
health and and doing in
accounting. We have decent
capacity Peak behavioral health
has 88 Acute beds Memorial
Medical Center, which is
operated by peak and that that,
uh
Wing has 12 Ms. C Valley
Hospital is 100 and 15 beds
between adult and juvenile.
Um
Although
They've been closer to capacity
recently as an example, peak has
only been full completely full
one weekend in the last two
years that Labor Day weekend for
whatever reason last year
Um, but they have had several
weekends or weeks where they've
been close to capacity recently.
But there is still some capacity
for impatient
Just a list of resources that
that exist that all work
together a combination of for
profit and nonprofits that
although
Oftentimes compete for some of
the same monies. They they have
a good relationship considering
and I see a lot of Cooper
operation and collaboration
between these different groups.
We also have several court
programs in Indiana County. Um
we have the special course
listed here.
Um, you heard about the
diversion program for our
Magistrate court, which kicks
off tomorrow.
And our municipal court is about
to kick off our S OS program,
Stability opportunity support.
Um, which is a kind of more as a
treatment core, but also as a
diversion program. Kind of a
hybrid. Um, and we're excited
about that program.
This is just a graphic. I won't
go through it. It kind of shows
that
The resources I just talked
about in courses providing your
packet, but
Um
Good resources and a lot of good
people doing this work across
the different, uh,
Parts of the care continuum
justice so more I mentioned the
sequential intercept model. Um
This map was created by that
task force or by that team, and
it shows what resources exist at
the different intercepts of the
criminal justice process. And by
doing that, of course, you're
able to identify gaps that
exist, but there is a lot of
resources in doing a county at
the different intercepts.
Of course, A big part of this is
housing, for instance, and the
mad team is one of the first
things they have to do. I'm not
the mat teams the act teams one
of the first things they have to
do when they get a new patient
is find housing. If they don't
know where they're going to be,
it's impossible to provide daily
care.
Um, and engagement.
So of course there's still um,
work that needs to be done. But
Natalie here from the city are
housing and neighbor
revitalization administrator has
a very good grasp and has done
amazing work in trying to fill
the gaps in that continuum and
Donna County.
She's available for questions if
there's questions specific to
that.
So what gaps do exist.
Of course, we do need more
housing options. Um, resources
in rural areas are likely going
to be a problem even in Donna
County.
We have very few crisis
resources for our youth.
Follow up after crisis care and
depending on what changes are
made right now, we have plenty
of forensic beds at NBH, because
we don't send hardly anybody up
there.
Um, if changes are made,
depending on what those changes
are, there may be a need for
forensic hospital in southern
New Mexico.
But ultimately this is really
the purpose of, uh
Why I'm hearing what I wanted to
present. I believe personally.
The biggest gap is criminal
competency right now in the
system.
You know, Prior to this last
session, I might have said Pret
pre trial attention was as big
if not bigger.
But I do believe with the
passage of Senate Bill 271,
sponsored by Senator Cervantes
and Senator Iy Soto and past and
signed, Um and then the the new
pretrial rules that the Supreme
Court issued. I think it will go
a long way to finding that
balance between, um where we
were before with cash Bill and
where we went after it.
So I think we need to give that
time to see how that works. But
the competency the criminal
competency side of things. We
don't have an answer for right
now.
Um
And
We basically, uh, dismissed the
vast majority of those cases
without any way to plug them in
to services or any appropriate
mechanism. Plug them in.
When I say a OT, um, has
potential but needs work. I've
not seen that a OT is a failed
program. I think a OT and Doan
County is an example of success.
Um, Senator Duh pointed out
yesterday that Las Cruces has
experienced a significant
increase in crime.
Especially in the last 4 to 5
years, and that's true.
Obviously, we don't know whether
there would have been even
higher without a OT or whether
had any impact at all.
But I do think it is a piece of
the puzzle. I mean, it is
capturing a group of these
people that would not have
received treatment otherwise,
but it's also gonna miss them
because even though it's
involuntary, it's still
voluntary. And some of these
people we talk about on this
list.
If they don't engage and they
refuse treatment. There's really
no mechanism under a OT.
Still to help them to to get
them treatment.
Um, And so we ultimately have
extremes on the criminal side,
so either go to Las Vegas or
case gets dismissed Nothing in
between. On the civil side. We
have a OT. We have mercy mental
health evaluation, and we have
our 30 Day commitment. But
I really believe there needs to
be a tiered approach at both the
criminal and civil side to try
to fit the right. Uh,
intervention to the right
person.
And give us some more.
This is what it looks like when
we have some of these people
like OC, who have all those
charges. They get dismissed. If
he's willing to get treatment,
We have a ton of options. He
will get services. We'll plug
them in.
If he doesn't want treatment,
we're stopped. We have no
options.
And it just continues. That's
that cycle continues.
I'm gonna end with two case
examples that I think really
highlight. Um
Where the failures in the system
are.
The first case example is JR.
Um, she's had 100 and one LSP
responses in the last about 14
years.
Many of those involved her being
armed with a knife threatening
herself and others.
Um a lot of times it's in her
apartment wherever she's at the
time. A lot of times it's in the
roadway in our community.
Very complicated situation.
Um, she has threatened both
fires MIH as well. Both act
teams to the point where they
can't take her on the acting
because of the safety of their
staff, which I don't blame them.
Um, she's recently escalated to
firearms, and we had a recent SW
call out where she was firing
outside of her apartment,
randomly hitting striking other
apartments.
Um
And everything. We've tried us
and fires MIH, and it's It is
not for lack of trying. I assure
you has been ineffective.
Um, guardianship. Up to this
point has been ineffective. We
received declination letters
from most of the agencies,
guardianship agencies in the
state again Safety concerns.
Just recently, she was appointed
another treatment guardian. She
is currently at Rio Vista, which
is a rehab and she is definitely
a complicated case of mental
illness and substance use
disorder.
Um
But everything we've tried has
been an effective she has had.
Over 25 inpatient stays for
acute care.
She exceeded over a million
dollars in, uh C MS dollars on
her care. She is capped out her
lifetime.
Acute impatient stay so they
will no longer medicate or
Medicare will no longer cover
Any of her stays.
Which means she probably won't
be able to stay anywhere.
Um
She's recently kicked from
Medicaid to Medicare.
Which means they don't cover
everything 100%. Now she has co
pays for her medication, which
is another excuse for her not to
take medication.
Um
We have placed her in protective
custody 58 times from 2010 to
2024 so 43-4 Dash 10 emergency
mental health.
Evaluation three day hold.
Whatever you wanna call it 58
times in that period in that 14
years.
11 additional times, where she
was armed with a knife and
barricaded and we could have
placed her and protect her cut,
But we did not want to push the
issue and we eventually broke
off.
So that's 11 additional times,
where she could have been placed
in protective custody.
As an example. She is an
extreme.
Um, I would say she's definitely
the exception, not the rule, but
it shows where the failure
points in the system are
The second example is who was
highlighted earlier with those
60 criminal cases, 71 charges
Um, And this is what it looks
like. He commits a crime,
sometimes in the same day.
He gets arrested or cited.
He found a competent, the case
is dismissed. And that's the
cycle. There's nothing in
between or interrupting that
cycle whatsoever.
So again, just another graphic
to show that it's not a lack of
resources per SE or lack of
providers.
If this individual at some point
says you know what I need help,
and he's willing
He will be plugged into
services.
But up to this point
He does not want treatment. He
does not want help. He does not
want services. And so we're left
with zero options.
And I promise I'm coming to to a
close here.
And with this, everyone's heard
the quote. You can lead a horse
to water, but you cannot make
them drink. Um, the second part
of this quote was taken from
who's now a licensed peer
support worker out of the book,
The least of us by Sam Cannon
and
And I do believe it's true, at
least for for a lot of people.
You may not be able to lead the
horse so you could lead the
horse water. You may not be able
to make them but you can make
them thirsty, especially when
somebody is committing crimes.
That is an opportunity to make
them thirsty while respecting
their their civil rights and
protecting their due process,
But we are not taking advantage
of that opportunity to make them
thirsty to get treatment in lieu
of something else.
An example of and of course we
can get people to engage in
voluntary treatment. That is
preferable, no doubt about it.
But that doesn't mean we should
exclude the potential for
compelled or mandated treatment.
My clinical data for million.
Las Cruces handles all of the US
probation office and the New
Mexico Department of
Corrections, probation cases. So
these are people who are
mandated treatment as a
condition of probation.
And about 50 to 60% of those
people continue care after the
mandate ends, which is a very
encouraging number. I think
that's a success. That means
just because it was mandated
initially doesn't mean they
won't continue the care which
hopefully will keep them out of
the criminal justice system in
the future.
We know from multiple studies
and some of them, Uh, Miss
Michael referenced some of them
before that compelled, treatment
mandated treatment can be
successful. Not for everyone,
Um, success may be 25%. I will
take that as a win 25% of people
that are
Are successful through these
programs.
Uh, New York in that study from
2010.
Uh, found that two people engage
in a at two thirds fewer arrests
than those
We signed a voluntary agreement
or who were not engaged in a OT
yet.
So ultimately that's my goal, of
course, is reduce recidivism, so
officers aren't dealing with
them.
And they're not constantly in
this cycle of
Rearrest her getting cited again
victimizing people. It's a win
win for everybody. If we stop
that
So in summer. I believe criminal
competency is a significant
issue in New Mexico. It may be
4% of the cases we see that's
much higher at the municipal
court level. Um
But I think if you capture how
many people are responsible for
those cases and those that group
of people that's responsible for
for 5, 10, 100 and 41 of those
cases that are being dismissed
and we find some way.
To address those people and by
address. I mean not necessarily
go to jail. I mean, get them
into services or treatment so
that we stop the cycle of
rearrest or, uh, recharging.
A lot of good will come from it
for everybody in the state.
And right now, despite available
resources in many communities,
we don't have a mechanism to get
these people the help that they
need if they don't want it.
And at this point, Madam chair.
Um I will stand for questions
along with the other staff. So,
um, I'd like some maybe guidance
from you. Do your your
Presentation meshed together
Would it be worthwhile to have
the the are you? Are you
presenting? Um Chief Smith?
You're here for questions, OK? I
just want to make sure I. I
understand what your preferences
are in roles. OK, um so, folks
happy to entertain questions Mr
Martinez, representative
Martinez.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Thank you, Chief.
Um
I wanna start off by, um
Telling you that co Martinez and
hers Valley of Hope down there.
Shining store for the entire
state. I've had the pleasure of
working with her over the years
on
Uh, different issues.
But let me get into my
questions. Um
But you're telling me is there's
still a revolving door.
In Las Cruces and Dona the
county. You're seeing the same
people over and over again.
The gentleman that you referred
to 33 felonies, some of them
Violent.
Um
Why is involuntary detention?
Not being used down there?
You said you had the
The resources. I'm I'm curious
why they're not using that.
Madam Chair representative in
his cases, there isn't a
mechanism in statute to do that.
Uh, Although battery on a police
officer, I would definitely
consider a violent offense or a
violent felon. That's a four
degree felony is not gonna
likely meet the dangerousness
requirement to get them.
Committed to an NBH. I
And so without that there is no
backup mechanism. It's either
you meet the standard of
dangerousness, which
Really means very, very, very
dangerous.
Or there's dismissal of the
case. There's nothing in between
now.
You know, pursuing a civil
commitment under 43-1 Dash 11.
Is an option. Obviously, that's
something that you know. Part of
it is working, making sure that
the system as it exists is
working as well as it can with
us. The DAS office, the existing
resources, and maybe maybe that
would have been a possibility
for him. That hasn't happened
And I'm not sure whether the
District Court judge would based
on just the volume of crime
alone.
Um, would find that he is
presents that likelihood of
serious harm to self or others.
Well, I would think
not only the the violent
felonies, but the amount of
felonies and the fact that
I mean, he seems to be in there
every two weeks.
Serves one night and he's back
out on the street that we're not
doing anything for him.
We? The system is failing him.
Because there are resources in
Dona County that could help him.
But it doesn't seem like
The D, a the judge. Whoever
makes that decision
Is
Making those those, um
Making that decision to send him
to one of those, um
Places that could help him.
And I don't What? I don't
understand. Madam Chair chief.
Where's the breakdown?
You guys have great resources
down there.
But then you have a guy that's
committing 33 felonies and
nothing is being done for him.
Madam Chair representative. My
my argument would be the
breakdown is a statute. It does
not give us the mechanism to
address somebody like him or the
others who are committing that
volume of crime.
Um, you know, the mechanisms are
a OT, which he likely would not
comply with.
Or civil commitment, which is a
high standard with clear and
convincing evidence. And maybe
you would meet that he would go
to Las Vegas for seven days a
month. Whatever it is, which is
not long enough, especially for
substance use disorder.
To actually address the problem
for that person.
Thank thank you, Madam Chair and
chief. It just it just I. I can
imagine your frustration. I'm
frustrated. Just
Listening to the presentation.
We are failing new Mexicans all
over the state by not
Fixing something or making those
connections or just making the
decision.
Um, to do that.
I mean,
It seems like everybody's
waiting for somebody else to do
something.
Somebody has to say OK, well
This is what we're doing.
Because this guy is just going
to get more and more dangerous.
I mean,
If if I raised three sons if I
didn't correct them immediately.
Two or three years later.
The behavior would be worse.
And it just seems like he's
advancing.
He's moving up the ladder.
His charges are getting worse
and worse.
He already has a battery on a
police officer.
If we need to change the law.
Then let's start working on that
it just
To me. It doesn't make any sense
that we have to change a
lawsuit. If you have all the
resources
And somebody just needs to say
you need to go here.
I think
I may be wrong, but I think the
judge has that ability.
Um, it it just It frustrates me
because
We see it all over it. It
happens in Albuquerque. You see
the same people
Um, and unfortunately, we're
starting to see that creep up
the hill to Rio Rancho.
Um and I have met with the
judges.
In the 13th and and
Ask them. What are you doing?
Are you going to let these
people out every time?
It's not just any people to
jail. It's connecting them to
Resources in the community, like
like you have
Um, somebody just needs to make
that decision.
I can. I can imagine your
frustration. I'm I'm
Extremely frustrated with with
the breakdown.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Thank you, representative, Uh
representative Romero.
Ah, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Chief Story for being
here the last couple of days and
helping draw light on, um
The the issue of, um competency,
and I think that's really clear
from your, um
Presentation. You know where the
problems are. I'm just trying to
interpret your data a little bit
better. Um, and just
understanding some of the
recidivism and how it might
connect to both the behavioral
health issues with the repeat
offenders, um, with the sort of
where competency and where that
line sort of, um, comes through,
and I'm looking at page 21 in
your presentation.
Um, on just the the chronic or
prolific.
Folks, and I just I'm trying to
interpret the data and also
connect that to again, if if
those folks that are sitting in
this recidivism category and are
sitting in this recidivism
category, and our first question
is, are they are these the same
people that are being counted
year to year?
Or are they different?
Madam Chair, representative.
Many of them are we see the same
names and, quite frankly, I. I
still see the same names now
from when I was a rookie
officer, which is really
discouraging and some of them
are new. And some of them
change. Um not all of these
people in this category, um have
competency issues or even have a
mental illness or substance use
issues, But I'd say a
significant proportion of them
do
OK, thank you, Madam Chair, So
that's part of so would with
this count, I would assume that
it follows the same trend in the
data. That's about 9% of this
group. That is also, um
Perhaps in that incompetent, um,
category is that correct?
I'm chair representative. I
don't have the number I my
suspicion is that it would be
much higher than that. Certainly
a much higher percentage of
people who have a substance use
disorder and or mental illness
or co occurring. So for that
category, especially OK, Thank
you, Madam chair. Um so so then
thinking through some of this
chronic or prolific, is there an
attachment to this with a
behavioral health issue as well?
That can correlate some of the
recidivist tendency with those
folks that are perhaps
Refusing care, Um, that would go
into that category.
Madam Chair representative. So
this came from a, uh, a pretty
in depth analysis of recidivism,
so within that obviously know
who's responsible for each of
those numbers, and when I pick
out let's say the 21 people with
11 or more arrests in 2023 for
one I can identify by name for
the most part who fits in that
category or not, but we can then
Look even further look at who's
had competency dismissals. So
although it's in depth, it
doesn't have that yet, but it
would be fairly easy to do that.
Thank you, man. That's good to
know. I think some of the
connection piece that I'm trying
to understand from our statewide
approach. Um, is both with the
city of Las Cruces is done and
and shout out to your city
council. For I think taking on a
number of these issues I know
Councilor Bencomo has been
really focused on some of the
crisis, intervention pieces and
some of the other, um, you know,
intervention forces that perhaps
aren't necessarily in the data
right now that when we look at
determinations of competency and
Some of the checkpoints for how
we start sort of parsing out who
goes where into what category
Um is, you know in the question
of what we saw with the statue
earlier today is like Is it
really just a financing problem
where we need to boast? You know
some of these crisis
intervention points that are
working, and I think when we see
data like this, it's hard to
sort of understand. These folks
could really benefit from a
behavioral health program. These
folks aren't necessarily
committing crimes, but they're
chronically offending in certain
ways, and I and I guess some of
the the question for how we both
look at the STA.
And and think through what could
help, you know, promote best
practices for what you could.
you could use support on. Um, I
guess just trying to figure out
those threads of of conversation
Since you respond to literally
everything under the sun. Is
there a way you know for us to
identify if we had more crisis
intervention points or support
for you, you know, would that
create better outcomes for any
of these pit bits or are we just
focused on competency is really
the
Point for where everything is
failing.
I'm sure representative I the
reality is it's so complex.
Everything is interrelated. So
We need all of it. The crisis
care the crisis to our center,
The diversion programs a OT each
one of those will put the
treatment courts each one of
them will hopefully pull out. A
number of people from this
bigger pool, including the
competency issue. The problem is
at the end. After all these
programs pull out those people,
which is what they exist for,
and they should. We should
invest in them. Because of that.
There's still a group of people
left.
But there's no answer for
And that's where
When I see the competency
problem, That's what I'm left
with. Is that at the end of it,
no matter what programs we
implement.
And I. I celebrate all the
programs we're doing because it
is making an impact, but there's
still going to be a group of
people left that we don't have
an answer for.
We don't have a mechanism to get
them healthy, and I think that's
the biggest failure point is
that we need some way.
Preferably we divert them,
preferably We get them plugged
into a treatment court Or maybe
we have to do a T.
Or maybe even civil commandment.
But at some point those will not
work for everybody, and we need
something to deal with the most
chronic offenders, the people
that have that need help the
most, but they're the hardest to
help.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I think that's a lesson
for us and just identifying that
category. That's not only
perhaps to your point.
Taking a million dollars of
resources We could have
literally sent them to the moon
and back on the amount of
funding that, um one person, you
know, how do you heal a person?
Um, And if it's not with money,
then what are we doing? Um, the
fact that we're not creating
that resource point for for how
to to find that support, um, is
really critical. And I'm I
appreciate that the case study
that you that you brought forth
because I feel like there's
probably several of those in
each of our communities to
really focus on. How are
U using those resources to the
best of our ability and not
taking up the time. Um and
effort that you all provide to
to have to keep going back and
back and back. Um so I really
appreciate that and certainly
something for us to to figure
figure out that that one point
that you highlight Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, representative. Um,
Senator. Duh.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, chief.
So for that for that group of
people that are left that that
we don't have a good good
answers for just based on on
your observations, anecdotally.
How how many of them tend to be
like a primary. Their primary
issue is like a severe mental
illness versus substance abuse
disorder versus both I. I know
there's gonna be a lot of
overlap between those two and
there is and the case that I
gave you, um JRC.
She definitely had an underlying
severe mental illness, and she
has been
Uh, self medicating for years.
And it is just exasperated
drastically, but I think the
increase you've seen in crime
overdoses. Uh, the competency
issue. Basically all the bad
stuff you line up from 2019
really 2024 is when everything
started to get bad.
I don't think that's an
explosion in schizophrenia in
New Mexico. I think it's an
explosion and fel and Matthews
and so
I personally believe based on
what we're seeing on the street
side. This increase is due to
That problem, which is almost
harder to deal with than the
mental illness side of things,
But of course, there is a lot of
overlap. We are dealing with
untreated mental illness that
there is a significant problem.
I don't want to downplay it.
But I think the reason it's
exploded so much is fentanyl and
meth.
Thank you.
And, uh,
Madam chair, chief. I
Like your your quote with the
lead a horse to water where you
can't make him drink, But you
can't make them thirsty. So in
this in this context
What is making them thirsty look
like to you So for that person
specifically that
That use that quote that now has
worked in this field for several
years as a mental health
professional. It was basically
like a treatment course. So he
was given the option. You go to
jail or you engage in treatment.
And back and forth, and you
chose treatment, and he probably
wasn't perfect at it. But
there's enough leeway and grace
built in so that eventually he
was successful. And then now he
works in this field and helps
other people.
It is different for each person.
Obviously, if we can get someone
to divert, and there's basically
no co at all. I have no problem
with that.
But there has to be that tier
model because, like the people,
I showed you
They're they're going to take
advantage of that, and they're
they're not going to engage in
treatment unless they get really
thirsty. And that could be that
option. You've committed 24
felonies in 60.
Misdemeanor 60 cases total
You have an option. You engage
in treatment or you go to jail.
Now The problem is right now
there's really not a way for a
judge to do that. Because once
they're once competency is
raised, it has to be stated. It
goes over for that evaluation,
and once they're counting
company, the judge does not have
discretion.
They have to dismiss.
So there is no mechanism
whatsoever to do that now. But
of course, in my opinion, at
some point, there's a group of
people who have to have that
option of jail at least some
jail versus treatment.
And then hopefully they make
that choice. The right choice.
Thank you and and manager chief
just
To to clarify for myself cause I
was getting confused between
like with all this.
The number of cases versus the
number of charges versus the
number of arrests can can you
clarify that because there can
be multiple charges in one case,
right arrest for multiple
things and Madam Chair Senator,
So if you look at this side,
it's a good example. And just I
read those felonies. You have
burglary of a vehicle and you
also have a misdemeanor assault.
So you got two charges from that
one case, the second one. You
see a vehicle and then battery
upon a police officer. Some of
these you have, um
Multiple counts of burger
vehicles, so they broke into two
vehicles. It's on the same case.
Um, so the cases might have
multiple charges, and that's how
that's why the charges are
higher than the cases.
OK, And and does so. Does he
have 60 charges or 6060 cases?
OK, 71, I believe is the total
charges. OK, Thank you. Thank
you, madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator.
Representative Alcon and then
Thank you. Uh, I met him here.
We see I'm trying to figure this
out. OK, So what would be your
suggestion?
As to what kind of loss we could
change.
That would not, uh,
Well, they they, uh, the
constitutional rights of an
individual.
Thank you, Madam Chair
representative. Of course, my
opinion is gonna be
Um, in conflict with probably
other people in this room, But
again, I we need a tiered tiered
approach. So, um, I think on the
competency side, I think we need
to amend the criminal competency
to allow for, um
One impatient restoration other
places than Las Vegas for
community restoration. There's
several studies that I've seen
recently of the success of
community competency
restoration, and although the
purpose of restoration is not
treatment, a side effect is
there is a treatment component
to it.
So it's not like it's not to the
benefit of the defendant to
receive restoration Now was it
preferable that they get
treatment that's tailored to
them. Based on evaluation? Yes.
So there's a mechanism to do
that enforce it. I have no
problem with that, but community
based restoration needs to
happen. Um
A OT is a good resource.
Obviously, we probably need to
implement better and no matter
what the data you could come up
with the best statute in the
world. If we don't implement it,
it's not gonna do anything. So
implementation is always a
problem.
But, uh, alt. I would like to
see something like Casey's law,
which is specific to substance
use disorder.
Um, probably being be very
controversial, but I think
It has a potential to save a lot
of lives. Essentially, it's like
a OT for substance use, which,
of course, none of these things
we're talking about, apply to
substance use disorder, so
there's really nothing for them.
And, um
It's even a little stronger than
a O.
But I think we have to have an
answer for substance use, and we
have to have this tiered
approach, so there's options.
And we can still start with the
least intrusive means. I mean,
that's that's what's required.
But when the options are
extremes
Everything else tends to fall in
the middle.
And we just lose out on any
benefit for
So let me I'm trying to figure
how to know how to make
something work, OK?
And then my little bit brain.
It's not working.
Um so OK, I'm just gonna go in
my school says
Somebody is arrested for
committing a crime, OK?
And, uh, placed in jail and they
were arraigned by the magistrate
Judge, Am I correct?
Yeah. Yes.
OK, so
When?
Where is the question of, uh,
mental competency come up.
Madam Chair representative. It
could be raised at any point. A
lot of times. It is potentially
raised at a re but at any point
in the process it's raised and
the other thing is once
someone's been found
incompetent.
The likelihood of it being
raised. Every time is obviously
drastically increased. And
because of the back the backlog
in evaluations what tends to
happen is they use one
evaluation going forward for
some unspecified amount of time
and so that everything just
starts automatically getting
raised and there's hearings are
found in competent. They use the
same evaluation so
It could be at any point,
though.
OK, so
I'm willing to say that,
basically, uh
Right there. Magistrate Court is
where
It'll be a
The decision will be made
basically as to where to go.
Was this defendant in that case
if the question comes about
about about competency
I'm getting tongue Tidier. OK,
The question about competency
comes up. It'll be right there
at the Magistrate Court at
arraignment.
And then from there, we had to
make a decision as to what to do
with this defendant.
All right.
Manager, representative I I
should preface. I'm obviously
not an attorney.
Um, won't be a cop if I was, but
If it's raised at any court, and
a lot of our cases for certain
municipal court, but same
process, it stayed a goods and
it moves over to district Court
and everything happens in
District court, and if they're
found in competent, it goes back
down to the lower court for
dismissal with an order to
dismiss
So OK, so if it
If you go to this court
And the divining competent it
sent back to municipal court and
was dismissed then and there.
There. Is there any way
That we could have somebody.
I could find a way to work with
these people on the way back to
either magistrate or municipal
court.
To work with them to see if they
can get him into one of these
programs before they're sent
back out on the street. I'm
chair and I'm glad you said,
because that's that's the
important point is
That requires a level of
co-operation and so the
diversion program that kicks off
tomorrow the SO SS program for
municipal court.
That's what we're trying to do
is take advantage of an
opportunity to get someone
That want help, or is at least
somewhat Aimal to it amenable to
it to engage in treatment we
have we can do that. The problem
is
You know these people when they
they know that the case they're
found incompetent. The case is
going to get dismissed. What
incentive is there to do
anything else?
It It's done with and so once,
especially once they found
incompetent, there's zero in in
the case is dismissed. Why, if
they don't want treatment,
they're not going to agree to it
at that point.
So
I guess, Madam chair. My
question is, uh, how long can
the judge keep somebody?
Incarcerated after arraignment
before releasing them.
Amateur representative in in
joining a county right now I
can't speak for the whole state,
but we operate under the same
rule, so I imagine it's the same
for most of these crimes. These
petty misdemeanors They're not
going to jail so much shoplifts.
They're getting a citation
unless they have a warrant or
something for the recipe.
Uh, if they break a window, I
criminal damage the property.
All those crimes are not even
going to jail if they do go to
jail. Under the current rules of
released by designee and some of
the other pretrial. They're not
spending very long. We've had
people on felony charges for
burglary.
Get arrested, get released and
burglarize another business
within four hours, so
The RSU in New Mexico is not
necessarily people spending too
much time in jail. We have
separate issues and the Criminal
Justice Institute who came in to
do that study. That's one of the
things they noted to me is
In Mexico. The problems are
different than some of the other
states.
Rest up. So you see, here's
where
I mean, my my problem, Madam
chair is not, uh
The problem of keeping somebody
in jail. My thinking is I want
to keep him in jail.
And the only reason that is, is
that the question has come up
about competency.
Now we gotta figure out what to
do with this person. Now we need
a couple of days to see where we
can move this person around and
see, uh
If they are willing to
But we program like this or if
eventually they're gonna end up
on the street back on the
street.
I know how a felony case, uh,
one fellow cases. The D A has 10
days to
To a a person or is it grand
jury?
Or or he has to, or they have to
be release them.
But, uh
So my my thinking is what I'm
trying to do is find a way.
To make these guys that are
doing 32 crimes spend a few days
thinking before they get back
out to do it 34 crime.
So how How do we go about that?
Madam Chair representative, and
I think it's an important note.
I mentioned Senate Bill 271.
Which I do think goes a long way
in being reasonable. When
someone commits a felony.
They're released and they commit
another felony. They're held,
obviously, until they see the
judges in all their cases. The
problem again is that it may not
capture the people I'm talking
about because
If they've been arrested on a
felony, they've been found
incompetent. That case gets
dismissed. There are no
conditions of release. There is
no pending felony.
They get arrested on another
felony. Senate bill 271 would
not apply.
So there's all kinds of just
There's a lot of problems
obviously to solve, and there's
a lot of nuancing complexity to
it, and there's a lot of
unintended consequences that
happen from different decisions.
Right now. I don't know the
mechanism. You know many states
the competency.
Crisis Restoration crisises
because a lot of states keep
people in jail.
Until they have their evaluation
until they're restored or until
they go to another facility. The
Mexico game does the opposite.
We don't keep them in jail, so
I don't know how you find the
balance. Um, but we're again.
Our problems are different than
many other states. Everyone's
dealing with this competency
problem crisis, but the
specifics are different.
Thank you, representative Um
Senator Cedillo Lopez.
Thank thank you, madam Chair.
Um, when you talk about these
people who don't get diverted
out from various means, and then
there's the core group of people
that just nothing works for
them. How many people would you
say we're talking about? I know
you gave us
Some names and examples, but
In general, you talk about 2030
people.
Madam Chair, Senator. That's a
really good question and the
that top 20 I showed you most of
those people probably are not
gonna be
Captured by some of these
programs because they're the
ones that tend to not, uh, be
cooperated with anything. And so
I think in Las Cruces, 20 is a
good number If you if you
snapped your fingers waved a
magic wand and these 20 people
were no longer either were their
mental illness was under control
is being treated or they're no
longer addicted to whatever
they're addicted to. We have a
lot. That's crime, and, uh,
quality of life would be better
for the city and for these
people, So 20 is a good number
for us, Um
And we're about 100 and 14,000
people. So you
Albuquerque is probably about
five times that, or maybe a
little more. The reason I ask is
has the Legislature. One of the
things we try to do is pass
legislation that's actually
constitutional and in order to
to do that.
Um, we need to look at the
solutions that do afford at
least drastic alternatives. We
have to look at AAA problem has
a very significant
Problem in public safety, I
think does count as an extremely
significant problem, and then we
have to make sure that the means
that the state chooses to solve
that problem is very tightly
connected, or or like using the
dream least drastic means to
solve that problem. And so when
we're talking about 20 people
that you can't get rid of that
you can't get out of the system
shouldn't have said get rid of
it. Can't get out of the system.
Um, because
All of the other programs Just
don't work.
What kind of solution do you
Imagine that we could get
To them.
Using least drastic
alternatives. What
What? Just brainstorming.
What ideas might you have?
Madam Chair Center, and
obviously that just because I
think they they won't take any
of these programs as new
programs are implemented. We
obviously should try and I think
we probably I'll be surprised at
some of those people will have
success stories and so using
these alternatives that are less
drastic.
Is still the option, but at some
point there has to be another
mechanism.
And
One of them is is community
based restoration where they're
ordered to restoration. It's not
just dismissed.
And
Maybe that's not for all
misdemeanors. Maybe that's after
there's five misdemeanors
dismissed due to incompetence. I
don't know whatever the number
is, but there's gotta be
something between everything and
nothing right now we're doing
nothing so and and and that's
exactly my point is we We have
extremes, everything or nothing.
So if we're getting into that
gray area of something that
would be constitutional
What does that look like?
How individualized is it? How,
Um
I don't cause it because it
sounds to me from going through
that list, like people have very
different problems. There's not
a cookie cutter approach for for
each of them. One might be drug
addicted. Might one might have
schizophrenia. A another one?
Maybe, uh,
Other. I don't know very
severely depressed and self
medicating and you know, so just
everybody's
Gonna be different. And so a
cookie cutter is probably gonna
violate somebody's rights
because it's not gonna fit.
Um and so is there.
What do you imagine? That's the
something in between the two
alternatives that we have
dismissal or
Commitment.
Madam Chair, Senator. I mean,
ultimately, the best case
scenario for me to get it.
Obviously, this isn't
My place to necessarily come up
with the details, but
If there's a mechanism to get
that person, an assessment
Because that assessment from
whether locally for us, it's the
clinical de Familia FY Plus or P
Behavior hall that assessment,
then tailors the treatment plan
to that person, and it's very
comprehensive. They provide
wraparound services. They look
for anything that's causing the
issues and they address it. And
so whether that's plugging them
into an act team or
comprehensive community support
services or usually a
combination of different things.
And right now we're doing that
for anybody that we can get to
voluntarily do that We're doing
it for so the key is the non
voluntary nature of it. That's
the bottom line, right? You're
seeking non voluntary.
Treatment or non voluntary
services.
Or not, you know, I I depending
on how you frame it Non
voluntary commitment.
Madam Chair, Senator.
If that's essentially what I am
saying, for people that are
obviously in involved with the
criminal justice system
committing crimes, not for
citizens at large, but for
people that are especially
continuously engaged, committing
crimes and in the criminal
justice system.
Um
We have to have some mechanism.
To plug them into treatment.
OK, Thank you, I. I think that's
the difficulty that's really the
difficulty is finding a solution
that meets constitutional
standards.
But also solves the problem. And
then when you're talking about
such a small number of people
with such a variety of problems
makes it really challenging.
So I really appreciated the
presentation. It was extremely
helpful. Thank you, madam Chair.
Uh, representative Bargo.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Um, First of all, I'd like to
begin by thanking both police
and fire for the work that
you're doing. I just in your
voice. I can hear the stress of
You know the frustration and, um
I just wanted to mention and and
I just wondered. Have you guys
met with Albuquerque? Um police
and fire in our new department.
Uh, we have a new, um, It's a
community outreach.
Department that, um, we
implemented about
Three years ago, I guess and we
started with a a budget
allocation of about $10 million
and it's increased since then.
Um, but it basically is a group
of
Trained
Um, social workers that go out
into the street so that the
stress doesn't fall.
All the time.
Um especially helping with the
homeless, but I know that it's
sort of all intermingled with
the behavioral health. Um and
what this new department does is
goes out into the street. If
there's a call and and kind of
takes the
The people that are not
As I guess. Violent or whatever,
Um
It takes that stress off of
police and fire.
And these people are trained to
go out basically and help these
individuals with shelter
transportation, you know, um
Whatever needs they they have.
um and try to evaluate them and
then you know, direct them into
a so if it's a veteran, or if
it's a
You know if it's um
A true behavioral health. Try to
get them into some kind of
service. Um, and they work in
conjunction with the second
apart because there's another
department called Health,
Housing and Homelessness. And
And so they kind of work
together with police and fire,
which actually leaves Madam
chair the police and fire to
deal with these more
Aggressive. I guess individuals
and I don't know I would love to
put you guys in touch with them
if you haven't met with them,
but I think it might be a model
that is worth looking into.
Um and I know it's expensive and
I know that resources are
limited, but I think, um, you
know, we need to really think
about critical evaluation.
Madam chair. How are smaller
departments are
Addressing these issues and
It would free up some of your
time because I'm sure that you
only have a certain amount of,
uh
Individuals that you're dealing
with. I mean employees.
That you have available to deal
with these issues. Um and so
The next step, Ma Madam chair is
that we created the Gateway
Center, which is still in
process.
And that's the old loveless
hospital over on, um
San Mateo and Gibson, which
eventually would become more of
a behavioral health center.
That's really the
You know that's sort of the
direction and right now, I think
there's only very few beds there
and it might behoove us. Madam
Charity actually have some of
these folks come and present to
us, and I'd be happy to help you
with that. Um, but
I just thought I'd mention that
model to you because I think
it's it's kind of a start.
Of of
Alleviating some of the stress
that is on police and fire.
And and, you know, I hear you're
frustration. I heard it at a PD.
I heard it with, uh, Afr.
And, um, I think that it's
something that's um definitely
something that we as a committee
also might wanna
Be interested in in looking at
seeing how it's working because
we have allocated a lot of
resources to the these
departments and to this new
Gateway center, So I just wanted
to mention that I don't really
have a question, I. I did hear
your presentation, and I thought
what I what crossed my mind is
kind of the same issue that
cross Senator Cilla Lopez mind
is the gap. Where is the gap?
Actually, that we're
And and and some of those people
who cannot be real
rehabilitated. I mean, they just
are beyond you know that they
truly in that mental health.
Um
Extreme, I guess. And so, I. I
just wanted to mention some of
these things. Um, Mountain chair
because, I I was involved in
some of this. Thank you.
Thank thank you, representative.
I have representative Rem
representative Chay and then,
uh, represent a lot of Ka. Um,
Does that work for your schedule
representing me?
Uh, thank you, madam. Chair
Chief. Let me ask you, um
So as your example that you have
up on the screen. Is he a
convicted felon?
I'm sure. Uh, representative. I
don't believe he is a convicted
felon and in his issue started
rather AB abruptly, um, mid
2021.
And so prior to that he had very
little interaction.
So, um, I have my suspicions.
obviously on on why that is, but
I don't. He's not a convicted
And Madam Chair and chief. Has
he ever been court committed to,
uh, mental treatment?
Madam Chair representative. No.
See Madam chair and this is a
problem that individual can go
by a gun.
And that's what needs to be
fixed. Also in this, bill, thank
you, madam Chair.
Thank you, representative,
representative Chay.
Oh, thank you very much. Madam
Chair and chief. Thank you for
your presentation. And and
because, um, we've been working
with the Justice Reinvestment
Initiative. This committee has
we've been focusing on data, so
we really appreciate your
bringing so much data to us
today and and I just want to
remind everybody and this
committee we want to focus on
it. And we want to give the the,
um
Uh, JR I and opportunity.
To, um, get its work done so the
more we can help them out,
folks, the better If if they
call you answer the call, and,
um so we'll try to, uh
to do that. And because we're
looking for
Policy guidance and data is the
best way to tell us
Whether we're getting it right
or whe whether we might actually
get it. Right. So thanks a lot.
Thank you.
Of, um representative Lara
Kenna. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Chiefs for being here
today. I wanted to appreciate
the very thoughtful dialogue
you've inspired with us and also
just
Um, note and ask
Representing parts of Las
Cruces. As you all might
imagine, when you all are in
front of the City Council or in
other town halls or public
forums.
The conversations and
commentary, in my sense has been
much more divisive, and that's
how I read about it in the paper
that one hand um people and
constituents are coming at you
all expecting a much harsher,
um, hammer because they have
real legitimate concerns about
quality of life and public
safety. And then we have other
advocates, and I tend to be
closer to this to these values
that are saying we need real
public health, behavioral health
approaches to interrupt cycles.
Trauma and incarceration and
poverty. Um, it seems like you
all are trying to have a
database conversation so that we
can have much more productive
conversations about what's
possible for Las Cruces in New
Mexico, Um, anything you wanna
share specifically about with
your lead about your leadership,
Chief story or other cheap here
about what you're doing to try
to have a conversation. That's
More beneficial and less
political. Just as inspiration
for us as we may go into a
special session that's heated in
the same ways and thank you for
being here.
I'm sure representative. Very
interesting question. Good
question. I
You know, you don't get a lot of
accomplished obviously through
animosity. And although I
disagree, um, on a number of
things with many of the people I
speak to
We actually oftentimes agree on
the end goal.
And so focusing on that angle is
very helpful. Um, but I've had
really good conversations with
people from all over the
spectrum. Um, from AC. LU. If
Daniel is still here, um, we
have We have good conversations,
even though we disagree on a lot
of things, and I think it's
helpful in the end, um to
To inform perspectives on both
sides and oftentimes.
Mice. Perspective changes a
little bit or theirs, Or maybe
both.
And that's the only way that I I
think we're gonna need anything
accomplished.
Thank you, Madam Chair and a
representative from the Fire
department side. We really take,
uh, community based. Look at
what would work, um, going back
in several years? 67 years ago
when we started our mobile
integrated health care program,
Uh, we did reach out to
departments like Santa Fe as
well as a FR to see what they
were doing, Uh, for their
communities. We quickly found
that our solution needed to be
community based, Uh, based on
our data, what our citizens were
were finding so our Ms program
focuses on
People who use the 911 system
they high high utilize of it for
medical care. That's their
access point to health care.
So we tailored our approach for
that.
Uh, we moved forward from there
and built on that success with
project Bluebird. Uh, that was
kind of our in between where we
partner with PD, and we go out.
We see individuals who are chief
Story said, kind of showing that
tendency that they are
approaching crisis. Uh, the
scene isn't necessarily, uh,
safe for our firefighters and
our licensed clinical social
workers to approach that
individual by themselves, as you
saw with that one case example
with JR, uh, actually
threatening our crews with a
with a knife.
So we make contact with them to
try to avert that.
And then our light team is built
through the 911 system.
And we respond to those people
who are mental crisis at that
time we actually received most
of our calls now from our PD
officers.
Early on the recognizing that
this solution could could work.
For this instance, this this
scene
All of that, to really say that
The the approach needs to meet
the community's needs. It needs
to look at it and the chief
stories point. I think what
we're looking at is New Mexico
being our community.
And how do we get people into
care when they've declined every
opportunity that's been
presented to them.
And we need to do that to keep
our community safe. Cuz this is
bleeding over just from officers
facing this challenge to our
first responders, and then our
Ambulance providers are ER S.
So we do need to look to a
solution. I think that is
community based based on New
Mexico anyone else on committee
questions?
Um
Well, very much appreciate your
participation in this hearing.
chiefs. Um I really appreciated
the conversation that you and I
had chief story in Las Cruces.
And you and I, um chiefs Um
Smith, where we went over some
of these items. So, um, very
much appreciate your engagement
and your willingness to share
your ideas and moving forward
and I encourage you to watch
what we're doing, cause we are
definitely interested in hearing
from you. Honestly, we are, um
and I wanna thank Mister County
Manager and other members of the
staff were coming up as well.
And I want you to know I think
everyone on the committee is
more than half of issues or
have, um, insights that you wish
to share with us. So thank you
again, and, um, I think we're
ready for our next presentation
but safe travels.
It's a little cooler here,
though, at least
Before you leave. You should
rather
Okay?
Mhm.
Mm Mhm. Mhm. Yeah.
On there.
Yes.
Yeah. Mm. You know that way.
There's a sentence.
Yeah, yeah.
And there should be like a
pathway to that, because I mean
the number of people escalating
to firearms were
Yep, Yep, No, I agree. It's
terrifying to think that I had
to stand trial for a crime you
committed And yet you can still
go. I mean, Oh, yeah,
that's it, And that's the that's
the crux of it right. They may
have had a diagnosis.
I think the question on rights
is really interesting, though,
right? Because we have the red
flag situation.
Where it's a third party, you
know, version of intervening,
but if they're already in the
system
All right. I think we're ready
for our next, um, presenter.
And she is Lindsey Fuchs, a
special commissioner, Second
Judicial District Court a
perspective on civil commitment,
and I'm sure you're gonna do
this, but it would be helpful to
kind of know what your role is
And so on. OK, very good.
And I'll turn green. OK, There
we go. All right. Um Oh, jeez.
OK, um
So I. I wanna be clear.
Obviously, it's titled Civil
Commitments. These are not
criminal cases. Um, they don't
touch the criminal realm there.
We don't make any criminal.
There's no criminal elements. No
findings, uh, that are equated
with the criminal court.
Um
The only way that I can envision
these interact with the criminal
court is that the same way that
any other area of law would
interact that some of the
respondents that come before us
have had criminal cases or have
pending criminal cases, much
like someone who was getting a
divorce might or in probate
court or in small claims, But we
do not interact with the
criminal court at all.
Um so II, I I'm I'm
All right. I'm just gonna go to
Max slide. Um so I want to start
with the Who, and there are
three special commissioners in
the second judicial district
that your civil commitment cases
that's myself La Donna and
Andrea Gunderson. There is one
petitioner's counsel who
represents essentially the state
or the hospitals in our cases,
and that is Ray Montano, and he
is contract. He contracts with
the district attorney in that
role, and then we have a group
of attorneys who represent
respondents in our cases or
patients.
And, um, they are a group of
attorneys under the title of
Joint Ventures. Uh, but those
include and this is the ex
exhaustive list. It is Joyce
Gentry, Travis Scott, Jeannie
Smith, Dan Hochman, V Hill and
Nate Gentry.
And so, um, the first three that
I named and that are on the, um
Uh, slide, uh, have been doing
this for I think individually
each upwards of 30 years
And they have done represented
thousands of respondents and
have had thousands of
adjudications in these cases.
Representative Hochman V Hill
has started taking some of these
cases recently earlier this
year, I think, uh, she does
about one docket a month.
And, uh,
Mr Gentry.
Sort of fills in. He used to do
more, but doesn't do as many
these days. Uh, part of why I
wanted to show you. This is to
kind of demonstrate how
Um, sort of niche. This
community is this area of law
And, um, you know that this is
in the most populous ju judicial
district in the state.
Um this is the totality of the
legal players. Uh, in this
Area of law. Um what? So I
wanted to talk about what we do
when we talk about mental health
court. I know that there's
different things that are called
mental Health Court what we do
as hearing officers in the
second as we do, Uh, we hear
civil commitment petitions for
adults and juveniles. We hear,
uh
To appoint treatment guardians
for adults and juveniles, and we
review and, uh grant or deny it
was my understanding for the
purpose of today's presentation
that the committee was
interested in, uh, talking about
civil commitment, so that's
gonna be the focus of my
presentation.
Talk about where
So we hold our hearings
currently at the UN M
Psychiatric Center, So they have
a room for us airing room where
myself and the both council
appear in person.
We have court technology in
there that allows our court
monitors to remote in to record
the hearings, and it also allows
for doctors, patients, Uh,
witnesses to remote in from
other facilities that we have
hearings. So we are physically
at the UN M Psychiatric Center.
We hear petitions primarily
from, uh UN N psychiatric
Center, Uh, Presbyterian
casement.
The veterans administrators, the
VA Hospital Loveless Central
Desert.
Even behavioral health Hospital
and UN M psychiatric, Uh,
Children's psychiatric Center.
Casement also has an adolescent
psychiatric unit.
And we don't hear petitions
filed from the New Mexico
Behavioral Health Institute, but
we often have petitions where
They are requesting commitment
to do.
So somebody is at UN M, but they
would like us to commit, so
these are sort of the players,
uh, from the facilities in
The second. Um when so, we hold
these dockets three days per
week. Every Tuesday, Thursday
and Friday morning. I came here
today fresh off of mental health
docket, and so I I wanted, uh,
this slide to sort of
demonstrate.
That
Uh, we hear these very often.
We have a a lot of these that
come before us.
Uh, we will hear sometimes, um
A A small docket would be four
or five.
Uh, the largest I've ever done.
Is, uh, 16 hearings on one
docket.
I would say the average is
probably 7 to 10.
Uh, per docket, and that's uh
three dockets.
So this is sort of my
Attempt at kind of walking you
through a little bit on on how
this flows and everything, of
course, is not on here. But the
first thing is that a petition
is filed and I've put here sort
of in
I have not bolded, it says by
medical provider
So
Uh, the law allows for
Uh, interested people outside of
just medical providers to file
petitions. It is
Not just the law.
Um
But what really with what the
requirements are for a petition
to be considered by the court.
Uh,
What we find is that it is I
have only ever seen medical
providers file petitions that
are carried. I've been doing
this for three years a little
over three years. And so that
doesn't mean it can't be done in
a different way. Uh, but this is
what the way the only way I've
ever seen it done.
Um
The petition is processed and
entered by our court staff and a
hearing is set within.
5 to 7 days.
Based on the statutory
timelines are respondent
counsel.
Goes and meets with
All of their clients. So those
hospitals that I listed, uh it
is not uncommon at all that the
respondent council is running
around to different hospitals
all day long to meet in person
with their clients.
Certainly there are times where,
uh, respondents do not want to
meet with their assumed
primarily kind of on their
active mental state. But our
respondent counsel goes out and
meets with their clients. I will
also say.
Uh, just take a moment to say
that
I think that we have, uh, a bar
here with the council and
respondents counsel that is
highly professional and
provides a great quality of
representation. And I just say
that because I don't think that
we hear that all the time, and I
just wanted to take a moment.
Um, they show up, prepared, they
show up ready to go with an
understanding of to the best of
their ability to as I stated,
and kind of explaining where and
how we hold our hearings.
And all you and M cases.
For adults are held.
Fully in person person who's
testifying. US. Often social
workers are in person. Uh,
sometimes there are other
Witnesses that come in person to
testify at UN M. However, we do
have the ability for hybrid
hearings and we hear, uh
Hearings from
From the other facilities remote
in to that room. Um
I wanted to note. I don't have
it necessarily here in the
slide, but
There are plenty of times that
petitions for civil commitments
are dismissed.
Uh, at the hearings or prior to
the hearings for usually one of
three reasons. One. Is that the
patient? Uh, a second is that
they're being just moved forward
with the petition. And the third
is that they? I bring that up
because what was
Surprising to me when I started
hearing these cases is that you
would have petitions and, um,
medical records as part of the
discovery that would
Detail, some really
You know, extreme behavior,
extreme symptoms, and I was
really surprised at how
Effective and quick some of the
medications to get them back to
their baseline back to a place
where they can be safely
discharged.
Like I said, We set our hearings
in 5 to 7 days and it is or have
been discharged.
Um
We review rights with the
respondents and the impact of
the involuntary civil
commitment. So if, um
We ensure that the respondents
know that if we have a hearing
And if the court receives clear
and convincing evidence on the
elements necessary, then the
court will find
that they will be committed in
voluntarily and that that has an
impact on some of their rights.
So the first is that they will
not be able to
Possess or receive firearms and
if we do or order civil
commitment, a firearms notice is
also issued so they cannot
legally, uh receive or possess
firearms. They also have their
name is sent to the FBI as
somebody who has been civilly
involuntarily civilly committed
and so I try to always explain
to them if they had some
opportunity in the future, uh,
that required an FBI background
check then, uh, that they
whoever was doing that check
would be able to I don't know.
How that would impact them. I
also talk, especially there's a
lot of
Federal jobs in New Mexico labs
and things like that, as well as
uh other areas that
Federal government, and so I
just want to make sure that they
know that they're
Uh, the burden of proof in our
cases is clear and convincing
Evidence.
And so that is what we are
looking for when we are And as I
stated earlier, the special
commissioner hears the
testimony.
We draft? Uh, an order with our
findings and recommendations and
those orders are entered into
the record on the same day.
So if we are going to
essentially hold somebody
Involuntarily restrict. It is
very important to us that the
record reflect why we are doing
that. So we have a very
And these are the findings.
Essentially, it's a summary of
the findings. Uh, that we make
Uh, when deciding on to commit
somebody
I again understand that you all
had a review of
The law this morning.
I just wanted to note that, uh,
I think a lot of focus ends up
on
The second one that I have here
on the screen, which is that the
mental uh, as a result of the
mental disorder, the respondent
presents a likelihood of serious
harm to self or others.
But we also find ourselves
focusing a lot on even if that
is true is commitment cause is
commitment consistent with the
least drastic means principle.
Are they going to benefit from?
um the treatment and, uh and
again is that is commitment
consistent, So we really find
ourselves focusing on who
Findings that are dispositive in
cases are not
I also wanted to take a time on
this slide to talk about the
type of testing.
Um
Findings.
What I don't wanna hear from a
doctor is something like
Well, you know people with
schizophrenia are particularly
vulnerable in our community.
That is a very general
statement. That is something
that does not tell me much about
the individual in front of me.
I am looking for, um
Testimony specific to what is
happening with this individual
Web behaviors. What thoughts are
are there to immediately and
even if a plan voluntarily is
spent two months voluntarily,
and then they have said, I want
to leave.
And does not believe that that
is safe and files a petition.
I don't need to hear what Or
maybe I want to hear a little
bit about what happened two
months ago that brought them
into the hospital. But really, I
need to know like what's going
on if they are discharged. And
so, um we really wanna focus and
not on the mental health
disorder.
Um, I wanted to talk to we see
For these petitions.
So we see schizophrenia. Very
common. That's I didn't put
these in any particular order,
but they they might sort of be
in. I'm descending order, but we
see primarily schizophrenia. We
see schizoaffective disorder. I
am not a doctor, but my
understanding is that sort of
schizophrenia.
We see bipolar with psychotic
features.
Unspecified psychosis.
A major depressive disorder,
Major neurocognitive or what
I've heard testimony on is sort
of another.
Way of seeing DeMent. So I just
wanted to this is far from an
exclusive list.
Uh, we often will see other
disorders or disabilities, other
cognitive disorders,
Intellectual disabilities,
autism spectrum disorder, Um,
post traumatic stress disorder.
Um, but I and I think PTSD might
be a good one to say that.
That's for instance, the type of
mental disorder that certainly
someone might have, but it is
usually not something that is
going to benefit from a civil
commitment.
That a ta a civil commitment or
that the treatment would
potentially resolve.
The acuity of it at that time.
I wanted to also talk just
generally and again. I'm not a
doctor. I imagine if I was or if
a doctor was sitting next to me,
they might say that some of
these are more collections of
symptoms, maybe mania, maybe
grave, passive neglect
catatonia. But these are the
things that we often see These
respondents in
And we we see this.
Even, you know, active in the
courtroom.
So things like paranoia
hallucinations.
Actively responding to internal
stimuli.
Incoherent and disordered
speech.
We
We do see a lot of catatonia had
some catatonia this morning
Malnutrition. Uh, where somebody
has really? That can go hand in
hand with like the grave.
Passive neglect where people are
not doing. They're not eating.
They're not. They have to be
prompted to do that, Or, um,
they talk about the activities
of daily living or independent
activities of daily living. So
these are some of the common
symptoms that we see in our I,
uh what the court can do in
these cases, so the
Essentially
Hold hearings and we can order
an involuntary civil commitment
to a psychiatric facility. If
we, uh if the petitioner has met
its burden
And on an initial petition for
an adult. We can, uh, commit
somebody for up to 30 days.
We can adjust that duration and
often it is adjusted so on an
initial petition for up to 30
days is the maximum
But it is very common for both
petitioner or respondent's
counsel to say, Hey, you know
what's the maximum 14 days and
we'll move to amend it, uh, to
bring it down again, and, um
Accordance with the least we can
on, uh, petitions to extend
Commitments up to six months or
a year, just depending on the
succession of petitions. There
are some additional findings
that have to be
Um, that is that the extended
treatment
Is likely to improve the
client's condition.
And that the proposed extended
commitment is consistent with
the juvenile commitments.
And they are up to 60 days and
we they are to be renewed every
60 days.
So we don't see we used to have
in in Albuquerque. We used to
have Burnley Academy. We used to
have desert hills. We used to
have some other residential
treatment facilities. Uh, nearly
all of those are gone. We really
just have the hospital settings
of, uh And so, um,
We don't see that near as often
anymore without any of those, or
the other thing that the court
can do is find that the burden
of proof for in volunteers
What the court does not do.
As we don't diagnose respondents
We don't prescribe it. We don't
order specific treatment plans
or compliance with treatment
plans, whether that's inpatient
or outpatient.
We don't say I'm not gonna
commit you, but I'm gonna order
that you part We do not, um,
order a specific discharge dates
or, uh, we we just give kind of
a a maximum duration.
But we do not pick we, um hear
the testaments or not.
I did not. This last page was
added by, uh, the a OC. They,
uh, a OC has been
Listening, Uh, over the course
of yesterday And today we have
an understanding. There has been
some data requests.
And they did a quick I think a
pretty quick trying to pull the
number of civil commitments that
have been filed yearly for the
For these fiscal years. Uh, my
understanding is this data
hasn't been sort of scrubbed to,
um, but it should give And so I
am happy to answer any questions
about kind of what the reality
of doing civil commitment
dockets on a regular basis.
Looks like
Um, and try to answer any
questions. Thank you very much,
Um, For that we have a question
from rep. Chasey and then
Oh, thank you, Madam Chair,
Lindsay. Nice to see you, Um
On your slide on common
symptoms.
Uh,
You have a phrase that I brought
up this morning when we were
having our presentation about
the statute on civil
commitments and you've got grave
passive neglect, which we do
actually have as part of the
statute on a OT.
And we were talking about how
that was a useful term.
To describe some of the
individuals with whom
We're dealing and that we want
to
Offer assistance.
And
I believe it's my understanding
from our presentation this
morning that that particular
phrase isn't in the statute on
civil commitment, but I don't
necessarily think all of these
are in the statute, either. I
just wondered if you could
comment on that. Or if it's
something that you deal with,
because it seems to
Get out a lot of the worries we
have about.
People and how difficult it can
be to assist.
Uh, Madam Chair representative
Cha.
So I
You know, without pulling out my
statue book? I don't know if
this is necessarily defined in
the statute.
Um, but what I will tell you is
that we have a testimony on it.
Direct testimony on it from
doctors. And, um, and certainly
not just my concern is grave,
passive neglect, but, uh
For that individual respondent.
What are your concerns? What is
grave? Passive neglect mean for
this patient? What are your
concerns that they were
discharged? And so when I am
considering grave passive
neglect for? Uh uh
Making a finding it is and not
necessarily
To the psychiatric
Thank you, I. I didn't expect
any further.
illumination of the of the
issue. I just wondered if you
knew it was in the statute and
and, um
Just one other question and you
might need to contemplate this a
bit it it sounds as if
You're hearings are not
particularly adversarial.
Am I wrong about that
impression?
I think that they can can be
quite adversarial.
But, um
I would say that
Really right. Sort of the
attorneys kind of
Right kind of
Drive the bus on the old and I
think that there is a very but
we I think our attorneys do
absolutely advocate for their
clients.
And, uh, it is very common that
the client immediately, uh, that
they would like to go.
UN parts of out into all sorts
of available to them outside of
the hospital, and, uh and I
think a big part of it might be
the
Extensive experience that most
of our attorneys have in
representing this population of
respondents. Um, but I think
that they it's not adversarial
in what we might think of
outside of a courtroom that
certainly I do think that they
are a courtroom, but
Um
I will say that it is. Well, I
guess, I. I would just leave it
at that. Well in full
disclosure, Madam chair.
The books and I worked together
as um sometimes
Co counsel in UM, representing
respondents in, um visa neglect
cases, and our clients didn't
always want to take our advice.
Um, but the court was ordering
them to do whatever the court
deemed necessary. And, uh, so I
guess you may be in that
situation or the attorneys may
be in that situation, not
uncommonly.
Um Madam Chair and
representative Chay.
Yes, And and I will say.
Like during these hearings.
While we're on the record, it is
very common that these
respondents are
Active, OK, and so, um
You know some of the things that
we might think of as maybe video
or entertainment or things like
that of what? Somebody with skis
or, um, with, um
Antonio might look like we see
really in our core in our
hearings and, frankly, on the
record on a regular basis, So I
think that as they can with
their clients, um, to discern
their position to, um make
Different recommendations, then
civil commitment to talk about
who might be able to, um, be
part of a discharge plan based
on their communication with
their clients, But
It is a very unique situation,
and so
I think it is different than
respondents, interviews and
neglects, but, um, but it is not
everyone who is, I think, madam.
True that the You said that
Surprised me because I really
don't know anything about these
types of hearings is the, um the
good part, which is how many of
the people have stabilized in
such a brief period of time,
Just getting on the right
medication. Um, I mean, that
sort of gives me a little hope.
So thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, Senator. Duh. Thank you,
madam Chair.
M. Fuchs.
Um
So I
I'm good friends with a couple
of people who work at UN MC, and
one of them is like
But it is no longer used to be a
psychiatrist. There. The other
ones, uh, the discharge planner
and I've heard from both of
them.
Um, that
They have seen multiple times.
They get someone committed to
Las Vegas person gets sent to
Las Vegas and then gets
discharged from Las Vegas like
24. Hours later, um, like Las
Vegas isn't holding so if they
you might have issue an order
for this person to be held for
30 days, But it's not happening
and they don't find out till the
person shows up. Back up in the
UN. M Psych ER. Um, So what?
What is the kind of the the
follow up and oversight after an
order has been issued, and what
is the consequence for whoever
has been ordered to commit this
person not doing so or at least
not doing so for the length of
time. The order specifies.
So, um
Madam Chair and senator. Duh.
What you're saying is absolutely
some of the same things that we
hear. I once even had a
respondent say I'll agree to go
to Las Vegas because I guess is
I'll get out of I'll get I'll
get out quicker than if you
commit me here.
Um, and the other thing that
happens, frankly, is that I will
commit somebody who's I'm just
gonna use you and M as an
example, um to the New Mexico
Behavioral Institute for up to
30 days and then in 30 days
we'll get another petition for
an extended commitment for up to
30 days because they never came
and got the patient and the
patient is still there.
So, um, what I would say,
though, is again the court
cannot say you have to hold this
patient.
It is the individual
Facility, I would say is
Um
Duty to do an evaluation to you
know, I can't say this person
has schizophrenia, so they have
to stay here until they do that
we often talk about like, what
are you looking for? Um
Before you willing to discharge
this patient or patient with the
court cannot second guess the
evaluation and determinations so
And there is very much sort of a
And push between I would say or
at least what I hear.
Anecdotally the is, you know,
sort of an epicenter where
people um and they are not. They
can be treated there. Whether
whether they meet the level of
acuity that N MH. I think that
is necessary to maintain them
there. And so the court really
can only review or hear a
petition that's filed and make
findings based on the testimony
that they hear
And so we don't have the ability
to kind of especially, um
The second, a facility that's in
Madam Chair. Um Mr. Thank you.
That's
That makes a lot of sense. It
also is so frustrating because
all of this time and effort and
energy that is going into trying
to pursue a process for this
person's benefit is for not I.
No, they just get a ride to Las
Vegas. Uh,
And that's about it. Um and I
know that's not true for for
everywhere that that folks are
are committed, but it's
frustrating that our state
facility, um
Why are these these numbers at
the end of your your handout?
Do you have an opinion as to why
there it looks like they're
going down.
Um, do you have an opinion as to
Why that might be Madam Chair,
Senator I. I don't. Um, I will
just say that we, uh, so I've
been doing, uh, these hearings
since April of 2021.
And we all have. I think, uh,
you know, we start to say things
like in the summer.
Or near the holidays. We all try
to sort of, think or find a
rhythm or pattern to things, and
I think we
Sort of that energy don't know.
Um
Why they've gone down.
Obvious. You know, when I when I
see too, I think Covid and how
that might have impacted things,
but I don't have a specific
opinion.
And I will tell you these are
statewide numbers. Uh, is my
understanding These are not the
second Judicial District Court
makes up a fair amount of these
numbers.
Yeah, thank you.
And
Ma'am. Sure, I, I assume that
you see or do you see kind of
the same kind of frequent flyer.
Situation that we've heard from
Certainly from from law
enforcement about kind of the
same same people showing up over
and over again in this civil
commitment petition process
from time to time you do. It's
usually so not necessarily like
say for me over the last three
years, the same person keep
coming back that you might see
in a six month period that
somebody has come back a couple
of times. Often. Frankly, those
are cases where you might have a
like, um we are not meeting
their needs.
We have patient or they, um
every once in a while, you'll
get a respondent that has like
Treatment or something of that
nature where they've gone
through just a myriad of that
nature.
And so, um
We do see them, but
Then, usually they'll fall off.
I also will say, though I will
see some that
You know, had a petition from
1998, and we haven't seen him
again until now. And so that's a
nice
Decent period of time where they
have not had to be hospitalized.
And I mean, I don't know if they
went out of state or uh or or
something else, but, um,
They? You know, we we so Yeah.
Yes. And no, I suppose. Um, but
another thing I wanna say about
these numbers is the way that
our cases work so each
Respondents gonna have one case
number in the second judicial
district, and they might have
multiple petitions. Within that
case number. They might have a
1998 case number and if they
come back in 2002 24 they should
have and so but if they then
have a case in the fourth,
though, that's another piece of
kind of scrubbing. This data a
little bit is to try to get you
Thank you.
And how, um
I'm not even sure
I have my psychiatrist, friend
texting me question. Uh, but our
information that I'm trying to
then turn into a question. Um
But so so I guess I'll tell you
the the the complaint and then
you can help me understand it.
Um, this doctor was saying that
She has a frustration because
frequently the patient is just
in the way it gets the petition
gets resolved is encouraging the
patient to sign in voluntarily
to the facility. Um, as opposed
to be being actually committed,
uh, but that then they just
discharged themselves the very
next day.
Um so they're they don't end up
getting
Getting the treatment. How How
frequently is a petition
resolved with an agreement to
voluntarily sign into a facility
and madam Chair Senator So
that's actually a really
interesting. So, um
Patients are often
Our respondents are often
encouraged by their council to
consider voluntary for several
reasons. I think the primary
ones are the rights that I
talked to
Especially if they're young. Um,
I often write to possess and
receive firearms. I say That's a
very big deal to some people,
and it's not a big deal at all
to other people, But it's a
right you have as you sit here
right now, and so, um
The the respondents have a due
process right and to not have to
go through a hearing where they
have major, um, rights are
implicated. And so there have
many times, I would say.
Then situations where the doctor
will come and say, Hey,
respondent says that they'll
sign in voluntary but I don't
want to take a Vol. I don't want
to take them what happens in
that circumstance, usually nurse
counsel.
They usually take. Usually we do
in that situation that what you
said It is exactly what's gonna
happen. They're gonna you know
what at 930 in the morning,
They're gonna say I'm voluntary
and we all close our laptops and
walk out of the building and
there's a Let get me out of here
and the recourse for the
hospital at that time is to file
another petition.
And what I usually do is I, uh,
when the doctor is concerned
about that, as we will
Put on the record with the
patient present.
That we are going to be
dismissing it based on the fact
that they are voluntary that
they are voluntarily agree
through with the treatment that
the hospital has for them until
they can be safely discharged
with an understanding that if if
they just turn around and demand
to be, uh, released
Or discharged. I should say, uh,
that the hospital can then turn
around and then I You know, I
talked to the doctors about you
know, we're we're not. We're not
gonna do that over and over
again. Um, you know that that we
can certainly, uh, the default.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you.
So we have Senator Cilla Lopez,
Senator Stewart, representative
Romero and
Of
Senator Cilia Lopez. Thank you.
Looking at the data at the end,
and I really appreciate that you
got the raw numbers and I
appreciate I was curious about,
um, where they were from their
statewide. Um, Do you have any
rough idea about how many of
these that were filed were
granted and how many were
dismissed Percentage or, uh,
Madam Chair, Senator C Lopez. I
don't
Cause that that would be
interesting, um, to know off the
top of your head. Would you say
you grant more than half for
Um
I would say.
Of the or to hearings.
Have full hearings.
More than half are rented.
In my personal experience.
And do you know if anybody has
the racial and ethnic data of
who's of what? Who's coming
before you? I do. Uh, sorry,
Madam Chair, Senator CIA Lopez.
I do not know. I will tell you.
I believe just in my work with
the court that there is, uh
Supreme Court Commission on how
we can capture that better and
use that available. But AOC is
looking into that and is going
to try. I think about out and so
you can add that to her list.
Thank you. And if could you also
add youth like the ages to that
to that data, because I think
that would be helpful to know
And and just eyeballing it are.
What would you say? Um, about
the age groups.
Madam Chair, Madam Chair,
Senator.
Lopez.
I would say the vast majority of
the civil commitment petitions
that we hear in the second
judicial district Court are
adult petition.
Um, I. I heard one juvenile
today. I heard one last month.
Um, they I my experiences, They
are usually older adults.
Um
There have been a few I would
say maybe the last year or two
that are
Um, multiple systems, so maybe
ours have
Um, juvenile justice cases as
well. But, um
This is a side question. Just
encourage me if they are civilly
committed to do their criminal
proceedings. Just are they just
held in abeyance. Madam Chair
Senator Cilla was
I OK? It just occurred to me
when you mentioned about the the
the systems. And then the other
question I had. Um, these are
just questions I wrote down as
you were speaking.
Uh, went on the page. Uh, I
think it's page six when you
have the caption. How, um, you
sent the vows. Wait, you said
medical providers, but the
statute 43-1 Dash 11 says any
interested person so you don't
get any DAS and no. You know,
parents or
Public, I I that It's just so
interesting that a statute so
broad seems to be, uh, so
limited in its application.
Madam Chair and Senator CIA.
Lopez. I
I would say that
We do not
So that doesn't mean it's not a
one off every once in a while,
but our petitioner counsel is a
man named Ray Ray Montano.
So when Tanya was a district
attorney for a very long time,
uh, in Farmington and in
Albuquerque,
And, uh, is retired, but does
some contract work?
I'm here and, um
I
You know?
The requirements for a petition
include things like
Discovery of
Current medical and psychiatric
records. It requires, um
You know, for us to commit
somebody We have to, uh,
essentially.
Practically have a
Place for them to be committed
to. We have to have a testimony
that's going
That the level of clear and
convincing evidence about their
And
You know, a psychiatric
condition about their symptoms
and their mental disorder and
I think it's requirements of a
petition.
Um
That doesn't mean the statue
doesn't allow for more, but it
it feels like it's underutilized
in that in that sense, maybe
although I you I see how maybe
it could be simplified or
something. I don't that that
gets me to. My next question is,
how is commitment paid as, um,
the responsibility we have.
Check. It is it is, in other
words, Medicaid.
Medicare.
Um, I. I know that the courts do
not pay for it.
Yeah, II. I knew that. But I was
just wondering, um, how that was
covered because that could also,
um, indicate
Since you're getting them from
medical
Practitioners of the medical
field. The hospitals, it could
be that these numbers and not
not to be
A cynic, but it could be these
numbers relate to the number of
beds available.
The petitions filed
Um, could be rela related to
whether they have beds.
I don't know. I just throw that
out to see if you would agree.
Or what if you have any sense of
that at all.
I don't. I don't know the number
of beds. We have to compare to
those numbers. I do know, at
least uh, in, um
The worlds that we have for
residential gun down as they
have. And so I have no II. I
don't know how those correlate
But
And that would naturally make
the numbers go down because they
are the ones filing these
petitions.
It is. Do you see the logic that
I'm following? Um, which is
cynical? Well, um
Almost conspiratorial, I'd say.
Well, Yeah, I always follow the
money. I always follow the money
And that's probably why I've
gotten so cynical. Um, thank
you, I. I thought this was an
excellent presentation. I had
one more question. And that is
when you make the recommendation
to the judge. Does the judge
have the entire record or um or
not to review? What do they What
do they get when you make the
recommendation? Uh, madam Chair,
Senator Lopez.
I I'm not sure.
For what each individual judge
does, but
Um, I do know that they rely
heavily on uh, our
recommendations as hearing
officers that they've hired to
do to do this work. They have
access to us to ask questions.
They have access to the the
recorded file. That is pretty
simultaneous. Um
I don't imagine essentially
But I'm certainly if they had
questions, they would come and
ask us or they would have
Thank you, Um
This is this is really important
work that you do and gave us a
lot of insight.
Into examples of why this
statute may not be working as
you would expect. And I
appreciate that. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Uh, we have
three more on the list. I like
to kind of wrap it up about 320
ish. I think we can probably do
that. Senator Stewart and Rep.
Romero and then representative
ring.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. I
I'll be very brief. Um
Uh, thank you, also for the
presentation. No I. I have the
same question that center city.
Lopez started with. It's great
to get these numbers on the
back. But I am very frustrated
that
No one seems to know. Uh, what
happens to these, uh,
commitments, So you just put the
number of filings isn't there
something with the filing where
you have to put what happened at
the end or something like that.
A, uh surely there is some place
where we can find out how many
civil commitments were doing a
year. How many we tried to do
and we don't
Beds. How many we try to do, but
it falls apart for something
else. How many we do that
successful?
I mean, we need data up here. We
badly need data. Not just for
fun. Uh, we need to understand
what the systems we have now are
doing or not so that we can
change them. So I don't mean to
jump on you, but I'm really
frustrated that numerous people
asked for the same data, and
there's nobody who gets it. Who
knows it? Who can offer it to
us? Uh and
Madam Chair, Senator Stewart. I
will tell you that. I think the
data that you are requesting is
something that can be provided.
I say that because of my role I
do have access to certain sort
of view inside the courts
electronic record, and we do it
is noted, Uh
You know that an order has been
entered whether it was granted
or dismissed or Gran
Well, there's uh, There's
separate petitions, but
sometimes they're her civil
commitment. So those things are
entered into the record, and I
think we can get you that data.
I just don't think that we, uh,
had that to you today, But I
think that, um
That is
That is pretty basic. What was
filed? What was what was heard?
What was the outcome? Uh, things
like that everyone we can get
ages. Um
I happen to chair a Children's
Court Improvement Commission
data work group, and so, uh, we
do a lot of data mining, uh,
abuse and neglect cases. And so
I know that there are certain
available.
And so I think that we can get
you that data. I just as I'm
sitting here, well, ma'am chair.
I appreciate your answer. Um,
so, uh, I, I just wanna
underscore that
We need this data, and we really
need it for uh, as soon as
possible. Uh, so I appreciate
you being willing to help get
that data.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator, Representative
Romero.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you for your presentation.
Um, I know we've been, uh, some
of the last questions are
focused on the back end. I'm I'm
sort of interested in the funnel
side and just from the system of
things as to how folks end up in
your courtroom, Um and I guess
just from the previous
conversation where we know folks
have committed a crime or
perhaps, or just in custody for
some reason, Um
That were once they're deemed
incompetent. Um, they're sort of
just left sort of out into the
wayside. Perhaps, um, I guess
I'm I'm interested. Is this a
unique program to the state to
the district court? Or is this
something that we know exists
across state, the state of New
Mexico?
Madam Chair and representative
Romero. I
I do not believe this is unique
to I know that
Um it is, uh, statewide law. I
can speak.
Much more, uh, informed strict.
Um, but and I will tell you that
As I stated, we
Practical piece psychiatric
providers.
Uh, we often hear testimony of
sort of how a family member
brought him. Sometimes they came
In Santa Fe.
Again. It's primarily where the
thank you, Madam Chair. That was
my concern is that if there are
no psychiatric facilities are is
this an opportunity for folks to
actually be, Um
You know?
Make progress through the
opportunity to have this and
where, At which point are they
sort of sent for the evaluation,
either as a mandate because of
the harm that I identified
through the process, and I guess
I'm trying to understand the
feedback loop that is that you
all you know, basically come up
with through the through the
evaluation, but is there
A way in which there's a front
end evaluation that saying we
need to have a, um
We need to basically go through
the civil commitment process
because they may have one of
the, um common symptoms that are
being displayed and
You know, I guess I'm trying to
understand like how we funnel
through the process you
uniformly across the state if
that's our job to make sure that
everyone at least gets a
You know?
Goes through the same process
wherever you are, Um And so I
really appreciate you sort of
helping us demonstrate that but
if we don't have the common
threads that are statewide, um
and we're still trying to fix
the problems that you have. You
know what I'm trying to
understand is does everyone have
the opportunity to go through
this? And what I'm hearing right
now? Is that probably we don't
number one and then number two,
depending on the symptoms that
are displayed whether it be on
the front end of the civil
commitment or
Perhaps the back end of we now
have a court identifying these
these issues, um, that there's
not a way to process through
this, Um
I guess.
A across the state in any sort
of fundamental way.
Um, I'm trying to like, you
know, looking at the system of
things try to figure out
What we are trying to do from a
statewide perspective, and I
really appreciate the process
that is working number one that
you've identified but also where
the breakdowns are, Um
throughout the various, Um
Touch points between law
enforcement between whether it
be a health practitioner, or how
folks get into this.
Sort of realm and
I I'm trying to identify at
which point um
Everyone should have this
opportunity to at least have an
evaluation.
Um to to get the treatment
that's needed and sounds like we
need to figure out what goes on
to briefly briefly. Sorry, Madam
Chair. Um I don't. Yeah, I I'll
just stop
there. OK, Um representative
Ream and then Representative
Bargo, and we're shooting for a
320.
Thank you, Madam Chair and I
want to follow up on Senator
des. Uh, uh, questions because I
wanna make it real clear to the
committee. So you have
Let's say a doctor who has
filled out the paperwork to
commit someone.
Let's just assume that there are
paranoid schizophrenic. They're
over there. You start the
process to do a forceful
commitment They signed that I
will voluntarily stay there and
let's assume they stay there a
week.
And they get medicated, and now
they're ready to be released and
the facility says OK, you can go
now, and they signed themselves
out so that person is not
technically committed correct.
Um, uh Madam Chair and
representative re
They are.
Committed to the hospital. So if
the hospital is discharging
them, and they're going to be
held, you are safe for
discharge. Um then they are no
longer two days later, they come
back because they immediately
Yeah. Um, Madam, chair and
expert I. I unfortunately, I
don't think I made my question
quite distinct enough. So the
person you started the
commitment
They voluntarily signed
themselves in.
So now you stop your commitment.
So they are not technically
committed.
Uh and sorry, madam Chair and
representative re II. I think,
I. I misunderstood your
question, Correct if if they
sign him voluntarily, and I will
tell you that I think most of
the hospitals in the Albuquerque
area do like to have them, you
know, sign in voluntarily, so
that it I think, uh, to protect
themselves, but not all
hospitals. I don't think require
that they sign and voluntary if
they voluntary, That's I think
sufficient. We dismiss the
commitment petition and Madam
chair.
Most of your frequent flyers
involved either failing some,
uh, some aspect of failing to
take medication Correct.
Madam Chair and representative
Ream, Uh, that is a very there
are a couple of things that
hospital or the providers try.
Mitigate that as a potential
issue, which is a lot of the
medications that are prescribed
can be, um
Minister as a long acting nation
will take a shot. It will last
for four weeks, and they have to
come every day.
Um, is your mic on?
It should be on. Sorry. OK,
that's all right. I got a
text saying that people couldn't
hear you so often, um, one of
the things that the medical
providers are trying to do prior
to a safe discharge is to get
patients on what they call an LA
I or a long acting injectable
and those usually last about
four weeks and it is they can
take the medication and it
Um, you know, has a release.
That is, uh, works, uh, up to
four weeks and then they have
to. They have to come back every
four weeks. But the idea is
they've spent four weeks on
their medication, and they are
therefore more likely to
continue on their medication
rather than being required to
take a pill. The other thing is
that civil commitments, um, are
often coupled with petitions for
appointment of a treatment
guardian, and so, um, in a
treatment guardian is gonna go
ahead and make those medication
decisions and consultation with
The respondent. Um, but
With the use of long acting
injectables and appointments of
treatment guardians. I think
those are some of the, um
psychiatric providers are trying
to mitigate that.
Frequent flyer concern. Uh,
Madam chair and your procedures
are sealed. So if law
enforcement came across an
individual in the field, and
that individual had a firearm,
they couldn't search the court
records and see that that
individual had been committed
correct.
Madam Chair representative is my
understand that these are
sealed. Com Um, I, I don't I do
not know individual law enforce
those records, but
They include. Very,
um Thank you, Madam Chair. I was
just highlighting again. The
loophole where an individual can
obtain a firearm by signing
themselves in and signing out
and then law enforcement can't
see any of that information.
Thank you, madam Chair.
OK, um, representative, Puerto
Rico. Thank you, ma'am Chair and
I am looking at the time so I
will keep it short as much as
possible. Um, I I agree with, um
Prot Stewart about the data. Um
It really? It's really
troublesome to me as a former
city planner to not see
comparative analysis over time
in reports that show me trends
of how our systems are
functioning. Um and I'm when I
think about trends, I think
about trends over five and 10
year periods.
And how you know we are
responding to those
Ups and downs. Um and and I know
that there's modeling out there
that can be purchased and I
don't know if the funding is not
there. But if it's not, that's
something that we definitely
need to know about. Um, because
that data is so critical to
making and I said this
yesterday. Good public policy.
Um and I think that it's
important that, um Madam chair
Um you know this data? I mean,
today I saw
One year basically of data. I'm
not seeing data over time that's
showing me how our systems are
responding. And so, I, I really
can't stress that enough. Um And
then I also you know, I question
when I see the data going down
as as representatives of Lopez
also brought that up. I mean,
When when our drug activity is
going up. It's hard for me to
understand. Um you know how in
the world
Are we
Uh, service scene.
People at a lesser degree when
we know that fentanyl and all of
these other issues are trending
upward. Um, and the other thing
that is
Concerning to me is are youth.
Um, I mean, you said, I think
there were very few youth.
And I know that the detention
center and other places a PS,
um there is so much activity
happening in these areas. So I'm
I'm I have to question some of
that. And I just I. I have to
say that and I know it's not
your fault. I know there's
people out there that are
probably higher up that are
listening to this discussion
today, So I ho I hope that
they're hearing this. Thank you.
I just want to jump in on the
data thing. II 100.
Agree. Data is useful. These
folks were not asked to bring
data. These folks were asked to
give an overview. The questions
were very appropriate and
they're willing to follow up. So
I think any implied criticism of
what was provided, I think is
Misplaced a little bit because
that is not what the subject of
the, um discussion was presented
to them. I am quite certain they
will be more than happy to
supplement, but they they, um,
that was not what the talk was
about. It was about how does it
work? How does the civil
commitment process work? So just
wanna be clear about that, and
you don't have to respond. And I
know, uh, I do believe some of
the A OC folks are listening,
and I'm quite certain that they
will come and supplement so
Thank you very much. I really
appreciate. Um, You did a great
job and I obviously people are
very interested in this topic,
given the number of questions
and the number of very
insightful questions that were,
um made to you, so thanks very
much, and we can get some
supplemental stuff on, you know,
Case cases and what actually led
to commitment. What was a
dismissal and and some other
kinds of things, so really
appreciate it.
OK?
Yes, please. It's pretty cool in
here anyway. Yeah, I'm not sure
why the windows are open.
Oh, yeah.
It's probably 90 out there.
Yeah.
It is when you got air
conditioning on you open them
with
OK?
Nice to see you.
General counsel Holly Agajanian.
I am. And would you introduce
your guest? Thank you, Madam
Chair. My name is Holly J and
I'm chief general counsel to
Governor Lou Hung Grisham, uh,
with me here today, uh, is not
Ben Baker.
Uh, somebody who looks a little
less like a Viking that we
noticed.
Have Gina de blasting here with
me. Today. She's the health
policy adviser for governor, Lou
Hung Grisham.
Um and she will be here today. I
expect you all will have a lot
of questions about MC OS.
Oh, OK about MC OS, um,
healthcare access, um,
accessibility, beds and the
like. And so Mr Bossy is here to
to help assist.
On the agenda today was a
discussion.
About the governor's bills for
the upcoming special session. As
you all know, um, we spent you
all have spent the vast majority
of the last couple of days
talking about the assisted
outpatient treatment. The
justice from the Supreme Court
was here yesterday about, uh,
criminal competency.
In addition to that the governor
also has bills that I can
discuss here today. If you all
would like
Regarding, uh, felons, firearms.
Um
As well as, uh
Um
The media and safety bill and a
bill regarding data reporting
since we've heard so much about
data today, um I think that that
would be a A very important one
and one that it was pointed out
yesterday, and it was pointed
out again today, uh, that the
Criminal Justice Institute who
is the organization that works
with local, state and national
jurisdictions, recently released
some of its preliminary data
about trends and they compared
these trends to national trends
in behavioral health crime.
And law enforcement.
Some of the key takeaways in
2022.
New Mexico ranked third in the
nation.
For the highest percentage of
persons. With subs. New Mexico
ranked sixth in the nation for
drug overdose deaths in 2021.
The percentage of persons
suffering from mental illness in
New Mexico was 11% higher than
the national average.
The percentage of people
suffering from serious mental
illness.
My gun is your the green light
is on. You like me to move it
close. People are apparently
people are people are having
trouble hearing you and the
outside world. Hi, everybody.
OK, so
Yeah. There we go. That's
better, um, so the percentage of
people suffering from a serious
mental illness
Was also higher than the
national average.
And I do recall yesterday. One
of the speakers noted that
Despite being higher than
Average in terms of the number
of folks suffering from serious
mental illness. New Mexico ranks
43rd in the nation in terms of
beds available, which is far
less obviously than the national
average.
A violent crime rate was 69%
higher than the national crime
rate in 22 in 2022 violent crime
consisting of rape, murder,
aggravated assault.
We had the highest
Violent crime rate in the nation
in 2022.
Between 2013 and 2022.
Albuquerque. Violent crime
reports increased by 78.9%.
As senator, Duh pointed out, Not
to be outdone, Las Cruces had a,
uh, increase by 100 and 12% in
the same period of time.
So it is against this backdrop
that the governor has called
this special session to try to
deal with
This crisis that we've had
That has really come to grip our
state.
The proposals that I have here
for you, um, are gonna already
and they already have inspired a
lot of meaningful discussions,
and there's going to be a lot of
policy differences.
Ah, one such difference, I know
is the governor's proposing a
bill regarding felons in
possession of a firearm.
I've heard a lot of people in
this room.
Um, in the past, say that
penalty enhancements do not
deter criminals.
And I don't disagree with you.
I don't think somebody makes the
decision before they do
something like that about what
the penalty might be. They're
going to do it anyway.
But I would suggest to this
committee that that's not the
only reason why our justice
system includes a system of
incarceration.
Some of you will disagree on
this and from a policy
perspective, But incarceration
is also about preventing crime
and punishing those who commit
them.
So in the case of a convicted
felon that's already been
adjudicated and convicted as
being someone that's already
demonstrated a willingness to
put their needs above the rules
of society who is then convicted
of being a felon in possession
of firearm or explosive device,
a step up from a third degree to
a second degree felony is
appropriate.
And again, I understand that
there's gonna be lots of folks
who agree with that on a
fundamental level, and I
understand and I respect that.
Similar similarly.
With regard to the bills that
I'm here to discuss today
related to competency on the
criminal side and assisted
outpatient assisted outpatient
treatment on the civil side.
They are going to be people that
will never support a program of
court ordered mental health
treatment.
And I'm also aware as I said to
you the last time I sat here
before all of you that there are
going to people be people that
think that this is too hard.
And to that I would
Respectfully also disagree hard.
Yes, very hard.
Absolutely.
But I don't believe that makes
it too hard. I don't think there
is such a thing as too hard when
it comes to making sure our
fellow new Mexicans have access
to mental health services
throughout the state.
Another question I've heard
asked by this committee is why
do we need this legislation when
localities are able to do this
themselves?
And the answer is because they
aren't doing it themselves.
Las Cruces, as we heard
yesterday does have a a pretty
robust A OT program. That's the
only one
Once again, it's fair to ask why
we need such a robust system of
court ordered.
Treatment when there are folks
out there.
That
Or it or or the idea that
voluntary treatment is a better
path. Of course it is.
But there are going to be a
chunks of chunk of folks of
people out there that simply
cannot or will not accept these
services voluntarily.
One thing I noted yesterday and
listening to the presentations
was I heard so many of you ask
when can we bring this to our
commit to our district? When can
I have an a OT program in my
district?
This is your chance to have that
program in your district. So
that being said, um, I think
what I will do unless Madam
chair you have any preference to
the contrary, um, is talk first
about the A OT bill because that
it has been sort of the big
focus for the last couple of
days. I'm happy to talk about
one of the other ones first, if
you would like.
But I thought I would start with
the A O yesterday. You all heard
a presentation.
Um
About a OT. So I started in the
middle of my slide deck. You all
know the the requirements. The
current requirements for a OT.
I also know one of the folks
yesterday, uh, the presenter,
Miss Michaels said When asked
by. I believe it was leader
worth.
What do you need, like if you
could change something about
this, What would it be and I? I
note two things, she says,
because those are two things
that this bill does. One is you
would want to change the
criteria of people who are
eligible to petition the court
for a OT.
And the other thing is an
expanded universe of new
Mexicans who are within the
scope of the court's ability to
order them.
A O.
Currently
The the A O law, um, essentially
in order to divert someone to a
OT If the person isn't already,
uh, involuntarily or or in a
hospital in some way,
essentially the marker is going
to be violence.
It's going to be violence
combined with, you know other
periods of mental health
treatment, but at the end of the
day, it's going to be violence.
The new criteria.
In this bill would note that it
would be somebody who is
suffering from a mental health
disorder, a serious mental
health disorder, which is
defined in your slides.
They are not stable in ongoing
voluntary treatment.
They are either unlikely to
survive safely in the community
without supervision and are
substantially deteriorating or
they need services to prevent
relapse or deterioration of
which I think might be spelled
wrong that would give that would
result in grave disability.
Or serious harm to themselves or
others.
Other criteria that must be met
is a demonstration that
participation in a O is the
least restrictive alternative
and that the respondent is
likely to benefit.
From assisted outpatient
treatment.
As part of this
The bill contemplates pilot
programs.
Initially and there's no there's
no nobody's wedded to the
numbers or the locations, but
these pilot programs, uh, at the
moment, have one year to put
these programs in place. They
will be in each judicial
district.
Everybody else has two years.
Getting to where we were
yesterday with changing who can
petition the court for
To have somebody ordered to a O.
The list is expanded to include
Um
Uh uh, the director of a of a
hospital where the respondent
resides.
The re the director or designee,
or organization, Agency, or
home where the respondent has
received services in the last 30
days, that's different than the
current statute.
A first responder who has had
repeated interactions with the
respondent which could mean
multiple arrests, transportation
to treatment or attempts to get
treatment.
So what this captures are
Actually, the officers that were
In some circumstances, talking
about this morning as well where
these are people that that know
these
Folks and watch them and see
them and have repeated
interactions with them and see
them deteriorating.
Adult protective services can
also initiate these proceedings.
Additional changes or the
director of designee from Indian
Health services or a tribal
court judge can also initiate
these services.
As part of this, there will be a
form. There should be a form. Um
From the administrative office
of the courts that they put
together and the petitioner
fills out.
Um
The
Uh, the form to list the
information that we've just
discussed the eligibility
criteria that can either have a
affidavit from a healthcare
provider who has examined the
respondent with the last 90
days.
Um, along with proof of two
intensive treatments within the
last 180 days with one in the
last 60 days.
After the petition is filed.
Um, there will be a hearing just
a threshold hearing. The
respondent does not need to be
at this hearing.
Um the the burden of proof at
this hearing is just prima
facie.
It is. Has the petitioner shown
the court enough such that the
court will summon the respondent
to appear.
If that threshold is met, and
the respondent gets notice
copies right to counsel if
they'd like a support person in
the room. They may have that as
well, Um, rights to participate
in the proceedings and rights to
appeal. These proceedings will
be closed. Um, unless the
respondent asks for it to be an
open public proceeding. Um, then
within 10 days after that, we'll
be a hearing of me on the
merits, as was discussed with
you all earlier. The burden of
proof there is clear and
convincing evidence. That's a
requirement of the United States
Supreme Court.
The next step is where I think
this plan is gonna diverge a
little bit with Las Cruces based
on my understanding of what I
heard, although I didn't get to
listen to all of it.
But if the burden of proof is
met, then the
Then there must be a meeting
with the case Manager and the
respondent within 14 days to try
to agree on a treatment plan.
If a treatment plan is reached
at the next hearing.
Then the court can approve it or
modify it. Um
Modification doesn't include
adding things It includes maybe
taking some things out, but the
court can't order something that
wasn't recommended in the plan.
And from then on its status
hearings, every 60 days,
although I think based on one of
the, um witnesses earlier,
perhaps it should say, um, at
least every 60 days in case a
court wants to do it more often.
But if an agreement is not
reached
And let's again make make very
clear. Even if we have the a OT
agreement that is still a court
order. They are still under the,
um that that black robe effect
that was being discussed. It is
still a court order. It is still
mandatory. That the person, uh,
undertake this treatment, But if
an agreement is not reached, and
the court believes that this
person is in need of assisted
outpatient treatment, the court
can order a clinical evaluation,
which will include diagnosis
capacity to consent to
medication.
Any other helpful information
and recommended services,
medications and interventions.
They would have that hearing.
Within about 21 days and the
court can adopt or modify that
plan. So what you have are are
basically two paths. You have an
agreement.
Or you have a plan. They're both
court orders. The agreement is
it the outset of the initial
hearing if folks can come to an
agreement on what the treatment
plan should be, that's going to
be the agreement.
If the respondent or the
petitioner have a disagreement
about the treatment plan, a
treatment plan is essentially
drafted by a health care
provider, And then the court
enters it, regardless of whether
the respondent agrees as
Because as a as a country we
don't punish people for not
taking medication. Failure to
take medication does not equal
non compliance, and once again
we're going to go now to status
conferences at least every 60
days with a report due five days
ahead of time that should
include progress services that
are provided and services that
are not provided because we
don't want to punish people for
not availing themselves of
services that aren't available
to them, and any changes that
are needed.
And it's at any point the court
may terminate for non
compliance.
The final report essentially
after a year.
A judge can assess progress and
can order additional treatment
for up to a year.
Now the question then becomes
how do we do this? How do we
have a OT everywhere?
Because that's what we need, and
that's what this bill has. It
has it in every single judicial
district because
It's not fundamentally fair to
tell someone you must
Avail yourself of this service.
But it's not available anywhere
nearby. You
And you may or may not have
transportation to get there.
These services again If we're
talking about voluntariness if a
service isn't readily available
to somebody, even in terms of
being able to get there, it
can't really be considered non
voluntary or involuntary
complaints because they didn't
really have a meaningful way to
go. So the services do have to
be available everywhere in the
state. How is that going to
happen?
My companion here with her magic
wand was going to make sure that
the MC OS are held accountable
and that's part of the two year
and one year runway as well.
That they need to be putting
these programs in place
throughout the state.
So that they can be accessed.
Easily and and I. I know you all
have heard me say this before,
but they're also have to be
touch points where it is just as
easy or at least close for a
police officer to take someone
for treatment as it is to take
them to jail.
As we get into the
Jail aspect of it. There is also
a criminal competency bill. That
does, um, a lot of what Justice
Zamora was talking about
yesterday, which essentially
offers
Pre charge diversion.
Post competency finding
Diversion.
And inappropriate circumstances
at the discretion of the court,
a referral to a OT.
So those are the big
Those are the big points of both
of those bills.
Um, once again, it is
Going to be incumbent on the MCs
to get these
Projects in place.
I would be remiss if I did not
think in advance. Uh, the chief
public defender Ben Bower for so
happily agreeing to represent
these folks. Um
He did not at all he it's I. We
would need extra funding again.
And this is what the time the
runway is for. Um, I do think
that we should add a contract
counsel component to the bill as
well like we heard yesterday in
Las Cruces, where they use
contract counsel. I think that
should obviously be in the bill
that makes complete sense.
Um, So those are those two I I
did already discuss the felon in
possession Bill. There is
another bill regarding, uh,
neighbors reporting. I don't
remember what the N I stands
for. Forgive me, but the BRS is
Bureau of reporting statistics.
It's essentially a database
kept. I believe by the FBI that,
um, that tracks crime data. A
lot of the data from CJ. I came
from IBIs. Um, if you don't see
your town or city in that
I report it might not be that
everything is great. It might be
that they don't report their
data to neighbors because they
don't have to yet, uh, Under
this last budget cycle, it was a
requirement for receiving funds
that agencies report their data
to neighbors. Um, my
understanding from Mr Eden K and
for Mr Baker that in their
conversations with law
enforcement agencies, there's no
opposition to this reporting
requirement.
And then finally, we come to
the, uh, the median bill.
That is a bill that provides
that in
Places that have a speed limit
of over 30 Miles an hour. Um, if
you are, uh, you may not
Uh, loiter on a median. That is
36 inches or less. Um, you may
Engage in your First Amendment
speech for parked cars, Uh, for
people that are in other lanes
that are designed to be sitting
still, but in traffic areas
where traffic is meant to be
flowing there there is no uh,
loitering or lingering in those
locations.
So with that summary of of both
of those, uh I stand for
questions.
Nobody. Good. Thanks, everyone.
Oh, I see. Oh,
Representative Martinez and then
Senator Um duh.
Madam Chair
and I know I promised you five
questions.
Um, I've cut it down to three.
On PG 11.
I'm I
I'm curious about this, and I've
Publicly stated by opposition to
Doing stuff like this in a
special session, But let me let
me just ask this question. Um
Why do we need this immediately?
If if the A OT is already on the
books
And jurisdictions can implement
that today.
And we're also gonna
Work on pilot sites.
That have a year to do this?
What's the immediacy? What's the
urgency?
Instead of bringing everybody up
here.
Spending $250,000 a day.
Why can't we say OK? These are
the pilot sites.
You guys start working on a
plan?
We come back in the 60 day We
take care of whatever changes to
the law we need to do.
And we saved $250,000 a day.
It's easier to explain to my
constituency.
That we are doing the people's
business.
But we're not wasting their
money. Um, those two questions.
We have the law on the book. Why
do we need to do it now? And
they have a year to implement
this.
Explain to me the urgency of
having to call a special session
to handle it now.
Thank you, Madam. Chair
representative.
We do have a law on the books.
But as I said,
Um, earlier.
Even though
Jurisdictions are already
Um, statutorily allowed.
To implement these programs.
They aren't doing it.
That's number one.
Number two
The other important
Part of of this one of the
things that we heard yesterday
from the Las Cruces, a OT person
was there treating about 40
people right now and somebody I
think fairly asked. You know
we're going to do this for 40
people, and I think the
expansion of the categories of
individuals that are eligible to
participate or be ordered to a
OT is hugely important. Because
I think you're gonna you're
gonna end up being able to, um
Provide services for more folks
than you had before.
And finally, with regard to why
special session
Because this is something that
is going to take.
So long to implement
We need to start it now.
Because it's gonna take a year.
We need to start that clock.
Now, um, waiting until January
and getting the bill passed and
signing it and then starting the
clock Um we will lose time and
we will lose the lives of new
Mexicans.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um M AJ.
And why can't we do that now?
Why do we need a special
session?
To identify pilot sites.
Tell them you have a year to get
your plan together.
Um
II. I still don't think that a
special session is needed to do
that.
The laws on the books or changes
necessary. Absolutely.
But if we're gonna give them a
year to implement it
I mean, what are we doing
rushing to change this?
In July.
We could do it and
January. They're not gonna be
implementing this stuff till
July 1st of next year.
I still struggle with the
absolute need to get it done.
And maybe that's just my own.
Personal bias against special
sessions. Um, it just seems like
this could be done.
Without
Calling everybody up here and
spending that much money.
Um, let's just do it.
Governor's office has a lot of
power.
She could just say this is what
we're gonna do. We've seen that
happen before.
Let's
Be smart about this.
I understand that
The, uh
Never mind. I'll give myself in
a whole lot of trouble if I say
that
Um, my third question.
Is
Um
We're we're looking at.
The Las Cruces model, which I
think is a great model.
Um
We could meet in January make
the changes to the law.
That's not gonna affect them
immediately.
They're still gonna have to
change the process.
Work on everything.
Which again I go back to
They could start setting things
in motion over there.
We come back in January.
Spend a good time.
Working on this getting it right
and we're not doing what we're
doing with a cannabis issue.
Every year. We see a new change
to the cannabis bill that was
promised during a special is
gonna solve all our problems.
Uh, we're gonna diversify the
economy and
I just don't see
That all the promises that were
made in the last special for the
cannabis issue.
That those things have happened.
So
I. I just don't I still don't
understand.
The need to run this bill, and
this seems to be the heavy lift
on the on what the governor is
proposing.
Fill in position. We
Worked on that.
I think representative Ream has
worked on that the last
Three or four years. There
wasn't the
Urgency to support that bill for
the last three sessions. But all
of a sudden we're gonna spend
$250,000 a day.
To get that done.
Let's let's just
Be smart about this.
Um
If if now
Felon in possession is
Top of the line. We need to get
this done. We have a bill right
to drop in January.
That's been vetted.
I mean, unfortunately,
Representative re won't be here,
but maybe he'll tap me on the
shoulder and ask me to do it.
Um
Again. I'm I'm just not
In the median bill.
I'll just say that I would
rather not comment on that.
I think I think that was four
questions. And I'm sure I still
I still owe you one. I think of
one later. All right. Um, we
have senator Duh and then
representative Alcon.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Um
So I. I agree with a lot of
what representative Martinez
saying.
Other than I will say on the
cannabis bill. When I closed out
debate on that in the Senate, I
said We're going to be back here
fixing this next year, so but
otherwise II I agree with with
with with almost everything that
representative was saying, um
why? Why would we need
legislative changes to do a
pilot program? If there are
other pilot programs already
have with the address of Morea
telling us about what they're
doing? We have the one to
happening. And Donny a count,
either those that I legal for
them to be doing that.
Out Legislative authority or we
don't need legislative
authority.
To do that. So so why sure, And
that's a that's a great que. Uh,
madam Chair represent, uh,
Senator. That's a great
question. Um, again, I. I go
back to the fact that I I'm not
suggesting that they don't have
the author the authority to do
it on their own, But I am
suggesting it is not getting
done.
And so we need to require it to
be in every judicial district
because it hasn't been done.
Yeah.
Well and and Madam chair and and
I apologize. I can never
pronounce your last name. So
that's why I I am avoiding
Say that? I don't wanna say a
Holly. Um,
AJ M Aga JIA. Thank you. I
apologize as as a do, hag. I
know how it feels when people
say it.
Uh,
So we often pass legislation
that people don't do. Uh,
the the Proton was telling me a
minute ago about that We had the
legislation about the science of
reading, and it's just not being
followed. And and it's just not
happening so
I.
II.
I don't I, you know well
I The longer I I'm up here, The
more I realize that what we do
passing legislation is about
that much and implementation and
enforcement.
Is that much it matters Way way
more, and this little bit that
we do is
Is not going to make all of this
happen, so I don't know why that
would change in this situation.
Why?
Why just adding in this
legislative authority that it
does not actually needed, which
suddenly inspire action when we
have not seen that happen time
and time again.
Um
But I have some some specific
questions about your hand out
here.
On page 12. This is expanding.
Who can who would be able to to
file a petition petition? One of
them is the director designee of
an organization agency or home
where the respondent has
received services in the past 30
days.
That so?
So if I'm I'm on Medicaid.
And I have my Medicaid and I I'm
receiving services. Does that
mean that
That now the
Health care authority and
designate from the healthcare
authority is somehow in would
have standing to bring a
petition.
Like why
Why does
Why would does this specific
Broadening? What? What purpose?
Would that serve? What are you
envisioning? Would you? Would
you say that last part again?
You said why would and then I. I
couldn't. What are you
envisioning this broadening
would accomplish
I understand.
I think, uh, Madam Chair,
senator. What this would
accomplish is, um, allowing.
People who see these respondents
on on a regular basis. Be it.
Family members. Be it first
responders be it folks who
worked at at soup kitchens. You
know people who have contact
with these individuals who are
able to see
What it is that is occurring in
terms of deterioration or in
terms of need for help. Now,
remember if this person files a
petition
They go in front of a judge.
Themselves. There's sort of a
handover, but they would have
to. We have to mean enough to
them to file it and to go in
front of a judge and explain to
a judge what it is that they
have seen and observed and meet
the criteria about
hospitalizations and other
things in order to even meet
that prima facie standard to get
the judge to say, all right, I
think we need to bring this
person in.
Why is it another one was the
public guardian of the county,
where the respondent was public
guardian? Yeah, no, that is
from, uh, California does that
when I was putting this down
initially, and I should also
express that that this bill is
not the final. I'm we're still,
uh, actually just sent Mister do
and some changes yesterday, so
we are still simplifying it and
editing it. Um
That is something that exists in
in other in other jurisdictions.
I wasn't sure when I put that in
there, whether that existed here
or not, But I didn't want it to
be. I don't want to be
exclusionary. Thank you.
And Madam chair, Miss. I forgot
already.
Ah, how to pronounce your last
name. I apologize. Um
It's It's just like it looks.
See, I can say it's like do
Hickey without the icky, But I,
I don't know if you have a cool
catchphrase like that, Um so on
page 14, you're talking about
this initial hearing where the
respondent doesn't even attend
that initial hearing.
And I'm thinking of like the
guardianship process there, the
alleged incapacitated person
they get to be there.
For the hearings. They they get
to be actively involved in in
the entire process, even though
there is a question, perhaps
about their capacity or
competency. Why are we would we
not allow a respondent to have
that same
Degree of involvement in a
process that could potentially
deprive them of their rights.
Madam Chair, senator because at
this and and the respondent is
certainly welcome to attend, But
you're right wouldn't have
necessarily received notice yet,
And they get notice. Yes,
because so this is the vetting
process to make sure that the
petitioner has actually provided
the court with really the
minimum standard of evidence
that it needs in order to
proceed.
So it's it's
What it is doing is, um
Relieving in its own way, the
respondent of having to come to
court one extra time when
The case may or may not even
proceed, regardless of what the
respondent does.
But But if you were interested
in in, suggesting that the
notice comes right after the
petition is filed, I I've got no
problem with that either.
Woman chair. I would certainly
have have an issue with creating
a different process.
For people getting to be
involved in lawsuits that are in
in in cases that involve them
then we have already
Under, say, guardianship and
conservative and so I I would
con and then I was confused.
Looking at page 15, because then
it says other considerations for
initial hearing.
And this is in the initial
hearing. I'm assuming that
The respondent hasn't
necessarily gotten notice of
It says it's not public unless
the respondent requests it.
How can they make that request?
How do they even know?
This is happening.
And then talking about
respondent self identifying. So
am I misreading something. Is
this a different initial
hearing? This burden of proof is
is And I apologize. This burden
of proof there is clear and
convincing, not prima facie. So
this is the initial hearing when
the respondent appears this is
after the judge has this is
really the hearing on the merits
is when the judge says when
we've gone on to page 14 for the
slide, the respondent gets all
of these things the notice and,
uh and then we proceed to the
that should they proceed to the
hearing on the merits?
OK, OK. Thank you.
So, ma'am chair.
Um
And you
You were you
You said, uh, you know,
voluntary treatment is is always
better, but that there are some
folks who either won't or can't
Uh, get that voluntary
treatment. Um
And one of the things I've I've
been sitting here, chatting with
a pro TEM about some confused
now is that I feel like we are
getting very different messaging
and data about the efficacy of
involuntary treatment.
Um
And sitting here just looking
around.
Uh, because, you know, five
minutes of Googling clearly
clearly is the most dependable
source of information. Um, but
but I did find these studies
saying that
Um
In, uh, data from other
countries comparing compulsory
treatment to voluntary
medication treatment shows rapid
recurrence of opioid use after
the release from these centers,
a systematic review of
involuntary treatment found no
evidence of benefit in a
suggestion of potential harm in
Massachusetts, there was data
from the public Health
Department that found that the
risk of fatal overdose was twice
as high after, uh involuntary
treatment, um, as opposed to
voluntary treatment, and the
risk of fatal overdose was 100
and 20. Times higher.
Among people recently released
from correctional sets, Uh,
settings largely do that's
different. Uh,
But I guess like so, yes, there
are people who can't or won't be
able to access the voluntary
treatment. But
If we don't have good data that
the involuntary treatment is
actually going to help them then
then why is that that a solution
and Madam chair Senator? I don't
know. For example, what
countries? Um, in the study you
were looking at, you know, at
Leia. I believe, Madam chair. I
don't I don't know the Malaysia
is going to be our beacon of
mental health provision. Um so
I, I would I would note that but
but also in terms of
Massachusetts again, My question
would be whether, um
Because the data that you that
you were reading
Involves drug overdose, so I
don't know if that's more of an
almost like an involuntary drug
treatment. I I'm not sure what
what treatment that study was
referring to. I just don't know.
You can click on the footnote
and tell me right, and Madam
chair and I. I don't expect you
to to have to be able to to
respond necessarily to the
random thing I found on the
Internet, But, um, But I guess
my point is without I don't feel
like I have been presented with
great data That tells me that
that this is a solution that
solves this problem.
Um And that is data I would want
to see before passing
legislation. That would do that,
Um
You also you acknowledge that
these are hard things to do.
And the fact that they're hard
is alone is not a reason to do
them, Um
But I don't know why we're gonna
make it harder by trying to do
it in a special session. I mean,
these are hard things to do, and
they are important issues to
address. But why would we
Set ourselves up for for failure
by saying, Do the really, really
hard thing really, really fast
and with the least amount of
really, really community input
because we don't have that
process of that happens during
session of the community getting
to to come in and give us it.
I'm and I'm confused mountain
chair like so are there six
pills now? Is it F in
possession? Median safety data
reporting, criminal competency,
civil commitment and a OT.
There is not a civil commitment
bill. There's not OK, OK?
It was for and then the the data
reporting bill was added.
OK, so civil commitment is not
something that the governor's
office is pursuing for the
special. No, that's correct.
It's it's the assisted
outpatient treatment bill. OK,
thank you. I appreciate that.
Um
Yeah, at the risk of, uh
Repeating myself.
I think it's a terrible idea to
do all this in a special I think
I think we will. We will end up
and as someone who worked really
hard on that cannabis bill in a
very short amount of time. Um
and a lot of people work really
hard on that cannabis bill in a
short amount of time, including
representative Romero, Uh and we
put a lot of effort into it, and
there's a lot of stuff we didn't
get right because policy is not
something that should be
developed.
Quickly.
It needs it needs a a
thoughtful, measured, um,
approach where we're We're sure
we have all the information and
and we're considering all the
unintended consequences. So I I
very much hope that the governor
will reconsider her approach on
this special. Thank you, madam
Chair.
You're welcome. We have
Sorry.
Representative a con, then
representative ring and then you
Thank you, madam Chair, you know
One of the things is, I don't
really like getting or being
political.
But they, uh
The day after the governor
announced that she was wanted to
have a specials.
Somebody and, um, the right side
of the state parties comments on
this and it was horrible. I've
been dis guy as folly in because
the governor's supposed to call
a special session. I mean,
that's all I was here. You know,
I was hearing
And then, uh, somebody sent me
another one from my local party.
membership. Uh, how do you have
to decide? Not only was he did
he follow Mr Pierce's comments,
but he used to be in a
derogatory way, too. And I kind
of sad that that happens at the
The sky is folly live without
anybody even thinking of a maybe
we could get together and make
something work instead of, uh
It's not going to go to heck,
because the governor's coming a
special session, But here's
where I'm having my problem.
I have sat here. This is my
second day.
Right now. I only have two days.
Uh, paperwork. That was that was
handed to us, Uh, everything
that we've done left yesterday
in my office.
So there's a lot more paperwork
missing.
And apparently, nobody is here.
But I'm here now.
I think I am hearing that we
need to do something.
Otherwise we wouldn't have these
kind of presentations.
I mean,
if
These people didn't feel we
needed to do something they were
bothered putting all this stuff
together.
And having over here and talking
to it talking to us.
And honestly, I can see where
we're having a problem with
this.
What's what's going on in the
world today here in the state of
New Mexico.
And, uh, sorry about pounding.
Nothing. Uh, I don't mean to be
bound
so that doesn't bother me
suddenly.
Uh, nobody wants to get
something done in the special
session because the sky is gonna
fall in if we go into special
test
But we are having a problem in
the state of New Mexico.
Yeah. I mean the problem Where
and it just look at Las Cruces,
where they got how many cases
they just don't have one or two
people.
The cruises that have this
problem. We have bunch
And I county in Albuquerque and
who knows what's happening?
Santa Fe, who knows what's
happening in Las Vegas?
Who knows what's happening in
grand in Milan in my area,
because we have no idea we have
no idea of if anybody is being
treated or worked with, or help
or being tried to be in hell.
And I, honestly honestly, ladies
and gentlemen do not think the
sky is gonna fall in if we do
something about this problem.
I don't think it's gonna happen.
I think we can get something
done in accomplish it together
and we don't get it done.
We table it till the session.
But
I don't understand why the
Scarlet is going to fall in
Just because a couple of people
say it's a horrible thing to do.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Uh, thank you, representative,
Representative Rem. Uh, thank
you, madam Chair. Um
And so
I don't know. For the last 15
years or so I've introduced
felon in possession of a
firearm. Uh, this year. Uh, we
passed it out of the house. It
got all the way to Senate
judiciary.
I've left. Uh, a couple of
messages for Dan Sligo to call
me so that we could discuss,
maybe using my bill and trying
to do that I haven't received a
call.
I'd like to work with you if I
could, um, also on your, uh,
median bill.
I would like to help whoever's
going to introduce that.
I am an expert witness in
traffic crash reconstruction,
and I think I could be helpful
for it.
But I'd appreciate it if someone
from the governor's office would
reach out to me on, um felon in
possession and the other
legislation.
Think I started introducing
legislation on the bail in 2018.
As I said on the floor when it
passed.
Uh, it's better than a brown
decision. But we're gonna be
back to fix it because it's not
gonna work. Thank you, madam
Chair.
Oh, thank you, Representative
Green, Um Representative Hemry
And then um, representative
Laura Ka.
Thank you, Madam Chair and and
thank you, Miss Ajani and, um
for being here. Appreciate this,
Um
I. I, uh, representative Reh
mentioned that he had brought
the felons in possession Bill a
number of sessions and so I'll
just start there. How is this
Bill?
That that what we're gonna see
in the special session if if we
go forward, uh, going to be
different from what we've seen
in the past that that
representative has introduced,
Uh, Madam Chair Representative.
Forgive me and and forgive me,
Representative Ream. I know.
Last session, um, that
representative reh had a felon
in possession, Bill. I believe
it was representative Hockman ba
uh ba who also had a felony in
possession, Bill. I don't recall
how those two differed from one
another, Um
This bill that we currently have
or the or the proposed bill is a
representative Hman V Hills
bill, which is essentially
bringing up
From the third degree to the
second degree.
Um, for the felon in possession
a minimum of nine years, Um, for
a serious, violent felon in
possession is bringing it up to
you. Um and Madam chair, Miss
Agajanian. Um
so it this This bill is met with
a lot of resistance in the past.
How? How does the governor's
office? Uh, foresee that that
resistance will be overcome
this this Madam chair
representative. I think that
that's a fantastic question. Um,
I think that we have
To, um again.
Agree that at some points we're
gonna have policy agreements and
at some point we're going to
have policy disagreements, and
as I said at the beginning, I
think a recognition that
incarceration is not only to
deter but also to, uh, a prevent
future crimes and be punish. Um,
I think we need to have serious
conversations about whether that
is why we do what we do and see
if we can get to a place where
we can have some agreement.
Yeah, OK. Thank you. Um, Madam,
Chair MA, and I'd like to shift
and go to the the A OT stuff.
Um, so I. I know you said a a
few moments ago that the bill we
have is still a work in progress
because I did not see the
anything in there.
Uh, for pilot programs or or
mandating, you know, July 1 of
2026. So I assume that's when
you say this is a still a work
in progress. That's
Uh,
Yes, Madam Chair Representative.
We're We're, um
The locations of those pilots
are what we're trying to
ascertain.
OK, OK. Thank you. And, um Madam
Chair MA and, um
Who Who else is are you working
with on on this bill? What other
stakeholders are at the table if
you will.
Sure. Um, Madam Chair
representative I. I have told
members of the committee that
I've spoken to before. When I
was initially putting together
the bill.
Um, what I did was I looked at a
bunch of other jurisdictions at
what at what they were doing and
kind of and tried to pull
something together and my goal
was to have a framework.
To bring to folks to present it
to them. Um, rather than trying
to build the boat as I sail it
with in terms of having those
discussions before the the bill
was even structured. Um, since
the outline has been
accomplished in just which was
really just in the last couple
of weeks. I know I have met with
several members of the
Legislature. I did meet at her
request with Ms Pines and Mr
Jackson last week I met with or
maybe it was the week before. I
can't remember. I've met with Mr
Bauer.
I have met with other
representatives from other
legislatures.
And, um, I'm trying to remember
a couple other community groups
that that are escaping. My, um I
have also done um, in within my
office, Uh, availed myself of
the expertise of my coworkers.
Um, Miss Whitfield, who was a
social worker, The Blasi, who
has a sort of an encyclopedic
knowledge of the way the health
care and the MC O system works
and I've been leaning on them
quite a bit as well. Thank you
And Madam chair. Uh, MA and, um
So so, you you mentioned
earlier. Uh, I think when, uh,
representative Martinez and and
senator duh were were asking
about why we needed to do this
now, when? When the framework is
there, the ability to do it is
there that just judicial
districts are not doing it. Why?
Are they not doing it? Why is
this not happening? Madam Chair
representative. That's a great
question, and I don't know that
there's going to be one answer.
Um
For every for the other 12
judicial districts. You know, I
don't know, you know? Is it too
hard? Um or their lack of
service providers, You know, you
have to, um, again. We're not
gonna try to set people up and
mandate that they avail
themselves of services that
aren't actually meaningfully
available to them. Um, I'm I'm
sure it's a little bit different
in every single judicial
district.
OK, Thank you. And and Madam
chair, miss. Then then
How does
Just mandating that the judicial
district changed that.
If if they don't have those
services if they if if there's
cost prohibitions if there's
some other thing
Um, this bill
Just by mandating that they do.
It doesn't seem to address why
they're not already doing it.
Understood, Madam Chair
representative, Um
What we have in the bill is the
sort of the judicial direction
part of it to have these
services available. The
infrastructure part of it is
what is coming or is what has
been, um
Required by the governor of the
M CS in their new contracts, so
getting the services there
Um and then, in order to have
the courts be able to order
folks into this treatment, um,
getting the services there is
going to be the responsibility
of the MC OS. They they get. Mr
Blasi could correct me like a
something like a billion dollars
a year from us. Um, And so they
can be, uh, they they will be
responsible for making sure the
services are available. That's
what that's what their job is.
Thank you. And and so, madam
Chair MA in. Um so the the
thought is that
If these programs are mandated
in a year for the pilot
programs, uh, two years for
that, that the the services will
Be available, or I mean, do we
know that they'll be able to
Get this done that service
providers will be able to be
hired in, you know, brought into
the state or or whatever I mean.
Is, Is there any guarantee that
that's going to get done in this
same time frame? I can. I'm
gonna I'm gonna let Mr Blasi uh,
speak to the issue of the
service provider providers. But
what? I will note that as part
of of the section on the pilots
and the deadlines, um are sort
of opportunities for districts
to, uh, apply for an extension
of the services that they need,
aren't there?
For their for their consumers,
But I'll I'll let Miss De Blasi
talk about the providers.
Thank you, Madam. Chair
Representative Henry. So the
governor's office, the health
care Authority? Um uh, Secretary
a. Miho and Medicaid director
Flannery. We've all been working
collaboratively with the managed
care organizations. We're
meeting with them, uh, routinely
talking about the needs, network
adequacy and, um, heightened
need for behavioral health
services. The Legislature has
Very generous in helping rebuild
the behavioral health
infrastructure. Um, you know, to
the tune of roughly about a
billion dollars and what we've
seen is that we're increasing
provider rates. We're seeing an
increase in the number of
providers. Uh, we have 100 and
4% increase in psych, Medicaid,
Psych psychiatric providers 73%
increase in, um, behavioral
health core providers for
Medicaid. So things are starting
to work and we will be very
selective.
With the pilots to ensure that
we're able to meet the needs of
of the A OT program. So right
now we've got seven act teams
and roughly 86 CCS providers.
Um Miss Michael spoke about that
yesterday, um across the state,
So you know, we'll we'll be very
selective and be strategic about
what makes sense for where we
would place those pilots.
OK, thank you. And, uh, just to
to follow up on that, madam
chair and and, uh Ms Gaja and
and and Miss Blasi, um and
forgive me if I mispronounced
that, Um um
So so the MC OS, as I understand
are
Reimbursement.
Uh, provide they're not service
providers correct.
Madam Chair, representative
Ambry. That is correct, however,
within the contract provisions
new turquoise care contracts.
There's a requirement for
community reinvestment. There
are specific requirements for
network adequacy. There are
requirements related to
timeliness of appointment for
behavioral health services.
Those are written into the new,
um, managed care contracts.
OK, Thank you, Um
Sort of my last, Uh, question on
on this bill, as it stands now,
uh, Madam Chair and and Ms Aoni
and is, is it limited?
Uh, I don't. I didn't see it in
here Or is there any thought on
limiting the type of offense?
Um, for which someone, uh, may
be eligible for this program.
Is that
Madam Chair, representative
Henry. Um, this is a civil.
There's this doesn't touch the
criminal side of OK, OK, thank
you. Um, I. I appreciate that
very much. Thank you for being
here and Madam chair. If I may,
Just one sort of last comment,
Um, you know, I don't disagree
that something needs to be done
And that you know, we've heard
things for for almost two days
about these issues and that
something needs to be done. But
I, I think
The fact that something needing
to be done is very different
from rushing into something, uh,
that that may not be, um
As, uh, fully vetted. Um
And and so that is That is my
big concern. So, but I thank you
for your time. And thank you,
madam Chair.
Uh, thank you, representative
Representative Laura K. Kenna.
Thank you, madam Chair and
presenters.
I first want to share that I'm
trying to follow the thread of
the presentation You offered and
brought in front of us at the
organizational meeting last
month. And then what? We're
hearing today. And like my
colleague, Senator duh. I also
have some questions about what I
thought was coming.
Based on the organizational
meeting. Um it sounds like there
has been some significant shifts
or some pieces have been let go
of to then focusing on what you
brought in front of us today and
first, even just to appreciate
my outgoing friend here,
representative REM
Um, it's hard for me to not
Feel like we are trying
desperately to follow some
political winds here.
Um, In the last couple of years
I've left and I've said it's
looked like bills. Um, that I
was part of, Um
Cabling or or not passing when I
was part of how house judiciary
that representative re brought
in front of us consistently, we
sort of dropped those in the
dumpster and then political
winds change and we pulled them
out of the dumpster. We slapped
democratic names on them.
And said we were going to
improve public safety.
Meanwhile, plagiarizing uh
representative Reimer
So
Even just to name that there
have been folks trying to have
these conversations for a long
time.
We said no. And now all of a
sudden we're being told very
quickly in a short summer that
that's where we have to go
because New Mexico is in crisis.
When I
Remember the last time we had
you in front of us.
I heard a lot about how we were
gonna have a bill that had civil
comp We That was that was gonna
look at the civil systems and
criminal legal systems. It was
going to have competency and
expanded a OT I expressed at the
time there would be expanded a
O. I think we've clarified so
far. There is not going to be
any competency bill this
session.
Is that what you responded so
far, Madam Chair and presenters.
Madam Chair representative. I
don't know what I said was there
wasn't going to be a civil
commitment. A civil commitment
Bill, So the civil aspect of it
is the A OT bill. The criminal
aspect of it is the competency
But you will still bring a
competency bill. Madam Chair and
presenters. Madam Chair
Representative. Yes. OK, so you
will have two separate bills
now Not one, as was presented
previously. Madam Chair,
Representative, Madam Chair. Uh,
Representative? Yes. Initially
we were going to try to put them
all in both.
Topics into one bill. It just
seemed, um
Almost logically better to just
split them up. Two. Madam Chair
presenters. That's that's one
piece of something you all have
shared today that I agree with,
Um as we move to a OT, have you
all Madam chair presenters had
the opportunity to look at the
archival footage or the debates
or the significant conversations
that were had over years when
New Mexico passed what's now
current statute.
Madam Chair representative, Um,
I have done
Uh, a as the senator. Uh, duh
was doing earlier. I've done my
own Google dive into the history
of it. I haven't gone into the
legislative archives per SE. Um,
but I have read, uh, as much as
I could about it, one of the
things and I know we've talked
about it on numerous occasions.
Um, one of the things that I
know was a big
Um
Part of getting that bill
initially over the finish line
was the idea of the specific
provision in there of not
holding someone in contempt of
court for not complying. That
provision has not been added
back in. That still is not
something that is going to be
able to happen if somebody does
not comply with the A OT order,
Madam chair presenter. I
appreciate that. We'll get to
that in a point because I have
some concerns on the bottom of
page 20 that sound to me like
you're going in that direction,
But before we go there, um Madam
Chair representative
Uh, presenters just even looking
at a quick scan at our courts,
Corrections and Justice
Committee now.
It's my sense that there were
maybe three legislators still
with us representative Reh, Um
Senator Stewart and someone over
there.
Representative Alcon
That took votes on that bill.
As someone that was doing issue
based advocacy at the time I
happened to be in the audience.
And, um please correct me if if
I don't remember this
accurately, but that bill was so
massive. It was the kind of bill
that took all the energy of a
session to get it done and
significant political capital to
move
And what I'm missing as we hear
these presentations now, um and
doing the best I can to follow
this and and some of what felt a
little bit disorganized.
Um
Is how
What we've established here.
As others have noted.
Is lacking in concrete, tangible
ways that you all are ready to
come in and fill with proposed
legislation. So just even
casually like when we look at
the list of who would be now
eligible to file the petition?
You have current statute on Page
seven. You have
Additions on page 12. So while
you haven't clearly delineated
like what's current, and what's
new as we try to flip back and
forth
I haven't heard justified
conversations about why the
folks currently eligible to file
a petition are not enough.
Or not sufficient or not meeting
the original intent of the law
We have in place or whatever it
is you all are trying to
accomplish And when I
Put that on top of this reality
that we have one judicial
district where I happen to
represent that's even doing
this.
It makes me wonder why we're
leapfrogging ahead to say we've
still not effectively done.
What we put into law, however,
many years ago
But now we're gonna make some
assumptions about why that
didn't work.
And we're going to expand this
in a way.
It's pretty significant.
And I wanna shout out the great
work that you all got to hear
about yesterday, uh, about
what's happening with a O down
south.
But it's also really important
to say that that model is
working.
Mostly on a voluntary basis,
because community collaborators
came together to get people
access to the care and services
they needed.
So some would say myself
included. It's not the A O
component of that. It's not the,
UM, judge in a robe ordering
someone to treatment that's
actually making that program
work.
It's the collaborative elements
of a community coming together
to connect resources.
Um and I asked Madam chair, I
I'll I'll wrap up and then we'll
go to page 20. I asked about
whether or not you'd watch those
debates and I think they're
worthwhile. We have an archive
for a reason. But one of the
biggest arguments being made
when we originally passed a OT,
and I didn't take a vote on
that. It was just an advocate in
the audience.
Was that if a judge in a robe
told somebody to comply with
treatment
There was enough evidence.
To pursue legislation that would
say that would increase the
efficacy of those orders and and
that someone would be more
compliant with that treatment. I
don't have anything in front of
me here to say whether or not
our original idea worked at the
time. We were looking at
national data. We kept hearing
that New Mexico was one of the
only states that didn't have a
Those are still original
premises that we should be
discussing now, before we expand
something like this.
Finally, Madam chair. Um you
said we're not gonna, um, count
someone as noncom.
Madam Chair presenters. I do
want to take you to your slide
20.
Again. It's hard for me to
follow these slides in the
presentation of like what's
current status, and I'm trying
to mark myself What I think, are
your new proposed changes here.
But your final bullet here says
court can terminate at any point
and can consider non compliance.
To mean additional interventions
are needed, including more
restrictive ones.
This makes me really nervous.
Um, it was not discussed out
loud. Would you like to present
on what you are? Or might you
share more on what you mean by
this split?
Absolutely thank you. Uh, Madam
Chair Representative, Um what?
That last
Um
Bullet means is so again.
What is specifically prohibited
is a contempt order.
Um, for non compliance that is
different.
Than a judge who has had
somebody in front of them every
60 days or more often than that
again, if that's if that's what
the judge requires, and is
looking at this person and is
saying, um, you know you aren't
following my orders.
Not gonna hold you in contempt.
I'm going to put additional
requirements on what it is that
you need to be doing, um, in
order to comply.
So, Madam Chair presenters.
There may be a legal distinction
there. But what is the practical
implications for the person in
front of the judge? The
practical implications is that
the person remains, um in the a
OT program, continuing to
receive a OT treatment, maybe in
a different mechanism than they
were before. Um, but is not
being fined or
Thrown in jail for not complying
with the order.
Um, Madam Chair presenters, but
it does say here, including more
restrictive ones. So might that
mean an involuntary commitment?
Madam Chair representative
there. There could be. I'm not
saying that's not within the
universe of possibilities. I
think that that's always within
the universe of possibility.
When you're talking about a OT
What it could also mean is I'm
gonna make you report every week
instead of every month. It
could. It could also just mean
things like that. It really is a
case by case basis.
Potentially
Thank you, Madam Chair I'm done
for the day.
Senator du He has one short
question because I have a few
things I wanna say too. Thank
you, II. I appreciate your
indulgence. Uh, Madam Chair and
committee,
Madam chair and, um
Oh, my gosh. So Stewart sat here
and gave me a phonetics lesson.
We left And so I know I'm going
to get it wrong again. Um yes,
the science of reading.
But Madam chair I so
So given the critical role MC OS
Play in this
I working in any way whatsoever.
Uh, with the governor. Consider
if we're going to be too in
these bills. Also having a bill
that would include a significant
Um, sanctions on the MC OS. If
they're not, I mean, they they
already are contractually
required to provide a lot of
this stuff, and they're not
already so.
What about imposing some
meaningful and significant, um,
consequences on them for not
doing so. And why wouldn't that
be part of any package of of
bills we would be looking at in
this context, Madam Chair
Senator That is music to my
ears. Um, we we have enforcement
mechanisms within the contract.
I agree with you 100% that
enforcement and holding the MC
OS accountable is the only way
If that doesn't work, the rest
of it doesn't work either.
Um, if you think that adding
that sort of accountability into
the bill is a is a key
component. I would certainly ask
the governor. I don't think she
would disagree with that at all.
Um, in California. I know they
have AAA fine system in place.
but that's county by county. Um,
but they they'll find $1000 a
day for services that are not
being provided. That should be
up to $25,000 per patient. Um
It's not. I think that sounds
great. Thank you.
Welcome.
So, um, I have a few questions.
I'm very confused by the notion
or the
The way we're expressing the
fact that the districts the
judicial districts are
responsible for the programs.
My understanding is it's the
counties that are responsible
for the program, so judicial
districts don't run behavioral
health programs. They don't have
behavioral health directors. So
referring to it as the
districts providing the program
doesn't make sense to me. Why
are we phrasing it that way and
understand, Uh, I was gonna say,
Madam Chair, Madam chair, but
Madam chair because again as
just as a functional matter
these run through the courthouse
that that's really what Why?
Because this is gonna have to be
when folks go to each judicial.
That's that is where they will
be. They implement laws.
Judges implement laws and the
laws say somebody can file a
petition. OK, the petitions
filed a court just like any
other petition. Certain things
happen. And then the counties or
the M CS are responsible. It's
not a pro. I'm I'm very confused
by it. What am I missing? Well,
currently right now, the
judicial districts well, Las
Cruces has an MOU with the
county to provide those
services.
OK, so I, I still am confused.
There's a legal process to get
someone into a OT.
And it's the court that's
responsible for providing the
program.
The court is responsible for
directing the person into the
program. Yeah, well, courts and
OK, so that's what ports do they
respond to petitions? So where's
the compulsion? Part of this?
I think, Madam chair. I think
the compulsion
If I if I understand what you're
asking, but I think the
compulsion part goes to what I
was just discussing with Senator
duh with in terms of the, uh,
the compliance issues. Is that
what you mean? Yeah, I mean,
We pass laws.
Courts apply them across the
board. You know, every district
is bound by it. The current A OT
law doesn't say it only applies
in the third district.
What right they don't. It
applies across the board. Any
court that gets a petition has
to react to it. The the current
law Madam chair states that a
court that in order to have a OT
a court has to have an MOU with
the county, so they do have to
have an agreement together. OK?
Oh, OK, so in it's the courts
responsibility to have the MOU
I don't think that a court can
as the current law stands. I
don't think a court can send
someone to a OT without an MOU
with a county.
II. I believe that's in the
current statute.
This is a very unusual setup. I
don't disagree with you, Madam
Chair.
And and and we can, as the
legislative branch require the
judicial branch to execute a, um
MO US.
With other organizations. We
have the ability
Within the separation of powers
that exist in our
Legal system.
Madam chair. I believe that we
do. It was as I had the I had a
very similar question at the
outset, but I believe that we
do.
And OK.
So in earlier conversations, um,
that you and I have, you know,
we've been talking, um
We had conversations about the
counties have to have a program.
Is that? No longer the case, Uh,
madam Chair
If you'll recall one of the, um
One of the initial aspects was
county by county
But because
Certain counties might not need
as robust services. There were
two other options that that we
discussed, which was by judicial
district or even dividing the
state up into five different I
was gonna say quadrants, but
that wouldn't be the right word
because there's five but five
different, um, regions
Bernalillo and then, uh, North
East, northwest southeast
Southwest, but that felt like it
was too big of a region because
again, you're not gonna be able
to be
People services quickly and
closely.
So the in between was the
judicial districts because
again, you have to be able to
people have to be able to access
the services relatively easily
in terms of Geographics.
The judicial district is going
to have an MOU with
A county or counties, cuz every
judicial district has more than
one county.
And what's that MO you gonna
say?
Madam Chair. Um
I actually
Don't have that requirement in
the current version of this bill
for that reason.
Because it I. I didn't quite
understand the genesis of it to
begin with.
Oh,
OK, Um, Um uh, Representative
Laura Cain is gonna help me
didn't see that on that point,
as it's been explained to me the
genesis of those MOU were about
paying for the services so
because the courts didn't have
the obligation to pay they they
sent someone to a OT, the county
or municipality could have
elected to intern MOU that said
they would pay for the mandated
treatment, OK, and and now we're
saying, um, in most cases
Medicaid will pay because a lot
of the people involved are
Medicaid qualify. I see some
yeses and some Nos. Well, we're
not gonna start taking answers
from the audience. So sorry. Um,
photo friends get bad enough
What we got going on up here.
So, uh,
so
OK, Medicaid.
And then if there's not, they're
not Medicaid eligible who
Who pays
Madam Chair as we heard
yesterday from Miss Michaels,
It's Medicaid. If they don't
have insurance, there's an
engine indigent fund that they
can tap. That's the county.
That's the county, right? Not
every county has an indigent
fund that call that takes care
of this stuff. So who's gonna
pay and I don't know Moa County
but lady can't pay
If if they're indigent, I think
that no, we're not talking in
June. I get indigent. That's
Medicaid.
All right, Who's Who's gonna
pay if you're just a run of the
mill person who has blue Cross
Blue shield?
Madam chair That would be the in
And what if you're uninsured,
But and you? You don't qualify
for Medicaid.
Madam chair there. Um, we would
look at other funds.
Um, that are available. We got
the health care affordability
fund that pays for, uh, premium
assistance.
Um through the exchange many
times when individuals enter the
A OT programs the team works to
get, um, insurance for the
individual, whether it be
Medicaid or other
OK, so I I'm still trying to
understand this and I apologize.
I really do. This is not We're
passing a law that requires
Somebody to do something and
who's the somebody? It's the
courts.
And it's the courts to follow
the law.
Cause we're gonna say when a
petition is filed, these certain
things happen.
And we're saying the court has
the responsibility to have
A hearing and certain things are
met, then.
Um the person will be put into
Directed into certain treatment
plans through these wonderful MC
OS that have served our state so
well.
All these years.
OK?
Um, primarily
S.
All right, so we're just passing
a law that says courts apply the
law.
And I'm just real Well. So so,
madam Chair we are. We are
passing a law to require
Um
Diversion.
And treatment for folks who
haven't done it voluntarily.
Yeah. And
Whereas in the past
Those services just
traditionally at a community
based level are not available.
So we've got to get the services
there.
We've gotta get them available
and But then, yes to go back to
what I was saying At the
beginning, we shouldn't have to
have a law.
But nobody's doing it.
And something needs to change,
As the representative said
earlier. I don't disagree with
you that we don't
We already have a law that says
we can have a OT.
But it's not being done.
And so what happens as a result
is we are losing in a funnel.
Um new Mexicans who could
benefit from treatment even if
it's and again. This is these
are gonna be services from a
voluntary spectrum all the way
up, and so we're going to be
able to get interventions for
folks on a voluntary level, and
we're going to be able to move
them through this system for the
folks that will not or cannot,
um, avail themselves of the
voluntary treatment to have a
court order as the person
The witness was saying yesterday
have that black robe effect so
that there is somebody who is
accountable in front of a judge
to get the services that they
have been ordered to avail
themselves of.
Well.
I'm gonna have to look at the
law and we'll have more
conversation because this
somehow this doesn't compute in
my
Normally logical brain.
Um so
Although some people might
dispute that, um
I did wanna raise an issue,
though, and that is
You know, Senator Wirth raised
this point yesterday and I
thought it was a very good one.
We have a law on the books.
Um
Com Commend Dona County They're
like our poster child this year
of goodness this year. This this
Part of our discussion because
they entered into an MOU. And
they've shown the initiative and
that it's it sounds like it's a
program that's working.
So, um, you know, why do we have
to change the law? It sounds
like there is a law that can be
implemented.
We could maybe tweak the law to
say every community has to have
a program. But why? Then change
it so much?
You see what I'm saying?
Absolutely, Madam Chair, I. I
very much see what you're
saying. I think that the the
big, um a couple of the big
needs for the change, Um, as Ms
Michael said yesterday is
expanding the list of people who
can petition and expanding the
list of folks who can be ordered
into those services because
again right now, what they were
saying is they're so now you're
in in order for you to be
somebody who the court can order
into a OT. Um, you're either
impatient somewhere. I'm
there are
Very constricted or a history of
violence or violent behavior.
Recent violent behavior and and
hospital. Uh, intervention. So
the new The new list essentially
broadens that out. So we pull
out that violence requirement
right is is a really sort of
simplistic way to say it. And so
the 40 people that are currently
being served in Las Cruces that
universe of folks would expand
by taking out that requirement.
OK?
Um
So I did hear, Ms Michael say it
would be good to have a longer
list of people who can petition
Um, I did not hear her say, um,
that the criteria were too
constrictive.
Um
And so
My question would for us would
be if we think in terms of that
this is a big deal.
Why, um, wouldn't we maybe
expand the list of people who
competition
Require every community to have
a program.
And help them, you know, help
them and cause communities are
gonna need money for this.
Right. She's their program costs
100 and 50,000 a year which I
think is incredibly inexpensive.
I can't believe that number. Um,
but Albuquerque would be more
expensive, obviously, and then
Do a check or maybe have some
data reporting requirements
because we don't we need to know
how it's working.
And call it a day.
I mean, I'm trying to instead of
You know, fixing something that
It really broken.
You know, broken really bad.
And I'm not even sure it's
broken at all. But
Um, I mean, I'm I'm suggesting
something that someone could get
their head around without
changing this whole, you know,
throwing up the whole thing and
let's start over again when it
seems to be working reasonably
well in Dona County.
You hear me, Madam? You said
that's my, um in terms of people
being able to get their head
around it, and I think maybe we
People in for the next meeting
because I want to know why it
fell apart in Bernalillo County,
because that is something we
need to know to try to avoid
that going forward because they
you know something happened
there. We need to understand,
And that will be my project. So,
um, sorry. It would be
difficult, but, yeah, I see. Um
And so I know Representative
Martinez is gonna help me, huh?
Thank you, Madam Chair. I don't
know about helping anybody.
Um
Do you have a copy of the
proposed
Build the work. The
Working bill.
Oh, and yes, I do.
The discussion draft, can you
I'm I'm a lot more confused now
that I started reading the bill.
You need to start winding up. I
didn't know we were gonna open
up the bill. She she can get a
hold of me later. With cancer.
Yeah, Why don't we do that
section 10? I need you to
explain.
The $25,000 fine to the
counties.
Um
So th this completely muddied.
The thing for me so
That's a good point. That's a
really good point. So but we can
talk about that. And then when
we get probably start wrapping
things up for today. Thank you,
madam. Yes, Madam Chair, Uh,
representatives. That's what I
was referring to before. When I
was discussing with Senator Duh
about the idea of where we where
you would put the accountability
um
You know, is it and I was saying
in California it's on the
counties. Um, it was initially
that has been pulled out. That
is not in there anymore.
And pulled out the finding.
Yeah. If you in the email that I
was, Yeah.
A lot going on.
Uh, we have one last little
comment from
I promise, Madam chair. It's a
small little comment. You can
tell a judge what you want him
to do. But you're not gonna make
that judge and do it.
That's all there is to that. OK,
that was small.
so
small, right?
What? But I will just, uh, leave
it there. I'll just, um, if you
already did this, I apologize,
but one of the things going
through this is I was worried a
little bit about the
constitutionality issues. Um,
with regard to how
Um how? Because I actually think
limiting who can get it is an
aspect of protecting the
petitioner. So a family member
or and I actually don't like
this. This hospital things I
wish there were some more checks
and balances because I'm worried
that they're doing it to keep
their beds full, uh, in some
cases, or that the issue of
whether they petition is whether
they have beds available, So I'm
worried about that that I've
mentioned, but I also am worried
about the constitutional issues
of involuntary
Um, treatment. I'll just leave
it there because I because of
time, but it is bothering me.
Well, we can have analysis done,
You know, on that particular
point that that would be great.
So, um
That would be great. We have
staff that we can ask to help
you with that. I would
appreciate that that analysis
because just just looking at it.
I think there are elements of
the prior one that was very
carefully drafted to avoid
constitutional problems. And I'm
just wondering whether we
crossed the line with this one
is my my concern. Yeah, and not
that what other states do is,
um, always right, because it's
wrong a lot, but there are other
states that require involuntary
treatment through with their a
OT programs. Just you. You know
that I. I
I'm aware of that. But I'm also
aware that they've been
constitutional issues raised
with them. So yeah, and if they
haven't been resolved, that's
not gonna solve our problem.
Absolutely OK, very. So, um
I just wanna talk about path
forward here.
Because we're working with you
guys, the governor's office. We
have meetings 26 and 27th. Will
we have and we haven't talked
about the median bill and the
felon and the data? We are. Are
those bills in in form where
they could be talked about in
like a line by line issue. You
know, these are our issues. Kind
of, um, discussion are those in
shape for that Madam chair Is
there OK, so that's something we
could put potentially on the
agenda to give you
Back on.
Um, we'll see what it looks
like. And the a OT bill, You
know, it's a tough one. I'm not
sure we're gonna be at that
place just yet, But we can, but
we do wanna see the next draft
as soon as possible. Um, so we
can start having our staff look
at it and give you feedback, OK?
Um, but thank you for, um, your
work on this and I, You know,
it's a tough It's tough.
Don't envy you, but, um,
appreciate it.
We now are I believe are at
committee discussion. And, um so
thank you And thank you. Um
we'll be talking with you again.
Obviously.
Um, We've had a lot of kind of
discussion. But yes, Um,
Representative Martinez, Madam
chair. I was just wondering if
we were gonna be able to take a
look at the competency bill
that's proposed.
Oh, I very good question. Thank
you. Um, uh, M Agajanian. Uh, I
love my name has been said more
today than I know. I'm
practicing because I may be in
school when I was in trouble. Um
Madam Chair, representative.
Yes, we will. II. I don't expect
it's that far away, OK?
Very good. Um, thank you for
joining us. Both of you, Um,
Committee discussion. We've had
quite a bit of discussion. Um
and I bet people are really
tired. Um, but all of you, um,
had a lot of very good, helpful
comments. I So thank you for
your active and in helpful
participation. We now are at
public comment. Um, do we have
any online public comment? No
online we I see Mr Jackson has
signed up for public comment. So
you're welcome to come to the
mic.
Share your public comments. Uh,
Mr Jackson.
Take care. Get some rest there.
Now, Madam Chair members of the
committee. Uh, Jim Jackson and
the, uh, on the registered
lobbyists for disability rights.
New Mexico, UM, and the mission
of disability rights in New
Mexico is to protect and promote
the rights of persons with
disabilities, and it's pretty
much all disabilities, including
mental health issues. I
appreciate. Uh uh, Madam chair.
I appreciate the opportunity
that you'll be giving us at a at
your next meeting to do a
presentation. So, um
Try to respond to a lot of the
issues that have already been
raised. But I did want to. Just,
uh, bring to your attention a
few a few highlights. I guess
I'd say one of the things that
our agency does is to try to
facilitate access to services.
and those of you who have been
in the Legislature for a long
time. Know that we'd I'd come to
you every year to try to get
funding, for instance, for the
DD waiver and so on. It's part
of our job to make sure that
people have access to services.
But our approach to that is
always to try to facilitate
voluntary services.
Um
Uh And and in that regard, for
instance, we're also trying to
promote diversion for people
with mental illness, divert them
out of the the criminal justice
system and get them access to
services and treatment.
Um, as you've heard for the last
couple of days when you get into
issues around involuntary
treatment, forcing adults, some
of whom have capacity to make
their own decisions when you try
to get into involuntary
commitment, a OT guardianship
civil commitment. All of these
things those rays as several of
you have noted those raise
important constitutional. Uh,
issues. Um, and due process
issues and part of our job as an
agency to make
That when the when the
Legislature establishes or
modifies those laws that we are
making sure that those due
process rights are really
embedded and that there and that
they practiced, Um III. I
couldn't help it to respond a
little bit. When representative
Chay talked about the, um are
these are these sort of
adversarial proceedings when
you're taking away somebody's
rights? I would hope that they
would be pretty adversarial
proceedings and not just
something that you can agree.
Uh, to agree to. So, um
They're there are important
issues and I'd also I I wanna
just really reinforce the notion
that these issues are
inextricably tied to the
availability of services and
resources. Uh uh, Madam Chair.
I'm a, uh I'm glad that you're
going to try to hear from the
Ben O County people. I can give
you the really quick answer,
Representative Henry asked this
question. Why isn't there? You
know, do the people in
Albuquerque and the second
district that they did They not
care. Why don't they have
And they've been desperate to
have a program and they haven't
been able to find the services
and the provider to implement
this program. And these these
things are inextricably
intertwined. Um, and I guess I
would just like to to finish by
noting
The issue of a OT never came up.
In this most recent 30 Day
session, and it's the governor
that sets the agenda for that,
Uh, for for a 30 day session. It
didn't It didn't come up well,
suddenly, suddenly it's an
emergency that we have to deal
with immediately. Some of us are
troubled by that partly again
because these are complex,
nuanced sorts of issues. I don't
think you're gonna be in a
position, particularly around
the A OT issues.
I don't think you're gonna be in
a position in the next six weeks
to be in a position where
everybody agrees on a roadmap to
the future of this program, so
I'd encourage you, uh to I. I
reflect many of the comments
that you all gave that this is
the kind of issue that really
needs a lot more attention, and
you shouldn't be rushing it in,
uh, into a special session. So,
um, we'll look forward to seeing
all of you at your next meeting
and appreciate the opportunity
for comment. Thank you.
Jim Offline, Could you maybe
give me some context to whom I
could, you know, get from the
second district to come. Thank
you.
Bye.
Hey, Well, I think we have
concluded a very full two days
and I wanna thank everyone again
and we're adjourned till the
next time.
2627
