Morning everybody representing
Madrid District 53, uh, in it
entails Donana and Otero on the
far south central. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Alan
Martinez.
Uh house District 23, which is
just a few miles from here, the.
and the town of Berlio west of
the river.
Uh, good morning, everyone.
Peter Wirth, Senate District 25
in Santa Fe.
Good morning everyone.
May Stewart from District 17 and
Albuquerque International
District at East Gateway here.
Hi, good morning. I'm Joseph
Cervantes from Donana County. I
represent about 4th of the
county and it's the part that
borders Texas and Mexico.
Morning, Madam Chair. Morning
everyone. I'm Representative
Janell Yonoru, House District
19, which is the International
district in the fairgrounds.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee, uh, Greg Neibert,
Senate District 27, which is
parts of Chavez.
Curry and Lee County and all of
Deba and Roosevelt on the east
side.
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair
and committee and audience. um,
Andrea Reid, District 64,
Chavez, Curry, Roosevelt County.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Bill
Hall, District 3, which
represents, uh, Aztec and
Bloomfield and the east side of
San Juan County.
Thank you. Um, first up is um
Tracy Hartzler, president of
Central New Mexico Community
College who have graciously
agreed to host us and many other
committees that I'm on and not
on, so, uh, you have a wonderful
facility and we appreciate your
assistance with scheduling this.
Thank you. Thank you. Well,
welcome. Uh, my name's Tracy
Hartz. I'm president of Central
New Mexico Community College,
and again, welcome, uh, to the
committee. We, uh, we have had
the opportunity to,
um,
of committees, uh, and we really
appreciate Marla Schulz and
Martina Leo, who's our policy
analyst who is able to work with
your greats committee staff and
other staff, uh, to make this a
welcoming and hospitable place
to be, and we really appreciate
that, uh, we know how long and
how hard it is to plan your,
your schedules. We know you
intended to be in Riodoso.
Honestly, we wish you could have
been there and it would have
been easy and convenient. Um,
but we really appreciate the
opportunity, uh, for you to come
to campus because we know that
many of you don't, may not be
familiar with CNM, um, or you
hear about it through.
The community colleges and your
workforce partners who you work
with closely, uh, but very
briefly, CNM, uh, is the largest
undergraduate institution in the
state. Uh, and yet we have class
sizes that are no more than 25.
Students to faculty, uh, uh,
faculty ratios. I mean, we have
small classes. We are known for
being small and relational, even
though we're quite large. Uh, we
have 9 sites, uh, in
Albuquerque. Um, and I, when I
say sites, we have campuses, we
have, uh, 7 campuses that are
throughout our taxing district
of Burnlio County and part of
Sandoval County. But we also, as
you, some of you may know, we
partner with, um,
With others to expand our work
and be able to reach our
learners and our business
partners who we don't, uh, who
don't necessarily come to our
campuses. And I'll say it
briefly, our, our key
partnerships right now are with,
um, certainly we work closely
with Albuquerque Public Schools.
We have shared facilities with
Albuquerque Public schools, um,
and looking to expand, uh, some
programming and some of their
excess space, and they have
excess capacity. We are
currently working with Rio
Rancho Public Schools and
partners in, um, Sandoval County
to build
what they are calling or what
we're calling Riotech, a Rio
tech campus. It's about 22
acres. Uh, we have about, we
lease, CNM leases about 5 or 7
acres for our our auto mechanic,
um, and electric vehicle
programming, rearancho is
renovating an existing facility
where they are expanding their
trades programs. And we, of
course, are sharing, uh, through
an agreement we are sharing our
instructors.
In programming so that we can
really leverage all of our
assets together to provide, um,
extensive career to expand on
our career technical training
programming, uh, for not only
for high school students but for
working adults and those in that
community. Uh, and then, of
course, downtown in Albuquerque,
we are working closely with the
state and the city, uh,
And our college to expand the,
uh, rail yards campus and to put
our CNM, uh, film program, which
is more than 25 years old, uh,
downtown, moving it from our
main campus and our advanced
technology center, relocating a
number of our programs alongside
the state's New Mexico Media
Academy, um, that again,
provides a continuation of
education and services to our
business partners in film and
digital media. So I partnerships
are challenging, which I think
you all know.
But we're really proud of the
work we do together to, um,
leverage our resources to make
sure we have a commitment, um,
and are visible and accessible.
Um, not only online and remote
and through a remote
programming, but, uh, in our
physical facilities and we
leverage our assets that way.
And I want to highlight the work
we have downtown because
We also lease some space for
from the University of New
Mexico for our our maker space
program so we have, I think, 300
members, paid members, um, who
use a
Space of about 40,000 square
feet with a lot of equipment to
be able to, um, make parts for
their business to make jewelry,
uh, to start and learn a number
of other skills that allow them
to, again, sort of follow a
crafts focus, but also to expand
on our workforce training and
professional upskilling program,
upskilling programs. So we have
our coding boot camps and a
number of our tech-related, uh,
short term work certificates
that, that, uh, we have downtown
in two locations. Um, and again,
in partnership.
With UNM. So again, really proud
of how we leverage our assets,
but when I think about our work,
particularly and I'll cite
Albuquerque.
Because of our presence
downtown. Um, we certainly focus
on, on safety and we really
appreciate the work that the
mayor is currently undertaking,
um, around behavioral health
services and providing more
community service, uh, staff to
aid with law enforcement. Um, we
know how important it is for the
community, uh, partners to come
together and our anchor
institutions whether it's us in
our hospitals and our county and
city buildings and others to be
able to work downtown and do
that safely, um, and provide the
mental.
And behavioral health services
that are needed by so many who
are, who are in the city, um,
who are in those locations. So I
really appreciate the work that
you do. I also want to highlight
two programs that we have
particularly that serve not only
Albuquerque but serve the state.
Uh, we have a law enforcement
academy, uh, program. I, one of
the highlights of the work that,
um,
I mean, I can, I get to go to
graduations frequently, program
graduations frequently. One of
the most moving ceremonies we
have is from our law enforcement
academy. We have 2 cohorts every
year. We're working on expanding
to 3. but we have cohorts
anywhere from 10 to 25 or 30
cadets every term who work
closely and who are, who come
from multiple jurisdictions, not
only, uh, Albuquerque, uh,
public safety.
For the police department, but
through a number of our county,
uh, and local, uh,
jurisdictions. Also some of our
university and safety officers
and some of our federal
officers, uh, federal agents
will come through our training
program.
What's important about the
learning, uh, the law
enforcement academy that they
commit about 15 weeks with us to
learn basic skills. Um,
And certainly learn about law
enforcement from a community
safety perspective, and they
take their driving and some
other tests with us, and then
they take their, I'll say
they're more hands-on training
in terms of weapons and some
other work with their local
jurisdiction. And so again, it's
so exciting to see in the
auditorium of more than 400
though I will say 400 just
because we want to maintain our
fire safety regulations, but
it's always full in terms of,
um, seeing so many of our law
enforcement partners who are
present, but also the families.
Who are so proud of their, um,
their spouses, their children,
uh, their grandchildren,
nephews, nieces who are
graduating from the law
enforcement academy knowing that
they're choosing a life of, uh,
public service and public
safety. So we're so proud of
that program and the partnership
that is now, I want to say it's
in our 5th year and I know we've
expanded, um, again, we've
continued our agreements with
most of the jurisdictions. Um,
and I also want to note that
we've also expanded our
community health worker program.
You all know in this committee
how important it is to provide,
um,
I'll say, um, I'll say public
service.
Employees with the skills they
need and behavioral health and
community service, um, to be
able to support and augment what
your law enforcement officers do
and what your what your
community needs and we've been
really proud to work with,
again, we work closely with City
of Albuquerque and with Burn Leo
County to expand our
Our behavioral health, social
work, um, and community service
certificates and programs to
really try to meet a need that
we know is, um,
Uh, workforce need that is
growing, but also that is
meaningful and has an impact. We
know that our graduates are,
and, and many of those graduates
have are just as impacted
individuals who seek to come
back and give back to their
community and continue to make
it positive change in their
lives and for their families and
their neighborhoods. So we
really appreciate that we can
offer an opportunity for them to
re-engage in a productive way.
Um, and again, uh, to promote
the public safety for, for so
many of their families in their
neighborhoods. So we're really
pleased
With that work, we know that
there's more to do and we're
really trying to scale up some
of that programming. Uh, but we
appreciate the direction that
we're headed and also that our
partners are, um, seeing the
value at CNM just like they do
in many of your own community
colleges, but they work closely
with, with us as a workforce
provider to be able to provide
the programming and the
training.
Uh, so that their, their
employees are, um, the ones who
are coming in have the right
skills and then of course for
continuing education. Um, but
again, I just want to say thank
you for your time. We really
appreciate that we're able to
provide space for you, uh, here
and, um, be glad to take any
questions if you have time, but
I'm certainly respectful of your
schedule.
Briefly, any questions?
Great. um, thanks very much
appreciate your hospitality.
Thank you so much. Great.
We had a few members come in.
Why don't we introduce ourselves
and then we'll get to the first
item on our substantive, uh,
agenda. Our representative Lord,
do you want to introduce
yourself, please? Thank you. Hi,
I'm Representative Stephanie
Lord from the East Mountains,
which is now part of
Albuquerque, the East Mountains,
and all the way out into
Torrance County and a couple
more sips and I will be safer
approach. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you.
Representative Alcon.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I am
Representative Elioli I
represent District 6, which is
part of uh Sibola and McKinley
County, I think I would have
made it on time, but somehow or
another I couldn't find the
right door, but I made it.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative, and
Representative Barrego.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Morego, District
17, and I just want to thank
Tracy because she does a great
job and I know because I worked
with her for, with the city of
Albuquerque.
Thank you very much,
Representative. So first on our
agenda is status of major
criminal justice-related
appropriations and we have with
us Scott Sanchez and John
Courtney, both of whom are with
LFC Legislative Finance.
is yours.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, good morning, everybody.
Thanks for having us this
morning. You should have.
Two handouts in front of you?
Uh, a slide deck that we'll be
working off of and then also a
pretty detailed Excel sheet, um,
that has both, uh, recurring and
non-recurring criminal justice
related appropriations from FY21
to FY 25. I'm John Courtney. I'm
deputy director at the
Legislative Finance Committee,
uh, with me is Scott Sanchez.
He's our public safety, uh,
fiscal analyst. We have 6 staff
with you this morning and I
think we'll be spending the
morning with you, uh, walking
you through, um,
Appropriations, some of the
research that we've done over
the last 10 years, um, that is
related to public safety, uh,
and included in that are, um,
Uh, flagging a number of issues
that we've found over the years
and um some outstanding
recommendations, some
recommendations that have been
implemented, um, but, uh, by and
large a number of
recommendations that uh from,
from our, uh, program
evaluations for the most part,
um, that, uh, haven't been
implemented yet, so you'll be,
you'll be seeing about 10 years
of work on both the fiscal
analyst side and the, um,
program evaluation side.
So, uh, with that, Madam Chair,
if you turn with us to, uh,
slide 2.
And Scott will, will, uh, dive
right in.
All right. Good morning, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
My name's Scott Sanchez. I'm the
analyst for public safety at
LFC, um, looking at slide 2, you
can see this handy dandy graph
that we've got that kind of
shows the growth of uh budgets
for public safety agencies, um,
from FY19 to FY 25, and we can
see that largely these um
Budgets have grown, you know, in
line with general fund growth
overall. But between FY 21 and
25, the operating budgets for
judicial and public safety
agencies grew by an average of
about 31%. Um, funding increases
for courts and DAs exceeded
overall growth in spending from
the general fund, um, with
funding for DPS and Law Office
of the Public Defender not far
behind. The only one that
remained relatively flat for
reasons that we've discussed
before is corrections, but you
know, we talked about that
during budget hearings. Um, if
you've flipped aside slide 3,
you can see.
Pretty detailed, you know,
5-year history of vacancy rates
many of these agencies, you
know, we highlight that again,
despite significant increases in
agency personnel budgets,
vacancy rates at many of these
public safety agencies remain
stubbornly high.
Um,
Slipping the slide 4, you'll see
a pie chart that shows kind of
where this 424.7 million in
non-recurring general fund
investments in public safety
agencies went. The details for,
you know, exactly where this
money went, you can see in that
Excel sheet that we kind of
handed out, um, but you can see
that, you know, about 50% of
that went to law enforcement
recruitment and retention or
$213 million you know, another,
uh, 21 million to the
corrections department 48.6.
to DPS 59.5 million to CYFD and
again the details for this, uh,
as to which projects were funded
and the remaining balances on
those funds you can see on that
spreadsheet.
One thing to highlight that's
not on this, uh, form, but you
know, if we look at the totals
for the amount of money invested
out of the $424 million invested
$189 million or about 44% of
these investments remains
unspent as of July.
12th when I looked at this, um,
So when we look at, you know,
some of the.
On slide 5, you can see this
total breakdown, you know, 424.6
million appropriated, 189.8
million still remaining unspent
and you can see on that chart on
the right, it's broken down as
to which agencies have, you
know, gotten most of that money
out the door and which have the
biggest remaining challenges in
getting that funding put out
with that, I'll hand it off to
you, John, for slide 6.
Thanks, Scott. So Madam Chair
and members, you know,
significant investments, um, in
public safety, um, and the next
presentation, uh, Eric Shaer and
I will talk about, um,
additional investments into uh
behavioral health, which, which
isn't necessarily covered here.
But, um, you know, what, what
we're seeing with a number of
these investments, um, is, you
know, some of that money is able
to be pushed out the door, uh,
some of it is, is still sitting
there and, you know, some some
of the reasons for that, I
believe, go back to um uh what
Scott mentioned in that second
slide, you know, staffing, I
think, remains a challenge for a
number of agencies. You see high
turnover, you see um high
vacancy rates.
Um, and these next set of slides
we'll, we'll dive into some of
the outstanding issues, um, kind
of in, in, uh, the, the
different, um.
Uh, public safety sectors.
And then in our next
presentation with, with Eric,
well, that's where we'll get
into um some of the
recommendations. So on slide 6.
You can see, uh, basically the
judiciary represented courts,
DAs and the law office of the
public defender, um, you know,
some of the issues that we've
seen in the data that we've
looked at in the last couple of
years is that treatment courts
continue to be underutilized.
They're currently at about 70%
capacity. If you go back 10
years, um, treatment courts were
actually overcapacity. Um, we've
done a couple of studies on, on
problem solving courts,
treatment courts, um.
When they're, when they're run,
uh, well, uh, meaning, uh, to
fidelity if you will, or which
means run as they're supposed to
be run, according to, to
research and, and the models
provided, uh, they do a really
good job of addressing um some
of the, the root causes and
contributing factor to
contributing factors to crime.
If you'll remember, um, from uh
previous work that we've done.
Um, you know, how, how do we,
how do we make a dent in crime?
Um, there's, there's kind of a,
a two-pronged approach that,
that I think of that that we've
cited a number of times,
improving swiftness and
certainty.
Those are far better deterrents
than uh um uh greater severity
of punishment.
And addressing root causes or
risk factors upstream issues.
Treatment courts
In theory, address those issues,
but they are, they are under
capacity. I will say that they
have improved um their numbers
recently, but they're still not
uh, where, where they could be.
On that second bullet there, you
can see a quick trend analysis
from 22 to 25 treatment court
funding increased by 42%, but
capacity and use decreased by
2013% respectively.
Um, leading up to budget season,
uh, which, you know, starts
basically next month.
Um, for the last couple of years
we've heard from the DAs and
LOPD about uh continued uh
challenges with recruitment and
retention of attorneys.
Um, you all made investments,
um, which are represented here
in um in this more detailed
table, um, to help with that, it
continues to be a challenge.
Um.
We also have a bullet here that,
uh, funding and the public
attorney workforce capacity
building fund will likely need
to be appropriated in the 25
session.
If you'll turn with me to um
slide 7.
Outstanding issues at HCA and
DOH. Now HCA is our, our new
healthcare authority agency. It
took pieces from DOH. It took
pieces from GSD, but the, the
core of that agency continues to
be uh uh Medicaid and behavioral
health.
Um.
We've done a number of reports
looking at uh managed care and
looking at substance use
disorders. And uh 23 LFC report
on substance use disorders found
that Medicaid enrollees
utilization of, uh, services,
uh, particularly behavioral
health services and key areas
actually has decreased since
2019. Now I, I was surprised to
see this because, you know, I,
that's the, that's the elephant
in the room, if you will, every
year during budget season.
Medicaid is, is becoming a
larger cost center of the budget
when you include federal funds,
it is the largest uh agency, the
HCA is a $12 billion agency this
year.
Um,
We
continue to see um challenges
with uh uh data and metrics from
uh the HCA, the big Medicaid
replacement system, um, the cost
for that has risen now to over
$400 million.
Um, and I would, I would say,
you know, I've, I've been
working for LFC going on 14
years now.
We probably know less today
about services being delivered
to um.
To Medicaid recipients than we
did.
Back then
Um,
You know, the another challenge
is we, we continue to suffer
from provided provider
shortages. Um, one of the, one
of the, um,
Appropriations in here, um,
that, uh, Scott has in this um.
Table is a $20 million
appropriation that you all made
to uh the Human Services
department, um, for the purpose
of helping to stand up uh
provider shortages that, um,
that funding went unspent for 2
years. You then uh um authorized
that last year, uh, splitting
about 10 million off for CYFD,
but for the same purpose of a
more specific purpose, um.
BHSD is actually transferred a
chunk of that money to CYFD to
fund multi-service homes, group
homes, no, why did they do that?
The federal the federal
government will not, will no
longer, um, uh, fund group
homes. They, they see it as as
potentially detrimental and, and
not a best practice, but it's a
challenging situation because
CYFD has uh these kids and, and,
you know, what they term as
office hours, right? Kids that
are sleeping in offices, so this
is a a a potential solution to
that.
Uh, from their perspective.
Um, the behavioral health
collaborative, um, you know, uh.
I think this, the collaborative
started out a number of years
ago with with a lot of high
hopes, um.
We've seen collaborative
agencies, uh.
Increase their spending
behavioral health from FY 22 to
25 we're now spending over $1.1
billion a year, um, for
behavioral health, through
behavioral health collaborative
agencies, but the collaborative
isn't currently meeting, um,
they, uh, last CEO, uh, Bryce
Pittinger left uh.
When did she leave Eric? October
of last year and they haven't
named a replacement as of yet.
Um, and to our understanding,
they're not currently meeting.
Um, and the Department of
Health, um, high turnover in DOH
facilities. The, the facilities
for DOH has been a particular
challenge over the years if you
remember LFC released a report
about 2 or 3 years ago where we
looked at all the facilities in
the state. There are particular
challenges during the pandemic
at the at the veteran's home.
Um, but, uh, some of these
service providers that where the
needs exist in Albuquerque for
behavioral health like turquoise
lodge continue to be about half
full, um, now they're, they're
explanations for this provided
by the Department of Health,
including uh challenges in
staffing.
Um, but nevertheless, they do
continue to have uh low census
rates.
Uh, slide 8
CYFD and CVRC.
So part of what the federal
government did when, when they
kind of revamped their funding
plan for child welfare, if you
will, as they said, OK, you
know, states come in with a,
with a plan under the uh the
family's first uh act that they
passed, uh, identified some
evidence-based services that
you'd like to provide through
that plan and the federal
government will reimburse you
for those services, uh, through
4E. Unfortunately, we're one of
about 5 states that
currently don't have an approved
plan. CYFD is is working to um
to revamp their, their last
submission with some feedback
from the federal government. Um,
we've seen a draft of this plan.
It involves um services CYFD and
ECDCCD and we're told that that
plan should be submitted, um, I
believe in the next few months.
Nevertheless, you know, repeat
maltreatment, which is kind of
the canary in the coal mine
measure for CYFD if, if a kid
was, was identified as.
Being malt maltreated, um.
Uh, you know, that report of
abuse or neglect was substant
substantiated, um, does that
child show up again?
For uh uh substantiated case of
maltreatment within 12 months.
Um, the national average for,
for this is about 6.
68%, I believe we're at about
15%.
Um.
JJS also within CYFD um.
We did a progress report on JJS
a few months ago, I believe it
was late last year, so almost a
year ago.
Um, you know, their population
has been dropping pretty
significantly over the last 10
years, um, as a part of, of, um,
reforms when the ACLU came in,
um, in, gosh, this would be the
late 20.
2000s, early 2010s, um, you
know, CYFD really worked to
follow national best practices
and and move towards
deinstitutionalization, um,
providing services at the front
end of the system to prevent use
of services at the back end of
the system.
We've seen their population
start to tick up again.
Um, you know, that, and we'll
talk about this a bit in the
next presentation. Nationally,
there's been a big drop in
juvenile crime over the last 20
years.
There does seem to be some
evidence that I believe Ryan
will talk about later today,
particularly in Albuquerque, of,
of an uptick, um, particularly
in in Bernlio County. One of the
other challenges, um, that has
been identified uh recently is,
um, they've been using a
validated, uh, assessment when
kids first come in, um, to,
through the door at JJ, um, that
validated risk tool, um, is
being overrode and, and not
in its traditional form more and
more.
Um, and then the CVRC during
budget season last year we we
heard a federal funds drying up.
Um, I think quicker than
expected, certainly quicker than
CBRC had anticipated you all
provided some uh some general
fund kind of coverage for that,
um.
Hopefully, uh, you know, they,
they're gonna try to continue to
recover those funds, but um uh
the number of clients served is
uh remained relatively flat.
Um, slide 9.
The Department of Public Safety.
And the corrections department.
So
You all have invested, um, funds
through both specials for local
governments and, uh, through the
Department of, of public safety
for salaries to help with
recruitment and retention.
Despite that, we've actually
seen um uh the state police have
vacancy rate increase recently.
Um, we're still having an issue
with local law enforcement
agencies not reporting crime
data we identified this back in
2018 as a potential issue as the
nation moved to neighbors. Um,
we actually made a suggestion
that, um, some of the funding be
contingent, um, the local
funding be contingent on that
reporting, you actually put that
in the, in the budget, uh, I
wanna say 2 or 3 years ago and
that was uh vetoed by the
governor.
Um.
The forensic lab has a high
vacancy rate and a growing
backlog of um sexual examination
kits, the corrections
department,
we, uh,
There is a risk needs assessment
that they have been uh working
to implement for about a decade
now. Um, they have, they've been
able to implement it, uh, at
re-entry, not at the front end
of the system when people are
first coming in the last time we
looked. I will say that Ryan and
Marco, who you'll hear from
later, will be starting on a a
corrections evaluation for
reentry to dig deeper into that
probably later this month.
Um,
Uh, UNM's ISR also did a recent
report on uh the classification
tool at the corrections
department and they found that
services aren't available at all
all security levels and that
causes um.
Corrections, uh, staff to
basically override.
Um, uh, that classification
tool. So what's a classification
tool? It's basically saying what
security level should this
person be in? Can they, are they
safe in Gen Pop or do they need
to be at uh PNM level 4 where
they're locked up 23 hours a
day, um.
This is a, a problem that we've
flagged going back I believe
over a decade, and it's a it's a
challenge we we still need to
overcome. Um.
Other evidence-based programs
like Matt have been slow to
implement, haven't had a lot of
participants. And then another
thing that I don't think we've
talked about a lot, but we've
put in a couple reports, um, for
high risk parolees. There's a
statute that basically has a
lower case load, um, for parole
officers, meaning, um, you know,
you, you can keep a closer eye
on these folks. That caseload
and that, that, um, method
called intensive.
Supervision doesn't have a
required treatment component.
Now, when it does, research
shows that it's cost beneficial
and it reduces recidivism. When
it doesn't, it shows basically
no impact. The other thing to
mention about the corrections
department is their recidivism
rate has been climbing.
As of recent
We
OK
OK, and looking at slide 10,
which I would encourage you to
look at with slide 11, um, you
know, we look at the funding
that was allocated for law
enforcement recruitment and
retention. And while programs
like the law enforcement
retention fund, you know, have
seen um utilization grow, you
know, we're in year 3 now where
DPS is distributing this law
enforcement retention money.
They've seen a 40% increase in
the number of agencies that have
applied,
um, you know, again, a big
problem with that though is that
that's only.
Partially funded at the current
rate based on utilization, so
we'll have to look at that in
future sessions. But when we
look at some of the language
vetoes, you know, for FY 23, the
law enforcement recruitment and
retention funding was awarded
without a clear application
process. It was kind of the
first year and it was an
informal survey was sent out
that a lot of agencies weren't
aware was going to be the
mechanism by which decisions
were made, um, that did lead to
some inconsistencies in the
exclusion of several large
agencies from funding. These are
problems that have been fixed in
future years. But, you know,
again, concerns about the.
Accuracy and vetting of those
survey responses affected the
fairness and uh the
effectiveness of some of that
funding allocation looking at
these language vetoes that you
can see on slide 11, you know,
some of these funds could now be
used for other recruitment and
retention strategies, a factor
that significantly influenced
how those funds were used. Um,
limitations on yearly spending
were removed and, you know,
again, they were put in place by
DFA and DPS collaborating, but,
you know, um, some of these
limitations being removed, uh.
Kind of led to changes in
clarification and allowable fund
uses, which was confusing, you
know, $9.2 million was spent on
retention stipends instead of
new officer salaries, which was
not, if you look at the language
carefully for that uh
appropriation, what they were
originally intended for.
Um, in 2023, House Bill 357
created a new program, the Law
Enforcement Workforce Capacity
Building Fund to replace this
DFA program that had clear
guardrails around the
distribution and use of funds
and were intended to avoid some
of the issues encountered in
implementing the prior program.
However, negotiations resulted
in an additional $57 million
being appropriated to DFA and
the 23 GAA without those same
guard rails. If you look on
slide 11, you can see that
second, um, appropriation, the
FY 24.
Recruitment and retention
special for 100 million, you
know, the language that was in
there specifically requiring
these appropriations be, um,
made only to agencies that were
meeting these reporting
requirements that language got
completely stripped out.
So, you know, again, the money's
getting appropriated we we see
if you look at that Excel sheet
that you know it's getting spent
but is being spent on what you
all intended it to be spent on
is it being spent in consistent
with those best practices.
that we're happy to answer any
questions.
Hm.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I just
had a couple of questions, um,
going back to the Children,
Youth and Families Department
information on page 8. Under the
juvenile justice. I want to make
sure I understand this.
juvenile justice services
recently overrode the use of the
validated risk tool and is that
the tool that originally they
were using to determine if
somebody would be held in
detention or not.
Madam Chair, Madam Chair
Representative Reed, yeah, it's
the um uh their their uh SDM
tool structure decision making
tool. It's a tool that they
actually, um, uh, did some
research on and and published in
a in a peer reviewed journal,
which is pretty rare coming from
a state agency, um, and our
understanding is, is they're no
longer using that tool, um.
Uh, as intended.
OK. And Madam Chair, and um,
experts, I just, my question was
we did hear a presentation from
DA Bregman on this, and he made
it sound like they weren't using
the tool, um, or they were using
the tool and the only way you
could really get held was if you
had a firearm, um, and so that
more people should be getting
held and they weren't getting
held. So I'm trying to correlate
what he said with what you're
telling us, Madam Chair.
Represented Riebe, I.
I'm not sure on that one, but
let me, let me go back to our
analyst and see if she has more
information on, on whether that
is a con uh concern.
Madam Chair, and I kind of
lastly on that, it says, um.
Seeing the facility population
increase.
For the first time since 2016.
Madam Chair, um, could that also
be partly because we've closed
down so many juvenile detention
centers that the ones that we
have open. I mean, I know we
just drove a kid to Farmington
from Clovis. It was the only
place I could find place for
someone who shot and killed
somebody. So is that taken into
account that we've closed
probably, I don't know half the
facilities across the state. And
is that something that needs to
be incorporated into these
numbers, Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Ree, it, it's a good point, you
know, as, as that population has
dropped over the years. We've
closed not only secure
facilities, but I believe a
couple rehabilitation centers as
well.
Um, I, I don't know that that's
led to the increase, but I'm, I.
Assume that it's, it's created
other challenges, probably also
for for families that have kids
in insecure facilities and have
to travel long distances to see
them. All right, and Madam
Chair, and because it just seems
like you're seeing a facility
population increase for the
first time, that seems to be the
big obviously juvenile crime has
jumped, especially in Bernalio
and across the state and across
the nation. So it seems, um,
that makes sense that those, you
know,
We have what
A handful of facilities that
they would be overcrowded. So,
um, my point being is I've
always thought that we do need
to reopen our juvenile
facilities again and start being
able to house more juveniles,
um, Madam Chair, and I, that's
just one interest I have and
then this risk tool that seems
to be when DA Bregman presented
that it was very, very difficult
to hold a child, um, unless they
had a firearm, so I, I wanted to
bring that point out, uh, Madam
Chair, and then.
Do you have any more
explanations on the, so the drug
court facilities or the
court-manded programs, those
aren't being used to their
capacity or turquoise was it
turquoise turquoise Lodge
turquoise Lodge, um, lounge,
turquoise, uh, too early for
that, um, turquoise
turquoise lodge, um, you know,
for having all these behavioral
health issues and we're having
issues where to put kids and
adults, I mean, and these
programs that we're pushing.
Madam Chair, can, can you
explain why, if you have any
idea, these aren't being used to
their full capacity, Madam Chair
Representative Reed, sure, let
me, let me go back to those
first two questions you have.
I'm hearing from our analysts
that um.
Uh, that issue that uh DA
Bregman mentioned was uh
specific to detaining juveniles
in the in Burnlio County
facilities, not the state
facilities. My understanding is
the county facility, the youth
facility is pretty full, the
state facilities have a they
have a lot of room, they have a
lot of capacity.
Um.
The question on, um, uh,
treatment courts and turquoise
lodge. You know, we visited
Turquoise Lodge a number of
times over the years, um, they
had, uh, challengers during
COVID, so they had to reduce
their capacity during that time.
Um, it took him a while to kind
of open back up after that and
uh most recently, uh, what I
believe I've heard is, um, just
challenges in staffing have have
been impactful, um, for
treatment courts. Um, we've
talked to LOPD and and DAs about
that through the years, um, our
understanding is that, um.
Anecdotally, what it sounds like
is happening is.
Um,
The PD would doesn't necessarily
see that as um.
Kind of the, the straightest
most easy path, if you will, um,
you know, they, I believe they
can, they believe they can.
Get somebody through a program
without having to to have them
commit um to that um another
thing we've heard is that um
some of these treatment core
models are relatively older
models. I know AOC has been
doing a lot of work with
treatment courts over the last 5
years to try to help that, but
you know, they're abstinence
only models which I think, um,
can be difficult for some folks,
particularly with the
legalization of marijuana.
OK
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative Chasey.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, and, uh, thank you for
your presentation.
I, I guess I have a question,
um, for Doctor Courtney because
And for those of us who've been
around for a really long time,
why do you think you know less?
Now, then you did.
Back when you started 14 years
ago.
Madam Chair, Representative
Chasey, uh, floor leader Chasey,
it's a good, it's a good
question. Um, you know, when we
first were looking at managed
care.
Um, I believe the first time
that we, we looked at Centennial
Care, uh, we were able to dig
pretty deeply into utilization
of services, um, HSD at the time
had something called the Report
41.
And the report 41 broke down in
in pretty good detail, um, what
services were delivered, how
many units were delivered, and,
um, and what um uh cohort, they
were delivered to, um.
In 2019, the legislature passed
Senate Bill 58 Senate Bill 58,
uh, gives, uh LFC and DFA the
authority to do program
inventories to basically work
with agencies to say,
You know, OK, we're, the state's
paying 10 number of dollars for
services. Uh, please inventory
those services for us.
Tell us how many people are
getting those services and
whether or not they're evidence
based.
That has probably been the most
challenging.
At um BHSD and HCA because the
granularity and the data just
isn't there and that report 41
has now been discontinued.
We're currently working with HSD
um on a, a big data request, um,
to uh try to obtain, um.
Uh, basically data that the.
will let us know more about
that.
Um, I believe we just answered a
bunch of their questions on
that. What about a week ago so
hopefully in the next few
months, um.
I, I can come back with a, with
a different story for you. Um,
but right now, what, what we can
tell you is, you know, uh, kind
of those big numbers that we
mentioned on um just overall
utilization of behavior uh
behavioral health services
decreasing over the last 5
years, 6 years.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
Doctor Courtney, I guess I, I,
um,
You know, over the years I've
gradually come to understand
better and appreciate so much
what LSC provides us. We are so
part time and so, um, much not
an equal branch of government.
We rely on your reports, uh.
Perhaps more than we even
should, but we, we, we, it, it's
all we've got.
And um.
I, I,
I, I think we need to correct it
when you're not getting the
information that you need
because then we're never going
to make any get anything right.
Um, I, I feel like
The LFC gave us um the data we
needed to start trying to figure
out uh what to do.
To fight crime.
And, uh, our, our investment
clearly is great. It's just that
we're, we still have a way to go
and some of our investment is in
very, very long term.
Solutions, but
The more we know, the more you
know, the more we know, and that
the better for us.
I would like LFC to let us know
at the time or that legislators
know, um, at the time of the
session, if there is a major
player that did not provide
input on it, um.
Fiscal impact report. For
example, um, a major trade
association refusing to um or
simply not getting the
information in to the LFC. I, I
just wish that would be
highlighted. I know you, you
list who which agencies
responded. I kind of think maybe
we should have which agencies
did not respond as well or not
agencies, because maybe you're
only listing the agencies I'm
trying to visualize.
I said
LFC report during the session,
but those that were
We requested and not received.
Because
That there's some bias in that,
uh, and it's not your fault.
You end up with an incomplete
report because you don't have
the opponents.
Um, arguments that then they
will either take to the, the
committee chair or to the
executive.
And uh it's first we've heard of
it.
That there's, there's an issue
and I
One a quick question, um,
this is an ongoing frustration
for me, and I know it is for you
too, because we want to reduce
recidivism, and we want the
corrections department to
actually have um a good effect
on people who were there and who
come out and they're not a
threat, or they're not such a
serious threat any longer and
are you saying the Compass tool
is still not being used reliably
or what tool were you talking
about? Madam Chair.
Madam Flora leader, the, the
last information that we had was
that it was being used for folks
getting out, but it still wasn't
being consistently used for uh
folks at entry. Um, but that's
something that we're planning to
dig into further with um with
this re-entry evaluation that uh
that we'll be doing over the
next 3 or 4 months.
Um, now I'm sure my
understanding on that compass
is.
It's really for exit planning
when they come in so that people
are put at the right
classification, so they're not
endangering others, but they're
also at the highest possible
level so that they can make
progress. And then, um, the
whole idea is to reduce
recidivism. So,
It seems like I've been hearing
for years that it's being normed
on our population.
And, and yet this is one of
those um proprietary, uh, tools
where we don't know how it's
being, um, the decisions are
being derived, so do you want to
say anything about that Madam
Chair Representatives one brief
clarification is that the
Compass tool is being used on
90% of people on probation and
parole, the 10% that it's not
being used on are the
absconders. Um, that is separate
and apart from the
classification tool which is
used at intake to.
Decide what level of security
they're classified at.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So
that's a separate tool. Thank
you. Thank you, Representative
Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um
Dr. Courtney, you talked a
little bit about the recruitment
and retention investment that
we've made.
Um,
Do you have enough data to tell
if it's a success or if it's
not,
Meeting up to expectations.
Um, Madam Chair, um,
I, I don't believe we do, but,
um, we will double check that
and if we, if we do have any
information on that, we'll we'll
get it back to you. That, that's
for the for the um.
Uh, attorneys, the, I think it
probably varies by LEA and and
police agency for the the
investment in in the police tool
like a, you know, state police's
vacancy rate has gone up. I
believe APD has fewer officers
today than they did a few years
ago. Um, so in, in pockets we
know it.
It probably hasn't accomplished
what we hoped it would
accomplish.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and Dr.
Courtney, um,
Do you, do you know percentage
wise, how many of the the law
enforcement agencies have
applied for this.
Um, and, and.
Do you know why those that have
not applied have not applied?
Uh, Madam Chair, um,
Representative Martinez, I think
we can get that information for
you. I think a lot of the, it's
harder to answer the negative,
you know, why they, why they
hadn't applied, you know, some,
for some it might be the
rigorous reporting requirements
for, you know, um, number of
officers that are certified and
I think DPS, who's here in the
room can, you know, help shed
some light on that, but
ultimately, you know, for
specific uh recruitment and
retention mechanisms like the
law enforcement retention fund,
there are rules around it that
maybe make it.
burdensome for agencies with
limited capacity. Um, but that's
something that we've worked with
GPS to try and help, you know,
clarify, but again, the, the
data reporting is a critical
part of that, and that's hard to
get by in from smaller agencies.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and do
you have any idea of percentage
wise how many are taking
advantage of this?
Uh, Madam Chair represent
representative Martinez, I, I
know we've got that data, um,
and we can, we can get you that
number.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Thank you, Representative.
Representative Lord.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you guys for all the
information. It's a lot to take
in and also very depressing. But
thank you anyways for it, um.
Sorry, just
OK, so I'm gonna try to go
through this as quickly as I can
because I actually have a ton of
questions, but I'm just gonna
narrow it down to a few. I feel
like I need to spend like hours
with you guys just asking you
stuff, so.
OK, so on slide 4, I do have a
question, so.
CYFD.
59.5 million and then I go to
page 5.
And they have a big chunk that
has not been spent.
So my question on that is, do we
have, we don't have any
information of why that money
hasn't been spent because they
keep coming back and asking for
a tremendous amount of money
that they don't have.
But yet every time I checked
there's either $20,000 dollars
lost in space or money they
haven't spent. Do you have any
information on that?
Uh
Madam Chair Representative Lord
that, that has to do with their
um child welfare replacement
system, um, their IT system for
the most part, it's something
they've been trying to replace
since 2007, I believe. Um, had a
number of false starts. They're,
they're kind of just restarting
over again, they were in front
of the IT committee, I believe,
um.
Not, not too long ago and uh we
have a uh like a 1 or 2 pager
on, on the status of that if, if
you're interested that that we
can send you.
And thank you, Madam Chair.
Yeah, I think I have that. It
started at they wanted 36
million.
In 2017, now they want 82
million. Is that what I'm
understanding, that huge big
increase.
Madam Chair Representative Lord
that, that is correct. The, the
additional cost estimates were,
were much lower than, than they
are now and the project, um,
originally was, um, intended
just to be the protective
services replacement system for
what is known as facts. My
understanding is now they have
um brought uh the juvenile
justice IT system under the
umbrella of this project.
Thank you, Mayor. It's why I get
so frustrated because we dole
out a lot of money and then we
don't get any updates and then
we get, hey, we need, uh, you
know, X amount, we need $32
million then all of a sudden
it's 86 million, right? And it
seems like there should have
been something sent in the very
first place that this is, we had
experts look, this is how much
it's going to be, not just
suddenly come back with,
anyways, I'm sorry, I'm
frustrated with CYFD and I'm
not, I'm not taking it out on
you guys. I'm just very
frustrated with that whole
system and the lack of oversight
and the
Never mind, um.
OK, Madam Chair, and experts, so
one of the things you're saying,
and this is on page 6. So we
have a difficulty with
recruiting attorneys and
retention of attorneys.
I can't even because you guys do
the money part, I can't even ask
you how we're going to fix that.
I understand the swiftness and
certainty and quickness of the
punishments and getting that
done, and I know things get
wrapped up in courts for a very
long time.
I don't really have a question
other than I'm frustrated with
that too. On page 7,
So on the healthcare authority
in 2023 LFC reported fund
Medicaid enrollees utilization
services in key areas actually
decreased.
Well, we know we're not seeing
more people are getting on
Medicaid. So what you're saying
is they're not using which
services in general?
Hm
Madam Chair Representative Lord,
we can, we can get that for you,
or Eric has the answer. We'll
we'll actually go over some of
that, um, in the next
presentation. Let's talk about
you. That's right.
OK. Um, and then you said on
page 7, sorry, Madam Chair, on
page 7.
Um,
The Behavioral Health
collaborative has not been met
with
Has not had a CEO since 2023.
Wow. OK. I don't, I really don't
have anything other than why,
but I don't know if you guys
have the answer to that. Are
they even looking?
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Lord, my, my understanding is,
uh, they are looking, I believe
they conducted, uh, some
interviews, um, but did not, uh,
successfully select a candidate.
And thank you, Madam Chair. So
on the same page,
So I know we had COVID and we
had a lot of staffing challenges
during that time, um, and you
see the turquoise lodge is 55%
full. Is that still due to
staffing challenges and what are
they doing? I mean, because we,
it seems like, and maybe I'm
wrong, it seems like we throw
money at stuff and then there's
no oversight other than you guys
coming back and telling us, but
it seems like for everything
that we're sending out, there
should be constant oversight,
like things need to be
micromanaged because we keep
throwing money here and there
and here and there and you guys
come back and it's like, oh,
it's been.
A couple of years. It hasn't
been used right. There hasn't
been, you know, guardrails and
stuff. So not anchor at you
guys. I'm just frustrated with
the system.
What are they doing for the
staffing challenges? What, what
is, what is, what are they doing
to try to correct this issue?
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
Lord, I, I know that they've,
you know, they, they brought in
a, a new facilities director not
too long ago, one of the first
things that they've been working
on is, is basically getting
their, their finances in order
every year they come in, um, and
they, they don't reach the
revenue they thought that they
would reach and so they come to
to you all asking to to fill
that hole and so that's one of
the first things they're working
on, um, as far as the um uh
recruitment
Retention of of staff. I, I
think that's just a, it's a,
it's a statewide issue that um
that hospitals and the number of
facilities and behavioral health
providers are continuing to to
face.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
think that's something we need
to look at honestly because if
it's not the money we need to
figure out why people don't want
to be involved in healthcare
anymore.
Rep, we're gonna have to wrap it
up here. Yeah, thank you. Sorry,
like I said, I could have this
could have been an all day thing
on page 8, last thing I have is,
um, I don't really have a
question. I just disgusted by
the repeat maltreatment within
12 months of children is up that
high. So stinking high in the
United States and our CYFD is a
dumpster fire and it just
irritates me. Sorry. I'm just
mad about everything in this
presentation because we are
trying to do the right thing and
it's just not getting done. No,
I'm not angry at you guys at
all. Thank you for presenting
the information. I just
frustrated.
Thank you.
Thank you, I think probably a
number of us have those
sentiments, so I appreciate
your.
Observation. We have Senator
Stewart, Representative Delgado,
and then Senator Cervantes, so.
Senator Stewart.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. I, I
think my questions uh can't be
answered by these two gentlemen,
but I'm gonna try anyway.
Uh, so,
Let's start with page 7.
So this idea that we are
spending $1.1 billion a year on
behavioral health.
Always stymies me when people
say, what are you doing for
behavioral health? I said, well,
apparently we're spending $1
billion a year, and I can't tell
people where that money goes, so
can you do it general where that
goes each year or if it's in the
next, it's in the next
presentation.
OK, I, I'll wait till the next
presentation for that, but it
better be good.
So on page 9.
When you're talking about the
Department of Public Safety.
The 45% vacancy rate in the
forensic lab is quite
problematic, but I bet it's
because there's only 10 people
or so that work there and so
they've got 4 vacancies or 5. I
mean, how many people work here
and who makes the decision what
gets left behind because you're
saying growing backlog of sexual
assault examination kits we got
into a lot of trouble the last
several years.
When we had thousands of these
sitting around. We had to demand
that someone take a look at them
and when they did, we caught all
kinds of people, so, uh, who
decides that that's the work
that doesn't get done? How many
people are there, see what I
mean? I mean you guys are just
the messengers. I apologize, but
if you can shed any light on
that.
Madam Chair, Senator Stewart, I
think the good news is that as
we moved into this new facility
as DPS has moved into the new
facility in Santa Fe, you know,
they were able to expand the
number of positions which
obviously increased their
vacancy rates some maybe
artificially they did have one
person who's very experienced
retire, which again in a smaller
team inflates that as well. Um,
but they've been conducting
interviews and have made some
progress towards actually
getting more bodies in those
chairs, so I hope that by the
time we get to session, we'll
have uh.
Better vacancy rate news that we
can report to you. Um, how
decisions get made as to what
cases get moved forward
quickest, which examination kits
gets examined. I'm certain that
they have rigorous requirements
and rules around how that gets
handled, but I'm happy to get
that information and get that
back to you.
Uh, please, if you would.
All right, thank you, um, Chair.
A representative Delgado.
Barrego,
sorry.
I miswrote your name and I kept
looking at my notes. Sorry guys.
My, my middle initial is D, by
the way, I'm sure that explains
my error. I'm sure that's the
explanation.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
So, um.
I am so frustrated, guys. I, I'm
sorry and it's not toward you,
it's toward the system.
Um, I came from the city of
Albuquerque almost 30 years in
the system. And one of the
things, Madam Chair, that
concerns me is, and, and I don't
know if it's a, it's if it's a
sort of
A symptom of the system or what,
but when, when in running a
division for the city for almost
10 years, we had a we had um,
audits pretty regularly, and
they audited our departments to
determine our effectiveness and
our efficiency. And it was very
clear from those audits, what
needed to be improved. In my
case, we had, we needed a fiscal
analyst at one.
Point. And I was able to receive
direction to hire a fiscal
analyst who helped us reconcile,
uh, money, state money, etc. And
it helped us sort of
Go in a direction that, um,
Made us more effective and more
efficient. And Madam Chair, I am
really, really concerned that I
haven't heard any of that. Maybe
I'm, you know, and I'm not, I'm
not an employee of the state or
I wasn't an employee of the
state, but I'm only hearing bits
and pieces. And when I see
Um,
table 5 or page 5, and I see
money that has been allocated,
it's not a problem of the
legislature putting money toward
a, a program, it's the money
that's unspent that really
concerns me, and I think, um.
Um, Madam representative Stewart
mentioned the sexual assault
examination kits we have, we had
a similar problem at the city of
Albuquerque, which we, we really
focused on, Madam Chair, and
those things got moving. And so
I'm, I'm just worried that
You know, somehow the system
And maybe I'm not hearing it,
maybe if you, you can correct me
if I'm wrong, but I mean, are,
are there yearly audits for
departments that
Give that information because it
seems to me like.
This is sort of like all over
the place.
And it's really concerning to
me.
Madam Chair, um, and I, you
know, my questions are with
regard to hiring for, uh, you
know, like, um.
Staffing and targeted marketing
strategies to hire the proper
employees that could address
some of these issues. I've heard
the issues, but I haven't heard,
here are the solutions that
we're working toward in order to
achieve addressing these issues
and that.
I mean, I, I'm a former division
manager and, you know, I, I look
for that kind of stuff, and I'm
not seeing that in here, so I
don't know. I mean, you can
respond if you want, but I'm
just suggesting that.
In the future, I think we need
to be seeing what are the
strategies to address those
issues and you did a great job,
gentlemen, of addressing the
issues, but I didn't hear
anything that said, here are the
solutions that we're taking and
the steps we're taking to
address those concerns.
And so, Madam Chair, I'm gonna
answer
and you know, I just want to
point out we also have an
executive branch of government,
um, but let's, uh, let's, uh,
John, go ahead. Madam Chair
Representative, so we'll, we'll
talk about some of the solutions
we've suggested in the next
presentation. As far as audits
on local governments, so say
City of Albuquerque or Bernlio
County, you know, they have an
annual uh fiscal audit that they
have to do, but, um, there are
pockets where I know that they
are doing.
Um, evaluations of specific
programs, uh, Doctor Paul Garin,
who I believe is in the room,
his group at the, at UNM's
Institute for Social Research
over the last 6 months has
released a number of evaluations
on, um, uh, county slash city,
um, uh, programs, uh,
identifying, you know, what
things are working, uh, where
there are gaps in implementation
that includes things that you
heard of like law enforcement
assistance.
diversion or lead uh crisis
response teams, uh, their
adverse childhood experience,
um, uh, program, um, so those
are relatively recent, but, but
they are out there. Um, I, I
can't speak to, you know, what,
what local government does for
um kind of looking at at
specific local divisions other
than that Madam Chair, just one
last comment, I think that if we
could show the efficiency and
the
Effectiveness and kind of bring
that back to this group so that
we're not sort of all over the
place, and we can actually
target what needs to happen,
then we can make our decisions a
little bit easier. So that's my
comment, man.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Cervantes, thank you.
Um,
I'm hearing all the frustration,
I'm gathering all the
frustration I'm feeling it, um,
and I heard you for a moment say
there's some good news, but it
was only that we built a new
building, I think, and got some
more office space. That's the
only good news I've heard so
far, so that's pretty, pretty
low bar. Um, this is our first
meeting after the special
session. I think we need to
recognize that you all have the
coach over here will know this.
I'm an old football player. We
used to always watch the game
films after the game and we'd
see who missed their block, who
didn't run the route.
Why did things go wrong the way
they didn't. There's so much in
here, of course, I can't cover
it in 5 minutes. None of us
could, and I appreciate the
chair trying to keep us on a
good schedule, but I, I just,
this is a good opportunity to
just illustrate something if you
go to page 9 of, of the
presentation, DPS.
This last session, one of the 5
big initiatives was to a data
reporting bill to pass a bill
that would require data from law
enforcement to go to DPS.
Some of us pointed out the fact
that's already the law has been
for many years, uh, and we're
seeing here from your analysis,
25% of local law enforcement
agencies are not complying with
the existing law, so I guess we
could have passed a new law and
said, pretty please, uh, report
to DPS and DPS pretty please get
the data from the local law
enforcement agencies.
Um, but we didn't do that in a
special session.
And we didn't need to.
And then when we see the data
here, according to you, 25% of
local law enforcement agencies
are not reporting data anyway.
Under the existing law, yeah,
let's pass another law, uh, that
they won't comply with.
And then when we try to use the
carrot and stick approach by
holding back some of their money
to say, hey, if you're not going
to follow our laws that we pass,
we're going to hold back some of
your money. What I understand
you to say is the governor
vetoed that.
So when we try to get
accountability from law
enforcement,
Rather than passing another bill
that's already the law, and we
try and hold their money up, the
executive said no to that.
Was there a message for why the
governor said we should not be
able to hold back money from
local law enforcement officers
when they don't comply with the
laws we pass?
Was there a message?
Uh, Mr. Chair, no, there was
not, yeah.
So
Y'all have gotten used to me
about this. I'm gonna call it
the way it is.
Right. And I, and I'm, I'm not
gonna hold back and I'm not
gonna hold feelings, uh, we know
where the problem's at.
And we don't need another law to
get people to do things they
already won't do, um, and when
we try and hold back their money
to get them to comply.
In this case, the governor said
no.
A long time ago, Senator Wirth
taught me something important.
He said, money drives the
policy. He, as a lawyer didn't
want to come on the Judiciary
committees back in the house. He
wanted to be on the
Appropriations Committee because
he rightfully recognized the
money is the hammer.
And when we tried to use the
money here in this case,
Well, we were thwarted, right,
to try and get the reporting. So
yeah, let's pass another bill
that's meaningless.
And, and that we don't enforce.
I'm living in the twilight zone,
right?
I mean, this, and, and so when
Senator, when Represent Barrego
says it's the system and others
are saying it's a, it's not the
system.
Center representative. It's not
the absence of laws and it's not
the system. It's an absence of
leadership and accountability.
Let's just call it what it is.
All right. So local law
enforcement won't do it, and DPS
won't make them do it, we can
pass another law to ask them
again, and we can try and hold
back money and that can be
vetoed and we're twilight zone.
So let's, let's recognize the
problem because that's the only
way we're going to solve it. Oh,
I'm frustrated and I'll just
ask, Madam Chair, in years past,
this committee would sometimes
meet with the finance committee,
uh, the, uh, legislative Finance
Committee, the Senate Finance
House of probation. This is the
kind of meeting we should have
with them.
I think jointly it's unwieldy to
have that many people and to get
everybody to speak, but it's
worth a whole day to say we're
appropriating more and more and
more money every year and we're
getting poorer and poorer and
poorer results. And some of
that's on us, but some of that's
on that committee too, and they
ought to be asking themselves
and answering to all of us why
they're continuing to
appropriate money.
Uh, to things that are not being
spent.
Uh, and I'm not being critical
of that committee, but we should
have that dialogue together as
colleagues because therein
really lies the problem. I'm
frustrated, but I hope we'll do
that, Madam Chair, and I'll just
tell you, not only is this our
first meeting since the special
session, I gave you just this
one example of this one bill of
the absurdity of what we're
doing.
But I'll tell you, since our
last meeting and since the
special system, my daughter here
in Albuquerque has been a victim
of crime again.
Now mercifully, property crime,
and so she was not at physical
risk.
But I'm just tired.
And I'm not so tired that I'm
not gonna keep fighting.
And I hope you all will join me
in the fight.
This is absurd. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Um, it's
really hard to follow that, um,
just that.
I don't know, summation of kind
of where we're at and just
extreme disappointment in terms
of how programs that we've been
funding have not and are not
being implemented in a, I don't
know, adequate.
Way, um, but let's just
reemphasize something that um
John brought up. We know and
we've heard this many years in
this committee and also in LFC.
That strategies to deal with
crime are best addressed through
Sure Swift justice. That means
apprehending the criminals
promptly and prompt prosecutions
if appropriate and prompt
sentencing.
And the way this legislature has
gone about that is we can't
patrol the streets. I tell my
constituents I'm not a police
officer. I'm trying to support
the executive, but I am not able
to actually implement the laws
that we have passed at this
point in time, but we do know
that Sure Swift justice is
critical, and what this
legislature has legislature has
done is
Allocated.
Mills, hundreds of millions of
dollars to the police, the
courts, behavioral health
professionals, um, public
defender's office to make sure
that folks are getting the
proper defenses that they
deserve and it's not being
spent.
And since I've been in the
legislature, which is a much
shorter period than my vice
chair, but I've observed that we
continue to do that and it
really started, I can't say it
started, but certainly I've been
very conscious of the fact that
there's been laser focus by this
legislature to ensure that those
with the responsibility of
enforcing the laws, have the
resources that they need.
They're not being utilized. It's
just not happening and we need
to start calling it for what it
is. The legislature, we have.
Oodles, hundreds and hundreds of
criminal laws. They need to be
enforced and they are not being
enforced because those
responsible for implementing on
the State. And let's not forget
the local level. We have a city
here that suffers from a serious
crime problem and it's the mayor
and it's the police department
that's primarily responsible for
ensuring that happens, not the
legislature. We have been
providing the resources that
they ask for and that they need.
So let's just call it as it is.
Um, so I, I don't expect a
response, but I just wanted to
kind of sum it up. We got a lot
of very good information, which
I very much appreciate we all
very much appreciate, but we're
gonna have to stay on this. I
recognize that and I think the
vice chair is quite right that
we should be talking more, um,
Senator Cvantes, I was talking
about the internal systems, not
about what we've done. I'm
talking about internal, um,
representative, we are not
direct. I'm not directing my
comments to your comments. So,
OK.
Appreciate that. So thank you
very much. I think we're ready
for our next uh session.
Thank you, doctor.
I, I don't think this is like a
feel good morning guys, so.
Yeah, it's gonna be a tough few
days, but hi Eric, you want to
introduce yourself?
Uh, good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee.
My name is Eric Shin, and I'm
the uh analyst at LFC for the
Healthcare Authority.
Uh, formerly the Human Services
Department.
I'm gonna just go ahead and jump
into this presentation, um, I
think they're being passed out
to you right now.
So 1st, 1st of all, um, and I'm
just starting off on page two
here. First, I'll talk about
some of the needs and gaps.
And significant action that the
legislature has taken over the
last couple of years, uh, to
improve behavioral health, uh,
within the state. And that also
includes behavioral health, some
of it kind of directed towards
seed uh criminal justice, um,
and other areas.
I'm also gonna talk a little bit
about what
Uh, does the state have the
ability, the power to do right
now and what has it done?
You know, how can we also pay
for some of the behavioral
health services that we have
moving forward, even though
we've paid for a lot already
that, um, and you heard in the
last presentation that, uh,
A lot of that money isn't being
spent. You're going to hear that
again um on this side and the
behavioral health side.
Uh, you'll see that overall
funding is up. Provider
networks, and I will say
provider networks uh within the
behavioral health system are
improving um to a certain
degree, but I will add a caveat
on that and that
We just went from
You're all probably familiar
with Centennial Care. Now we're
switching over to turquoise
care.
Which um we had 3 managed care
organizations, those are the
organizations or the insurance
companies, whatever you want to
call them, the, the, um, the
health plans that manage all of
the care for Medicaid. We went
from 3 to 4, and then we dropped
one of those MCOs and that was,
um, Western Sky. Well, Western
Sky was building up their
network quite a bit the last few
years and so a lot of the
increase was actually in Western
Sky. We dropped them. And so now
we're kind of coming back.
And regrouping now that we're
starting Turquoise Care and
we'll have to be kind of
monitoring that data as we go
along and implement that which
just started on, uh, January
1st. And so that's kind of
one thing in there to kind of be
aware of. Another thing I wanted
to uh kind of mention too before
we go into this is um access to
high quality evidence-based
services.
are being slow to be implemented
and they're not, um, you know,
they're not being widely
accepted and so the state needs
to do a lot of work, uh, in that
area to kind of improve.
The quality of services that
people are receiving and uh the
availability of evidence-based
services, right?
We want to know that, um, the
services that we're providing
are actually or that we're
paying for are actually doing uh
what they're intended to do. And
so that's, that's another
important piece and then John
will go over some of the, uh,
behavioral health and criminal
justice LFC research and
recommendations.
So one thing I wanted to kind of
address, um, and I'm not sure we
we touched on this too much in
the last presentation, but why
are we here? Um, you know,
going, moving on to slide 3.
We have seen high rates of crime
in our communities we've
experienced a lot of uh
substance use disorder and
behavior health related issues
in our communities
and if you look at this table
here, you'll see that the state
ranks relatively high among
adults for uh behavioral health
issues, um, but also our youth
are, are quite a bit higher than
that, um, these
rankings, I will say, have
improved slightly over the last
couple of years, but we're still
not doing um quite as well as we
want to do.
Out there
Um.
So I think
We all understand that in order
to improve our behavioral health
rankings in order to improve our
outcomes, better services are
needed, um.
Better
evidence-based services are
needed, especially to prevent,
um, you know, and I don't wanna,
when we're talking about
behavioral health.
One thing I need to kind of, you
know, take a step back and say
is.
You know, we don't want to um
stigmatize people with
behavioral health issues, right?
And so when we're talking about
behavioral health in the CJ
context and the criminal justice
context.
We need to talk about it in
terms of if people have um
behavioral health issues. Most
of those people never end up in
in criminal justice, uh, system,
right? But we do know that
Folks with untreated behavioral
health disorders can sometimes
end up in the criminal justice
system, and I think we need to
make sure that we, we kind of
point that out so that.
We're not kind of stigmatizing
people, but um.
Anyway, uh,
There's general acknowledgement
that more and better services
are needed, especially to to
prevent um criminal justice
involvement.
And to provide better services
when people do get into the uh
criminal justice system.
Uh, moving on to slide 4.
Um,
So how do we get more high
quality services, um.
We have to meet people where
they are.
A large proportion of people in
need of services are on
Medicaid. Uh, if you look there.
You'll see that, um,
In April 2024 enrollment was at
about 878,000 on Medicaid.
The total spend on Medicaid for
those folks, and that's
including both physical health
and behavioral health was about
$10.3 billion.
So it's the biggest piece of the
state's budget. Most of that is
federal funding, but you do have
the power to appropriate that
funding.
Um, and so that's, that's that.
Um,
So many of the people that were
looking to.
Target with these behavioral
health services are either on
Medicaid.
They,
if they're not on Medicaid, they
probably qualify for Medicaid
and in the.
Um, in terms of criminal justice
system.
Many of these folks, uh, may be
eligible to receive Medicaid 90
days prior to release and that's
because of a new waiver that the
state just received, uh, the
re-entry waiver, um, we can go
over that a little bit later
and, and.
It's, that's kind of an aside,
and we can go over that a little
bit later if you guys want, but
um.
They can receive those services
before release.
Um, Medicaid can be used to pay
for targeted interventions to
prevent CJ involvement and
prevent re-entry.
Uh, Medicaid is the largest
payer for behavioral health and
substance use programming.
The legislature made significant
investments to start up more
evidence-based providers and
programming.
And evidence-based interventions
are slow to ramp up.
And are not widely adopted
statewide.
Uh, the managed care
organizations. I also want to
mention managed care
organizations in the state, they
play, they play a big role here,
right?
Um, they get about $88 billion.
And we need to be working with
them, uh, the state needs to be
overseeing those contracts and
ensuring that
Um,
care coordination is happening
that uh
We're looking out for folks and
making sure that they're
actually getting the services
that'll
Um, change some of the outcomes
that we're seeing.
Moving on to slide 5.
Uh, over the last few years, the
legislature has focused on
expanding access to quality
services.
On the right hand side, uh,
you'll see the Medicaid
behavioral health grew from
about $750 million to about 900
million over the past 4 years.
And that included uh about in
the last two years, about 31
million each year, uh, in rate
adjustments, rate increases for
providers and that's to
hopefully improve recruitment
and retention of those providers
into the state um so that we
could improve access, uh, for.
Behavioral health services.
You'll see on that left hand
side, most of this money, um,
there's about 987 million there.
Most of that money goes into
Medicaid behavioral health, um,
managed care, so those managed
care organizations that's, uh.
Presbyterian Health Services,
Blue Cross Blue Shield, and the
two new provider, uh, new MCOs
or United Health and Molina
Health, right? That's that 981
mil I'm sorry, about $830
million for behavioral health
services goes to those, those 4.
Those 4 MCOs.
Moving on to slide 6.
So we're hoping and expecting to
see more utilization of the
services that are evidence-based
and targeted at those most in
need.
You'll see that with the 416
million spent on outpatient
services, including evaluations
and therapies.
And, and applied behavioral
analysis. You'll see, I, I
actually highlighted two
services there, um, if you're
looking at the table on the
right hand side.
Uh, for you that I think it
might be of particular interest
to this committee.
And that's that assertive
community treatment and
multi-systemic therapy.
And those two are uh.
You know, we're spending quite a
bit less on those than a lot of
the other services, um, that.
You know, may or may not be
evidence-based.
That we could really ramp up, I
think, to kind of improve some
of the.
Prevention of folks sending it
up in the criminal justice
system or um, you know, in terms
of the multi-systemic therapy
that's for juveniles and that
can help, um, prevent or, you
know, either re-entry into into
JJ or uh entry in the first
place, and those are, you know,
kind of, um, their evidence
Prevention of folks sending it
up in the criminal justice
system or um, you know, in terms
of the multi-systemic therapy
that's for juveniles and that
can help, um, prevent or, you
know, either re-entry into into
JJ or uh entry in the first
place, and those are, you know,
kind of, um, their
evidence-based, they're
nationally recognized as being
evidence-based they're holistic
in terms of, you know, that they
look at the community.
That, um, either the person with
serious mental illness lives in,
um,
You know, the, the whole, uh,
Gambit of services and um.
That people have
Moving on to slide 7,
so they should have said
behavioral health collaborative
agencies received $407 million
in non-recurring behavioral
health funding between FY 23 and
uh FY 25.
Um,
The behavioral health
collaborative agencies have
received um.
Significant non-recurring
appropriations over the last few
years to expand access to
services through workforce
development and capacity
building.
And if you look at this chart
here on the left hand side,
you'll see that for capacity
building, um, you know, there's
over 200 million in FY 23 and FY
24 that went out for capacity
building in the behavioral
health or this actually includes
behavioral health and physical
health. It's not broken out,
but um,
Uh, very little of that has
actually been spent to date.
But that money is moving. It is
being granted out, you know, it,
it's, um.
It's just, you know, the
providers haven't started
spending that money and it's,
it's, it's still, uh, needing
time to kind of work its way
through the system, um.
Another thing I wanted to
mention there is you'll see a
little, a little table there on
the right hand side. It's
labeled FY 23825 non-recurring
um
includes.
You'll see the 2nd to the last
one, behavioral health providers
startup costs. This was an
appropriation for 200 million
that went to both CYFD and to
the healthcare authority.
Uh
And it's gone largely unused so
far, and this was from FY 23,
um.
And a lot of it that has been
used has been kind of outside of
the legislative intent. It's not
really, so the whole point of it
was to start up.
You know, behavioral health
services and to, um, allow those
behavioral health services to
then.
Bill Medicaid, which again, you
know, that's our big pot of
money if if providers can bill
Medicaid, then they can be
sustainable, right? And so
that's, and we haven't seen much
of that happen yet.
Of the little bit that has been
spent, so.
That's another thing that we're
kind of, you know, keeping our
eye on and trying to.
Make sure that that gets done.
Uh, moving on to slide 8, and
I'm just gonna talk a little,
it's a little bit more about
gaps and needs and that sort of
thing. We're working with the
department to try and get uh
better utilization data, um.
In the table below, we can't
tell what services these 620
people so that under that
behavioral health practitioner
visits per 1000 members. One
issue that we have is we can't
tell if the 620 people received,
um, what services they received,
whether there was just one group
or a group of super users that
were receiving those services.
Or how well MCOs are doing at um
managing cases prior to them
getting into the um emergency
departments or emergency rooms,
they're on the right hand side
where we have um 57% of
emergency room visits for
non-emergency needs, right? And
so.
That's really expensive way to
treat people that have uh
behavioral health issues is
Going to the emergency room for
non-emergency needs.
And so again, um, you know, this
gets back to the question that
Uh, majority floor leader had
earlier on.
Um, the data that we have and
it's, we're not getting the kind
of data that we need, um, to
really understand.
The um our accountability and
how these dollars are actually
being spent.
Um, moving on to slide 9 and
this this slide is the one that
gets to uh President Pro Tem, or
no, I believe it was, I'm sorry,
it was uh.
Representative Lord to ask that
question.
Um,
On the utilization, and yeah,
you can see here that a lot of
the utilization, so this is,
this is one where we broke out.
Um, utilization for 1000 member
months and the easiest way to
kind of understand this metric
is just, um, utilization per
1000 members, right? And so, um.
While
You might hear from the
healthcare authority that they
are increasing their networks
and they're increasing providers
and that sort of thing.
You're not seeing um an increase
in the actual utilization of
these services, and that's
important because, um,
We want
Folks, you know, actually some
of these services maybe not, but
most of these services, we want
folks to, um,
utilizing more.
Uh
If we expect them to actually
improve outcomes, right?
Uh, slight 10, that's just uh I
just included slide 10 in there
just to kind of show that, you
know, we are improving a little
bit. Um, there's kind of
marginal improvement on bringing
in providers so far, um, but.
I do think that we want
more improvement, uh, you'll see
that.
Uh
We still have the same number of
providers now, but we also
dropped off on, um,
The number of members actually
in Medicaid.
might take you a minute to kind
of study that, but it's
It's improving a little bit,
but, um, I think we're wanting
to see, uh, more improvement.
With that, Madam Chair, I'll
pass it over to John for further
comments.
Thanks, sir.
Um, so picking up on slide 11,
you know, Eric just talked about
the, the money that we're
putting into the behavioral
health system and you know, why
is that important? We know Swift
and swiftness and certainty is,
is, is a key to, to deterring
crime. Um, but addressing, you
know, what I've commonly
referred to as root causes, but,
you know, really in my mind,
these are, these are risk
factors if and they're, they're
not, you know, it's.
It's not.
A definite prescription for
involvement with the criminal
justice system if you have these
risk factors, but if you do and
they go unaddressed your chances
for becoming involved with the
criminal justice system are
increased. That includes adverse
childhood experiences that
includes um um school absences,
um, it includes, um.
Uh, uh, substance use disorder,
um.
So this is, you know, a, a
simplification of, of what we
see as, as the formula to to
being impactful and you know,
this is not only important, very
far upstream in early childhood
which you all have made
significant investments in um
programs that have been shown
nationally to decrease
involvement with the criminal
justice system and in certain
home visiting programs like uh
nurse family partnership, but,
you know, it's also important
that
That other end of the system in
incarceration because over 90%
of the people that are
incarcerated today are going to
be back out at some point over
90%.
And nationally about half of
those are gonna come back.
And the better.
job that we do to address those
risk factors, um, you know,
hopefully the further down that
we can, we can drive those
numbers.
You'll turn to page
12
I wanted to give kind of a long
view of um crime rates in New
Mexico.
And here on the right hand side
of the page you see violent
crime rates and property crime
rates in New Mexico, uh, in the
dark blue bar.
And on the bottom that light
blue bar, those are national,
uh, violent crime and property
crime rates.
You can see that in the, in the
90s, the, the crime rates were
actually a little bit worse in
the state.
Nationally, we've seen a decline
in both violent crime and
property crime.
Um.
In New Mexico, we've we've seen,
we've seen a bit of a bump.
We've seen that property crime
continue to decline, but the
violent crime has has increased.
Now, this is reported crime.
Not all crime goes reported. In
fact, some crimes are severely
underreported, we know, for
example, uh, not all burglary is
reported. Not all rapes are
reported. The, the two kind of
key metrics, the canaries in the
coal mine on, on violent crime
and property crime are going to
be homicide for violent crime
and motor vehicle vehicle theft
for property crime, homicide
because, you know, if, if
somebody gets killed, that's
usually.
Discovered by uh by the police.
And motor vehicle theft more
often than not the uh those are
reported for um insurance
reasons.
You can see.
On the table on the left side of
the page, the different
categories of um violent crime,
uh, which are unshaded and
proper property crime which are
shaded in blue, and how we
compare to the United States
through 2022.
Now, 2, you know, these data
are.
Audited by the FBI so we don't
get the 2023 data until likely
October, but you can see that,
you know, we're, we're out
outpacing the national averages
in terms of increase in in most
of these categories,
unfortunately. The other thing
to mention is there's a
There's another tool that the
Bureau of Justice Statistics
uses to look at um crime called
the National Crime Victimization
Survey. Um, I was just at an
NCSL conference where we saw a
presentation on, on crime and
they said for the first time in
a number of years.
The
The reported crime
To the FBI and the survey of
this national survey of of uh
victimization diverged a bit.
Which in their interpretation
likely means that there's less
reporting right now of certain
crime types, um, you know,
anecdotally, and I know I've
heard concerns about um about
that very thing, um.
Uh, in New Mexico.
If you'll turn to page 13.
So, uh, Ryan will talk about
this more specifically, uh, the
work that they did, uh, looking
at the Berlio County crime
update on the right hand side of
the page there you see uh the
unsolved rate of violent crimes
reported to police in New Mexico
and you see that that rate's
been going up.
Um,
Additionally, you know, services
to address those root cause and
upstream issues we talked about
that a little bit in the last
presentation.
Um, you know, there, there are
issues with access and service
availability. There are issues
with low up, uh, uptake in some
areas of the state, um, uh,
underutilization and then uh
implementation challenges.
So if you turn to slide 14.
This is just looking at again,
all the, all the state criminal
justice agencies, public safety
agencies going back basically 10
years.
And you can see that, um, you
know, you all have made
significant investments in, in
all of those agencies, um,
usually at a a pace that's
quicker than general fund
spending.
Um.
The exception to that is the
corrections department, which
has seen a significant decrease
in population in recent years.
And so that's the thing to, to
remember and that's what, what
Ryan will point out, but I'll
just speak to it really quickly.
You know, crime hasn't been
going down.
It hasn't. It's been, it's been
went up and it's been staying
up.
But the criminal justice system,
if you will, in terms of
arrests, prosecutions,
convictions, incarcerations has
not been keeping pace with that
increased level of reported
crime and it's a, it's very much
a domino effect. You know, if,
if we don't clear a case, if we
don't catch somebody, um, uh,
who committed a crime and turned
them over to a prosecutor. Well,
they're going to have fewer
cases to prosecute. If they have
fewer cases to prosecute, there
there's gonna be, you know, less
people in
prison and you, you see the very
real outcome of that because we
have probably more capacity in
New Mexico prisons than we've
ever had in our over 100 year
history of being a state.
If you'll turn with me to slide
15. So this is where we'll get
into some of the recommendations
that we've talked about in in
previous reports. Um, I probably
won't go over, uh, all the
issues there in the, the blue
box on the left as we talked
about a lot of those in the.
In the last present
presentation.
Um,
And again, you can see the uh
corrections, uh.
The prison population state
prison population there in the
graph, uh, and facility capacity
uh in the Green Line, the uh
inmate population represented by
blue it looks like it looks to
be stabilizing.
After a number of years of of
decline.
Um, so, you know,
recommendations in our past, uh,
reports have included uh
requiring the corrections
department to use a validated
risk assessment tool on all
inmates to determine appropriate
security classification, uh, UNM
just completed a study of that
earlier this year and I believe
uh the corrections department is
seems to be on track to, to do
that. We, we did a report on
this a couple of years ago, um,
and I guess the thing to know is
it, it, it.
Uh, today hasn't necessarily
been implemented to.
Um, to where we thought it
should be.
Um,
Eric, um, I'm sorry, Scott
talked about the needs
assessments in the last
presentation.
Um, require the corrections
department to seek alternatives
to reincarceration before
revoking parole for substance
use violations that intensive
supervision piece that I
mentioned requiring services to
be accompanied with that such as
behavioral health treatment, um,
that could be that could be
potential legislation. This last
one, and I'll, uh, somebody
tells Senator Cervantes when he
gets back. There's some good
news, as Eric said, um, the
state was just approved their
11:15.
Uh, Medicaid waiver, uh, to
allow for Medicaid coverage 60
days prior to release of
incarcerated individuals that'll
apply to any incarcerated
individuals both 90 days. Thank
you, Eric both um uh in a state
facility or or a county
facility.
This is going to cover money,
uh, funding for case management.
It will cover funding for
Medicaid assisted treatment and
it will cover, um, at least 30
days of medication. We're one of
11 states that were just
approved for this with another
13 states, um, currently pending
approval.
If you'll turn to page 16.
You know, we talked about
treatment courts. One of the
things that we didn't talk about
when we talked about judiciary
in the last presentation was um
uh pretrial services.
Um,
I will say that in in a number
of reports we've outlined some
best practices for pre-trial
services, um,
Uh, we've recommended that the
program be defined in statute,
the statute requires uh periodic
validation of risk assessments,
uh, and implement implementation
of needs assessments to connect
people that are in pretrial
services to services, um.
And required reporting. I'll say
that AOC is, is, you know,
without legislation, AOC is
making progress on these things.
They're putting standards into
into place based on based on
national best practices. They're
doing data reporting there, uh,
working with UNM to validate
risk assessments both in Burnlio
County and statewide. Um, our
recommendation goes back to, you
know, conversations with NCSL
and folks uh from other states
that a statutory framework,
even.
Just calling for those basic
things could still be useful and
would give some stability to
those uh best practices. Um, the
chart there, I, I mentioned, um,
uh treatment court capacity, um,
uh decreasing in partic
participation decreasing, you
can see that trend over the
last, what is this, 8 years.
Page 17, so we had a pretty
in-depth substance use disorder
report, uh, that we released
late last year, which I, I
referenced before and all all
these reports are available on
our, on our website.
Um, you know, successful
treatment of SUD first and many
times off uh requires uh
identification of the problem.
Uh, or screening, um, the
legislature has provided, uh,
more money for, for screening
tools, um, with, uh, an
additional appropriation this
year and the government results
uh opportunity fund with the
grow.
Um, for, uh, a particular
screening tool.
Um, other challenges include,
you know, pharmacies can limit
the type of medication assisted
treatment drugs available in
areas, uh, with high rates of
opioid disorders, um, Medicaid
assisted treatment can also be
used for alcohol use disorders,
which is a frankly, one of the
biggest challenges the state
faces uh that doesn't, isn't
talked about quite a lot, um,
those types of services are, are
we found in, in uh that report
that we released in 23 are
pretty underutilized.
Um,
So here we have some some
recommendations and a reference
to the, to the growth funding
that I mentioned, um.
The 2nd wreck here authorizing
the pharmacy board and DOH to
require pharmacies and high need
locations to make available
medication assisted treatment
and then require Medicaid to
implement a single credentialing
to reduce, uh, need to work with
multiple M MCOs to be
reimbursable within their
networks. And if I remember
correctly, the HC is working on
that one, right, Eric's a single
credentialing.
Um, slide 18, we talked about
juveniles and youth, um, a while
ago again nationally we've seen
this, this big decline and I, I
know um uh um DA Bregman's, uh,
concerns and and presentation uh
were mentioned earlier.
Um, I believe, uh,
Uh, Ryan will have some data on
that as well, um.
You know what, when we've
researched in the past, uh, this
issue, you know, it's, it's
really important to connect
youth to services and school
intervening early in juvenile
justice situation, um, you can
see here, uh, treatment courts,
sorry, the, the figures a little
blurry here, um, juvenile
treatment court utilization
rates have have also declined,
um, almost at a steeper rate
than um.
Uh, adult treatment courts, um,
because a lot of these courts,
um.
Uh, just aren't around anymore.
Um, so we have uh some wrecks
here on the right hand side of
the page, um, you know, just
generally, uh, executive
agencies to consider targeting
continuing to target expansion
of evidence-based prevention
programs.
And improve uh performance
reporting to those, uh, to the
legislature.
Um.
CYFD, uh, improving access to
proven programs, uh, I believe
at least one of those, um, Eric
mentioned family functional
therapy.
And then public schools
considering uh implementing high
dosage tutoring and additional
learning time for absent
students. We, we had a pretty uh
eye opening report. I think it
was just last month on uh school
absences, uh, chronic
absenteeism in New Mexico and
it's a, it's a significant
problem in the state.
Um,
On page 19 we we've talked about
a number of these, but uh these
are are listed out here for you
just to, to go through if you'd
like, uh, notable vetoes over
the last several years, you
know, the, there hasn't been a
lot of money that's been vetoed,
and I, I think, I think Scott
kind of made that clear earlier.
What's been vetoed are, um, some
of the language that would
restrict the usage of that money
and some of the guardrails that
would require um reporting, um,
uh.
Of how that money is, is being
used.
So,
Page 2.
Um,
In summary, you know, we, we're
still seeing issues across the
board with service
implementation despite pretty
significant investment, um, you
know, it'll be interesting to
see what, what agencies come in
asking for with, with budget
requests, um, this year, um.
But you know, there have been
resources dedicated to, to the
things that agencies have
identified in previous years,
including recruitment and
retention, um, including data
collection, you know, one of the
things that we
We didn't mention is you all are
investing a ton of money in in
data systems across New Mexico.
Um, a good chunk of money for a
new criminal justice information
system, uh, chunk of money for a
new Medicaid information system,
a chunk of money for a new uh
system at CYFD that would cover
both protective services and
juvenile justice services, you
know, um,
Uh, one of the ways that we can
know and map out where we're
going is to know where we are
now and know where we've been.
So, you know, it's the
implementation of, of um those
software systems is, is also
going to be key.
Um,
And it just generally speaking,
both state and local agencies,
you know, we're, we're saying we
need to continue to work on
improving screening, access to
services and staffing strategies
to to better implement programs
and uh with that, uh, Madam
Chair, we'd stand for questions.
Thank you very much. Eric, did
you have something to add? No,
you look poised to speak, so I
didn't want to cut you off
there. Um, I have Rep Lujan, um,
rep Martinez, Rep Chasey.
Um, representative Delgado
Brego.
I don't know what I'm doing
today, guys. I'm sorry. Shoot,
Representative Lord.
Representative.
Is your name Niber? Oh, Senator
Neibert
yeah, Senator Delgado.
It's Monday, you know.
All right. Um, Representative
Lujan. Thank you Janet. I try to
keep it down. um, thank you. um.
So, um, I'm just gonna get kind
of to the point as, as we're
working on the budget and uh
being a member here on
appropriations. So when we're
looking at the non-recurring uh
funding being the highest amount
of funding that we give to our
agencies.
Um,
I just have to ask structurally
How that impacts those agencies
when it's not recurring. If you
can
Talk, talk us through that. I
think that's an important point
because what I hear from our
agencies and I hear from other,
other sources of, of how we to
sure up, to make sure that we
have um that recurring source.
In which we here as legislators
all the time, as opposed to
having non-recurring funding
given to them, which they, they
haven't really established
within their agencies how
they're going to appropriate
those funds and then they're
left now without being able to
expend those funds. Can you walk
us through that a bit. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Yeah, Madam Chair and
Representative, you know, the
way I think about it, it's, and
I think it's worth talking about
recurring versus non-recurring
so the way I think about
recurring funding is, you know,
if it's for ongoing, um, costs,
so, you know, uh, personnel, um,
vehicles, stuff like, yeah, not
purchasing the vehicles, but
fueling them up or maintaining
them, that sort of thing, right?
Um.
Non-recurring funding is meant
to be, you know, about 2 years,
uh, recently we did the, um, the
growth fund, which is 3 years,
uh, time to allow agencies to
look at that and those are for
those.
Things that you purchase one
time purchase, right, so it's um
buildings, um, vehicles, the
actual vehicles, you know, the
wheels, um.
It's, it's, it's all of those
sorts of things and so we give
them, you know, in terms of
growth funding we give them 3
years time to um spend that
money, um, in terms of some of
this rural healthcare delivery
fund dollars that I was talking
about, um, on slide 7, which is
that.
That capacity building funding.
You know, they've got a couple
of years to spend that money,
um, and they're doing it, the
healthcare authority is spending
that money through, um.
Grants to.
Local healthcare providers to
start up their new service
lines, their new business lines,
um, you know, for both
behavioral health and on this
chart, it's both behavioral
health and physical health
services. Thank you,
Madam Chair
when we give those fundings and
they use them as grant fundings,
then we're not getting the the
information back, um,
specifically to, to understand
if they um
If we're going to have the data,
if we're going to have if those
programs are then substantial
enough for us to to continue to
fund, which I appreciate the
growth fund and it's brand new
to us, and I know that that's
why it's implemented. But this
is, this is a practice that's
going on and from our records
and data that we have now, they
have so much money that they
can't get out the doors. So how
do we, how are we going to help
them get that money out the
door? Welcome, Chair.
And Madam Chair, and the whole
purpose behind a lot of this
capacity, uh, building funding
so that.
These business lines can
eventually become sustainable by
Um,
Uh, by billing Medicaid, right,
so I think that's an important
piece to kind of keep in mind
and I, I do think that you know
it is going to just take some
time to roll out these grants
and and um get those individual
providers actually spending that
money. Thank you. That leads
into my next question regarding
Medicaid and spending and when
we, so the sustainability of us
doing this and and putting
everything into the Medicaid
bucket, so to speak. Then for me
And maybe we need to talk about
this more, but that then kind of
creates more of an offset in my
in the way I'm seeing things
because now we're, we don't
understand all the way that
we're spending our money through
Medicaid and now we're putting
more dependency upon them. How
do they then become more
sustainable as a as a funder, as
a source.
Um,
It's, it's kind of like a
vicious cycle here, Madam Chair,
and these are, these are the
things we need to really, this
is not on you guys, this is on
us, which goes back to the fact
of hearing all the things I'm
taking in today and hearing that
we don't have
The equal power as,
as a legislative branch.
I would, you know, that's
something to highlight, and I
think this is, this just
reflects.
That statement of us not really
digging into this and really
doing our job, so to speak,
fully at the full potential that
we need to. So I'd like to, I'd
like to just say how then how
does that, how is that
productive or sustainable, we
keep on putting the money back
into, I know there's a return on
value on that, and we all
understand that. But when we,
this is just a vicious cycle of
spending and we need to get a
grasp on it, Madam Chair. I
don't know if you can respond to
that.
Well, I, I, uh, Madam Chair, I
guess my response to that is
that this is the legislative
branch of government, right? And
You passed the laws and we
expect the executive branch to
execute.
Thank you. And then my last
question is.
One last question, it's all it's
all it's western skies network
is no longer MCO, yet it's
stated in here, Madam Chair,
that they were, they were
reasonably account for a lot of,
um,
The um the clients that they
have that we have and we're able
to track, but now they're not an
MCO. So how are those clients,
those patient, uh, can you, can
you kind of walk me through that
and say, where do they go? How
is that? How are they affected,
ma'am?
Ma'am, sure, so just very
quickly, the, uh, what I was
referring to is their providers,
so they were growing providers,
not clients. Clients though, um,
get re-enrolled into, you know,
they have to go back to Medicaid
and they have to get re-enrolled
into the other MCOs. Um, there's
a whole process behind that,
but, uh, quickly, that's how
they do that. Thank you. I
appreciate that that that that
just leads on, Madam Chair, if
you will, another process,
another, another, uh, stop and
hold.
Somebody that has had to utilize
in, in, uh, go through this
whole process and programs for
behavioral health system. It,
it's just another, it's it's.
Madam Chair, I'm sorry, I'm a
little like frustrated as
everybody else here is today. Am
I losing my words, but it's very
frustrating. And those that need
access and and need those uh
providers. To me it just is like
now you have to go back now you
have to go back and in the
process is never ending. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative Representative
Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um, and
gentlemen, uh, just a few quick
questions.
The um 1115 waiver.
The 90 days does that is that
just for mental health or does
that cover medical also?
So
Madam Chair and representatives,
so that's a re-entry waiver and
so that's, that covers, um,
anything really, uh, now.
It, it, it covers Matt, so
medication assisted treatment,
so that's, you know, like
typically that'll be like your
Suboxone type medications, um,
has the, it'll give you like the
30, this is what we are approved
for now we still have to make a
plan and do all that stuff. It's
not going to be in effect for a
little while. There's, there's
issues like that, but a 30 day
supply of prescriptions, any
prescriptions that you have so
that you're not just.
Um, thrown out and you have to
go find your prescriptions, that
sort of thing.
Um, diagnostic services, um,
there's a lot of stuff in that,
in that waiver to kind of help.
Um,
People land on their feet as
they are released from
incarceration.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, so
when, when is the plan due back
to CMS?
Uh, it's, I'm a little murky on
the timeline, uh, Madam Chair,
uh, I'm working with the
department to kind of nail that
down a little bit closer, um,
but that's, that's something I,
I think they're kind of working
on too. They just got approval
of this, I believe 2 weeks ago.
Um, and so, uh.
That's, that's where we're at on
that.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair.
Real quick, uh, throughout the
presentation, I heard the phrase
evidence-based.
What evidence are we looking at
if some of these programs are
brand new?
Um,
Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Martinez. So the
legislature in 2019 actually uh
defined kind of three levels of
evidence, um, evidence-based
research based, and, and
promising if a if a program is,
is brand new, you know, um.
Coming into New Mexico, that
statute basically outlines the
the steps that someone would
need uh to take to, um, uh, do
research, um, to ensure that
that uh is um defined as
evidence-based by the state. Now
that path is probably a little
quicker and easier than a
definition of uh evidence-based
uh by the federal government and
that
That can impact
certain types of, of funding,
um, particularly around, uh,
early, early childhood programs.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um, but
what evidence are we looking at
if it's a brand new program?
So if it's a if it's a brand new
program, I, I don't believe it
could be, um, categorized as
evidence based until um the
research is, is built around it
to to show that it works. That's
kind of the, the, the spirit of
the of the um the grow fund, if
you will, you know, having that
3 year period as a as a pilot
period and asking agencies and
in fact, some of those grow
appropriations are are very
specific to the
Types of studies that um, uh,
that, um, would be asked of to
uh to show that those programs
are effective in achieving the
the desired outcomes, but
essentially what you would be
measuring is, is what you're
defining as as success and, you
know, what is the needle that
that you're trying to move that
could be reducing recidivism. It
could be um.
Uh, gosh, lowering maltreatment
rates if it's for CYFD, it, it
would probably depend on the
policy area in the program.
And Madam Chair, if I may just
add one little thing I had
pointed out like the assisted
outpatient treatment,
multi-systemic therapy earlier,
um, those two things, you know,
those are nationally recognized
best practice. There's a lot of
research behind them already and
so what we're talking about
doing is.
Expanding the offerings in the
state because they're already
recognized as being
evidence-based.
Thank you, Madam Chair. One last
question on page.
15
On the uh.
Recommendations.
Um, the third one require uh New
Mexico corrections.
S alternatives to uh
reincarceration before revoking
parole.
For substance abuse violation.
The, the problem is that.
The substance abuse issue is
what's driving their criminal
activity.
So what kind of alternatives are
you looking at?
Um, if they're breaking into
cars or residential burglary or
stealing a lady's purse in the
parking lot.
Um,
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Martinez, that's an excellent
question. So the, you know, my
understanding is it is that
there is a certain percentage of
folks that are um coming back
to, um, prison, uh, because
they're revoked for uh for
parole, um, because, uh, there's
a substance issue but not
necessarily a uh a property
crime or a violent crime that
has occurred. For example, we,
we went on a ride along with
The corrections department a
number of years ago and, um, you
know, depending on the parole
officer, they can revoke parole
for, uh, having an empty beer
can on the property. We went to
a a ride along, um, in, in
Meadow Lake and um we went into
a gentleman's home that um.
Uh, he had just gotten a job,
um.
An officer asked, um, they
they'd found some paraphernalia
in the house. He said it wasn't
his and she said, well, if, if
we test you, are you gonna, are
you gonna test positive? He says
yes, but not for that drug for
marijuana.
And she said, well, we've, we've
got to revoke you.
And so I, I think in those
instances, um, you know, there's
a a desire to, uh, if that
person isn't already in
treatment to perhaps get them
into treatment because one of
the other things that that she
said that I found pretty eye
opening was, you know, he's
gonna go back and I don't think
he's going to get out again. I
don't think he's gonna be able
to get a job again.
And, um, and that's, you know,
that's part of this of the
importance of this re-entry
piece is that, you know, most of
these people are going to get
out again and how do we make
them successful contributing
members of of society instead of
going back to to criminal
behavior that that uh hurts, you
know, people and property.
Thank you Madam Chair.
I'm going to end with this on
page 11.
We're getting a little tight
here, so I will read very fast.
OK,
page 11, the certainty of being
caught is vastly more powerful,
uh, more powerful deterrent than
the punishment. That's what I've
been saying. People are no
longer afraid to get caught.
Um, and if we
I'm all for setting up programs
to treat substance abuse issues
and give them every opportunity
to be successful.
But we need to balance that.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. We
have Representative Chasey then
Representative Barrego.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, I
really want to thank you for
the, uh, recommendations on page
15. And, um,
point out again, although it's
been, um, mentioned a number of
times.
We, we really want to take a
scientific approach to this. We
wanted, we want to do what's
effective, but we need the data
and the fact that we have little
to none doesn't really help us
if we're going to increase
penalties, we ought to know
whether the ones we have right
now are working in any sense of,
of, uh, prevention. But, um,
I, I, I, um,
I am, I'm appalled. I never knew
about the line item veto of the
language. Um, and requiring the
uh reporting of data and then
suddenly we have an emergency
bill before us to, uh, require
reporting of data, um, and I'm
all for the reporting because
we've heard for years, we have,
and anyone on House Judiciary,
we have this, we don't know
whether we're talking about the
same offenders all over the
state. We want to try to figure
out who the actual
people are, but I wanted to, um,
mention on the, the 3rd bullet,
uh, requiring, um, corrections
to seek alternatives to
reincarceration before revoking
parole for a substance use
violation and you know, um,
representing my and I have been
working in this area for
probably since 2013. And, um, we
tried in 2019 with probably too
large a bill.
For, um,
To reform probation parole, that
was vetoed, and we had a much
scaled down bill in the 2023
session.
That passed the Senate with
bipartisan support. We had a
long debate in the house on it
and it got vetoed.
And the only opposition that
time was just the corrections
department and, and, but they're
not giving us the information
that we need. So, uh, I, I mean
we really have to do that and I
think Senator Maestas now well,
um, continue that work, uh,
Senator O'Neill and I will not.
OK, I, we'll probably both keep
talking about it until December,
but, um, good luck with that.
But the intensive
Provision is a really good idea
and the Ford Foundation did a
study 28 years ago on juveniles
and that is the best thing to do
for after juvenile has its his
or her first contact with the
system really intensive juvenile
supervision. I bet it would be
cheaper than locking them up
because we're spending so much
money on the juvenile detention.
So, um, the intensive
supervision is, um, a very
effective.
I mean, for 28 years ago it was,
um, for, uh, preventing juvenile
further contact with the system
after the first one. So I, I
hope that we can really act on
some of these and I just wanted
to um plug Goodwill Industries
because I, we have found out and
um my chief of staff, Alisa
Lauer, and I have met with them.
And it turns out, uh,
Representative Martinez knows a
lot about what they're doing.
They're not getting any state
money and they have a very
excellent program supporting
people coming out of prison. And
very high success rate. It's
called Next Steps, and, um, we'd
like to get, uh, them some state
funding. It's exactly what we
keep hearing that people need,
and I just wanted to point out
too that the
justice reinvestment Initiative,
the JRI that's here working with
us.
Also needs data in order to make
legitimate and useful
recommendations to New Mexico.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
You representative, um,
representative Brego, then Lord,
and then Senator Niburton.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
just wanted to say you guys, you
gave me a little bit more
reprise on, on this particular
report in the previous one
because it was a little more
specific and it had the
recommendations, um, at least in
this area.
Um,
So my question is, well, I have
two questions, but one is on
page 17, Madam Chair, um, you
mentioned that the, um,
issues, successful treatment,
blah blah, blah. And then you
talked about opioids, and I just
wondered how much money from the
opioid settlement fund is going
toward this.
Treatment.
Or do you know?
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Brego, we, we can.
Get that. I would appreciate
that, Madam Chair, if you could
get that information to me
because I keep asking about, you
know, how much we received, how
much is available, and where
it's being distributed, so I
would really like to know that.
Yeah, Madam Chair and uh Brego,
and I can send you our, our
table that gives you a full
accounting of it, um, after this
hearing, but, you know, I will
point out on slide 5, we do have
7.3 million of it, um, going to
the behavioral health.
Services division
And then there's other amounts
that are going to like um CYFD
for um, oh, what is it called,
um.
I think you have it there, but
it, it's, it's escaping me right
now, but there's there's with
me. I'd like to go over that
with you, um, Madam Chair, and
if anybody else wants it, then
we can distribute it.
he just gave it to me. So we've
got like 2.5 million going to uh
DOH medication assisted
treatment, 1 million for
medication assisted treatment
and and tribes. Um, there's a
whole list and so we can get
together after this if you want
kind of go through it. Thank
you.
Um, my second question, Madam
Chair, or is it really a
statement,
um, so on page 12, you talk
about New Mexico crimes and you
break it down by type of crime
in New Mexico and the US, and I
just wanted to point out, Madam
Chair, for the past 2 years,
I've had a motor vehicle theft
bill along with Senator Maestas,
which has gone nowhere, and I
just want to point out that in
New Mexico it's at 107%. So we
will be
Bringing that bill hopefully up
again in January and I think in
Albuquerque, um, and I, I sat on
the flood control board and we
found those cars in the Arroyos
all the time using taxpayer
money to take them out of the
arroyos and, you know, uh,
recoup whatever we could, um,
but I, you know, we also, Madam
Chair, had the support of the
insurance, um,
Division, um,
The automobile dealers APD, and,
uh, DA Bregman's office. So I
hope that we can bring that bill
up again and that we can make
some traction on that. Thank
you.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Lord.
Sorry, um, real quick, on page
9, I still didn't understand the
explanation, so we have all
these services, but they're
being underutilized. I'm sorry,
I didn't understand the
explanation, just that we don't
have data on that or they're not
being used because.
Um, so, Madam Chair and
Representative Lord, um, yeah,
no, so these, this is basically
just showing you that
utilization is, is going down,
um, even though our provider
networks are.
Um, improving.
Um, according to the data that
is reported to the healthcare
authority through the managed
care organizations, but, um,
that same data is showing that.
Utilization is going down and we
wouldn't expect it to be going
down, right, if it, if there's
um high rates of behavioral
health issues, uh, substance use
disorders, that sort of thing,
we would be expecting it to go
up. Yeah, and that's very
concerning. I don't still don't
know why. OK, so we'll skip that
one. Well, I'm not going to skip
that one. I'm just not gonna ask
you more questions about it
right now. Um, so on page 15, we
talk about the prison revolving
door and that and that is an
issue. I mean, because we have
Multiple problems. We have
people who are just drug
addicted, then we have people
who are drug addicted, do minor
crimes, and then people that are
drug addicted who do horrific
crimes. So when somebody does
something, is Medicare covering
rehab? Are they paying for that
who's paying for the cost and
where are they going? If let's
just walk me through something
in Albuquerque gets arrested,
they're a drug addict, uh,
they've done a minor crime or
better yet, take anyone off of
Central.
What where are we putting them?
What is happening? What's the
next step?
So, uh, Madam Chair,
Representative Lord, if, if they
are incarcerated, um,
historically going back to the
60s, Medicaid does does not
cover services. So those are
either paid out of local
government funds if it's a
county, um, or, uh, paid out of
uh state funds if it's the
state. Um, there have also been
issues getting folks re-enrolled
into Medicaid, um.
At exit of prison and so there's
been a chunk of money that the
corrections department oversees,
um, one chunk in their their
community corrections program
that uh is um uh general fund.
Historically that went through
the, the behavioral health
collaborative and then when um
uh who came after value options.
Optum,
uh um.
And now it's falling colors,
that's right. Um, so in, in
theory with this new 11:15
waiver, uh, folks getting, um,
two things could potentially
happen. One,
you know.
That 90 days before they're
released will be covered by
Medicaid, but 2, you know, it's,
it's possible that um, Medicaid
would only be suspended for
folks that are incarcerated
rather than uh a disenrollment,
which my understanding is that
has been kind of the standard
operating procedure, again going
back to the 60s when the feds um
made this ruledam and my issue
is if they're even getting
Medicaid, it's still not being
covered for rehab, so that has
to be a state issue.
So I guess I grew, uh,
represented Martinez that left.
We need some sort of balance in
this because if somebody's been
in prison or even not somebody's
getting incarcerated and they
have a drug addiction problem.
We need to get that addressed.
If somebody doesn't mind a
crime, they need to pay the, do
the time for that, but they also
need to get the drug rehab, but
we also have some very serious
criminals out there like the one
that shot my friend Jeremy
Vaughan in the neck, who's a
longtime criminal who should not
have been out because he had
just shot at a law enforcement
officer and was out on an ankle
monitor, which goes onto the
next page about who should be
receiving the ankle monitors.
And who's overseeing them. The
officer in Alma Gorda too. And
let's not forget this guy from
Santa Fe, that charming
individual that shot a poor
83-year-old man in front of the
Best Buy, which is just
absolutely disgusting.
Then he robbed a bank. Then he
goes down to Las Cruces and does
a carjacking.
And has aptly, absolutely no
regard for human life. And when
we do our balancing at the end
of the day, we have to make sure
that people like this are not on
the street, because this is a
type of person I'm talking
about.
That there is no way to fix this
person. I'm sorry, but this guy
is a career criminal, and that's
where the balance is gonna come
in that this person needs to be
off the streets and keep our,
our safety.
Um, that's all I have. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative Senator Nibert.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, just
one.
Point or question you mentioned
that uh school abs absences are
an indication of
Maybe future uh.
I guess future activity that we
have to deal with as society and
and.
I hope my community is not the
only one in the state, uh, that
is not doing a very good job
with.
Dealing with
Continual absences by many of
our schoolchildren.
But it seems like something's
broken there that uh children
are absent from school sometimes
continuous for, for maybe even a
couple months and yet there's no
accountability. The parents
never get brought in. The
parents never, uh, get, uh.
Get in trouble, so to speak, for
their children's absences and,
and so it seems to me that if
we're going to, to, we have
something that would work to
reduce crime and that would be
one of them.
That we need to do a better job.
At that end in making sure that
that we.
Uh, have some mechanism to keep
the children in school, to keep
the the parents accountable for
the children being in school
and, and do we ever look at
maybe what PED and and maybe
juvenile probation or whoever is
in charge of that stuff, uh,
what they're doing with respect
to these children.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator Neber,
good question, um, so we, I
think it was just last month we
released a a pretty
comprehensive report on on
student absences and and chronic
absenteeism and I, I think you
named the, the folks that that
have a role in that PED um CYFD,
uh, the school districts, um,
you know, one of the interesting
things that that we saw in that
report that I frankly surprised
me was, um, concerned with uh
teacher absences and
And teacher absence is actually
being pretty highly correlated
with classrooms where you see a
lot of, a lot of student
absences. Um, so we've, we've
got a number of recommendations
in, in that report. I think I
mentioned a few of them, uh, you
know, an intensive tutoring, um.
But the um.
You know, the, um.
We sent that report to to PED,
um, you know, made, made folks
aware of it and um, you know,
it's, it's another set of
recommendations that, um, that
all those actors could, could,
um.
Followed to potentially improve
the situation.
Because I, you know, getting
back to we have laws on the
books. I think we have laws on
the books to require school
attendance, and yet we have
situations where uh it either
gets ignored or we have created
so many hurdles to get to the
point where there's some action
that probably is meaningless at
that point. It gets back to the
fact that there's no consequence
for a long time for that action.
So I
I appreciate you looking at that
and I hope that we can maybe
interconnect all these things to
maybe, uh, start having some
better outcomes when they turn
18 or 25 or whatever we're not
seeing them in the system, so to
speak. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Anyone else?
No, I really appreciate your
time and your expertise and, and
thank you for the very good
presentation. Um we are next at
Bernalio County Criminal Justice
System update. Before we get to
that, I want to acknowledge
Senator Maestas and ask him to
introduce himself. I think you
came in.
A little late. Thank you, Madam
Chair. you're here. Thank you.
Great to be here. Antonio
Maestas, state senator from
District 26 here in Albuquerque
west of the river. Great. Thank
you. And um just a few
housekeeping things. We are
going to have lunch brought in,
so that will help us move
forward with our agenda.
So
Who, uh, Representative Lujan, I
forgot.
OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Lujan has
District 48 in Santa Fe.
Uh, thank you for all your work
and the work of the committee.
Thank you.
Oh,
and that.
Right, gentlemen, you want to
introduce yourselves.
Yes, I am Doctor Ryan Tolman, a
program evaluator with the
Legislative Finance Committee.
Good morning, everyone. My name
is Marco Antonio Lueros, a
program evaluator with the LFC.
The floor is yours.
Great. Thank you so much. Well,
good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee and
thank you for having us here
today.
Uh, this morning, uh, I'm here
with my colleague Marco to share
with you our policy spotlight
which provides an update on
crime in New Mexico and Bernalio
County.
Uh, you should have a copy of
the report and it looks like
this.
Uh, before I begin, I'd first
like to thank all of the LFC
staff and criminal justice
involved agencies and their
staff who assisted us with this
report.
So if you will please turn with
me to page 4. I will discuss our
first chapter, New Mexico can
reduce crime by addressing root
causes and the swiftness and
certainty of justice.
So New Mexico's crime rates
remain above the national
average, driven by high crime
rates in Bernalio County.
However, as my colleagues have
touched on, uh, in their earlier
reports and presentations, uh,
we know what is effective and
where we can direct our efforts
at reducing crime, such as
treating its root causes,
increasing certainty that
offenders are caught and held
accountable and reducing
recidivism.
As you can see in chart one,
The legislatures appropriated
over $800 million over the past
three years towards prioritizing
treatment, swiftness and
certainty of justice and victim
and community needs.
In regard to addressing root
causes of crime. Research shows
substance use treatment is the
most effective way to break the
cycle of crime and incarceration
for offenders with drug abuse
and addiction issues.
Therefore, New Mexico could
target crime reduction by
diverting low-level offenders
into programs treating addiction
or addressing other root causes
of crime through pretrial
services or treatment courts.
Over on page 5.
Uh, research shows the certainty
and swiftness of being caught is
a more powerful deterrent to
crime than the severity of
criminal penalties.
Our analysis finds that there is
an accountability gap in
Bernelio County criminal justice
system where arrests.
Criminal convictions and prison
admissions do not keep pace with
crime, meaning that the system
is not effectively holding
offenders accountable.
New Mexico can reduce this
accountability gap by investing
in law enforcement's ability to
solve cases and to improve
prosecution efforts by
addressing issues of evidence
collection and witness
cooperation.
On the bottom of page 5.
Another thing that New Mexico
can do to address crime is to
ensure that inmates are prepared
successfully to re-enter the
community and avoid reoffending.
We can do this by increasing
participation uh by incarcerated
individuals and behavioral
health, educational, or
vocational programs and ensuring
they have medication assisted
treatment.
If you will please turn with me
to page 8.
I would like to address our next
chapter.
So how has crime uh been in
Albuquerque recently? Well, for
the most part, crime in
Albuquerque has remained flat or
increased while crime rates have
decreased nationally.
So you may recall that the FBI
recently reported that crime
rates had gone down nationally
comparing the first quarter of
2024 to the first quarter of
2023.
But what about in Albuquerque?
Well, if you look over on chart
3, you'll see that for
Albuquerque, violent crime and
homicide has remained flat.
Well, property crime and vehicle
theft has increased during that
time.
If you look at chart 4 on the
bottom of the page, you will see
that over time that violent
crime in Albuquerque reached a
high around 2017 and plateaued.
Violent crime in Albuquerque
remains much higher than the
rest of the state, which also
remains higher than national
rates.
If you look over on page 9, if
you look at chart 5.
Well, Albuquerque tends to drive
crime rates in New Mexico, many
communities across New Mexico
also experienced increases in
violent crime.
And at least 20 communities
across the state, violent crime
rates were up.
One point of concern is cases
involving juveniles with
firearms reported by the 2nd
district in Bernalio County.
If you will turn to page 10.
You will see in chart 6 that
there has been a recent increase
in cases involving juveniles and
the percentage of those cases
where a firearm was present.
Nonetheless, his chart 7
indicates the majority of felony
cases in Bernalio County are
committed by older men.
While trends in violent crime
predated the pandemic, the
pandemic seems to have
exacerbated the situation.
Particularly with gun violence
and homicides.
Over on page 11.
Figure one shows an analysis of
fatal shootings in Albuquerque.
From 2020 to 2023.
Indicating the gun violence rose
most sharply in neighborhoods
where gun violence already
existed before the pandemic.
Crime is still concentrated in a
few areas of hotspots in
Albuquerque.
OFC staff have previously
reported on evidence-based
policing practices and
recommended that law enforcement
agencies conduct joint patrols
in these hot spots.
Utilizing crime analytics from
APD's real-time crime center.
Next, if you will turn your
attention to chart 8 on the
bottom of the page. I would like
to discuss trends in property
crime.
After peaking in 2017, property
crime rates in Bernnalio County
steadily decreased through 2021,
but rose again in 2022.
Since 2021, drug offenses in
Albuquerque have more than
doubled, which coincides with
the increase in property crime.
If you turned over to page 12.
You can see in chart 9 that
various property crimes have
increased in the first quarter
of 2024 compared to the same
time period in 2023.
One concerning trend is a recent
increase in motor vehicle
thefts.
As you can see in chart 10,
motor vehicle thefts have
increased in Albuquerque over
the two most recent years of
data which exceeded comparable
cities.
Over on page 13, I want to
highlight some of the root
causes that could be driving
these crime trends in
Albuquerque.
Social conditions in Bernelio
County, such as an increase in
substance use, a high rate of
adverse childhood experiences or
races, uh poor education
outcomes and high rates of
poverty can contribute to high
rates of crime.
As you can see in chart 11, drug
overdose death rates in New
Mexico exceeds the US average.
LFC staff have previously
reported that investing in these
upstream efforts can help
improve these root causes of
crime.
If you will please turn with me
to page 14.
I will discuss accountability in
the justice system in our next
chapter in which we find that
reported crimes far exceed
arrest and convictions.
Like I mentioned before, uh,
research shows that the
certainty of being caught is a
more powerful deterrent than
severity of punishment.
This means it is more important
to prioritize solving crimes and
securing convictions,
particularly for serious
offenses.
When LFC staff first reported on
crime in the criminal justice
system in 2018, we found that as
crime rose in the mid-2010s,
arrest and convictions remain
flat or declined.
Creating accountability gap for
criminal behavior.
If you will look at chart 13,
uh, we find that accountability
gap persists today.
Although felony arrests have
increased in recent years, they
have not reached pre-pandemic
levels.
Felony convictions were the
fewest in 2023, despite
increases in number of felony
arrests during that time.
Prison admissions have also not
tracked with crime, with 74%
fewer admissions in FY 22 than
in FY19.
Declining case clearance rates
indicates Albuquerque's law
enforcement agencies are not
effectively deterring or solving
crime. If you will look over on
page 15, you can see in charts
14 and 15 that case clearance
rates continues to decline.
Less than 1 in 5 violent crimes
in Albuquerque results in an
arrest.
Only 6% of property crimes are
solved. These case clearance
rates are about half of the
national average.
If you will please turn with me
to page 16.
Uh, charts 16 and 17 show that
APD is not keeping pace with
crime to being an effective
deterrent, resulting in solving
cases and making arrests.
Church 16 and 17 shows that its
crime is increased. APD's budget
also increased, growing 63% from
a budget of 163 million in FY12
to 265 million in FY 24.
However, during this time, the
number of police officers shrink
from over 1000 in FY12.
To 856 in FY 24, a decrease of
17% and well below their
staffing targets. This data
indicates that APD has struggled
to recruit and retain police
officers to keep pace with
crime, even as the department's
budget has grown and received
nearly 400,000 from the law
enforcement retention fund.
Thank you, and I will now turn
the presentation over to my
colleague Marco.
Good morning, Madam Chair.
Members of the committee, and
thank you, Doctor Tolman for
that concise introduction.
I would like to continue our
discussion of accountability by
directing your attention to page
18 in the document.
As Ryan pointed out, our
analysis of APD data
demonstrated an accountability
gap for criminal behavior due to
flattening or declining
clearance and conviction rates
and an increase in reported
felonies.
Law enforcement and the court
systems are both responsible for
addressing this accountability
gap.
As such, LFC staff analyzed
court data to better understand
their role in the accountability
gap.
Starting off with overall felony
convictions, chart 19 on page
18.
Illustrates overall convictions
for felony cases, and the second
judicial district from 2017 to
2023.
The DA's office reports a 48%
decrease in overall felony
convictions from 2017 to 2023.
Chart 20 on the following page
on page 19.
Illustrates conviction rates for
multiple types of felony cases
from 2017 to 2023.
Only homicide and vehicular
homicide cases are consistently
prosecuted above the national
benchmark of 74%.
Domestic violence, sexual
offenses, and crimes against
persons cases are the lowest
convicted types of felony cases.
The DA's office is implementing
promising initiatives to address
these metrics, which include the
formation of specialty teams, an
increase in staffing levels and
the continued use of discovery
support teams.
Turning to page 20.
LFC staff also wanted to know
who is more likely to cycle
through the criminal justice
system.
Charts 22 and 23 show that
individuals with multiple felony
arrests make up a relatively
small percentage of the total
population arrested for a felony
at 25%, but a responsible for a
larger percentage of all felony
arrests at 47%.
Once individuals are arrested,
their case may be convicted or
dismissed depending on the
overall strength of the case.
There are many different points
within the criminal justice
system where cases can drop out
of the system. As illustrated in
figure 2 on page 21.
According to our analysis, a
felony case dismissals. Most
cases are dismissed before
indictment due to a lack of
witness or victim cooperation.
Chart 24 on page 22.
Illustrates how the reasons for
dismissal.
are distributed among cases that
were not indicted or convicted
in the analytic sample.
LFC staff found that most
dismissals for repeat offenders
were due to evidence collection,
victim cooperation, and witness
cooperation issues.
Victim and witness cooperation
was a reason for case dismissals
and 32% of cases. However,
witness cooperation such as
police officers not being
present was a factor in 19% of
cases compared to 13% for victim
cooperation.
You may have recently heard from
the governor's office that
Albuquerque is impacted by the
fact that 16,000 cases since
2017 have been dismissed for
competency.
The 16,000 figure that was
reported actually represents all
cases since 2017 that have been
dismissed for competency across
the entire state of New Mexico,
not just Albuquerque.
It also represents all types of
cases, including felonies,
misdemeanors, and parking
tickets.
The 16,000 figure does not
accurately represent the issue
of competency in Bernalio
County.
LSC staff conducted a more
granular analysis of competency
in Bernelio County.
You will notice in chart 24.
That competency was the reason
for dismissal and 6% of the
cases in the study sample.
The study sample includes all
25,000 felony cases and the
Bernillio County Metro Court
since 2017.
LFC staff found that out of
these 25,000 felony cases.
512 or around 2% were dismissed
because of incompetency.
Of those individuals with 4 or
more felony charges. 51 or 7.5%
were dismissed due to
incompetency from 2017 to 2023
compared to 4% from 2011 to
2017.
Figure 3 on page 24 illustrates
the felony competency process.
Concerning competency
evaluations, LSC staff found
that there is a shortage of
qualified certified behavioral
health evaluators which can lead
to delays in completing
evaluations. The state currently
has only 22 certified competency
evaluators that operate on a
contract basis. There is a
limited qualified behavioral
health workforce who can provide
competency and dangerousness
evaluations to the courts.
Shifting gears away from
arrests, convictions, and
competency. I'd like for
everyone to flip to page 25.
LFC staff were also interested
in knowing more about pre-child
diversion and detention
practices.
Diversion is the practice of
diverting individuals out of the
criminal justice system.
And into treatment.
As seen in figure 4 on page 25,
as well as in Appendix B. US
substance abuse and Mental
Health Administration developed
the sequential intercept model
as a way to identify resources
and gaps in services at each
intercept to develop local
strategic action plans.
In reviewing pretrial detention
and diversion, LFC staff founded
the Albuquerque Community Safety
Department.
Diverts 5% of APD's call volume,
but impacts on subsequent
criminal justice system
involvement are not yet known.
It is recommended that the
department should seek to
monitor and report on the
department's impact on those
individuals that it has served
and whether there has been a
reduction in subsequent criminal
justice system interaction.
Similarly, it is recommended
that the Bernillio County lead
program should report updated
performance measures and
outcomes.
If individuals aren't diverted
by law enforcement, they may be
diverted by the district
attorney's office.
Pre-prosecution diversion
programs and treatment courts
provide criminal justice
involved individuals who may be
experiencing mental and
substance use disorders,
treatment services and resources
prior to prosecution.
Chart 25 on page 27.
Illustrates that prosecutorial
offers to diversion are
increasing within the 2nd
judicial district Attorney's
office, but acceptances and
completions have lagged.
LFC staff also found that
statewide treatment cor
participation was rising prior
to FY20, but then fell for
several years during the
pandemic.
Chart 26 on page 27.
Illustrate illustrates statewide
treatment court capacity and
participation numbers from FY 17
to FY 24.
In Bernallio County, treatment
court participation decreased by
30% or 98 participants from FY19
to FY 24. However, in the third
quarter of FY 24, the second
judicial district court reported
that both the adult treatment
and young adult treatment courts
were overcapacity while other
treatment courts remain
underutilized.
Wait times for treatment courts
already at capacity. We're up to
4 months in 2023, potentially
delaying services for these
individuals.
These data indicate New Mexico
evidence-based treatment courts
to reduce wait times.
Other resources at the pre-trial
detention intercepts include the
medication-assisted treatment
program at the Metropolitan
Detention Center. NBC is
currently working towards
establishing a 7 day a week
addiction medicine program.
LFC staff were also interested
in analyzing the impacts of bail
reform.
LFC staff found that new arrests
of defendants on pretrial
release represent a small
fraction of overall crime
reported in Bernlio County.
Chart 27 on page 29.
Illustrates that between 2017
and 2023, 80.8% of defendants on
pretrial release picked up no
new charges.
14.4% were arrested on a new
nonviolent charge and 4.8% were
arrested on a new violent
charge.
LFC staff also found that the
rate of preventive detention
motions granted has increased
over the past two years.
Chart 28 on page 30.
Shows that so far in 2024, 59%
of pre-trial detention motions
have been granted.
In 2023, 56% of pre trial
detention motions were granted
and prior to 2023, the rate of
pre-trial detention motions
granted was approximately 50%.
Important to note is that in May
2024, the New Mexico Supreme
Court issued rule changes that
call for defendants with a
pending felony or certain
misdemeanors who are arrested
again on new felony counts or a
new enumerated misdemeanors to
remain jailed until a judge in
the initial case decides whether
to modify or revoke their
conditions of release.
The revised rules include other
changes, including removing an
option for judges to require
mental health or addiction
treatment as a condition of
release from jail and
prohibiting judges from using
the results of a public safety
assessment to decide whether
someone is released or kept in
jail until their trial.
The legislature should consider
outlining minimum standards for
pre-trial services.
Flipping ahead to page 32.
LFC staff also found that recent
increases in recidivism suggest
the need for improved treatment
and re-entry services.
Chart 29 on page 32 shows that
as of the 2nd quarter of FY 24,
the three-year recidivism rate
at the New Mexico Corrections
Department is currently at 40%.
This number basically means that
within 3 years
post-incarceration, 40% of all
individuals re-entering society
will recidivate.
This marks a 4% increase from
the recidivism rate that was
reported in FY 23.
This increased reports reverses
the downward trend in recidivism
rates reported from FY20 to FY
23.
And previous reports from the
LFC and UNM's ISR indicate that
an MCD is not fully implementing
evidence-based practices and its
programmatic operations.
Since FY 21, the legislature has
made significant investments in
programs like transitional
housing and re-entry services to
support offenders reintegration
into society and to reduce
recidivism.
These investments include
expanding, uh,
However, reporting on the
outcomes of these investments
must be developed by NMCD.
Lastly, LFC staff recommends
that expanding access to
behavioral health coverage and
substance abuse treatment is key
to addressing recidivism.
Of the incarcerated population,
LSC staff have previously
reported that 59% are dealing
with a mental health disorder
and 65% are dealing with the
substance use disorder. I will
now turn the presentation back
over to Doctor Tolman for a
final word on key
recommendations. Thanks, Mark.
Thanks, Marco.
Uh, if you will please turn with
me back to page 6, we have a
list of recommendations, uh, and
I just want to highlight a few
of our policy spotlight's key
recommendations.
So the legislature for one could
consider outlining minimum
standards for pre-trial services
with the administrative office
of the courts administering and
providing certification for
programs that meet these
standards, um.
Couple bullets down, uh,
appropriating funds to the
administrative office of the
courts for certified competency
evaluators.
Um, the administrative office of
the courts should work with each
judicial district to increase
participation and treatment
courts in pretrial diversion
programs.
Uh, the second judicial district
attorney's office should focus
on diverting low-level offenders
into programs treating addiction
and addressing other root causes
of crime.
And the Albuquerque Police
Department should increase the
number of sworn law enforcement
officers to meet staffing
targets. Um, thank you so much
and we will now stand by for
questions.
Um, thank you for the
presentation, really appreciate
it. So I have Senator Maasti
representative Lord.
Anyone else?
Um, Wuhan.
Anyone else?
Oh, I'm sorry, Martinez, Jay.
All right. Representative, about
5 minutes or so, uh, Senator.
Thank you, uh.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, presenters.
Uh, couple, couple points on,
uh, pretrial detention and then
indictments.
And then on pre-prosecution
diversion.
A preventative retention, uh, if
you could look on page 29.
And page 30.
Um, page 30 actually, will be
good, uh, Madam Chair,
gentlemen, is, is to the
percentages are awesome but also
in in numbers in in raw numbers.
Uh, believe it or not, outside
of Berlio County, the uh, the
success of these preventative
detention motions are much, much
higher.
And I believe it's, you know,
because of the relationships
that that prosecutors and judges
have in the smaller towns.
Um, but I would rather live in a
world where.
100 detention mos, I mean.
I'd rather not live in a world
where there's a 100 motions
filed in 59 granted. I think if
the DA were to file say 70 that
maybe have like 64 granted, I,
I, I, the key is not the
percentage, the key is the
number of detention that that
that happened and I think the DA
loses credibility when it just
files motions that frankly, they
know they're probably going to
lose and then if, and then if
there's a person that a judge is
not inclined to hold, but you
file it very, very in
Frequently you would have
credibility and maybe more
success in in detaining that
person.
Because these are very, very
draining procedures, and it'd be
good to get stats on how long
each hearing takes cause it's
incredibly labor intensive that
we did not anticipate in the
appropriating process when, when
the judges, uh, did bail reform.
Um, just, just some thoughts and
then also on page 18, I think
if, if I could, you know, I have
a top 10 list of.
Of why, you know, crime is.
Uh,
So prevalent. I think this is
number one on chart 19.
Uh, when I worked at the DA's
office, Madam Chair, we, there
was, uh, we probably over
indicted. I mean we indicted
8000 indictments a year. One
year we did 10,000, a bunch of.
Drug cases that shouldn't have
been indicted.
I think that in my personal
opinion, there should be at
least 6500 indictments in Berlin
County, a population of this
size, just, just.
To be fair, let's just say there
should be 5000.
But to live in a city where
there's 1800 felony cases is
categorically unacceptable for
the population of this city. It
is the number one reason in my
opinion why crime is so uh.
It's prevalent in this city is
the number of indictments and
what happened was, you know, we
all know that preliminary
hearings are much more just,
fair, and correct than grand
jury hearings. We know that we
know we got to move into this
preliminary hearing world, but
the courts moved into it way too
fast and the DA's office was
inept at adjusting and the
police and the system. And so,
um.
So, uh, I, I think that, and
it's a weird system, and I'm
sure.
The the grand jury process is a
prosecutorial process. It's an
executive branch process.
Uh, it's, it's the, it's the
state charging someone with a
crime, but the courts
facilitated the courtroom, the
courts facilitated, the jurors,
the courts kind of facilitated
that process. So back in the
day, the DA would call the chief
judge and say, hey man, I'm
backed up. I need, I need, uh, 2
grand juries next week from
Thursday and instead of, instead
of one, and the judge would say,
great, click and there would be
two grand juries going
simultaneously that relationship
has broke down, uh, and, and,
and became.
Just very unproductive. Uh, so
we have to be cognizant of that,
but there's there, we have to
have at least 5000 indictments
in Albuquerque, and we have to
get there somehow.
Also, uh.
We worked long and hard, Madam
Chair, as a, as a legislature to
to incentivize pre-prosecution
diversion because you get the
same result. You hold someone
accountable, you get in the in
the counseling or programs.
And then it's a double
beneficial situation because
they don't have a criminal
conviction and they don't have
the the all the negative
consequences of that conviction.
But, but the state needs
leverage, so if you look on the
upper right hand side of page
27, Madam Chair, chart 25.
The state needs leverage, so
back in the day, once again,
we'd offer, uh, to the defense
counsel 3 misdemeanors, 3 years'
probation, they would do
backflips to take that plea.
They would be like, we'll be
there tomorrow morning at 8,
we'll be chill out. We'll come
back next week now, the state,
for whatever reason, does not
have that much leverage, and
those pleas are being rejected.
The fact that a pre-prosecution
diversion is being rejected, I
think is.
Incredibly problematic and we
got to get our, our, our arms
around that. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Senator.
Representative Lord. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
So many issues.
Good. All right, I'll just ask a
couple of questions. So, uh, you
said there was a decrease in APD
people that are, are leaving no
longer in the academy. Have you
asked any of them why any of the
APD with boots on the ground,
why they're leaving, why?
No answer on that one. OK.
uh, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Lord, we didn't
ask APD specifically that, um,
but we can follow up with them.
All we know is their staffing
levels continue to decrease, um.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
if you ask them a lot of it's a
morality issues. Nobody wants to
be in law enforcement anymore or
the qualified immunity. There's
a lot of reasons why. And it's
the same with the sheriff's
department. So the people that I
know they're in law enforcement
are waiting to leave to get
transferred to go to another
state. They're looking for, um,
better conditions, they're
leaving the state. So, and
nobody wants to be in law
enforcement anymore, so I don't
know when at one point what
we're going to do, because we're
at that point right now. We
don't have enough
And
all the evidence shows that
having law enforcement in
hotspots actually works. That's
data-driven scientific evidence.
If you put them in these hot
spots and you put more law
enforcement boots on the ground.
I, I'm in the East Mountains and
I'm lucky if I get 4 sheriffs on
a good day. We don't have. I
love our sheriffs up there, but
we don't have enough and we have
an issue with up there with, uh,
speeding on 14. We don't have
enough law enforcement out there
to handle the issues. So we have
this perpetuation of nothing
getting done, nobody.
caught and I'm gonna get
arrested.
So my other question was on this
on page, uh, 20 Madam Chair,
you, uh, experts, you have.
So of course, we knew this is a
few people doing the crime over
and over again. Got that.
But my question is, where we
send most felony case dismissals
are because the evidence
collection problems.
Did that, where did that data
come from? Did that come from
prosecutors and they're saying
that there's not enough, um,
evidence.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Lord, we analyzed court records,
uh, directly.
In
Or Madam Chair, the, the problem
with that, they see it's either
twofold, it's either that is
actually correct, or it's that
the prosecutors want to say that
that's the reason that I'd like
to see more information on that
because if I'm going to just
what the prosecutor says, the
prosecutor may not want to
prosecute and say, well, there's
not enough evidence, period.
If it's a collection problem,
then we go back to the problem I
just discussed. We don't have
enough law enforcement. We don't
have anything to help the law
enforcement, and we're going to
end up with a perpetual problem
of somebody gets picked up,
there's not enough officers and
not dead. And if it is an actual
issue then that needs to be
addressed as well. So I'm seeing
a circle that is continually
broken that can never be fixed
until we address almost every
single issue that is in here and
that is
It's extremely.
Problematic. I'm such a huge
issue. Uh, it's, it's, I don't
see this ever.
Being fixed because it's not
just one thing, it's every
single thing listed in here and
in here and in here, and we
can't fix them until we actually
sit down and this is why I
always say our problems could be
handled better over beer and
tacos because we could actually
sit down and talk about this
stuff without all the politics
and sit down and say, OK, what's
really going on? and have an
actual APD officer that I could
ask questions and the sheriff I
could ask questions and find out
where is it broken from
everybody, every single
stakeholder.
Perspective. What do you think
we could do to fix this issue
because otherwise we're over
here trying to figure it out,
and I'm trying to look at other
states to see what they do. And
all I know right now is hotspots
is one of the ways that they are
handling the crime issue, and we
should be looking at what other
states are doing.
And try to fix this
overwhelming.
Problem.
Anyways, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
Representative Lujan. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um,
Yeah, crime, crime is the issue
everywhere in our state, um, we
have.
Madam Chair, myself, I just
wanted to say this. I, in my own
district in Santa Fe. I had to,
I witnessed a crime right in
front of me, um, at 10 o'clock
at night.
And I had to.
I had to act, so I had to take
the individual who is being
assaulted to the emergency room.
Um, that's why I'm a little
heavy on this, and then an hour
later.
Um, a woman was shot in the
head, same district, my
district.
As mentioned earlier, uh, 82
year old gentleman in my
community.
Shot and killed.
Um, this is, it's been reported
that in my district in my city
of Santa Fe that crime is down.
But when we're looking at these
reports even just from Bernalia,
I have to wonder what, what the
actual reports are in Santa Fe,
um.
And um, I'm affected.
We're all affected.
Um, so some of my questions are
just going to go into some of
the recommendations here. I
mean, I'm alerted to all this.
I've been working in harm
reduction legislation myself,
Madam Chair, I've been trying,
I've been working in behavioral
health reform, Madam Chair, I've
been trying to cross reference,
you know, with the competency
bill that I put forward. I'm
trying and putting this all
together. I can't thank you
enough.
And this committee enough for
being so poignant on, on a
really getting the information
out, especially to the public,
what we're doing and how we're,
we're managing this information
and how we are going to move
forward to try to help, um, so
with the recommendations you
gave, um, could you elaborate on
the, um,
Like how you got undeveloped
recommendations and the evidence
support.
Your recommendations.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Liu Han, many of these
recommendations have been
developed over the past several
years we've reported on these
issues, uh, particularly this,
uh, since 2018, uh, many of
these recommendations, you know,
we keep coming back with the
same recommendations over and
over again.
Um, when we develop a
recommendations usually we try
and look at what isn't working,
what could potentially work. We
look at best practices,
evidence-based practices we'll
try and look at what other
states are doing. Um, we look at
the research to try and figure
out what could potentially work
here and so that helps form the
basis of many of our
recommendations. Do you know any
of the barriers to, uh, the
participation in the diversion
programs.
Madam Chair Representative
Lihong, can you repeat the
question? Yeah. Do we know any
of the barriers of participation
with a diversion programs that
exist right now, Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Luhan, I think a lot of it.
There's probably multiple
barriers and it could be
explored further and taking a
deeper dive, uh, having talking
with in with several people
anecdotically, I think it
happens, it has a lot to do
with.
Policy buy-in from the
individuals working with the and
the policies by the various
actors of the criminal justice
system. So whether to send, um,
Clients or to refer clients or
offenders to particular like
treatment courts, um, whether
the is often by the DA whether
the public defender wants to
accept those plea deals or that
course of action, it's up to
them. So it has a lot to do with
cooperation and the actors at
the time, uh, so whatever we can
do to try and incentivize these
types of diversion programs we
should look into. Saman you
wouldn't, it's not the, the
funding for the diversion
programs, that's it.
It's a barrier specifically?
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Liuhan, uh, we're looking into,
we're currently looking into
that because we do find some
successful cases, particularly
in the 2nd judicial district
where some treatment courts are
have wait lists currently where
the they are being utilized. Um,
and so we wanted to look for
ways where we can expand those
opportunities, um, in the rest
of the state, they're not, uh,
in other areas of the state
they're not as utilized or
there's still vacancies.
In those programs, so we want to
look to opportunities where they
are being utilized where we
can't expand those and it may be
a matter of resources in those
particular cases, uh, in other
cases it may be a different
barrier.
Appreciate that. My last
question, Madam Chair, is
in your research and reporting
in this, are there any other
metro type, um,
Cities in the United States that
are comparative that are doing a
better job, so to speak, or have
lower rates than
Berna Leo.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Lujans rates as some of the data
that you propose here is a crime
rates and such that we're we're
at such a higher percent as
compared to other, uh, places in
New Mexico and then in the
United States, Madam Chair,
Representative Lujan, if you
turn into chart 10 on page 12,
uh, it gives a, this is
highlights motor vehicle thefts
in particular for but it lists
some comparable cities. Uh, when
we look at this for violence
property crime as well. We see
comparable patterns, uh, Doctor
Courtney had mentioned it
earlier, like motor vehicle
theft tends to be a canary in
the coal mine when it comes to
property crime, homicides for.
Violent crime and so when we
look at these rates compared to
other comparable cities we see
similar rates.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative.
Representative Martinez and then
Representative JC.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
gentlemen, I, I just have.
One question, uh.
I notice you rely a lot on the
UNM Institute of Social Research
for your data.
Um, on page 29 chart 27.
Um, you say 81% of defendants on
pretrial release in Berlio
County do not pick up new
charges.
That's not what I'm hearing when
I'm talking to
uh police on the ground, they're
arresting the same guy over,
over, over and over again, 4567
times. Um, so I'm not.
I'm not sure.
how that statement can be made.
Definitively because
What's happening in the real
world is very different than
what this
One
Chart is saying so um
Do you have a comment on that?
Um, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Martinez, uh,
unim's Institute of Social
Research.
or does their analysis directly
from the court records and data
in the second judicial district.
And so this all comes directly
from the court records, uh, but
I'm sure from law enforcement
officer's perspective was
frustrated and arresting the
same individual over and over
again. It, it doesn't appear
that way, but this this data
comes from all of the court
records within the judicial
district.
Madam Chair,
I, I, I still have a hard time
believing.
This right here, um.
Because it's not just one police
officer that's told me that.
And it's not just police
officers. I've spoken to
prosecutors who agree with my
take that it's
Although a small group of
actors, these actors are getting
picked up constantly and then
being released only to reoffend
over and over again, so.
I would be very interested to
Maybe talking to somebody from.
The institute to see how
These numbers
Go with what I'm hearing in in
the real world, so.
Um, I may reach out to the, to
the institute to try to set up a
meeting. Thank you very much.
Thank you,
Representative.presentative
Chasey and then Representative
Barrego.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for this presentation and um
I, I don't think this is
possible, but I'm wondering if
these data control for the, um,
lack of reporting by one quarter
of the
Of the
Target audience.
I don't know that you can
control for that. I know you can
control for socioeconomic status
or
Sex or whatever, but I don't
know that you can control for a
lack of data.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Chasey, uh, we don't have that
data in the court records. Most
of the our analysis will either
come directly from court records
or data that's reported to the
FBI, so we're trying to get
directly to the data, uh, but
it's we're limited by what they
offer.
So are lacking the data is
really important, um, Madam
Chair, and I, I did have a
communication with Doctor
Courtney, because I was
wondering how long ago that line
item, uh, the House Bill 2 was
lined on him vetoed and it was
for the 2024 fiscal year budget
in 2023. And um so that
reporting requirement was line
item vetoed in um March of or
April whenever the signing date
was of
2023, so it's very, very recent
and now just, I'm just gonna
make one quick point because I
think we're going to a new topic
this afternoon, and that is that
some of us got an email from
Peter Kubra suggesting, you
know, we were talking about the
Medicaid waiver for those who
are formally incarcerated, um,
Maybe we can have a discussion
of Medicaid waiver for people
with behavioral health
conditions who are just as
involved because, um, these
would be people who are
ineligible for a DD waiver, and
yet they've got serious mental
illness, um, substance use
disorder, brain injury, and
they're at risk.
For institutionalization,
hospitalization, jail or rehab
center. So we, we probably need
to look at that as part of our,
um, whole evaluation on
competency. So thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you,
Representative, I agree. I just
saw that email again and um
Peter's been sending us
information on that for a month
or two now, and I think it is
something that we should worth
having a presentation on because
I saw it and I know nothing
about that, so we need
Get some information so we can
all be educated and see if there
is a way to leverage that, um,
so good suggestion. Thank you,
Representative. Representative
Barrego.
Thank you Madam Chair. Um, I
just want to thank you guys for
this report. You're speaking my
language, especially with your
charts and your graphs and so
on. Um, and I just wanted to ask
because it's not mentioned in
here, but when you're talking
about the crime data, you're
talking about per capita, right?
And I think, uh, Representative
Lujan's question about
comparisons really came to light
with me, um, but it's not
explicit in your report that it
is per capita. So I just want
To clarify that.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Barrego, uh, it is per capita
data that's reported to the FBI
is all scaled per capita. So
it's reported, uh how many
crimes happen per 100,000
residents.
OK. And then I just wanted to
point out, Madam Chair, that um
I think it's chart, I can't
remember exactly. I just had it
a minute ago, um.
Let's see.
Um, chart 16, um, Madam Chair,
where we talk about the increase
in budget, uh, for sworn police
officers did rise during the
time that I was city councilor
and city council president. So I
remember that and what I wanted
to point out, Madam Chair, was a
lot of that budget, a lot of
that budget increase came during
the time of COVID and you know,
some officers were out, some
were sick, some, I mean, it
just, but I wanted to.
Point out the whole issue of
retention um because no sooner
that we're trained, we've
trained an officer, somebody
else takes them away to another
city and so retention is really
important in terms of keeping
our officers and I also wanted
to encourage you to share this
report with Mayor Keller and our
chief, uh, Medina. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative Senator Worth.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. I
just wanted to follow up a
little bit on, uh,
Representative Martinez's
questions about the data and I
saw Mr. Courtney, you were going
to jump in on that. I think this
is a really important issue
because what's happening is
there's a narrative out there
that you're hearing that we're
all hearing, but then there's
the data.
And so I just thought it would
be good to have Doctor Courtney.
Jump in there and and just give
us some more information. I'm
certainly familiar with the
Institute for Social Research
and have heard that
presentation, but I think it's
an important presentation.
Because this data.
Comes from the courts, as I
understand it, so there's not
missing data here, correct? This
is right out of the court
records. Is that correct, Madam
Chair?
Madam Chair, and, uh, Mr. Flora
leader, you know, I, I
I think that narrative that um
represented Martinez.
Uh, brought up doesn't
necessarily diverge from the
data. In fact, you know.
I think UNM a number of years
ago, um, uh.
was working with uh Scott
Darnell and, uh, under an effort
called the Albuquerque I Team,
and they found exactly what you
said. There's a very small
percentage of folks committing
all the crime and I I point you
towards page 14, chart 13.
Um, you know, it's kind of
interesting to see that between
Uh, 2022 and 23 felony arrests
actually increased by a little
bit in Albuquerque.
But if you look at felony
convictions so that that would
be, you know,
Basically, you know, those cases
reaching their their conclusion
and and resulting most likely in
incarceration that stayed flat
or even declined between 22 and
23. And this is part of that,
that domino effect that I was
mentioning where, you know, if
you have high crime, even if
you're making a little bit more
arrests if you're not getting
those folks convicted, they're
going to be back out on the
street and before bail reform,
the, you know, a lot of those.
Folks would just stay in
incarcerated.
Um, now that they're being let
back out, um, I think there's
some good analysis around, you
know, the fact that, that that
mechanism in and of itself isn't
what is leading to the increased
crime,
but, um, it's, you know, it's
very likely that still today, a
small percentage of people are
are committing most of those
crimes and if we're not holding
them accountable all the way
through the system from arrest.
To, to, um, incarceration, um, I
don't think it would be
surprising to hear, to hear
those, those stories from
Albuquerque police officers.
Uh, thank you, Madam. That's all
I have. Thank you, Senator.
Anyone else?
All right, we're going to take a
little recess for lunch. There
is lunch here. Um we have a
little extra time we're set to
