Thank you, Madam Chair,
committee members, as the chair
indicated, my name is Megan
Dorsey. I am a consultant for
CCJ.
It is. Is that better?
Thank you. Let me know if I need
to speak more loudly.
Um, I'll be presenting today on
the United States Supreme Court
opinion of City of Grant's Pass,
Oregon versus Johnson.
And this is a complex opinion
that including the concurrences
and dissents is 75 pages long,
which I'm going to try to
distill into succinct points in
a way that is interesting and
relevant to the work that this
committee is intending to do,
uh, but please feel free to
interrupt me if you have
questions as they come up.
So first I'm gonna start with a
bit of a factual summary about
what happened in this case in
detail the procedural history
that led the case to appear
before the United States Supreme
Court.
Um, first, we're talking about a
city in Oregon, Grants Pass,
which had at the time that this
action originated approximately
a population of 38,000 people,
an estimated 600 of whom were
experiencing uh inadequate
shelter on a daily basis.
In response to that situation,
the city passed 3 ordinances,
uh, attempting to address the
issue.
And as you may see, if you
choose to read the opinions, the
majority and the dissent
disagree as to the intent behind
these ordinances, but honestly
for the analysis of the opinion,
it's not hugely relevant.
Either way, the three ordinances
prohibited sleeping on public
sideways, streets, and
alleyways, camping on public
property and camping and
overnight parking in the city's
parks.
Uh, essentially, when considered
as a whole and taking into
consideration the definitions
that were also included in organ
statutes. These laws made it in
uh unlawful for a person to
sleep anywhere in public,
including in their own car at
any time as if they also had uh
something with them that was
used to protect them from the
elements such as a blanket.
The ordinances had escalating
penalties for a first violation,
an individual would be subject
to a fine which could start at
$295 and increased to $537 if
unpaid.
Subsequent violations could
result in a bar, meaning that
the individual would not be
allowed in any city park for
approximate up to 30 days.
And if an individual were to
violate a ban order, then they
could be charged with criminal
criminal trespass, which an
organ is a misdemeanor
punishable by 30 days in custody
and a $1250 fine.
Now, after organ uh grants
passed, excuse me, passed those
ordinances to, well, several
individuals at issue here,
Gloria Johnson and John Logan
decided to file a lawsuit.
Both of them were without
adequate housing, they tended to
live and sleep in their car, and
we're concerned that given the
way that they had to reside in
Oregon, that they were going to
be subject to criminal
punishment for unlawful camping.
And so they, with others filed a
class action lawsuit in the
district court.
The district court in Oregon uh
certified the class action and
granted summary judgment against
the city, or non-lawyers, that
means they said that um Johnson
and Logan won, but the city was
incorrect and could not enforce
the ordinances at issue.
And they did so under the 8th
Amendment. Essentially, the
district court relied on a
binding precedent of Martin,
which we'll talk about later,
but basically the, the district
court found that Grant's past
had far more homeless people
than practically available
shelter beds, uh, essentially
they had zero emergency shelter
beds, and the only beds
available had limitations upon
them, um, including religious
limitations that made them not
available for many of the city.
People experiencing
homelessness.
The district court found that
the under the ordinance is the
only way for people without
housing to legally sleep on
public property within the city
was if they were to lay on the
ground with only the clothing on
their backs without any items
near them, and that seems like
an unfair and unconstitutional
restriction upon these people
who had no other choice.
And so, the district court found
that everyone without shelter in
Grant's Pass was involuntarily
homeless. That was the legal
standard that they were relying
upon whether or not they were
involuntarily homeless, and that
was because the city's homeless
population outnumbered the
available beds.
Interestingly, uh, this
Decision was more narrow than
most people seem to understand
and more narrow than the
majority opinion, uh,
Described, the district court
said that although the city
could not enforce those
ordinances, they could still uh
legally and constitutionally
implement time and place
restrictions or when people
without housing could use their
belongings to be warm and dry,
and when those things they need
to be packed up and put away.
The city could ban the use of
tents in public parks.
And it could continue to enforce
laws that would actually further
public health and safety, such
as laws restricting littering,
public urination or defecation.
Obstruction of roadways,
possession or distribution of
illicit substances, harassment,
or violence.
Um, despite the narrowly
tailored injunction, the city
decided to appeal the district
court's opinion, and the case
was brought before the Ninth
Circuit, which affirmed in all
relevant parts. The circuit
majority found that all
unsheltered people in Grants
Pass were involuntarily
homeless, because again, as
found below, that there were not
enough shelter beds to
adequately house all of the
people in question.
Another little piece of this
that I think is important for
your analysis in ways in which
this may apply to laws you
consider in future.
That uh the only class member
who had standing to challenge
the sleeping provision of the of
the ordinance passed away during
litigation. And so the Ninth
Circuit remanded that particular
argument to the district court
to try to find a substitute
class member to maintain
standing.
So for non-lawyers, what that
means is every uh challenge has
to be premised upon a person who
has a right to make an objection
to that issue, and in this case,
the only person that had filed
suit on the sleeping issue had
passed away, and so that issue
was never brought before the
Supreme Court.
Based upon the Ninth Circuit's
affirmation, the city again
appealed. Many others joined in
the appeal, a lot of briefing
was filed on both sides of the
issues and ultimately the United
States Supreme Court issued
their opinion on June 28th of
2024. And so the rest of my
presentation will describe for
you um the different analysis
between the majority and the
dissent, as well as the impact
this may have on the future.
So, first, we need to identify
what issue the court was facing
and not surprisingly, the
majority and the dissent phrased
the issue very differently. Um,
and these are quotes directly
from the majority opinion and
from the dissent, but the
majority said that the only
question we face is whether one
specific provision of the
Constitution. The cruel and
unusual punishments clause of
the Eighth Amendment prohibits
the enforcement of public
camping laws.
While the dissent said, the only
question for the court today is
whether the Constitution permits
punishing homeless people with
no access to shelter, or
sleeping in public with as
little as a blanket to keep
warm.
And so with that framing of the
issue we'll turn to the the law
that the part or that the
justices relied upon in deciding
this case.
As you, I'm sure are aware, the
Constitution imposes limits on
what governments may declare to
be criminal and how criminal
laws may be enforced and what
punishments are available after
enforcement or as part of
enforcement.
Uh, the First Amendment.
For tax uh prohibits the
government from using criminal
laws to abridge the right to
speak, worship, and assemble.
Equal protection clause prevents
governments from adopting laws
that individually discriminate
between persons, due process
clauses of the 5th and 14th
Amendments ensure that officials
may not displace certain rules
associated with criminal
liability, so that old and
vulnerable, so rooted
traditions.
Long story short, they can't
take away due process rights
from people in criminal
litigation.
The 5th and 6th Amendments
provide for other um rights for
people to avoid prosecution, and
finally, the Eighth Amendment
prohibition against cruel and
unusual punishments was the
focus of this particular case.
And the reason I list out some
of those other protections
available under the Federal
Constitution is because
Those were not reached in this
case. This entire opinion was
only decided under the Eighth
Amendment, which means that
these ordinances and similarly
situated ordinances may still be
subject to attack under these
other provisions.
Um, however, in, in the majority
opinion here,
The majority held that cruel and
unusual punishments clause
focuses the question on what
method or kind of punishment
government may impose after a
criminal conviction on the
question of whether a government
may criminalize a particular
behavior in the first place, or
how it may go about securing a
conviction for that offense.
Basically, excuse me, basically
what the majority held is that
the 8th Amendment, this
particular section of the Eighth
Amendment is supposed to be
about um specifically what
Whether a government may may
impose a specific um punishment
after a conviction, not what the
government can criminalize in
the first place.
Interestingly, the decent
disagrees with that analysis of
the Eighth Amendment.
Uh, the dissent found that the
prohibitions under the Eighth
Amendment are not limited to
medieval tortures. Instead, the
Eighth Amendment places
limitations on the powers of
those entrusted with the
criminal law functions of the
government.
Specifically, the descent found
that the 8th Amendment
circumscribes the criminal
process in three ways. It limits
the types of punishment that can
be imposed for convicted crimes,
prescribes punishment grossly
disproportionate
disproportionate to the severity
of the crime and imposes
substantive limits on what may
be made criminal and punished as
such.
So again, that that differing
perspective on exactly what the
Eighth Amendment does is
critical in a way that the
majority decided and the way
that its dissented.
Uh, another critical, there's 3
critical presidential cases in
this opinion that the court
relied upon to varying degrees.
So I'm gonna go through them as
quickly as I can because they're
really relevant to understanding
the the broader impact of the
city of Grants Pass.
Uh, the first case is Martin v.
Boise. Uh, in that case, the
city of Boise, Idaho, made a
camping ordinance that made it a
misdemeanor to use street
sidewalks, parks, or public
places for camping, and the
court, uh,
Under the Eighth Amendment
analyzed whether that type of
ordinance was constitutional.
And in that case, in Boise, in
Martin B. Boise, the, the court
found yes, that the Eighth
Amendment's cruel and unusual
clause prohibits the imposition
of criminal penalties for
sitting, sleeping, or lying
outside on public property or
homeless individuals who cannot
obtain shelter specifically.
The court concluded essentially
that as long as there's no other
option for sleeping indoors, the
government cannot criminalize
indigent homeless people for
sleeping outdoors on public
property.
And that access to alternative
shelter was legally lacking
whenever there is a greater
number of homeless individuals
and the number of practically
available shelter beds, and this
practically available shelter
beds is very important. Uh,
basically it means that beds are
not practically available, even
if the bed is open, if it is
limited by a type of rule, such
as, um, it's only available for
individuals who don't smoke or
who agree to attend religious.
Proceedings.
Now, uh, another case that was
critical for the court's
reasoning in City of Grants was
Robinson v. California.
In that case, Mr. Robertson was
convicted under a California
statute for being addicted to
the use of narcotics, and he
faced a mandatory mandatory 90
day jail sentence.
The court considered whether the
Constitution prohibited
criminalization of the status of
being addicted to drugs and held
that the cruel and unusual
punishments provision of the
Eighth Amendment.
Prohibited California from
enforcing that law, essentially,
it is unconstitutional to
criminalize a status of being
addicted to narcotics, and in so
reasoning the court recognized
that imprisonment for 90 days is
not in the abstract, cruel and
unusual punishment, but
When, especially because there
are many crimes for which a
similar penalty is available,
uh, but in this case, the court
reasoned that when punishing
status, even one day and says
prison or jail would be cruel
and unusual.
Now, um, this, in this
particular case was kind of the
linchpin for the for the opinion
in City v. Grant. So before I
move on to the next president,
I'm just going to give you a
little bit of a take of the
majority versus the dissent on
this particular piece of
precedent.
The majority, when considering
Robinson in light of Grant's
past facts, distinguished
Robinson, meaning they said
France passes is not like
Robinson.
They found that public camping
ordinances like those before us,
like those in Grants Pass are
nothing like the law at issue in
Robinson.
Rather than criminalize mere
status, Grant's past forbids
actions, like occupying a
campsite on public property for
the purpose of maintaining a
temporary place to live.
So the court in City of Grants
Pass, said the grants passed
grants pass ordinances do not
violate Robinson because they do
not criminalize status alone.
The dissent disagreed.
And said that in fact, Robinson
is controlling and should
squarely resolve this case.
Um, and quoting from the
dissent, they said, indeed, the
majority seems to agree that an
ordinance that fined and jailed
homeless people would be
unconstitutional.
Um,
However, they incorrectly apply
Robinson.
First, no one contest the power
of local governments to address
homelessness. Second, the
majority overstates the line
drawing problems that this case
presents. Third, straightforward
application of Robinson does not
conflict with Powell, which
we'll talk about later. And
finally, the majority draws the
wrong message from the various
amici requesting this Court's
guidance.
some other wonderful quotes from
the dissent's opinion there, but
essentially, the point was that
the dissent believed that the
ordinances in the city of Grants
did in fact criminalize status
because they were geared towards
people experiencing
homelessness. Again, I'll get
into the nuance of that a little
bit more at the moment.
But the 3 critical presidential
case um that both the majority
and dissent argued about was
Powell v. Texas.
In that case, a defendant was
convicted under a Texas statute
making it a crime to get drunk
or be found in a state of
intoxication in any public
place.
The defendant in that case, Mr.
Powell, appealed his conviction
and argued that the conduct of
conviction, i.e. being drunk in
public, was an involuntary
byproduct of his status as an
alcoholic.
And the court considered, did
the Texas statute
unconstitutionally criminalized
status under Robinson.
And held that states shall not
enforce laws that criminalize a
mere status, but states maintain
authority to secure a conviction
when the accused has committed
some act society has interest in
preventing, whether defendants
act might be described as
involuntary or occasioned by a
particular status.
That is how the majority court
in City of Grants Pass
characterized the opinion or the
holding in Powell.
Um, and in interpreting Powell
that way, the majority found
that grant's pass is like Powell
and should be decided like
Powell was decided.
Specifically that the 8th
Amendment does not allow an
expansion of Robinson sufficient
to cover the intrusion into
substantive law, and that was
what
The majority saw the people in
City of Grants Pass attempting
to do it, attempting to do.
Uh, the majority also found
You know reasoning that was
somewhat reliant upon Powell,
that adopting a standard
prohibiting criminalization of
involuntary acts would be
challenging because courts would
be required to determine when
something is involuntary.
Even though that is a standard
that is very commonly used in a
variety of capacities in our
court systems, both federal and
state.
The majority in Grant's Pass
also found that it would be hard
for a jurisdiction to keep
accurate counts of available
beds and individuals without
adequate shelter, and it would
be hard to define what
practically available means when
those those things are standard
um task that governments are
assigned to do and the
definition of practically
available was made very clear in
Robinson.
Uh, finally, the majority argued
that many people will refuse to
use shelters if they are allowed
to sleep in public.
Which indicates again, perhaps
in Grant's past, the the
Nature of the adequate
inadequate shelters that were
available if people were more
willing to sleep outside in the
elements than to utilize those
services that were available.
Now, the descent takes a very
different take on Powell, and in
fact, termed it a straw man, uh,
in, in tech in legal terms, the
dissent distinguishes Powell.
The dissent said that the court
in Powell uh
It seems to me that the dissent
was implying that the majority
misstated the ruling in Powell,
and I'm trying to say that
delicately in the same way that
lawyers would, but I think that
the the exact language from the
descent is important.
The language from the dissent
says that the court in Powell
considered the distinction
between status and conduct, but
could not agree on a controlling
rationale. The four justices
concluded that Robinson covered
any condition the defendant is
powerless to change.
And 4 justices rejected that
view.
Justice White, who cast the
fifth vote, the deciding vote,
left the question open because
the defendant had made no
showing that he was unable to
stay off the street in the night
in question.
Even Justice Marshall's
plurality opinion in Powell
agreed that Robinson prohibited
enforcing laws that criminalize
mere status. And so the Powell
court considered a statute that
criminalized voluntary conduct,
getting drunk, that could be
rendered involuntary by status,
alcoholism.
So, to put a finer take on that.
The majority is saying,
That Powell made a very clear
rule that you cannot do this
thing that Grant's past is
trying to do, and the dissent is
saying that is not what happens
in Powell. They did not provide
a controlling rationale that the
majority agreed upon.
Now,
Uh, a little bit more clear
information about what the
majority held in City of Grants
based upon all of this
precedents and their
interpretation of that
precedent.
The majority opinion was written
by Justice Gorsuch, who was
joined by Roberts, Thomas Alito,
Kavanaugh, and Barrett.
Um, and essentially they found
that the city's ordinances were
not cruel because they were not
designed to cause terror, pain
or disgrace, and that they were
not unusual because similar
punishments have been used in
other cases, um, as I referenced
earlier.
Uh, Justice Thomas did file a
concurrence to the majority
holding and held uh which just
added some dicta meaning some
thoughts about what the court
might do in the future,
essentially, Justice Thomas
found that Robinson was wrongly
decided and that with the
appropriate case, the court
should consider overturning it,
but did clarify.
That this opinion, the city of
Grants Pass, does not require
reconsideration of Robinson,
which remains binding precedent,
remains controlling law.
Justice Thomas also mentioned
that the opinion did not reach
the civil fine and park
exclusion provisions of the
ordinances as because he
believes that those are outside
the scope of the Eighth
Amendment.
Um, the dissent.
Obviously disagrees with exactly
what that holding is, um, and I
think that some of the reasoning
behind the dissent is relevant
to the conversations that this
committee has been having.
Uh, so, the dissent said, and,
and I quote,
Sleep is a biological necessity,
not a crime. For some people,
sleeping outside is their only
option. The city of Grants Pass,
jails and fines those people for
sleeping anywhere in public at
any time, including in their
cars, if they use as little as a
blanket to keep warm or a rolled
up shirt as a pillow for people
with no access to shelter that
punishes them for being
homeless. That is unconscionable
and unconstitutional.
Unconstitutional, punishing
people for their status is cruel
and unusual under the Eighth
Amendment. C. Robinson.
The dissent held that it's
possible to acknowledge and
balance the issues facing local
governments and the humanity and
dignity of people without
adequate housing, while still
maintaining constitutionality
and found that instead of
choosing to engage in that
balancing act, the majority
focused almost exclusively on
the needs of local governments
and leaves the most vulnerable
in our society with an
impossible choice, quote, either
stay awake or be arrested.
Um, there are interestingly
enough, since I have heard this
committee mention time and time
again an interest in evidence,
data, and real life examples.
The descent is full of real life
examples of the ways in which
ordinances like that have been
utilized to um
Results in really negative
impacts, and I encourage you to
take a look at those in more
detail if you're interested.
Um, one which I do want to draw
the court or excuse me, the
committee's attention to is
found on the dissent page 7, in
which there was a Nashville man
who experienced homelessness for
nearly 20 years. When an at work
reacher tried to help him secure
housing, the worker had
difficulty finding him for his
appointments because he was
frequently arrested for being
homeless. He was arrested 1098
times and had 250 charge
citations all for petty
offenses.
The outreach worker made him a
t-shirt that read, Please do not
arrest me.
May out outreach worker is
working on my housing.
Once the worker was able to
secure him stable housing, he
had no further encountings with
the police, no citations, and no
arrests.
And I think, again, that is one
example where we see the real
underlying problem here is
access to secure housing.
There was a concurrence to the
scent.
Concurrence to the dissent that
was filed by Justice Douglas,
who said this Court too has a
role to play in faithfully
enforcing the Constitution to
prohibit.
Punishing the very existence of
those without shelter or remain
hopeful that someday in the near
future this court will play its
role in safeguarding
constitutional liberties for the
most vulnerable among us.
Because the court today
abdicates that role
irrespectfully dissent.
Uh, now, it is important to
recognize that although this
opinion was a landmark opinion
that drastically changed the
legal view on this issue. There
are still legal issues that
remain in this area, um, as you
can see both confirmed by the
majority and the dissent, as
well as the related
concurrences. This issue was
decided squarely under the
Eighth Amendment, um, and there,
and as we know, in New Mexico,
the state affords greater
protections under the.
State constitution than it does
under the federal Constitution.
In addition to that, the Supreme
Court did not reach issue issues
of under the First Amendment or
under due process, which remain
available.
To uh parties who object to
these types of.
Laws
Um, and
Sorry, I just want to find, oh,
both the majority and the
dissent made clear, stated
Verbatim, nothing in today's
decision prevents states, cities
and counties from going a step
further and declining to
criminalize public camping
altogether.
Indeed, although the majority
describes Martin as adopting an
unworkable rule, the elected
representatives in Oregon
codified that very rule after
this litigation occurred.
In 2021, Oregon passed a law
that constrains the abilities of
municipalities to punish
homeless residents for public.
For for for public sleeping.
Um, and the law was meant to
ensure that individuals
experiencing homelessness are
protected from fines or arrests
for sleeping or camping on
public property when there are
no other options. In addition,
both the majority and the
dissent drew um the public's
attention to alternative
measures to these types of laws,
and indicated that a variety of
jurisdictions have tried to
combat inadequate housing by
expanding shelter and affordable
housing opportunities, investing
in mental health and substance
abuse treatment.
programs developing outreach
programs to improve relations
between governments and those
they serve and enact legal
restrictions that limit or
restrict encampments.
Or other conduct that pose
significant health or safety
risks, such as limitations on
fire, cooking, harassment,
illegal drug use, and littering.
Interestingly enough, the
majority found it persuasive
that organ itself allows a
necessity defense to most
criminal charges, and I think
although I didn't have a chance
to research this potentially
civil penalties, um, which may
prevent convictions under these
types of ordinances.
And I believe that concludes my
presentation and I'm happy to
either pass it to Mr. Cummings
or stand for questions as the
chair sees fit.
That's a good
It might be best if we have
questions on this case and then
when we talk.
The other one is relates to gun
safety and it's a little, it's
different in terms of analysis
and focus and so on. So
questions about Grant's past.
We're scheduled to end at about
noon. We do have some leeway in
the um uh Senator Ivey Soto,
representative um Chasey, anyone
else?
OK.
Uh, representative Brego.
Representative Lord.
000, Nyber. OK, I thought maybe
you were
OK.
OK, Lopez, let's try to keep it
to about 5 minutes each cause we
have a second case that's coming
up. All right. Um, where are I,
Senator um Iy Soto. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, so just, first
of all, just real quick to start
off with Powell. So, so my
understanding of the holding of
power is that being an alcoholic
is status but being drunk is
behavior.
Madam Chair, Senator.
I think that that is a fair.
Summary of the
Majority opinion.
In the city of Grants Pass on
their interpretation of power.
OK. And
And right, and so that's, so
that's how they're, they're
trying to splice it for Grant's
pass. Correct. Mike.
My question is, is, is, is on
the definition or application of
involuntary homelessness. How
was involuntariness?
Used
Or, or, or is that now takes
strip stripped away.
With
With this decision.
Madam Chair, Senator, it's a
fabulous question, and I'll be
honest with you, I don't know
how courts are going to
Interpret this in future cases
as far as involuntary involun
the involuntary nature of
homelessness is concerned, I
think it depends upon.
The opinion in the city of
Grants Pass does not require an
analysis of whether or not it is
involuntary. Um, if a claim were
brought that was based upon
other precedent, I think that it
would be reasonable to still
rely upon the way the
involuntariness was analyzed in
Robinson.
of Grants Pass didn't overturn
Robinson. Right. OK. And no, and
the, and the, and the reason I
ask that is, is so I was
So I was having a fairly
intimate lunch with a good
friend of mine yesterday.
And um what? And, and, and what
are the issues that the, that my
friend raised was that uh uh
interestingly, like something
like over two thirds of the
homeless people.
In this state are actually not
from the state.
Um, and, uh, according to the
stats that she has.
And that, and that that doesn't
make their, their situation any
less tragic.
But it does make whether they're
homeless here.
A little bit of a question
versus the responsibility that
we have.
For people who
become homeless here.
As opposed to who became
homeless somewhere else.
And moved here.
And, and whether or not there's,
there's any analysis.
Uh, in this, that, that, that
comes up. Madam Chair, Senator,
thank you for that
clarification. I think I
understand the question better
now.
Um,
Again, I can't predict what the
courts will do in the future,
obviously. That being said, it's
my opinion that there is nothing
in the city of Grants Pass that
directly implicates that issue.
Uh, however, I do believe that
it is clear in Grant's past that
Robinson is still controlling
law.
And in Robinson, whether or not
a person is involuntarily
homeless is predicated solely
upon the population of people
without adequate housing in the
in the number of available
practically available shelter
beds. So where the individuals
without adequate housing came
from, um, is not part of that.
OK.
OK, thank you. I appreciate
that. Thank you very much. Thank
you, Senator, um Representative
Chasey and then Represented
Brega.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
you might have been addressing
my question.
In answering the senator's
question, you
Mentioned that you thought the
holding was more limited than we
might initially have um
have viewed it.
Is it because of the
The different or the limitation
on the new interpretation of
Robinson, Madam Chair, Madam
Leader.
Not exactly, um.
My
I've seen a lot of
Summaries in legal journals and
inliers and things like that
that have categorized this as a
Supreme Court case that says
it's OK to criminalize living on
the streets, and I think that is
an unfairly broad way to
summarize this case because it
was only decided under the
Eighth Amendment, excluding
access to the excluding the
fines and fees provision of the
Eighth Amendment.
And so because of that, even the
majority in grants pass says.
That there may be other due
process issues at play, but
those were not raised in this
case. They were not analyzed or
addressed in this case. And so,
similarly situated ordinances
may still be subject to
constitutional scrutiny under
other constitutional provisions
outside of the Eighth Amendment.
Oh, thank you very much, um,
Madam Chair, that raises all
kinds of questions in my mind
and um and maybe.
It's provides a little bit of
hope for
Um,
are not criminalizing the
status.
And uh
So I, I guess we just have a lot
of thinking.
And uh.
Well, designing to do. Thank
you, Madam. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative.
Representative Rego and Nibert
and then Cedillo.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, Megan, with regard to
littering, um, how, how do they
define littering?
I'm sorry. How is littering
defined?
Um, Madam Chair, representative,
it was not defined in this case.
OK, um,
So
This other question that I have
is with, with regard to
encampments.
Um, and
Kind of the government moving
out those encampments, is that,
was that at all discussed in
this?
In this case,
Madam Chair Representative, I'm
guessing you might be
referencing some of the
litigation in Albuquerque
around, yes, I see you nodding,
um.
That particular issue is not
directly addressed by City of
Grants Pass, though I would
imagine that the opinion in City
of Grants Pass may be utilized
in future in that litigation.
OK. And just one comment, Madam
Chair, um,
You know,
One of the one of the things
that it alluded to in in your
discussion was providing housing
as but I guess one of the
questions that comes up in my
mind, which we see pretty often
is with regard to
And dare I say it, but um
urinating and deprecating in
public. It was that, was there
any discussion regarding that?
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you for that question. In
part, yes, um, to put a slight
spin on the way you're phrasing
that question, both the majority
and the dissent were very clear
that nothing in this in this
opinion limits governments,
local government's ability or
state government abilities to
criminalize conduct.
That the entity deems it should
prevent and in fact encouraged
in some places were definitely
in the dissent encouraged and in
the majority allowed that it may
be effective to focus on conduct
uh rather than status, so things
like glittering, graffiti,
harassment, and urination and
public defecation are more ripe
for criminalization and perhaps
the status itself.
The slight twist on that, that
the dissent has is that these
ordinances that eliminate the
ability to sleep in public are
based upon status, which
obviously was not the majority
holding, but either way,
regardless of what the purpose
of these these particular
ordinance at issue are. There is
no limitation on prohibiting
urinating in public.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you for that because I, I
was trying in a polite way to
ask about littering and actually
get to that, the answer on, on
public defecation and, and
urinating, so that's why I asked
the question, um, and ma'am
chair, I'm just gonna mention,
um, right now, the city of
Espanola has a public encampment
that is close to the river and
um you know, concerns a lot of
people because of.
You know, Eli and so on going
into the river. So, um, I'm
fully aware that, you know, in
Albuquerque DOT has moved some
of these encampments, and
that's.
The, the reason that I asked
about moving the encounterments
and so on. thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Neibert.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
So, Megan, what are the cities
and counties.
Supposed to do to deal with the
Issues that they're facing with
these.
Sometimes encampments or
sometimes sporadic, you know,
tents popping up.
What, what is your
recommendation that they do to
address the situation.
Madam Chair, Senator, I would
never presume to tell the
legislature what it should do or
presume myself and the cities,
uh Same,
same response that nonetheless,
I would, Madam Chair, Senator,
draw.
Local government's attention to
several places in both the
majority and the dissent.
In which they enumerate
alternative measures that can be
utilized to address this. And
and I want to be clear, both the
majority and the dissent.
Readily and repeatedly
acknowledged that this is a
complex issue and that
policymakers, lawmakers need to
have, I hate using this phrasing
cause we hear it all too much. A
wide range of tools in the
toolbox to address the issue.
And um some of those
suggestions, which were
enumerated in
Both the descent and
The majority opinion included
focusing on expanding shelter
and affordable housing
opportunities, similar to what a
Representative Borego was
referencing including making
sure that there are time and
place restrictions, um, and
other conduct related
restrictions on encampments, uh,
potentially things protecting
the environment around those
locations if needed, um,
investing heavily in mental
health and substance abuse
treatment and availability.
Access to those types of
Um, options, developing outreach
programs specifically to get
warm handoffs and person to
person contact between trusted
government officials and these
these individuals who tend to
have very deep
Distrust of authority given the
way that they perceive ongoing
harassment and criminalization
of behavior they don't believe
they can avoid, um, again, as I
said, enacting legal
restrictions that limit or
restrict encampments or conduct
that pose significant health or
safety risks.
Um
I think those are the big ones
that were listed in the opinion,
sir.
Um, Madam Chair, Megan.
Most or many of the cities in
New Mexico are
Surrounded by public land.
Minister by the Bureau of Land
Management, the United States
Forest Service or or other
federal entities.
And I've often wondered if
A community could
Designate
Someplace.
Outside of their normal parks
and things as a place where
People could go.
And for for lack of a better
word, but they could set up
their.
Um, tents there camp and do
other things on those lands
because it seems that
Many of the communities that I'm
familiar with, they're concerned
about.
The impact.
That this type of activity is
having on.
The residents in in that area,
people that own homes, kids,
what have you that are that are
in that area, so they don't want
it in their backyard. They want
it someplace else, so looking at
someplace else, if there's uh
Lambs adjacent to a city that
are administered by the federal
government. I'm wondering if
there's a mechanism to uh get
those lands designated and, and
I know there's mechanisms to
take federal lands.
Into uh uh
A community's purview.
Uh, for, for other uses and I'm
wondering if that would work.
And my other question is, you,
you mentioned sleeping was a
natural or a requirement of
one's uh.
I guess the function in life.
And I'm wondering how that's uh
that's viewed, but yet you can
outlaw urinating and defecating
because it seems to me that
those three things fall in the
same category, uh, they're,
they're all required for
For one to
continue to live. So this kind
of an odd comment there, but
This is a difficult, difficult
issue that I know counties and
cities are particularly
struggling with.
And I don't know that we as a
state are providing uh
Maybe much uh much help.
But somehow we do have to do
what Gorsuch said, we have to as
a, as society, we have to come
to grips with this and figure
out some solutions because we
can't have uh
Uh
We, we can't have the problems
that we're having to face and
all the issues that that we're
having to face, uh, and, and
just rely on each community to
do it alone.
Thank you, Senator. Um, we have
Senator Cedil Lopez and then
Senator Maestas.
Thank you, Madam Chair. A lot
of, um, a lot of the issues have
already been addressed. I want
to focus on something you said
that I think is really important
to keep in mind while um
Well this sets the floor, so it
allows the state or state, city,
county may criminalize certain
conduct.
It doesn't mean that we must,
and in fact, it would be
probably better policy to stay
away from.
This area. Did I hear you say,
and if you could clarify that
some suggested it or, or could
you, I didn't see that in the
opinion, so I.
Yeah. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator.
Yes, Senator, you hit the nail
on the head, both in the
majority opinion and in the
dissent.
The, uh, the justices made it
very clear.
That, of course, just because
something is legal doesn't
doesn't mean that it is a good
public policy. It doesn't mean
that any government is required
to follow suit with what this
opinion says, um, and
specifically in response to your
question, Organ made just that
decision after all of this
litigation in 2021, the law that
they passed after this was
litigated initially, um,
obviously before this opinion
came from the Supreme Court, but
after these issues were brought
to the
District court level, um, their
law said that any city or county
law that regulates the act of
sitting, lying, sleeping, or
keeping warm and dry outdoors on
public property that is open to
the public, must be objectively
reasonable as to time, place,
and manner with regards to
persons experiencing
homelessness.
The law also grants persons
experiencing homelessness, a
cause of action to bring suit
for injunctive or declaratory
relief to challenge the
objective reasonableness of an
ordinance. And again, as I
stated before, that law was
intended to ensure that
individuals experiencing
homelessness are protected from
fines or arrests for sleeping or
camping on public property when
there are no other options. And
so Oregon did exactly as you
were saying, Senator, and said
even though
This is possible under the
Constitution, we as a state do
not believe it's good public
policy to criminalize behavior
that cannot be avoided. Thank
you. Um, that's all I have, man.
Thank you, Senator,
Senator Maest Thank you, Madam
Chair, and thank you for the
presentation, Ms. Dorj. I
appreciated your analysis.
I enjoyed it. The um couple
quick comments. One is kind of
the tool that the state has, the
government has is is the crime
of trespassing. Um,
Trespassing, you don't break the
law for your initial appearance,
but if you're told to leave and
you remain and that's a
trespass, or if you received
proper notice not to return and
you return, and that triggers
the crime of trespassing.
Unfortunately, um,
Trespassing is not a
Not um
Enforced in my hometown for and
for good reason, you know, uh.
You know, APD has come a long
way and checking the boxes with
regards to its settlement
agreement but has not.
Overcome uh
The number of shootings of
civilians in in Hambuquerque. So
anyway, there's reasons behind
it, but uh we should consider
looking at the trespassing
statute, Madam Chair, it's a
year, it's a full misdemeanor. I
don't know when it came into
effect, probably back in the
day.
Uh, it should be more of a petty
misdemeanor or even like a 30
day fine, which would be be more
reasonable if somebody were to
be arrested. Right now, people
are getting citations. And then
secondly, um, we have to look
ourselves in the mirror as a
state with regards to the lack
of housing, and the housing
stock in this state.
In the fine city of Santa Fe,
folks are fighting a four-story
apartment building.
In my hometown on 4th Street,
which is a, which was the old
Route 66, a major thoroughfare.
The city of Los Aranchos, which
is
Basically a bunch of rich people
incorporated their own city to,
so they could file lawsuits, uh,
is, is, is trying to stop a
four-story apartment house.
So even though I agree with the
wants and desires of those
folks, we have to put our own
personal wants and desires of
what we perceive as perfection.
Uh, that has to be set aside to
overcome generational poverty.
There was a study done in
Seattle, Washington, and I'm
sure that looked at post Jim
Crow zoning laws, post Jim Crow,
not pre-post.
And those, the inability to
build casitas, to subdivide the
inability to do this or that
with your own property, uh, cost
the black community $13 billion
in generational wealth.
We really need to
Consider if we're gonna overcome
generational poverty in the
state, we, we
We cannot fight housing, the,
the buildup of the housing
stuff. Thank you.
Um
Thank you, Senator
else before we go to the next
case.
Um
Represented, didn't you speak
already?
OK, briefly, please, cause we
have to move to the next case.
Thank you, Madam Chair, for
allowing me. Um, I just wanted
to mention um in Albuquerque, we
built some transitional housing
for the homeless, and it was on
2nd and Lomas, and that
basically that housing and I, I
took your comment, uh, Senator
Maastis, um, because what it did
is it took people off the
street, gave them it's a smaller
unit, but it gave them the
opportunity to
Transition into actual housing
because the idea of putting
people immediately in the house
and that, you know, from the
street is um
It's something that we really
need to think about deeply. So
thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. OK,
Brandon.
The floor is yours.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
We're gonna discuss gun law,
which I promise will be really
straightforward and.
make a lot of sense.
Um,
So really quickly, there's 2
cases that I'll mention on
background that you help us
understand Bruin too.
I'm sorry I'm gonna try.
So 2 cases that I'll mention
before Bruin, which is just
heller was the case that brought
us the recognize that there's an
individual right under the
Second Amendment, but the right
to keep and bear arms is an
individual, right? I should say.
And McDonald, which applied that
to the states.
The next major piece of case law
following that was the Bruin
decision, and the Bruin decision
told us that
Give us a two-part test.
Is the behavior that is
attempting that you're trying to
regulate.
Protected by the Second
Amendment.
And that would mean is it
something that the Second
Amendment, the plain text
recognizes.
Um,
good example, the easiest
example there is that there's
never been a serious contention
that the Second Amendment
includes your right to own a
nuclear weapon.
That's outside, that would be an
unusual and danger and
exceptionally dangerous weapon.
Um, assuming that the item
you're talking about is
Falls within the text of the
Second Amendment.
Which would be any firearm.
Uh, then the question is whether
There is
Regulation, historically and
historical or traditional
pattern of regulation
sufficiently analogous.
To allow the modern regulation,
uh, to stand. Sometimes that's
referred to as the historical
analog test.
Uh, an easy example.
Meeting that test would be.
Um, the New Mexico safe storage
law.
There is an analog, historical
analog from the colony of
Massachusetts, which
specifically regulated storing
guns in houses.
US versus Rahimi is the first.
Major test to be brought before
the Supreme Court.
Post ruin.
And post the introduction of
that historical analog test.
So, the facts in uh Rahimi.
I'm gonna try to be real brief
on um
Zakki Rahimi actually.
something of a one-man crime
spree.
In 2019, Rahimi allegedly
assaulted his girlfriend during
an argument in a parking lot.
An attack in which he was said
to have fired and uh fired his
weapon and threatened her with a
gun.
The Texas State court entered a
protective order against Mr.
Rahimi, barring him from being
with 200 yards of the woman.
Finding that domestic violence
was likely to reoccur.
Finding that he was a credible
threat to her safety.
The order suspended his handgun
license and prohibited
prohibited him from possessing
firearm.
Um,
Following Mr. Rahimi's repeated
arrest, he was charged by the
federal government with having
defied that protective order and
thereby charged with violating
18 USC 922G8.
Um, that would be the section of
922G is the section of federal
law that prohibits possession of
a of a firearms by certain
categories of persons.
One category is felons.
One category is persons who have
a domestic violence protection
protective order issued against
them and that's
The G8 category.
Ultimately, um,
Mr. Rahimi.
was
allowed to enter a conditional
plea in federal district court.
He
Uh, appealed the conviction to
the 5th Circuit.
And the 5th Circuit determined
that
The 922 D8 prescription against
possessing a firearm.
As a person who is subject to a
domestic violence protective
order.
failed to pass constitutional
muster.
Under the Bruin decision.
The court specifically found in
rejecting the all of the
historical analogs presented to
it, the 5th Circuit found that
the law of disarming.
Suspected domestic abusers was
one that quote, our ancestors
would never have accepted.
So this is the first case
brought to the Supreme Court.
To
Uh
Test the boundaries of that
ruin.
Historical analog.
Um,
Standard.
Writing for the majority on
We're gonna do sort of a high
level overview. Happy to answer
questions about it. This was a 8
to 1 decision.
With one majority opinion, 5
concurring opinions, and one
dissent.
Um,
So
The, uh, yeah, there's a a a.
Obviously the the concurring
opinions agree in the outcome.
Um, they write.
But they reach very, they get
their very different way.
Um,
In writing the opinion.
Chief Justice Roberts.
First categorized it, the
principle behind the decision as
one of common sense.
And wrote that when an
individual possesses a clear
threat of physical violence to
another, the threatening
individual may be disarmed.
Robert's opinion.
Says that this decision
Ports with, it doesn't change or
Uh, overrule the brewin holding.
To support that position.
He
Comes up with a historical
analog.
Where he used 2 separate
And relatively unknown type of
relatively unknown in modern
law, types of
Uh,
Crimes. So the first or or or
laws. The first is the more
simple, straightforward is a
going.
Going armed
Was
And the going armed laws would
be.
No 1 may go armed to a certain
location.
Or a person who had previously
Um, engaged in
Violent behavior or dangerous
behavior with weapons at a
certain location would not be
permitted themselves to go armed
to that location, even if other
people were allowed to go armed.
The surety laws were described
as a
A form of preventative justice.
Which authorized magistrates to
require individuals suspected of
future misbehavior to post a
bond.
If an individual failed to post
a bond, he would be jailed if an
individual did post a bond and
then broke the piece, the bond
would be forfeit.
So
That should stick out because
the court does not address
The idea that they're relying on
a on a on a future crime surety
bond statute that would
Almost certainly be
unconstituted.
Today.
Um, 30.
statutes literally allowed you
to go and complain to a court.
That uh
Brandon might be dangerous in
the future, and you should make
him post a bond or throw him in
jail because I think he might be
dangerous in the.
Um, nevertheless,
The majority opinion says that
when you combine.
These these surety statutes,
which were historically and
traditionally permitted with the
going armed statutes, which were
also historically and
traditionally permitted.
The combination.
Creates a sufficient historical
analog to a law that restricts
the rights.
Of a person.
Subject to a domestic violence
protective order.
To the extent that it now meets
the brewing.
as I, as I noted, there's a
mishmash of of of concurrences
and we'll talk about those
really briefly and then
Um,
The descent, which I think
actually helps explain.
The reality of this decision,
better than the majority opinion
does.
So
Justice Sotomayor was joined by
Justice Kagan.
And
They focused on
Taking aim at Thomas, who wrote
the, who's the sole dissenter,
and also
Um, the
Author of the majority opinion
in Bruin.
And
The criticism was that if the
dissent was the decision.
Then the result would be that
effectively almost no gun law
could ever be considered
constitutional.
Because
The limited spectrum of
basically they said.
It would be so exacting as to be
useless, a too sensitive alarm
that sounds whenever a
regulation did not exist in
essentially identical form at
the founding.
Uh
Justice Gorsuch wrote to
complain that there was a
procedural problem with
case and that it since it didn't
meet that procedural requirement
for a facial challenge, they
shouldn't consider the.
But he did agree that in limited
circumstances, the majority
opinion.
Uh, was correct. Um.
The the the concurrence by
Justice Kavanaugh essentially
recites.
History and text.
And
Almost operates as a repeat of a
lot of the historical.
Analysis that was contained in
Bruin and reaches the same
conclusion as the um majority
opinion.
Justice
Justice Barrett.
Writes separately.
And her concurrence is
interesting because.
She makes a point to um
emphasize that the Second
Amendment is not absolute.
And that it codified a pre that
it codified a pre-existing right
and pre-existing limits are
therefore
Incorporated as part and parcel
of that right.
Um,
Justice
Justice Brown Jackson wrote that
effectively the brewin test is
unworkable. This case proves it,
she agreed with the outcome.
Um,
Which is to say that she agreed
with the upholding of 922 G8.
But um
Blames the problems in
interpreting Brew and on the
fact that Justice Thomas wrote
the opinion in Bruin.
And Justice Thomas was the sole
dissenter to this decision.
The effectively
Um,
Although
Roberts goes to great lengths to
explain why this decision meets.
Justice Thomas's
Uh, standard from Brein.
Justice Thomas
Wastes no time.
In rejecting that.
Blame outright.
His descent
In its very first paragraph
tells us that uh post Brew and
the court's directive.
It was clear a firearm
regulation that falls within the
Second Amendment's plain text is
unconstitutional unless it's
consistent with the nation's
historical tradition of firearm
regulation.
Not a single historical
regulation justifies the statute
at issue.
Effectively, Thomasins, um,
A number of pages, quite a lot
of words, to say um what
To agree with justice.
Um,
Jackson Brown.
That the majority is not in fact
following Bruins requirement.
Um, he disagrees with her about
whether they should.
The descent, because it was
written by the same person who
author authored that landmark
decision in Bruin is.
Extremely
Well, it's very critical, but
it's also very illustrative of
what.
The actual with with the overall
effect of that opinion, that
majority opinion was, which is
to say that
Um,
Effectively.
The court
had to either.
Be extremely rigid in its
application of the brewing test.
Or it had to find some way to
get out of the corner it had
painted itself into.
And that's exactly what Justice
Thomas.
uses the majority opinion of
doing, is to say,
He accuses the majority opinion
of
Wanting to uphold the law and
finding a way to do it.
He doesn't buy the analog, he
doesn't buy that adding the
going armed.
laws or statutes together with
the surety laws is anything
close to a historical precedent
under what?
Trewin required.
There are 2 overall changes
resulting from the Rahimi
decision.
Um,
One is really clear and one is
clear as mud.
So the one that's really clear
is that the court is explicit
and all of the concurrences.
overlap in agreeing that
People found by a court to be a
credible threat to others may be
barred from owning or possessing
firearms.
Um,
It's clear that the court is not
extending the opinion does not
extend the ability to restrict.
Uh, access to guns, classes that
are suspected of being dangerous
absent that credible finding.
And absent and the finding must
be made by a court.
But the so the the the outcome
that is 100% clear is anyone
found by a court to be a
credible threat to an up to
other people with a firearm.
They have those firearm rights
restricted.
The bigger uh and probably more
relevant for future legislation.
Portion of this decision is
is, is the distance that the
majority opinion was willing to
go to in order to find.
What it decided was enough of a
historical analog.
So rather than following uh
Justice Thomas's path, which
would require you to find a.
Maybe not identical, but pretty
darn close.
Um, statute that existed in the
1700s.
What the majority did in order
to be able to reach the outcome
it reached was add two statutes
that are
3, it's pretty difficult to
follow the logic.
That when you add those two.
Uh, statutes together what you
get is historical precedent for
domestic violence.
Detective order restriction on
gun owners.
And that offers that that.
Will certainly result in
additional.
Litigation
But I think it also offers um
If you carefully consider.
And spend
The time that it will take to
get through and and see where
those concurrences overlap.
There is an indication there
that the Bruin holding is not as
limiting as many courts.
Certainly the 5th Circuit
believed it to be.
And that's my synopsis, I'm
happy to answer. Excellent, um,
Brandon
members, questions, comments.
Senator Ivy Soto.
Um, Lord.
Dia Lopez.
Anyone else?
O
OK.
Senator Ivy Soto.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair, um.
Yes. Sorry. No, that's OK. Thank
you. Uh.
So what are the things, uh, that
I noticed in, in the, in this
opinion.
Uh
Justice Roberts seemed to be
going out of his way to try to.
To get as many justices as
possible and, and so when you,
when you do that, you make
certain trade-offs.
Along the way, or you, you
decide to address certain issues
or not address certain issues.
Uh, and, and what are the issues
that, that it seemed to me that
Justice Roberts.
Seem to kick down the down the
down the line in order to keep
the.
The 8 that he had was what the
standard of proof.
Was that that would be
necessary.
Or court in making a decision.
Certainly if a court decided.
And, and, but, but in this
particular case,
Rahimi
Admitted
And he
And he consented to the to the
restraining order.
And so, and so there's almost a
throwaway line where.
It's like
But the standard of proof is not
determined here.
If you could comment on that.
Madam Chair, Senator, um, I
think that you're 100% correct
in terms of.
That there's a lot of strategic
voting that goes on in these
these decisions.
And if you want to hold a uh
majority together. Sometimes
that means you'll have to take
things and explicitly say you're
not deciding.
So yes, the, the, the question
is,
Um, I understand it.
What's the standard of proof for
that domestic violence
protective order in order for it
to meet the be a valid
determination of credible
threat.
And various states have various
standards. Some states are very
low standard.
Some states are very are.
Very convincing evidence
standard.
Um,
Most states are less than that.
We are, we are a preponderance
of evidence.
More likely than not.
Yes, 50% the same as as a civil
case, uh, far less than a
conviction in criminal court.
Um,
But I, and I, and I would, I
would hazard a guess that that's
the majority of.
less than
Oh
So you're correct that there's,
there remains an open question
about whether or not that
termination that one is a
credible threat with a firearm,
such that their rights may be
removed.
Um, and be made or what standard
what what standard of proof is
required.
Or
Explicitly did not reach them.
But, but certainly the finding
having this the the separate
finding of dangerousness.
That is, that is, that is
consistent actually with the
with the build that.
this actually already.
R.
I believe so, and, and that's
already long, right?
that pass? Yes,
So we already have that in law.
Incredible fighting in advance
of in advance of this decision
having been made.
Yes, our statute for domestic
violence restraining orders does
does require that the court make
an explicit finding of that the
person is a credible threat.
To another person before
restricting gun rights.
Um, Californians did not.
was ultimately struck down for
that reason.
Although I believe that they
have since reenacted with the
requirement.
Yeah. Thank you, sir.
Thank you.
Adventure.
Thank you, Senator.
Representative Lord.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I just
have a few comments, um.
Yeah, I'm, I'm the surety laws
is quite a stretch.
Um, in my opinion, because it's
reasonable cause of your injury
and a breach of peace, so
basically you're saying we think
somebody's gonna do something,
they have to have a bond.
Which then I guess we could just
say, well, I fear that all these
minors that can get firearms all
have to have bonds and anybody
in a gang has to have a bond. I
mean, where are you going to end
with that? That's quite a
stretch.
Um,
And also as I'm reading about
the goinged armed.
Wow, that's very interesting.
I'm bringing back in the history
of that. That was solely used to
take firearms away from black
people.
It was solely meant that pretty
much predominantly I read over
and over again that it was to
keep uh guns at the hands of of
black people and free slaves.
So, uh, I think everybody knows
how I feel about firearms and
the Second Amendment, so I just.
Find it interesting when you
read historically.
Cause I'm going all the way back
to 1600s and Again, the surety
laws are definitely a stretch,
and I would hate to see us.
I think that it's appropriate to
bond people for what they may do
in the future.
I find it very disturbing that
the going armed was used quite
heavily to keep firearms out of
the hands of black.
Are you are you are you through
representative or?
Oh, OK.
OK. Oh, you're adjourned. OK.
All right.
OK. Um, I'll keep that in mind.
Um, Senator Cedilia Lopez.
Thank you and um and I just
wanted, it was Senator Cervantes
bill that I co-sponsored that
we're that we're talking about,
um, but I, um,
Oh, if ruin is not so limited.
As you interpret, and then
trying to read the tea leaves of
the Oprah overlapping decisions.
Which seems like an enormous
task, um, and I don't know that
you've done it, but what would
you think are some of the
suggestions, um, and
specifically I was thinking
about the type of firearm that
was used, um, on the attempted
assassination.
Of um
of the former President Trump,
um,
What kinds of things can we do?
And the reason I raise that is
OK, Bruin said historical, we've
looked to historical precedent.
There's no historical precedent
for that kind of firearm. So
where do we go? Um, what do we,
what we do we think about when
we're thinking about gun safety
at this point?
I just point out to ask staff to
answer that I think is a little
unfair. I mean, I, you're, we,
we all can answer that, but the
offer uh someone who we asked to
summarize an opinion to then
tell us what other weapons would
fall under these things. I, I
think I just keep that in mind.
I think that's a little unfair.
I agree it's unfair, um, but I
also know that uh uh I'm
speaking to one of the foremost
experts, I think, um, but I, I
certainly, if you don't want to
answer that, you don't have.
to. If, if I may, Madam Chair, I
can answer that.
Well, I want people recognize
that's your opinion,
I agree, but the overlapping,
but the overlapping pieces like
what emerges.
So my answer would be.
Um, with regard to
Um,
With regard to classes of
weapons or specific types of
weapons, that's outside the
scope of Rahimi. Rahimi would be
talking about people who can
have weapons. OK. So you would
be looking at Heller?
And then your decision about
whether or not a certain type of
weapon can be outlawed, would
depend on whether or not the
Supreme Court was going to
decide that it was a, that that
is a weapon in common use.
if that is a dangerous and
unusual weapon.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, I
think the common use for
self-defense if I remember the
one.
So.
Uh, Madam, Madam Chair, the, the
question is whether the question
of whether or not an AR-15.
is a weapon, a dangerous and
unusual weapon or a weapon in
common use.
For self-defense because I think
the
the
Weapon in common use for the
defense.
Yes. So for self-defense or for
whatever other reason you're
permitted under the Second
Amendment to have the one.
But
The common in common use
standard, whether the AR-15
meets that or does not meet that
is presently the subject of
several district court splits,
and perhaps at least one circuit
split.
So that's an issue that is
currently being litigated.
Different courts have reached
different decisions.
And and Madam Chair, I think
that's one of the one of the
many problems with Heller, um,
is
But, you know, are we looking at
common use then? Are we looking
at common use now? It's, it's
just a really problematic
decision, but with this new
guidance in the overlapping
opinions, I, I think that more
You know, reading the tea leaves
um will happen and uh and I
apologize if it was unfair, uh,
but I do know, um, that
Um,
That Brandon is Mr. Cummings is
very well versed in these cases.
So thank you, Man. Madam Chair,
my answer is I
I will at least always try to
limit them to simply what I
believe the case law says, where
you can go from here is really
absolutely, absolutely. Thank
you. Thank you, um,
Representative Block.
Thank you, Madam Chairman.
And uh thank you Brandon, for
being here and uh good, good
information today. I appreciate
it. So, Madam Chairman, uh,
Brandon, I'm just wondering, so
I, I assume we're having this
discussion because there's
potential legislation that could
be enacted regarding felons in
possession of firearms, so,
Madam Chairman and uh Mr.
Cummings, I'm wondering, so
In the current legislation that
we've seen as a committee, Mr.
Representative Block, I, I
scheduled this talk and it had
no bearing on felons in
possession or any other pending
or potentially pending um
legislation. I just want to
clarify that. It is a relevant
piece of case law, I think, or
us moving forward as legislators
in general when talking about
the Second Amendment.
Thank you, Madam Chairman, and I
appreciate it. I didn't intend
to to uh opine on the reasons
the chair put this on the
agenda. I just was wondering
regarding potential legislation
that would indeed be in the same
realm. So a bill that would just
say, let's just say a felon in
possession of a firearm, who was
just a felon, so any felony
whatsoever, we would be
increasing penalties. I'm just
wondering, does this case law
with Rahimi have any
Would it, would it have any
Bearings on the potential new
legislation we could create.
Today or in the next few, few
years, Madam Chair, and I hope
that was broad enough to not put
anyone in a corner.
Madam Chair, representative.
This decision, Rahimi, I think,
um,
Certainly will play a major role
in discussions about.
Legislation that involves
restricting any class of persons
from owning firearms.
I think that um
Rahimi addresses the question
about felons in possession of a
firearm.
Although that's not the case
before it.
It is, that's a that's a
different subsection of 922G.
It's certainly in the same
arena.
I think that the two
Um, aren't any answers, but the
two, the two areas, areas it
touches on.
would be
Number one, it does tell us that
a person who is bound to be a
credible threat.
By a court and always have their
firearms rights.
Uh restricted or even removed.
Other part of the of the Rahimi
decision that's a little more
problematic in that regard.
is the fact that it's tying
Um, those class.
The removal of the of gun rights
from certain classes to that
finding.
Of credible threat.
So, um,
The question of whether you said
any felony.
the question of whether or not a
nonviolent felony and continue
to result in
Firearms restrictions.
First, the subject is the
subject of litigation in many
locations presently, and second
is an open question.
OK, thank you, Madam Chairman.
Thank you so much for that, Mr.
Cummings. I, uh, give me a
little more clarification, so
the non nonviolent felons, we
could potentially be in a in hot
water, if we passed a bill that
said
Felons in possession, so any
felon, even nonviolent felons in
possessession of a firearm.
That could potentially be
Opening us up to litigation
because it's not necessarily
been settled. Is that what I'm
hearing, Madam Chairman, or is
there, uh, is there more
concrete information about that,
madam chair.
Madam Chair Representative, I
would say that uh to the to the
extent that it could open us up
to.
Litigation
The existing statute is already
open to that same type of
litigation.
And there are cases across the
nation addressing that very
question.
Um, so it's likely a matter of
time before.
11 way or another.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair. Go
ahead. Thank you,
Representative. Anyone else?
Senator Cervantes.
Uh, was there somebody else?
I think that I'm sure I just, I
wanted to with amusement look
over to my shoulder a little bit
to my friends on the left side
of the committee only because I
remember a couple of meetings
back when I said that the
Brewing case would not stand the
test of time, uh, and that the
court had put itself in a box
that it had to get itself out of
because, of course, by the
historical analogy, uh analogy
test, you wouldn't be able to do
this, which is prohibit firearms
in the hands of a domestic
violence, uh uh order and I
remember the eyebrows
From this simple country lawyer
from Las Cruces said the
Lawrence Thomas didn't know what
he was doing, but Clarence
Thomas doesn't know what he's
doing. Um, and, uh, and, and
that's why, and that's why he's
now by himself on the Supreme
Court in this decision. I asked
who, who's the dissenting vote,
and he's gone from the guy
riding the majority of this
historic analogy standard now
all by himself out there and,
and again, the country lawyer
from Las Cruces is sitting here
challenging uh Supreme Court
justice, but, um, we should
recognize
Sometimes those guys get it
wrong, and I say guys, meaning
male and female, get it wrong
and so we should never be too
wedded to um what comes down
from them, we should exercise
our own critical thinking from
time to time and, and it was
pretty clear that the Raheny
case, we knew Rahini was coming,
and they were twisted in
pretzels to try and, and that's
what they've done with Rahini,
right? They've, they've
contorted themselves to try and
find a way to not strike down uh
domestic violence or the
prohibition and still hold on to
their historic
Analogy standard and that's
beginning to erode. We can see
it already starting to fall
apart on them even really after
a couple of years, so we should
do so. Um, and that.
Means that when we start looking
at some of the bills that we've
been looking at over the years
and we've had Brandon and Megan
and others put a lot of time
into these presentations, even
last year, so that we know the
confines because we can, we can
impose these, we can pass these
laws, perhaps, or we can.
Issue executive orders, but if
all your mind is a lawsuit, um,
you know, what are we doing
other than making the news, and
so I I appreciate the fact that
we understand the lane that
we're supposed to work within,
if we really want to pass things
that are going to stand the
test. So we, we, I think this
committee and our standing
committees, uh, are really at a
great privilege to have a good
understanding now of these
lanes, and, and I think it's
number on us to to help our
colleagues who are not on these
committees who don't have that
opportunity to, to know that.
There are some limitations on
what we can and can't do and.
Even if I make fun of of Justice
Thomas from time to time, it,
it, he's an easy target, let's
just face it, um, uh, so, um,
Yeah, um, and, and, and Madam
Chair, I did want to say, um,
well, we had the opportunity, I
don't know whether either one of
you were here earlier today, but
I, I wanted to take the
opportunity to echo something
the chair was saying earlier
today. I know this is off topic,
but I want to thank both of you
all, and I, I did tell the
committee you both have worked
really hard the last two months.
You've dropped your private
practices, your
Bing educational requirements at
a dime, and you've done so even
this last weekend when somebody
says we need you at 4, we need
you on Saturday, we need you
Sunday, uh, you all have 7 p.m.
at night some occasions at all
hours, very long meetings, long
conversations, far more than I
attended even and even far more
than the chair who attended,
even more than I did, so, uh, I
want the committee to know when
when there's any suggestion
that, that there wasn't a lot of
work put in and a lot of time
put in, a lot of effort and
resources put in and, and we
got, let's say.
Council to hire you all and pay
you, uh, um, deplorably low
wages typically, but
nonetheless, to make yourselves
available, so thank you for me.
I think the chair will probably
echo those comments because she
knows very well that you all
have worked really hard the last
2 or 3 months uh to try and put
together a a special session for
us. So thank you for that,
madam.
Moisture and indeed, um, when I
opened the meeting, I, um,
specifically acknowledged the
work of both of you and
I know how hard you worked and
you responded to every request
for information and analysis and
He guide us in terms of what
would be appropriate and I
imagine we're gonna continue to
be working together as we move
forward over the next course of
the interim, and I appreciate
your willingness to do so
because it is.
Sometimes stressful and
contentious, but um.
As those of us are lawyers are
getting used to that and we've
developed pretty thick skin, so
appreciate you both, you both
did excellent presentations just
now on the two cases that I
asked you to brief us on, so
thank you very much. Um, we're
