Yeah
good morning everyone
we have some music
okay
I really appreciate everyone's
attendance here this is the
second day of court's
corrections and justice in
committee interim committee for
the legislature we are at n s u
r s well today we were unreal
does so yesterday and we have a
great briefings yesterday and
i'm imagining we're going to
have some really interesting
briefings us today and later in
the afternoon I think some
legislators will be coming in
but I don't want to really start
off off schedule so
I also understand there's a loop
been a little bit of change on
ours are um agenda mayor
jennings isn't available or
there's something's coming up
has come up so I believe there
is a representative from
analysis hello sir please come
up and introduce yourself in we
love to hear from you.
As far as
madam
madame chairon seanpel president
in murals well and we welcome
you to campus on behalf of mayor
jennings he is working with the
army court of engineers today
about some dams and some other
matters that are going on so he
asked me to just come and make
very well very brief welcoming
remarks and so again welcome to
campus were glad you're here if
we can provide anything for you
please let us know enemy roswell
primarily focuses on career
technical education we are
comprehensive college so we do
have transfer opportunities but
we have a wide variety of health
service programs and also
technical education programs
that prepare soon standard the
work force as well as going to
four year degrees so again thank
you and welcome to campus
before you go there maybe some
questions from members so
I have a few do you said you
have various kind of programs
you have health care training
programs like and what would
they be
so madam chair we do have
various health science programs
we have a nursing program in the
states been very supportive of
that we're actually going
through a nurse expansion to
meet the local critical needs in
nursing shortages and so are
looking to add to our nursing
cohort in the january time frame
with our construction that's
going on we have respiratory
therapy programming occupational
therapy assistant we have a
medical assisting program and
then we have a very active ems
program for the eastern part of
the state that provides empty
training all the way through
paramedic training
that's fantastic as those many
of those categories that you
cited are well almost all of our
categories there's a need and so
we appreciate that in our
imagining the opportunity
scholarship is helping a lot is
that is fear to say at least
when I talk to my constitution
at some hearing that uhm madam
chair I would say the
opportunity to scholarship is
providing.
Just that opportunities for
individuals who probably
wouldn't be able to be in in
college and we appreciate the
language as a two year campus
you know the vast majority of
our students about seventy eight
percent at times are part time
and so being able to come and
take six hours and still qualify
for the scholarship is very
helpful for our campus and
we represent charges county and
artisa we share our teacher with
the carl's bad campus and
ninety eight percent of our
students come from our
geographic air responsibility
well thank you anyone else
questions a representative of
the others thank you
thank you manager don't you also
have a social work program here
so madam chair representative of
chavez we have a behavioral
health program that set students
up to do their associate degree
and we have social work
programming that leads into the
bsw program in the thing about
the bsw program are at portalis
is it is a credit from the
national association of social
workers and that allows the
students to do an accelerated
masters if they so choose so if
they come out of that accredited
program and portal is and they
can do a one year masters and
the portallist campus again with
state support and we we focus on
a one eastern concept so student
can come here to their associate
work with us and then move to
port towers and do a bachelors
and then also finish the msw in
one year if they follow that
accelerated track yes ma'am.
Thank you manager
anyone else.
Well thank you for your
hospitality great room and we're
really pleased to be here sir
thank you madame thank you
okay next on our agenda is
bill williams manager of charges
county and michael brisco.
Detention administrator in the
total of the item is set backs
and solutions to corrections in
charges county
madam chairman honored gast and
especially the support staff
because I know without them you
got would be struggling as much
as I do without our support
staff at the county want to
thank you all for coming to
russia again the mayor is that a
meeting with the US core of
engineers we had some flooding
recently of course he also have
shares rollers though chap is
county flood commissioner so
he's there this morning and
we've got staff there they're
going through a table top
exercise to help alleviate uh
concerns with flighting and that
type of thing uh
you the question you had their
minute to go about
nursing programs health care in
at the university I want to
announce the chavis county is
building a new approx eight
million dollars
public health office and chavis
county to assure that we can
provide a lot of thanks that as
I get to talk and will talk a
little more about mental health
behavioral health and things and
and were very excited that our
local
department of health staff does
a really good job of helping us
to identify and and correct a
lot of the concerns that we have
in our community and just wanted
it to say that quickly so I can
give you a very brief background
first if I want to introduce a
mister mcclaim here he's also
going to be one of our subject
matter experts as it's mister
brisko here that part of our
leadership team at at uh
chaviscally detention facility
personally I haven't a degree in
agriculture i've been the chat
was county manager for about
five years I know very little
about corrections
a lot of things I know very
little about I can grow us mouth
if you need that
my my career I came up doing
agricultural pursuits and then I
went into building for a very
short time that's a very
difficult.
Job to have in the nineties and
and I did that for a short time
and then I went to work for the
federal government I worked for
the fish and wildlife service a
couple of different duty
stations and a lot of different
opportunities so again if you
need to know something about an
endangered species or habitat I
can probably help you when it
comes to
detention facilities that's why
we have the team that we have
and and I want to lead off with
our teams and the expertise of
our teams chavis county has
finance department that second
to know we've got you know ten
hearted excellent towards that
the last ten years have got more
than that but we've got ten in a
row and that all boils down to
the leadership the training that
each person in that department
has everyone knows their part
everyone does their part no one
is trying to cover something
they don't understand no one has
to get overwhelmed because of
the leadership there's a good
solid leader that make sure
everyone's done what they need
to do and kind of orchestrates
things are legal department the
former county manager uh was
here for twenty seven and half
years he started is roll with
the county as are attorney
became the county manager for
about fifteen years
his wife was appointed as a
federal judge and albert kirki
so he went ahead and retired and
moved out but turkey started a
sole practice and were fortunate
enough to have his his help on
our day to day legal staff of
course were very happy he's got
the institutional knowledge not
only of how to run a county but
uh but how to run chavis county
in particular that's very
helpful he certainly knows
corrections he certainly knows
courts because being an attorney
of course they spent his entire
career in life doing that
and again if you need to know
how to build a house for a road
on probably the guy to go talk
to but if it comes to courts
it's the rest of our team that
that does that for so
we've got expertise throughout
all our departments again road
department they've got expertise
and experience specific to roads
but their leadership property.
Profile it's kind of the same as
we have with our other
departments we've got a solid
leader we make sure that there's
training everyone knows their
part and does what they're
supposed to do same for all of
our elected officials treasure
clerk assessor.
Uh.
Getting to detention quickly
you'll also know some that's the
best public speaker to so but
but i'll be sure and cover the
time and then
when it comes to detention we
started out a few years ago we
had some long term detention
officers uh the chief security
are chief administrator laughed
some of our other high ranking
people left and and
whether that was a part of a
problem or not remains to to be
seen I mean it's it's subjective
I suppose but we hired a highly
qualified
replacement and so we had a a
highly qualified detention
administrator hired and I don't
know whether it was because he
was used to being running a
smaller facility I don't know if
it was the complexity in the
sides of our deal I don't know
if it had to do but I don't know
if it had to do with staffing
problems that we're all having
across not only the state of new
mexico but the nation when it
comes to staffing not only
detention facilities but a lot
of different jobs are are very
difficult to staff so.
The.
To be polite this this
particular supervisor became
overwhelmed and he quit leading
which caused a lot of major
setbacks within our facility.
Uh
he.
Left in the middle of the day
creating quite a quite a star.
Which was very difficult to
overcome
as you guys are aware in
detention.
People in the jail know what's
going on sooner than anybody
else does and so there was a
rumor that all of our staff had
left all of the officers had
gone and no one was there which
creates a very volatile
situation and so
first thing I did when that
happens called the sheriff and
ask him to assist us with some
additional security because we
were extremely law on staff and
i'll get into that a minute
three days after this.
Happened we happened to have the
national institute of jail
operations coming to do a survey
of our jail and the reason is we
knew that we were.
Needing assistance from anybody
that we could get it from that
new jails and understood what
was going on again i'm not a
jail administrator but I was for
about two weeks and why I didn't
like that but the good thing was
I was able to go to the
lieutenants the sergeants the
staff and I basically gave him a
paptock it's a look nothing has
changed here the administrator
has left.
But you guys are the ones that
are running the jail you've
always been the guys who are
running the tail and I just
empowered him so you know you
know what you're supposed to
let's keep this going we're
going to we're going to find a
new leader as soon as possible
but in the meantime we've got a
job to do to keep people safe uh
to assure that the inmates are
treated properly and and
everything's gone like it's
supposed to be done so.
We went that direction national
institute a jail operations like
say happen to come in because
we're looking for innovative
ways to not not necessarily even
innovative ways we're just
trying to find what the baseline
needed to be to correct the
problems that are jail
their report said we were
lacking leadership we were lack
in training nobody knew their
job which of course all that
caused security issues policies
and procedures weren't faint
followed but a lot of it had to
do with the fact that nobody
knew it policy and procedures
were staff was overwhelmed we
had a high turnover rate we were
below twenty percent on staffing
for the entire facility and
that's that's a huge number but
I think that there are probably
other facilities within the
state of new mexico they've
encountered very very similar
numbers and percentages I mean
it's it's very scary especially
when you're in the middle of it
part of the problem with that
kind of staff in no one was
being trained and because they
weren't being trained no one
really understood what their job
was course we had the leader's
lieutenants and stuff everybody
was carrying the weight I
believe you were chief security
at the time running the four amp
and an officer at the same time
so.
There were some that new what
their job was but their
shouldering the way to the whole
thing officers didn't know what
their role was because they
weren't being properly trained
they came in thinking that they
needed to do everything and of
course that doesn't work
everyone has a place and that's
what good leadership does it
make sure that everyone's in
power to do what they need to do
and and has the training and
assistance that they need so
leadership team came at the
first thing we did we were very
fortunate to find a
administrator brisco within a
very short time he came on board
very quickly but when he came on
board the first thing that he
addressed was not staffing you
might think well you're below
twenty percent why didn't you
address the staffing issues
first thing now he was working
on it can currently but but the
most important factor that he
saw was the lack of training
because the few people that we
had weren't trained properly
again like so they're
shouldering the weight of the
world on their shoulders didn't
really know what to do is that
they've all got to be trained so
they understand what their
portion what what their role is
within this organization so we
don't lose any more concurrently
he
spoke up for
pay increases in and get into
that and just second the the
roles of
the staffing first thing
made sure people understood
policies procedures are are
training with first thing he
made sure everyone understood
what the roles were that it
was
absolutely necessary for the
security of not only the
totanies but also the staff to
make sure everyone knew what
they were doing policies and
procedures make sure that civil
rights were understood and and
people are treated as they
should be currently we have a
hundred and sixty hour we have
a.
A training academy each new
officer comes in they they go a
hundred and sixty hours before
they ever go go out and turn
loose on the floor so we're real
proud of that we're proud of the
way that that's coming forward
staffing we start to talk with
as a county had done what we
thought we could to help with
staffing so of course we gave
some pay increases we had such a
small staff we're paying
incentives which turned out to
be a kind of a bad thing in a
lot of ways because they were
already working twelve hour
shifts so we said if you can
stay for an additional four
hours then you get a little
stipend for that if you stay for
two additional four hours shifts
you get a little bigger stipend
and some people were staying
even more
shifts so they were making some
money which you know initially
that started out hold really
excited we've got a little money
boost to moral but but again
that probably created a bigger
problem than uh
then the incentives themselves
because people just got
completely worn out there there
was no no time to recharge no
time to spend a family and it
probably created a bigger
problem but one of the biggest
things we've realized was that
at some point we quit
recognizing that attention
officers were law enforcement
and you know everybody in this
room has probably at some point
tried to give more money to law
enforcement to assure that they
had the proper equipment good
pay all those things that those
people need to attention
officers spend twenty four hours
a day seven days a week
sometimes for years with
detainees where it's a law
enforcement officer thirty forty
five minutes and they turn him
over and and they're done with
we recognize that because
they're out on the streets we
don't always recognize that
detention officers are.
Um
primary law enforcement in our
counties that were really
thankful we've got him we
changed the way that we looked
at and we changed a again are
structure our detention officers
were already making more than
art office workers if you want
to call that at the county so
they were already making a
little more but they were not
anywhere near where the
sheriff's worst so we got them
more and line with what that was
which really helped one of the
things though again good
leadership
we took the staff that we had we
took the new staff that we were
getting that were being trained
and they were empowered they had
ownership in the jail they
understood what their goal was
they felt proud of what they
were doing.
They because they're younger
than I am I still type stuff up
and put it literally type stuff
up put it in the newspaper and
wait for something to happen and
in our day and age of course
there's a lot of social media on
electronic ways to do things
that people like me don't think
about they created their own
video recruitment video showing
their staff doing some of the
things that they do and it it
kinda went via all at least not
a local level
they're in it I probably don't
not viral means but but anyway
that really helped and
recruitment and and retention of
people just being understood and
and doing thanks the next thing
that came up with a anti
recipient visit programs when
copied came along first of all
we were a short staffed even
then covered came along we were
even shorter staffed we shut
down programs for the safety and
and benefit of people and then
we were in a position where we
couldn't open those back up and
we just didn't see a way to get
that down to assure that there
are security people could be
vet it out those kind of things
than currently we have
about thirty volunteers we've
reinstituted program such as
wings for life aspend and
various religious programs
across the board there uh many
more programs I know but you
guys can answer that the second
oh so so those were some of the
first things we did.
And then nigel came back
national instead of jail
operations they were scheduled
to do another inspection in six
months I as soon as we got the
first report I asked them to
come back in six months to
assure that we were were we were
improving so they came back and
they said we really don't want
to come back there's no way you
could have fixed any of the
stuff in six months but they are
very surprised at the change in
leadership and how are all of
sent the staffing was at eighty
percent within six months
training academy was in place
and of course it continues to
grow and develop people knew
their jobs lieutenants were
doing lieutenants work sergeants
for joint sergeants work
officers were doing officers
work which the course makes a
well run organization
to the.
We
swung the pindle and so far the
nationalists to the jail
operations asked mr brisco to
attend their elite academy they
only invite certain people
across the nation to go to that
academy and and learn from the
best of the best subsequent to
that they've asked mr brisco to
do some teaching at that academy
he has been enrolling his staff
and and not only.
Programs that they have there
but other programs across the
nation and the state as well as
their internal academy
and he's probably the most
important thing for a leader to
do is to train his replacement
he's been working to assure that
we have a car to plan when he
leaves.
The.
I am real happy to say that
mister brisko was awarded the
national jail administrator of
the year award this year for
from
at the jail con twenty twenty
five uh convention
and that that's not just county
jail says not just city local
jealousies are federal prisons
these are wardens from across
the way our guy here in chavis
county made that and.
I'm going to tell you what he
always tells everybody when we
say you know how good a job he's
doing and and everything says
look the staff at the jail does
not work for me I work for them
and that that has been the best
thing I think that.
They could have heard we could
have heard and it certainly
showing good results so so I
know what you want to know is
what you can do for us
i'm getting there and I have one
other topic that's a very very
important topic so of course as
everyone knows jails of become a
defacto health care mental
health behavioral health
substance abuse providers and.
Anything any help we can get to
to identify how to take care of
those things get it out of the
jail and get it uh taken care of
the proper venue is course very
much appreciated we've been
looking locally at jail
diversion programs uh several of
us went to see the miami dade
program and how that works it's
a wonderful program very robust
it doesn't really work here you
can't pick up that giant
building in miami dade bring it
over here and set it down and go
florida floor with different
jail diversion programs while
people are being adjudicated and
make sure they get to the right
place and are provided the the
right stuff first of all we
don't have millions of people
paying taxes to pay millions of
dollars to to facilitate
something like this so we've
started looking at other models
that seem to be working in our
area uh smaller programs
focusing more in the customs and
cultures of our local
communities and and we're were
working towards those kind of
solutions identifying where
these problems are on the street
before they get to the jail to
divert people from going to jail
when obviously they they need
something else I don't think
most people like to be in jail
however I do believe that a lot
of people that are living on the
street intentionally go to jail
so that they can get a bass they
can get a good meals that they
can relax for a while and I
think we need to do all we can
to uh.
Correct that uh.
Corse rising cost last suits
goods and services at jails and
and elsewhere aging facilities
security upgrades and the
medically assisted treatment
programs those are all things
that we are confronted with in
our jails and we need to find
ways to
to alleviate the cost to the to
the local tax payers I know
that's what you all hear for and
I know that that's what you guys
are all striving to do
in santa fe and we appreciate
that and just ask that you
continue that now uh when when I
spoke with representative
channel she told me that one of
the topics they wanted to talk
about was the juvenile attention
facility in chapis county with
former juvenile detention center
in chavis county.
So i'm not sure what the number
of juvenile detention centers
were ten years ago when I began
working for the county by note
was a much larger number chapter
county stupid out attention
facility was not the first one
shut down and
hopefully it'll be the last
until a better solution comes up
but currently there are only
four juvenile detention
facilities left in the state of
new mexico burning leo county
they have so many that they have
to deal with there they don't
take ourselves we really only
have three juvenile detention
facilities that we can.
Work with currently
the major reason that we shut
ourselves I told you we had
staffing issues had had staffing
issues when we're trying to
split staff to two separate
locations specialized training
over here you can't really flow
them back and forth you have to
have a dedicated staff there in
a day dedicated staff at the
adult detention center.
We couldn't do it there there
was really not a way to keep it
staffed and of course everyone
here knows that we must assure
the security and safety of every
detainee that we have but most
certainly we take extra
precautions when it comes to
juvenile offenders because we
want to make sure that we don't
become a bigger part of the
problem and create a life for
crime you know we we want to
reform and and help them so that
was the biggest reasons we did
it monetarily it cost us one
point two million dollars a year
to run or a chat was accounted
to detention facility we had an
average of three juveniles we
could house as many as fifteen
that would have been tight prior
twelve would be more comfortable
but we actually had housing for
fifteen one point two million
dollars a year to run that
when we estimated what it would
cost us if we close the down we
based our projections on four
juvenile offenders even though
for the previous three years
we've had an average of three.
Housing costs transportation
everything in it cost us less
than four hundred thousand
dollars a year to do that
instead of one point two million
dollars and now
thanks to continue to change and
evolve we have eight to nine on
average juvenile offenders and
chapters counting we have for a
couple of years
last year our cost we budgeted a
million dollars to cover it our
cost was seven hundred thousand
dollars last year.
But we believe that the cost
that one point two when you take
everything into account those
cost would have been over three
million dollars so again it's
much more economically
beneficial to us to send them
somewhere else and we're not
even talking about the liability
that comes with with housing
juveniles so we're also
good or bad we're passing that
on to our neighbor to to to be
the one who's in the heart seat
when it comes to juvenile
detention and so again anything
we can figure out how to
correct.
All of these problems it's much
appreciated now I have two
subject matter experts part of
our leadership team and they are
here to answer any questions you
all might have and thank you for
indulging my
public speaking skills
night at all and you do not have
poor republic speaking since
you're great mr williams thank
you john when would you like to
add anything before we go to go
to questions great while we
appreciate all of you being here
questions representative
charges.
Thank you madame chair thank you
for the presentation of the
information um I wanted to dig
in a little bit deeper into a
couple of actually three things
as you said one of them was um
madam chair that you thought
identifying the problems on the
street before they get to jail
was something important to do
can you expand on that a little
bit more and also include if
you've thought about what that
might look like in terms of
identifying at risk kids and the
kinds of services that they
might need.
Yes madam chair representative
chabbers.
Again there are people in much
better speaking about this law
enforcement people but but what
I see from the manager's seat is
that.
The.
We have no alternatives when
someone miss behaviors if you
want to call that out on the
street whether it's because of a
a health problem whether it's
because of mental health whether
it's because they just come out
of behave or if they're actually
committing the crime we treat
everyone exactly the same way
and so if we had methods to
provide people on the street
that it could be assassed
depending on what type of call
it was whether it was a minor
misdemeanor someone just miss
behaving someone urinating on on
cars whatever whatever the case
was if we had a way to send
proper team that was trained to
go out and assess that
information and find other
methods to deal with them
possibly send them to
uh to get some mental health
care maybe maybe they need
health care make you know that
there are a lot of issues a lot
of problems in its it's not all
mental health it's not all drug
abuse it's not all behavioral
health everything mixes and
matches and I I believe that we
need to figure a way out to
divert people from going to jail
because jail is not the answer
for I don't know i'm just gonna
take a wild stab at that the
percentage I would say that
probably thirty to forty percent
of the people in jail don't need
to be there they need other
types of help and we're not.
We're not able to do that in a
jail setting counties and
taxpayers are not able to pay
for that with with the budgets
that we have and so anything we
could do there when it comes to
juvenile's.
We seem to have a
not just our community I mean I
keep up with the news across the
state in all of our communities
I think we have a respect
problem which even I was I don't
believe that they respect the
lie don't believe that they
respect their parents and
therefore they go get in trouble
and how do we fix that I have
enough to schools I I don't know
I don't know what the answer is
but.
You are certainly much better at
figuring those things out which
is why you're you're serving us
in the state and I I thank you
for that.
Of me welcome madam chair my my
next question has to do with
behavioral health and and you
mentioned that in your
presentation so is the county
geo man chair
using that when um individuals
come in and are identified as
having a substance abuse
problem.
Madame chairman representative
of chavis and i'll probably pass
this off we do have some form of
the amount program of course
it's kind of been staged so we
will not be fully responsible
for that until
january january of next year but
we are
uh taking some of the initial
steps of course we keep the
locks and in those types of
things added jail anyway to to
take care of overdose i'm gonna
say quickly and i'm a pass it
off to to mister brisko.
My biggest concern with the
match program and maybe I just
don't understand how the math
program works but my fear is
that if someone can't get a
fixed on the street if they
can't find the drugs that
they're looking for will they
intentionally get themselves
arrested that they can go to
jail and get a substitute for
that and if so how does that
solve the problem I mean i'm in
and like say i'm first to say I
may not understand how that
program works but it's it's
certainly as my fear that will
become the the the provider for
for those.
Fixes or highs or whatever it is
within our community and i'm
past the two minutes to brisk
mancher representative of chavis
yes we currently do have a
matter program we do a
continuation of care currently
so much what that means if they
come into my facility and are
having a crash script from a
provider we continuate we
continue that care with them and
in.
I want to see june we are going
to step in the next face so the
people are already increased
regularly inside will be a
ministering matter of them as
well if the
physicians decide that they need
they fit that criteria.
Madam chair do you have so you
probably use some kind of a
screening program or
assessment when folks commanded
to identify who might be be a
need of map madam chair
representative chavis just man
that is correct we do have a
screening protocol that will
utilize on everyone that comes
through to determine if they're
eligible for the program and
also we we.
Double check with their provider
on the streets to make sure they
are current have a current
script for that.
And then my final question I
wanted to ask about staffing but
is that look like now manager.
Madam chair representative javas
we currently have over eighty
percent we normally stay above
eighty percent now and they go
from eighty the ninety eight
percent sometimes and then comes
back down to eighty fluctuates
but it's always above eighty
percent for the last two years
map it course like any jobs that
we have it absent flows
constantly but that were staying
at a much higher level than then
we've seen in and probably ten
years in chavis county at the
detention facility madame chair
represent javas that's that's
correct and you know we're are
retention forum is a lot hired
that we probably have ever had
and that's just working with
them sorry attention very high.
Thank you manager.
Thank you representative
representative sedilo person
thank you madam chair and thank
you for everything you do what
the solutions and I really
appreciate the presentation
cause these aren't easy
solutions they're very complex
problems and it'll it the
frustrating so really thank you
for everything you do
how many people on average do
you have in the adult attention
center.
Manager sender I have a maximum
capacity of three hundred and
thirty to fixed best of the mac
with the maximum passive four
hundred and I currently have
three hundred and nineteen
admit.
Wow okay i'm old enough to
remember the old county deals
um so that's probably a big
increase over time rate where do
you tribute the increase to.
Madame chair center I I actually
that the rate for imits coming
in on opinion disorder and for
just substance abuse in general
as well as the almost population
and behavior held I believe that
those those numbers have risen
to where we've never seen so I
believe that activity to that.
Wow cause that that is a large
very large facility.
I turning to the to the juvenile
detention issue.
You went up o.
From you know an average of 2-3
children.
At any given time to seven or
eight.
Uhm.
Where do these children go.
I'm you know more or less so mad
in chair center when it
juveniles arrested in channels
county they are brought in to
the pd and then I arranged for
the transport from there so they
never actually go to our
facility they go straight from
that the um
pd that arrested them and from
booking to a whatever facility
we can find bed space that
usually it's a hard to find best
space and lee countries been
really well at helping us and
working with us to get us
housing for a driver.
Leave county how far is that.
The.
The facility.
Because one of the things we've
heard from parents is how
frustrated they are when their
children go to firming to.
Or other other places and it's
very very difficult to go visit
them and see them also a lot of
the programs that would be
helpful to them involve parents
because is you can imagine a a
child who committed crime you
wonder what what was going on
with the parents and so that's
very frustrating have you seen
that.
Madam chair sir yes and that's
actually a big reason why we
tried to utilize hubs because
early county cause it's the
closest to our facility is the
closest to our are community so
everything we can do to get in
hobs we do which I not use it
utilize the ones are further
away just because the look just
accept it even bringing up back
and from court and too court and
everything it is a logistic
nightmare actually or a lot of
them not detained because of
this reason you know pre try it
pre child attention of these
juveniles.
Yeah.
Madam chair center yes that's
correct a lot of juveniles and
here is university citations or
put on house arrest in luff
going to urge a rough facility
probably the more serious ones
that you.
Send to
that is correct now ok.
Have you measured the
residentism and compared it to
when you you know when you're
sending these juveniles to
different places for the pre
trial that's not a research of
an issue but then they have to
serve if they get.
I know if it's not convicted
adjudicated
if you know what um and then
they're they're they'd need to
go to a facility and then they
get out right there all of them
all of the juveniles are going
to get out
if you measured it all or do you
have any data about resteading
madame cherson right I do not
have actual numbers for for the
data I can't tell you I do see
the same names come across my
desk numerously I mean in out in
our children and then.
Yes ma'am that's correct.
Um
because exactly exactly his.
It has mister williams said um
what we want to do is we want to
stop stop there
in so one of the things that's
important at least to me
personally but I think to the
whole legislature is to look for
programs especially for our
children but adults too
that will start this revolving
door
do you have any ideas cause you
say i'd like a I thought mister
williams was very sweet to say
we have the answers no that's
why we are here that's why we're
we're seeking solutions from
from you if we have the answers
we wouldn't be here but we don't
madam chair center I do not have
that for adult detention we are
implementing some fathers for
readers stuff like that and it's
trying to innovate get
innovative ways to reconnect
these.
Parents with their juveniles.
Priority getting out or with the
the domestic violence with the
offender and his spouse to try
to slow down the specificism
rates that we have been trying
to hash out the problems and a
controlled environment prior to
them going back to the streets
and reoffending.
Okay you're talking to somebody
who used to run a domestic
violence center so you have a
big door there when you said you
get them together what do you
mean by that could you tell me a
little bit about more about your
domestic finance programs.
Representative center yes ma'am
so it was kind of a idea we had
that i'm working with our local
judges so we're not violating in
a restraining orders or no
victims and what we're doing is
where we're going to try to set
up a program where we
threw the through the courts we
actually can bring in the victim
and the perpetrator on a
volunteer basis and how mediate
the problems being in a control
environment prior to them
getting out.
We kind of what we found is a
lot of domestic violence victims
most those cases are dismissed
anyway because the victim
refuses to testify so they're
dropped anyway well when they
get out they go back to the same
house immediately it's a problem
because now there they love each
other but they're back in back
in in a fight so what we're
trying to do attach those
problems out in our environment
and a control environment.
Or were not breaking any any
laws or anything and that we're
when they get out they can
continue a life instead of
trying to beat out those
problems right there are you
collecting data about the
success of this program because
it's extremely innovative so
vice manager
singer we haven't started this
program this is all in the works
i'm i'm literally going through
our attorneys and through our
courts right now to try to see
if they'll even let me do this
in my head I think it'll work
just because we're tie up our
courts retired up of our
resources with this simply
because they're not going to
testify most of those
investing pictures are not going
to test for you either they're
scared or because they level and
if they love him and if that's
the deal on the vanci want to
come into this program i'm retry
to accept it put this together
and try to make better members
of society when they get out
that we were they're not causing
more domestic but staying up on
resources I would urge you to
contact the advocates the
diversity of violence advocates
has well has the better batter
intervention program providers
to help you set this up and then
I would order to collect data
because i've never heard of a
program like this and um
if it's unique because what you
say is correct those cases are
going to get dismissed now I
would argue about why but that's
that's a whole other thing and
if this was something because a
lot of times what the victim.
Survivor wants is not
necessarily leave the
relationship but in the
violence.
And that's why I like battery's
intervention program so much
cause they they may or may not
make it but the violence has got
to stop.
Madam chair center completely
agree and like I said this is
we're just a little just branch
from the support attractor one
day and thought we're going to
do this so I reached out to our
local judges and asked them the
voting is possible because I
know we're gonna be violate some
restraining orders and stuff
there and are our local judges
are hundred percent of more with
and they're willing to do it and
as far as the victim in pack I
have seen out email to them and
waiting for a response back.
They might think i'm crazy but
that's what I do well if you
need help connecting with them
let me know i.
I'm always interested in data
and unique programs it would
have trouble finding it because
it's not an evidence evidence
based program but you can do
something like a.
If you can show your own data
then you might get funding has a
promising practice um and so i'm
intrigued um.
And and interested in that kind
of residentism and I apologize I
know i'm dominated but he
this was a very interesting
information it's very
interesting yeah no and and we
sit together so I am I am very
interested because I have other
questions but i'll wait I know I
spent.
Yet too much time I do extra
time I would be happy to okay
they have a second yeah well
thank you for being so
considered some me and I would
if you're interested i'd love to
speak to you more about it i'm
chair center thank you ma'am and
I would do need all the help on
the second get so I appreciate
it.
I write representative of read
and then represent a hall and I
have a nia and block don't think
you manage and thank you for
your presentation.
I want to talk a little bit more
about the juvenile detention
centers because we're we've been
really having a lot of
discussion whether we need to re
open our juvenile facilities or
not and in this influx and given
the crime and and can you
explain to the committee you
said there's different different
things that you I mean I talked
to
county managers all the time
they seem to hate the idea of
opening a juvenile attention
center liability reasons a
special things that you have to
do with these facilities could
you kind of talk to me a little
bit about what is so different
about running the juvenile
facility that makes it so much
more difficult and costly
that maybe would make you not
want to open one does that make
sense.
And then I may follow up
questions and we do you want to
open them again.
Madam chair representative the
one of the big deals for
juvenile solutions is the
training that to train the
officer to handle june all the
finger is.
Double the amount of training
for a general.
And after the animals juveniles
rather than adults just for the
the level of care that we're
going to need to give them the
training has to be weigh up
which is definitely time
consuming and it's definitely
costly.
What about a madam chair in mr
brisko the.
I I remember it it may be the
president contexts a little for
me I allowed the idea of having
the kids closer to their
families when I did prosecute
uhm the that laboratory shooter
he stayed in our facility but
had a tona mental health
assistance I guess I would say
with people come in in and
obviously as family and really
captain very stable and
honest medications and what
needed to be done to get us to
the point of trial or or we
needed to be versed in them
after alba kirky were they
wanted to send him I think up to
idc or something but didn't
really feel that was probably
the right thing that we needed
to keep in close and and we were
able to get the right people in
there but it was classly
inexpensive and it was a
something we had to review with
the courts a lot get permission.
Do you have to have for the
mental health aspect of it do
you have to have a more higher
quality for the kids for the
adults is that also initially.
Madam chair representative I
believe that to handle the
middle health of a of a
juvenile's completely different
how interest of adult so I I
would venture to say yes I
believe that that should be a
higher train higher educated
mental health provider than just
the norm.
Or liability concerns different
matter chair and speakers they
are those different concerns all
is at a higher liability to run
a juvenile tension center than
an adult madam chair
representative yes I believe it
is come all you've seen is
higher payouts for for any legal
reasons excuse me higher payouts
and way more costly.
Alright and so maniferrant and
experts what what is your
thoughts about uh.
Reopening these local juvenile
detentions that are as I know
like incurred counting my county
managers like oh gosh you know
that was a nightmare running a
juvenile facility but we really
are trying to decide you know
should we be reopening these
facilities close to home and you
know with the uptake and crime
and then also who should be paid
for this should it be the county
should be the state that's
questions that have been brought
to my attention I think there's
different opinions on that so
maybe
mr waved you could address that
madam chair of representative
I think they will everyone in
this county and i'm speaking for
our accounting commissioners I I
believe that everyone would.
What the juveniles to be closer
to their parents would want them
to.
Want to find ways to keep them
from going to jail in the first
place want to find ways to
assure that they become a better
part of our society.
Uh I I believe that's what we
all want I believe that
you know money is not the only
issue with the with the juvenile
detention as you alluded to you
know that the settlement so if
we have settlements
loss of the lawsuit you know
those numbers are exponentially
higher and
missed briscol mentioned.
Because of the training and
stuff there's just that many
more things that are an attorney
could sue you for well you
missed this piece of the
training miss this piece of the
train because there's three
times the amount of training and
so so those costs you're higher
for for good reason I mean you
are a whole lot more to defend
and make sure that you're doing
you have to make sure that the
training so you have to do all
that
I don't believe in again i'm
speaking for the commissioners
and and certainly I I don't have
the right to do that however I
believe knowing each of them
that they would be open to
reopening.
And you have now detention
facility in our community or a
regional facility we've heard
we've heard talk of that
certainly we think.
We're going to encounter
problems hopefully it'll be a
long way in the distance but
we're going to encounter
problems just like bernaly
county pretty much will not take
anyone in lesser from burning up
counting because they have
enough to deal with on their own
sand one county of course worse
that's a long way for us to send
people saying mon county's been
very receptive but but you know
what happens if if they do the
same thing what happens if lost
curses we don't have lost
christine what you know if leak
county does that work we're
going to be in in dire straights
and how do we handle that and as
you mentioned whose
responsibility is you know yes
this juvenile might be from
chavis county but if there's no
facility here for whatever
reason there's no facility and
leak county for whatever reason
there's no beds available in
albuquerque whose responsibility
is you know I I don't know but I
I think knowing
how compassionate are are local
elected officials are not not
only the county commissioners
who would it would be their
choice to to make but also the
other community leaders that we
have here I think that everyone
would be perceptive to to
letting it happen again opening
it back up because it's not just
about the money yeah money is a
portion of it and we can we can
send them somewhere else for
about a third of the costs but
my biggest fear is that's a very
short term solution because as
we're seeing those opportunities
to send them somewhere else or
are going away quickly so again
just to
hit that one more time I think
that they would be willing to do
it but we have to find out what
the proper way as who's who is
going to help us find it because
we can't fund it without
overtaxing our people and and I
certainly understand curry
counting managers we've we've
had a lot of tarks they've done
some really innovative things
with mental health and and some
of the things that we were
discussing earlier about how to.
Correct things within the
community and they're working
very diligently on them we
appreciate that but that's
pretty much any counting manager
any county leadership across the
state they're all trying to find
the right solution to the
problems and and again i'll
venture a guest that probably
most of the people on the state
would rather have their kids
closer than haven't further wait
for a variety of reasons thank
you manager in
mr waves you think you could
staff both facilities.
That that's the thousand dollar
question I guess i'm i'm very
thankful i'm very thankful for
the leadership style that that
are detention has currently and
their ability to staff.
But we've seen it across the
board whether it's sheriff's
department whether it's
detention whether it's office
helpers whether it's facility
maintenance or road we're having
staffing problems everywhere so
I wouldn't want to put all my
eggs and that basket that we
could staff but but maybe an i'm
gonna say something probably
very unpopular right now though
but the states got a quick
paying the state police and the
state corrections people more
than we can match in our
countries because they take away
are good people and move him up
there to what to why did because
if if we're not taking care of
it at home how can having more
people than they can handle and
on the state police or or the
corrections department help us
locally which is what it's all
about thank manager and closing
a come because i'm gonna wrap it
up because I know whether people
need to speak a something you
said I just wanted to comment on
first of all congratulations
very impressive award sounds
well deserved um.
But something you said about
stating that we forget that you
guys are peace officers and you
you are with these individuals
every single day and I always
wondered.
How you in your training and
success that you've had what do
you tell your and this is more
personal for you just wondered
what do you tell how do you act
with inmates like in the sense
of I feel that you would have to
have like it a mask on
on innocence to be like you know
i'm in control of you know this
what i'm doing here but have you
immediately too and i've always
wondered how detention officers
trained their officers to do
that and
is that difficult to do it's
just a personal question of
always how they thought you're
the perfect person to maybe
answer it for me madam chair
representative
it's easy your firm fair and
consist every day every day is a
new day but every day you go on
there with the head up and you
go on with the positive attitude
to get a positive result but
firm ferrer consistent is
is a must you have to be firm
yet to be very excited if it's a
rule to rule its black and white
burned bar consistence the best
thing I could say well it sounds
like you retain very well and
it's working very well free so I
commend you for that and a great
presentation that very
informative so thank you
check thank you
represent a hole.
The bottom chair thank you and I
know I know we're shorter and
time so bunch but i'm not going
to ask him do you have a
standardized.
Is your the way you train is it
like in a credited thing or is
each correctional facility
basically on its own manager.
Madame to represent him the
standardized training came from
new mac so basically what I did
was I took new mexico county
standardized training I took
nigels of training I took the
new mexican department of
corrections training and I can
find most of it and.
We built our own
but we built it in a matter to
wear not only meeting the
standards of new mexico counties
barassa meeting the national
assume jell operation standards.
They gave us a bare minimum so
basically the way I thought is
less double.
In the follow up on do you work
with the m u
rather the rusale campus the
local local school to set up
something to.
Make more a corrections more of
a.
Career versus a job.
Madam chair representative
currently we do not we do work
with some other energies around
fletsy and some other stuff that
we we're going to be received
and training for but currently
from here no sir.
Thank you madame madam chair
representative hold me
responded quickly out the nigel
training the national
institution jail operations
training they have their
training set up so that meets
the standards and requirements
of every state currently they're
working with our attorney to
assure that the training that
that we teach that there is
there training meets the new
mexico standards and does not
it's funny what's a law here
might be against the law here so
they're having to evaluate that
pretty much line by line to
figure out what is appropriate
here there was one state was a
whale
while means was was pretty darn
close to what we require it new
mexico
so so they used they use that
general idea and they've gone
back and forth and discussed it
and
we're kind of one of the first
that are going to be doing it I
believe that new mexico counties
is also now interested in
partnering up with nigel and
trying to find ways to enhance
some of these operations across
the state not just in charity
county
we found my guests kind of big
chance almost have
you know an odd introduction
somewhere to at a meeting and we
madame and we needed the help
and so we brought him in to do
this and it's turned out they
have been just a god sent to it
state they.
They've seen it everywhere
they've seen it at every level
whether it's a federal prison
where there is a city jail
they've seen the same problems
over and over again so they know
how to address it they make sure
that all of the things that they
teach our legal based they don't
there's there's no subjective
training to any of these it's
it's all legal base it's all
very
very high level stuff uh so it
was a were were glad that we're
seeing that and we're glad that
that's going to assist us in any
legal battles that we have
because unfortunately everybody
that gets arrested or pulled
over these days seems like they
want to sue the counties and and
then that's costly the versus
new mac where it's best practice
so everything everything that
they're doing every policy
they're putting in places backed
up by legal so.
I mean it's it's way better than
just best back practice.
That's for any thank you thanks
for
thank you representative of an
eye thank you madame chair thank
you to the percentages it's
always really nice to hear
what's going on locally and so I
really appreciate your time
today
i'm not sure if you'll were able
to tune in or know what we heard
about yesterday but I feel like
a couple of us are referencing a
presentation that we heard about
the missouri model
for a juvenile justice and so I
have a question kind of
pretending to that
also about the cost and training
associated so from what i'm
understanding this model
yes has local juvenile
facilities but they're broken up
in terms of level of severity of
the offense which I thought was
really interesting and i'm
wondering if that would factor
into cost any if you are
thinking about lower level of
fenders having a place to go
vs higher level.
Madam chair representative I
believe that yes there is gonna
be a cospect in that to as far
as like the department of
corrections to house a level six
in may a maximum security and
mate is about double the cost
than a lower level nothing's
different in juvenile you still
it's actually worse than you've
announced because higher level
care higher level train officers
so yes I believe it will
have a cost difference.
Okay thank you and I was asking
that cause i'm thinking you know
as we're thinking about the
types of facilities that could
be
across the state if there were
just some sort of next depending
on.
The local needs
and all of that to say you
talked about the three given
isle offenders that has now
grown to like eight nine
juvenile fenders why it types of
offenses are you seeing.
Madam chair representative so
currently the way works here is
the higher level of the crime is
the ones that are going to be
arrested so I currently have.
Everything from murder
man sauder I have shooting at
her from its more of a violent
finders that are actually being
arrested rather than just the
minority possessions of stuff
like that everyone all seven I
have currently are violent
finners.
Violent charges
thank you madame chair and my
last question
related to eastern new mexico
question except maybe on the
flip side is you all have any
kind of working relationship
with
eastern as it relates to re
entry type programs I heard
earlier that there is a an
emphasis and work force training
and so I was just wondering if
that was any kind of partnership
madame chairman representative
and I we don't currently
before rjal hit rock bottom we
were looking at a working with
the university to bring in some
individuals we got to the point
if we were almost ready to start
and then we
couldn't do that because of
staffing issues and security of
of those people coming in that
wouldn't be of course fully
trained in as I said we will
also work training our own
officers well know some thankful
we didn't do it but I think we
should reinstitute that but also
like the idea that you just said
what what two things I I want to
come in on the missouri model I
I had heard something about that
and I think I would like to
research that because I think
that could be a a real great
thing a tiered system and then
maybe you know the the ones
that.
Can stay locally we can house
those locally and and the more
violent crimes may be there the
ones that have to be transported
maybe that's a good middle
ground
you know I I don't know but I
i'm i'm really intrigued by that
idea
the other thing working with the
university for programs were
very fortunate that eastern new
mexico ross will exist and works
with us so well they're they're
very innovative and I think a
doctor power now have a
discussion about that and maybe
we can find some ways to to
incorporate that into some of
our model thank you.
Awesome good to hear thank you
thank you manager you're welcome
representative block thank you
madame chair thank you guys for
being here today very good
presentation and congratulations
mister briska that's an amazing
accomplishment very awesome
that.
Eastern mexico gets a some glory
at the national level I love to
hear it so
a first question it'll be the
hardest question I ask them I go
for easier questions I hope
madam chair but when it comes to
lawsuits.
At the jail.
How how many have you seen since
I guess the new administration
sort of speak where we're
getting more people on the
ground eighty percent staff etc
how many listens are we seeing
currently at the county level
for that facility
mr chairman representative
blocked her madam chairman i'm
sorry i'm used to my commission
and it's a mast most days madam
chairman uh commission are
representative block.
I don't have a a solid
number but we get lawsuits at
the jail on a regular and
recurring basis I would say on
average we get three a week.
And of course part of the
problem with that is weird
insured by new mexico counties
who is having issues across the
state not just travelers
counting but across all the
counties with having to find off
all of these last suits and as I
mentioned before maybe maybe I
should come up with a better way
to say it but but you know it
seems like anyone who gets
pulled over and arrested
or incarcerated they want to sue
and and get their hand into the
taxpayer's pocket and and i'm
sorry but I believe that that's
what they see big payouts and
we get many of those a week
probably like say probably an
average of three a week
unfortunately because most of
their merc considering to be
civil rights violations now
which used to be proven in fed
recorded a much higher standard
or now heard and local court at
a much easier to.
Prove standard I guess and again
i'm not an attorney obviously
only another proper terminology
but
they're easier to win and in
state court rather than they
would be in a federal court the
burden of proof is a lot less
and they did cap the payouts to
two million dollars but that's
per current so you know if we
had a.
Class action lawsuit saying that
everybody got sick because the
food was bad you know we could
have as many as three hundred
people at two million dollars a
piece and the county can't pay
that and so the only way we
could would be able to handle
that would be go out to the
taxpayers to pay it and no one
wants that tap and no no way
believes that should happen.
But.
Yeah.
We have made it easier for
people to see us for frivolous
lawsuits and and we have to find
a way to correct that I mean I
know that wasn't the intent of
what what went on I I know
people civil rights are very
important and we certainly want
to treat every person in jail.
Properly want to assure their
civil rights are not violated
but we've got to make sure that
we find a way that a eliminates
the new mexico counties having
to settle so many claims because
the potential for two million
dollars a peace times however
many counties there are in the
state getting three of these a
week and and they end up having
to settle on and that makes our
reinsurance hire makes it
impossible for us to find
another insurance provider
because our our history is so
high so I know it's a really
long answer and probably but
they're pretty bad but thank you
no but thank you mister if you
have a ad please represent the
actual we did recognize the so
in order to take about this we
have update training in in
celebrates to protect our
inmates we've upped our training
in the escalation techniques to
lower our uses of forces and
verbal judo with with up that so
much just to try to combat these
these lawsuits
thank you madame chair thank you
for that answer mister bristol
mister williams so I agree I
think that well i'm not an
attorney and we get reminded
that every single c c j meeting
and I I don't intend ever want
to be an attorney
madam chair I I do think
well not everybody has to be an
attorney to want another rates
which is what many of these
losses are about so manimater
and experts I guess my opinion
on this is the state of new
mexico has set the example for
the countings where a lot of
these lawsuits they get kicked
out or they get settled.
And then they're just.
Feeds the epidemic of continual
last it's in the future because
people can see oh even if it was
frivolous they don't want to
spend the time to have to
litigate this ram so we continue
that cycle of litigation which
no one wants but I don't know if
you have anything to add to that
but I just had a couple of other
questions before I stopped
madame chair representative
blocked you're absolutely right
and that's that's exactly what
we see a person can file a
frivolous law saying i'm not I I
don't have any examples of this
but but certainly the scenario
is they are personally file a
frivolous lawsuit while they're
in jail settled for fifty
thousand dollars go out when
that money's gone get arrested
again file another frivolous law
suit and you know I can make a
hundred hundred fifty thousand
dollars a year pretty easily and
like say the counties are all
not just chavis counting but
we're all trying to reduce costs
to the tax payers on every
avenue certainly insurance is a
big one most of the counties are
insured by in some manner
through new mexico counties new
mexico counties can't you know
they're they're finding off a
whilst now you know they're
swarming around them in their
fighting office quickly as a
cancel I don't fault them but
again like I say our history
then become so high when we try
to go out and self insurance
fine ways to reduce those costs
to the taxpayers we can't
because our and it's it it's a
cycle that we can't can't beat
but thank you for noticing that
thank you been concerned about
that
thank you madame chair and thank
you mister williams and I I come
from the perspective my dad was
and stick government he retired
from the state government and
that's what happened every
single time every administration
republican democrat didn't
matter that's what happened and
I think that's really trickled
down so I wish we were just
fighted out until the end of the
world until we we won which we
usually put if we didn't settle
but that's just my opinion so my
next question is a little easier
it's for both you gentlemen on
the the ends here it's not for
mr williams but i'm just
wondering how you continue to
keep your more among your
employees.
So that you keep that eighty
percent uh.
Vacancy of twenty percent only
they can see so tell me madam
chair represented block uh we
have not heard from this young
problem anyway uh madam chair
represent us your name again
it's I was short thorough
lieutenant clinton mcclean i'm a
chef scan to answer for fourteen
years i'm currently in charge of
staffing in a recruiting and as
my major when mr briscol came on
that was my main focus was put
in into recruiting and hiring so
thankfully to the dedication of
our staff and the way that we
work on her people and get him
the worst quickly as we can it's
got to be a team effort as far
as ensuring they know what
they're doing the training but
also coaching and mentoring and
realizing that we're all leaders
in that position we're all
trainers were all people that
can mentor and help in coach in
a set instead of I dictator or
and or person it's going to be
little someone in that staffing
so creating that culture of like
mister brisko said I say the
same thing to my staff I work
for them they don't work for me
so anything that I can do day to
day to help them to ensure or
answer questions or get them to
get the answer themselves breeds
that environment for that moral.
Totally that answers question
not rubber
go ahead you wouldn't continue
working anywhere that didn't
respect you right as to some
people do know just getting but
it's the same thing freedom to
train him right treat him good
and treat unfair and they'll
have your back.
That is great representative
block one thing that this
leadership team at ccdc has done
as they just completed their
second annual
corrections officer appreciation
week they get volunteer they get
donations of thousands of
dollars every person that works
at the jail
comes to this meeting they get
handouts everything from
vacations term egloope or not
eagle what's the
yetty coolers to I mean there's
just some kind of merchant
everybody gets something that
they get a great meal it's for
not only for them but the their
entire family so they can build
that family bond.
The.
That that has really shown them
how much we appreciate them we
always hand out certificates
from the county commission at
the same time we we we want them
to to understand how much their
value by the county and not just
the county government but the
county community and and that's
worked out really well proud of
that thank you thank you manager
and thank you thank you all and
I I really like that firm fair
consistent approach which is
great thank you you need to
write a book.
Thank you madame chair so I just
think you you need to write a
book or something because
because all that information
especially with the national
recognition is super important
and then just doubt tilling on
senator city a low business
point I would love to get some
more information about that
program that you're doing here
because I think that that that
could definitely work when it
comes to reuniting families but
I also would definitely like to
continue to get some data like
she said because we like to
legislate off data it's super
important to us so if it's
working in tabas i'm sure we
could duplicate it and all the
other county so
if you have anything to add to
that and that's all I had madame
chair madame chair
representative block with love
to be the pipe program for that
and make a success out of and
not only just for to be the
pilot program but to make better
citizens in our community.
And a lower said business rate.
Thank you madame chair thank you
gentlemen thank you
representative representative.
Thinking man i'm sure
gentleman thank you for being
here this morning
so
i'm representative borrega from
albuquerque former city council
president forever city counselor
during the caster court
appointed settlement agreement
and we're just completed that
with the federal government so
proud to say that we're at that
point I have a brother who
worked in corrections at the
penitentiary of new max new
mexico he was a correction's
officer is also on the swat
human in less alamos and he was
the union president so I know a
little bit about corrections and
police
and it really intrigued me when
an and actually representative
block madam chair stolen one of
my questions was regarding the
training and the descalation
training for is particularly a
mean and as if you know anything
about the car sir was basically
related to a mental health some
mental health situations and I
was just interested in
um
if you could expand a little bit
about the training that you give
to your corrections officers
regarding the descalation
particularly when you have a
mental health instance
madam chair representative yes
man so are description
techniques we're actually
training them to recognize
behavioral health as well so
we're actually going to be
bringing us and we have a health
therapist to teach my officers
that the difference of some
having a middle health crisis
versus a attitude adjustment.
And I believe that's we have to
learn that otherwise we're not
going to have that situation
properly and the less the last
use of the forces we have I mean
it is safer for my officers it's
safer for my in may it's just
less litigation it's less.
You name it I mean it all around
we strive to get our description
techniques tar to a standard
vits where above any any other
training i've ever seen and the
reason for is just to keep
everyone safe
and just a follow up on their
response do you work at all with
like albuquerque since they have
a new trend you know like the
the apd or any of those groups
are state police regarding
joint trainings.
Manager representative no we
have not.
Okay is that something that you
have at all discourse story.
We have disgusted action but as
more about a local level for the
uh like our valley and the city
browser and their tactics to
bring them into our training
center actually crashed in with
them on on the same type of my
madam chair and
representatives it sounds to me
gentleman like that might be an
area that we want to expand a
little I was really impressed to
hear and I walked in it but it
was a little further than I
thought it was
I walked in and I heard you
talking about your program that
you actually have sort of
crafted and in the last day and
a half day I guess we've been
talking about pronational
programs
and you know I am really
impressed with what you were
talking about it was you know
and it just seems to me like
you know that cross training
could be something that would be
that really beneficial
especially when in I and I know
apd pretty well
they went through some very
rigorous training and the and
the the uhm federal judge who
was responsible would not
basically sign off on that until
it was complete and he they were
satisfied without training so I
I really encourage that and i'm
happy to help without if I can
put you in touch with any of
those books i'm sure you know
arm but
you know to create those
programs and if there's a ways
that we as legislators can help
you with that I think that those
are things that I would be
interested in madam chairman at
representative of I actually was
going to ask you if you did have
a name that you could share with
the screen to reach out
right now if you want the tip we
certainly.
Don't need to reinvent the wheel
on on any programs that we do if
someone has something in place
it's working that again like
site when I was talking about
the miami dade model we have to
consider the cost customs and
cultures of our local
communities
but
certainly there is differences
with albacorkian and
southeastern new mexico but
there's also a lot of
similarities and and in this
particular case it may be a
hundred percent lift it up and
move it over and and we are
always looking for things like
that and thank you for bringing
it to attention and my second
question madam chair and I only
have two
is with with regard to your
staffing
and and I understand your all
probably per a
recipients and looking forward
to that retirement at some point
um with regard to the
corrections folks how do you
recruit
I mean what incentives do you
offer or do you have any does
corrections have any incentives
I mean we created instead of a
couple of years ago for fire for
recruitment and for retention
and i'm just wondering how the
corrections for madam chairman
and
representing borregar we we do
have first of all chavis county
comparator some of our
surrounding counties we pay a
higher percentage to
health care we pay a high higher
percentage to retirement than
most other entities city and
county around us at you know I
might want to catch leak county
or eddie county out because they
have more money than most of us
do but and and I don't know what
their contribution levels are
but as far as chavis county we
contribute really well so that
works really well and
recruitment on all of our jobs
that we have
a with detention in particular
having raised the the pay level
the tables that we have they are
certainly.
Right neconic with our law
enforcement people which I think
it's very crucial very important
because we have over the years
continued to enhance law
enforcement pay but we'd left
them behind but we got them more
in in line with with what a line
forcement is sheriff's officer
would make and so were real real
happy about that and and I think
that that's a good recruitment
tool
again their recruitment with
knowing where to look for people
I think it's been very
beneficial and we have looked
and we have talked with the
sheriff but we have not
completed this coming up at the
program the sheriff's department
cannot hire
they can have a certified
officer until they're twenty one
years of age we feel like we've
got a gap from the time
someone's interested law
enforcement and their eighteen
years old graduated from high
school in three years they could
be anywhere they could be doing
any number of things and we
won't while while they're
interested in law enforcement
want to be able to recruit them
there and so we're trying to
figure out ways to do things
such as
service officers that don't have
to be secure are or certified
and they can kind of follow up
on paperwork with that maybe a
three tired approach where for
the two years that they need
three years because we need two
years and we need to send them
to the academy for a year so
that way when they're twenty one
they're fully certified and
ready to go to work so we
thought if we could find a way
to keep them occupied
for the two years that we need
before we can send him after
academy maybe they do a rotation
and detention for six months and
that helps even if they become a
a sheriff's officer they
understand what goes on the
detention we think that would be
beneficial if there are a
service officer
I don't know what they call
those
services
if they did that for six months
and tagged along with sheriff's
department that understands
sheriffs that understand the
interactions people as they're
being adjudicated we have other
programs jailed a version
programs probation programs that
we could.
Maybe make a six month staff
where they rotated through those
and then have incentives you
know if if you've been in the
program for two years and then
you go to
certification to become a a
sheriff's office sir you get a a
bonus when you hire on or if you
decide hey you know what I
started out here planning to
become a share but I found out
how much I like detention we
would like to figure out a way
that we could certify or or
incentivise taking each of these
steps towards a broader law
enforcement understanding so
we're working on that but we
haven't haven't thank you man
this is something really
important because
a couple years ago we did a bill
I did a bill actually that
for fire for recruitment and if
they stayed with the fire
department a certain amount of
time after their training then
they would get a certain
incentive enough that that
incentive that would incentive
would have to be paid back if
they did not complete that time
so I think it's something that
we might want to take a look at
managers how we can and center
buys you know our corrections
folks to to want to stay and on
a contribute to that
retirement phone cell I just.
Thank you
just as a center so deal op us
as for a brief moment she wonder
clarify something thank you I
just wanted to clarify
when general when senate
representative black we do have
a senator to but when
representative block said uh oh
i'm all about reuniting those
families that not the gall of
these programs that goal of
these programs is to stop the
violence whether or not the the
family reunites and I didn't
want to be misinterpreted thank
you manager for allowing me to
offer that clarification i'm
sure I just have a few
clarifying kind of questions so
mister brisco you had meant an
manager you had
mentioned that you'd kind of
stepped up your training program
almost in light of some of the
litigation that had had been
that is prevalent and you've
been addressing so have you
noticed any return on that
meaning you're working really
hard to make sure people
understand the law and civil
roads and how you should behave
in these other things have you
noticed any change in the
environment and the litigation
environment manager yes I have
and to expand on that we've seen
it by use of bless uses of
forces less injuries
the better train officer we get
the smarter to the faster than
other safer officer I get which
in return is less litigation
less injuries less workers calm
claims is safer for my inmates
all around so to answer your
question yes man we have okay
well I appreciate yours your
you know being honest about that
because I i've been a defense
lawyer for a long time and you
know I get is it we all would
get frustrated our big
institution we get sued and what
we would do is look at where
we're the soft sparts in a case
and we would.
Counselor managers on things
that need to be improved and
certainly that would be to
training and all of those kinds
of things there is a period of
time when we were getting hit
with retaliation claims
constantly and we actually
looked for programs that would
help us mitigate against
litigation on retaliation and we
trained our managers how to
first of all not retaliate you
know and then behave and ways
not proceed those retaliation
cause both can lead to liability
right actual retaliation and
behavior that was not intended
to be retaliatory but could be
perceived by you know the plane
of or or others as retaliatory
so you know I commend you on
recognizing the past to getting
out of some of this limitation
is actually making your
employees no you know kind of
the pit falls and what people's
rights are and so and so that is
a very smart approach and I just
wanted to acknowledge that work
you're doing and that and that
way thank you very much and I
want to go here I would like to
say you stated that very well of
concerns are for counties and
and how we have to mitigate some
of those issues but thank you
for that statement so i'm happy
to to work with you on those
kinds of issues I mean it is
important that we try to manage
in a way that we're not creating
claims in you know and that is
not to say that there aren't for
frivolous lawsuits I think we
have to acknowledge that as well
but often there is merit and
there is some basis for some of
the some of the claims that are
being filed but and mister
brisco i'm going to be want to
acknowledge your honor as well
and really that your community
is very lucky to have three
general man and and other
employees here at the county who
obviously are very committed to
your work and providing good
service to your citizens and so
thank you for that thank you
manager welcome madame chairman
I would like to announce for.
Administrator briscoe that his
goal when I first talked to him
is to be at the cabinet
secretary department of
corrections for the state of new
mexico so just planting a seed
if anyone we have not not any
time soon
who does the confirmation
process
what we it's not
all right well thank you very
much gentlemen we really
appreciate your wellingness and
we learned a lot I thought this
was a great presentation really
thank you
thank thank you very much thank
you for all that you do and
thanks for coming to our little
corner of the state to try to
find some answers you know we we
have lots of opinions and some
up merc are useful in some of
mark but thank you for coming to
hear him nonetheless thank you
mr williams thank you very much
mister thank you
so
up is juvenile justice and
treatment we have diana loose
how did I pronounce your name
directly and here there you are
we have jenna ferberula from the
public defender's office so I
think two people we have met
before and now well to be very
competent
professional so looking forward
to hearing your presentation as
well.
That one okay very good good
morning madam chair members of
the committee everybody here may
okay
okay is that better there you go
okay good morning I am thank you
for one inviting I need to speak
and I miss burrell is so that we
spoke and kind of give different
maybe different perspectives but
also I think a lot of it's going
to probably be similar I kind of
i've issues and problems that
were all feeling i'm i'm the
elected district attorney for
the fifth judicial district it's
most of you now I which is
chavis any and think you for
appearing and I chavis county
for your meeting today i'm let
me just start if it's okay with
a little bit about what you've
been talking about i'm the
closing of juvenile detention
centers I this has created a
problem for juvenile prosecution
I in the fit we struggle with
having placement for juveniles I
and in that lot of them are
released house arrest they can
be involved in a a violent crime
again crime because there's just
no place for them to go I when
the inn is for the in is for I
the other problem we've had is
where we've had homicides sadly
juvenile numbers or up for
homicides I in the fifth
district ins when we've had
homicides I are problem has
become housing the juveniles
where they're going to be and
then transporting them for court
a lot of the court hearings are
still by google we appreciate
the supreme court allowing us to
do that but a lot of them the
hearings have to be in person
and then when we did trial and
so i'm going to talk about this
specific case and I know that mr
baits is here so he knows about
it as well
the what we call sadly the cohen
park shooting.
Two juveniles I were murdered I
and we ultimately charged four
juveniles and two adults out of
that case.
We prosecuted through trials
three of those juveniles and
charged with first degree murder
I will fill in deliberate or
alternatively following the
murder account for each of the
juvens who were victims that
were murdered I during those
those trials they were all
presided over by uh judge lilly
or chorns court judge we we side
i'm adult sanctions on both it
on all three one was tried
separately the other two were
joined for a trial
into we had multiple weeks of
trial we had to transport it
they had to be transported I
each day early morning hours
they had to go which you leave
county because le county kept
them during our trials and bring
these
young man over for a trial and
then take them back and we did
this and so I our job is
obviously the prosecution side
but I can't as a citizen or the
elected district attorney say
that that's the process that
should be happening I am
obviously get slowly was not
happy with it but we had no
other choice we don't have a
juvenile detention facility and
shaves county and I can tell you
respectfully to the county and
all the county commissioners no
annoyance for the input of the
district attorneys are certainly
not the elected district turning
from the fit district I on a
position before they made a
decision to close I know they're
public meetings but they didn't
certainly didn't invite me to
come in speak as to what kind of
problems this were caused I
understand logistics I
understand staffing understand
that it's a lot of money but be
wise important public safety I
in our community and that's what
we strive to do is the district
attorney's office so let me talk
to you about part of the
problems were seen by juvenile
crime involving crime is up easy
access to forums I cannot
express to you all enough how
that that statute.
The new statute that was
negligently making a farm
accessible to a monitor
thirty dash seven does four
point one has not helped it is
not helped us we have filed
those charges i'm I individuals
in the fit history specifically
in chavis county and and we are
prosecuting those but that's not
solving the problem the problem
is juvenile's have extremely
easy access to far arms I am
they're using I install right
now this year in twenty twenty
five in chavis county we have
had a shooting out of front on a
given our case I they were
charged with tampering because
they disposed of the farms we've
charged receiving stolen
property of a farming and lawful
possession in a hand gun on the
case we have another unlawful
possession of a hinging case an
unlawful caring of a deadly
weapon a forum we have a
breaking and entering armed
after which means they broke in
and took a forum we have another
breaking and entering armed
after entering in which two
juvenile to a charge because
they broke into a house wearing
masks that said this is very
recent within the last week and
a half I am i'm armed i'm
themselves with the fire and so
this is real time this is what's
happening in nive in chavis
county I can tell you that
overall chavis county has
generally hired violent crime
then my other two counties of of
lee or I eddie I bet we have had
our own
juvenile homicides I in the past
year filed in lee county i'm it
is easy access to farms and i'm
just going to tell you that I
you can't tell you my opinion
you can't legislate people doing
the right thing I am I I am
extreme conservative republican
you all know that for those of
you the dealt with me from years
you didn't do not miss that I am
no longer the president.
The new mexico district
attorneys association because I
stand on that line that the gun
is not the problem the problem
is we can't legislate morality
we can't legislate I have more
resources necessarily being in a
particular community.
This legislature has funded a
light in you have thrown a lot
of money at a lot of things and
what we're seeing is that's not
always the answer right you've
got to put the money in the
right places so talking about
regional juvenile facilities I
think regional is a good idea I
don't know that trying to do
levels is going to work because
I can't predict a new york can
anybody else how many german
ohiside murders are going to be
in the fifth how many years are
there going to be an albuquerque
how me they're going to be in
santa fe around us curses
randomly they'll be and in
farmington I we already had the
library shooting and close so it
the reality is it's everywhere
so having regional where they
can hell's whoever needs to be
house is probably the best plan
who's gonna find it are well we
can have seen from the counties
apparently they think the state
should find it because they shut
their stamp because of the
expense but I think the solution
is that everyone's going to have
to work together
we overall have had farm
juveniles charged with farm
crimes in the whole fact I we in
twenty twenty three we had
twenty five cases that we filed
out of the fiftieth street town
there three counties and twenty
twenty four we had fourteen and
this year I only brought you the
stats for uh chavis so far I do
have others in the other
counties but since we're turning
much have us for twenty five
thousand one today I had
a our problem has become
if it's not a case for seeking
adult sanctions we're we're
sinking probably incarceration
for especially like first three
murdered.
There is no treatment they it is
almost impossible to get a child
place that it facility if their
charts with something involving
a farm because there deemed to
be dangerous so what is the
solution right that that is why
judges that have to impose it if
it's a juvenile senate or an
adult sentence they're looking
at the same problems and they
were to these juveniles go from
here right if there are
cynicism juvenile i'm if they
don't have a home life they're
not in school I there there are
not programs for them it's just
turnaround the right back in
this system because this is the
life that they grew up in and
these are the options they have
available to them I and we don't
want more cases in the field we
we have it varies by a few
hundred cases between us and the
thirteenth d a district I either
being the second highest number
of cases in the state so what is
that tell you the fifth does not
have that population we do not
have the same population is real
rancho and there's the other
communities of the thirteenth
but we have we at times have the
second to albuquerque that the
number of criminal cases so
we have really good law
enforcement I and they worked
their cases and they filed them
but we've got to have treatment
for juveniles we've got to have
places for them to go right now
so courier monsieur that's out
right and then a valuators
they're no longer evaluators
with CYFD to do evaluators if a
juvenile is
a meanable to treatment or not
we we don't have evaluators were
struggling to have that done I
and what some judges are doing
is simply relying on a report
from the j PO office I am and
that's all we have or the
defense is hiring an expert
states hiring an expert all that
money if if it's public defender
a public defender contract.
And the stain of mexico it's all
state money.
It's all tax for your money and
we're hurrying two different
experts and then judge is going
to make a decision
I don't think that's the best
process so I i'm not going to go
down the rabbit hello talking
about all the issues with CYFD
but I can tell you the juvenile
probation side they do a really
good job they work really hard
and they really stay staffed
well we don't have a lot of
turnover there so that's a
positive that's a positive but
they only have so many resources
and when we're following you
know.
Gun case after gang keys there's
all kinds of other juvenile
cases being filed in between and
so the reality the years are
without treatment and facilities
I easy access to farms it's a
problem so the thing we don't
have that I don't know the
anybody's proposed I don't
recall seeing it anything that
dab brightman proposed in his
general legislation for this
last year is trying to come up
with a better abstracting
statute for this state the feds
have a a really powerful useful
statute we do not and their
parents that take these kids to
get rid of the guidance they get
rid of them for them they're
they're part of the problem and
we have arm if we can't prove
the tampering which is a little
bit harder in our state at this
time based on some case fly
we don't have any ability to
really charge anybody with the
thing there's not really a a
crime that fits and I know that
everyone's not a wise of fan of
new criminal laws new crimes but
if we really want to slow down
juvenile crime we've got to look
at where they getting access and
who's responsible for monitoring
them at home and raising them
and what is really going on they
perhaps we can charge write me
out the fifth district relates
heavily on the US attorney's
office they pick up a lot of the
adults connected to our juvenile
crimes they charge them with
with gun crimes drug crimes
whatever they can and so even
the change are from a previous
US attorney they they were a
great partner but now that it's
it's rhyme ellison continuing to
be a great partner with a hour
office I think prior to the
switch right before the switch
they had taken six different
cases out of homicides out of
the fifth and that they were
charging adults.
Um for us to help us where maybe
we didn't have
the evidence to charge the more
violent crime but they could
charge a gun I and so they were
helping us so anything that is
helping us slow this down
we get the reputation in the
fair then especially I think I
do and i'll take ownership of
that that we incarcerate
everybody uh look at the stats
we do not ask oscar twelve
district judges how many people
are planned to straight
probation how many people are
six seven eight times on
probation violation and all the
good is 60day sanction from the
judge in their put back on
probation we are not encouraged
to reading everybody in the
department of corrections we are
prosecuting everyone and seeking
a conviction on on on felony
crimes and especially ballot
crime I bet we we can get that I
somehow we get that reputation
but the stats and even
corrections had put out the
stats that it doesn't support
that
we are glad to take that that
label I bet it's it's not really
us we do probably have a lot of
people convicted of murder in uh
the department of corrections
and i'll stand on the line that
if they killed somebody we're
going to seek uh increased
recent i'm so I will at start
and i'll allow questions or my
uh coperiod
miss berley from loves it's
public defender they have time
why don't we have misborrower
speak and then we'll open up the
questions to either or both of
it
thank you madame chair
representatives senators and I
appreciate appreciate you
inviting me this morning my name
is jennifer by the line and that
i'm the deputy chief for the law
office of the public defenders
i've worked as a public defender
for the majority of my legal
career over twenty years I was a
useful youth defender primary
just defending juveniles and
albuquerque for for.
Years um of my of my career or
so I have a special interest in
juvenile um.
In our juvenile clients as a
public defenders I also just
want to recognize I do have mine
are district defender here mate
banks
may be some is a district
defender he overseas our rosal
in carls about office so i'm he
is in charge of the uh office
here in travis county
but I have a real personal
interest in this and even though
I don't take a full case of now
because I oversee the officers
statewide the cases I do
actually pick up our second
chair or juvenile cases and
particularly drive in a home
sites
I I don't disagree with a lot of
misloots has saying especially
about
the lack of treatment and
facilities for juveniles um we
have how to increase.
You know prior to the pandemic
there is actually our general
crime was trending down even
some of the violent crime
and then it started turning up
not just here new mexico it's
it's a national issue rate as
well as violent crime in general
and
I think we have to look at.
And I agree that legislating
we can't legislate ourselves out
of this as well what what we
must look at we have to look at
the root causes for a lot of
this right
for the for the crime there is
access to guns in the in the
state is an issue with the
nationally as well um but also a
lot of our youth uhm just don't
have the stability they don't
have at home they don't have the
resources in the community and I
hear over and over again from
our juvenile defenders statewide
that there's just no uh
placement for the even the non
violent juveniles there's so
many times that I hear and
especially our rural areas that.
Um judges have to place on our
general clients and detention
because there's nowhere else for
them to go and very specifically
and actually not.
Equal are the female clients
I don't believe.
There may be one facility now
and senator so that that is a
residential treatment facility
that will take.
Young females but
I don't think they're taking any
new people now according to cyfd
so
we have a lack of resources as
she said especially for anybody
charge with the violent crime to
got to get to seek treatment and
very specifically for females
who are in the system which is
um I think we need to focus on
some of that and also just.
Umm substance abuse treatment in
the community there is one place
in albuquerque right now that
that services use with separate
abuse and that is you know our
biggest city where people think
we have the the best programming
um so I think we have to look at
that I think we have to look at
also you know some of our school
systems that we a lot of the
even the most serious crimes
that are charged in the state in
mexico homicides
the arclians have not had
prior referrals which.
Is it pretty shocking to me in
general right the first time
that we have contact with him in
the criminal justice system
they're charged with first of
your home
so I think we have to look at
two things right but struck
strengthen in the system as a
whole with cfd um with you know
probation but also and more
services for the juveniles that
we that we have in the juvenile
justice system but we also have
to look at other programs to try
to get to the at risk youth
prior to
them even coming into the system
because that is something that.
When I was
handle in these cases I did not
see as much
um that there were there were
clients coming in with no
actually no history and being
charged a very violent cases so
though those are.
Hard right be those are even up
any time a jivid all this charge
with the homicide it is it
destroys every you know it just
it destroys it impacts the
victims the community the child
their family it's it's just it's
one of the worst in horrific
kind of cases to deal with i'll
be honest with you and but we
have to look at maybe look at
more than you know the real
causes as well there are a lot
of cross of her youth to with
the term that we use where
they're in say we see c y d
custody as well as a juvenile
justice system.
Um
i'm actually seen an increase in
that I don't have data but just
in talking to people
and so you know I do agree that
we we need to look at more trick
more treatment more localized
treatment these kids need to be
close to their families.
Um but we also have there's also
reality that a lot of these
children are not being raised by
their parents.
Their parents are either
incarcerated or on drugs or
working.
Three jobs to to you know to
raise their kids or you know our
grandma or antis are are are
raising these children so
I think there's a lot of issues
I don't think I have all the
answers I don't think anybody
has all the answers but.
We have to look at that as as
well and
and not in cars rating all the
youth if we can find better
treatment for them because I do
see that a lot where judges are
like I have to keep them safe so
i'm going to keep them in
detention because I have no
alternatives and um a lot of the
detention centers during the
pandemic stopped programming.
Um because you know we're trying
to keep people safe they weren't
letting people into jails or
attorneys weren't even allowed
into a lot of the jails.
That has just started to come
back even in bernalio county
where which has the biggest
preadjudication junior tension
center they just started.
Bringing community
members back in to to bring
programming to the kids to
actually do school they were
just giving them no books before
with no actual classes so that
stuff that is just starting
again and we have to make sure
that that.
Is continuing and all of the
facilities that are open now
and that we're giving.
Um you know the kids some kind
of treatment when they're in in
custody and because in the
majority of the juveniles
detention centers they are not
receiving any kind of mental
health treatment.
Thank you manager
thank you
i've got representative
charters.
Anyone else said he looked
rippin.
Anyone else read okay we'll get
a startus I imagine them be
others
okay represent of charges thank
you madame chair thank you for
the information in the
presentation
a couple of things that that.
That folks said.
One of them that concerns me is
that there isn't any there are
any valuations CYFD d
I mean is that how long has that
been going on
oh madam chair
representative in miss berlin
may also have an answer I we
were notified and because we had
cases out of chavez and lead
that or juvenile's charge with
murder and convicted uh that had
to
then have those I I mean the
value hearings uh that they no
longer have evaluators with cfd
I don't know a day bed it's been
more than a year I and so
juvenile probation simply their
officer prepared to report and
so if we want any valuators and
we either ask the court or I
could say the defense gets one
in the state it's one and that's
what we that's what we've done I
I was like you shocked that
there are no evaluators I get if
they say there is only one or
two and they can only do so many
and our backed up that that we
understand that but to say they
don't have any neither so list
any more there's no providers I
and so it's not like any of us I
guess including legislators got
a member that notified is that
they were no longer doing this
and I don't know if it's
staffing I don't know if it's
funding okay and and madam chair
you're talking about like a
psychological evaluation to
switch you're talking about it
it's a manimature representative
it's a specific evaluation as
whether or not the child is a
meaningful to treatment as a
juvenile or should be sinister
as an adult so it's a very
specific evaluation but usually
it is
you know I think that there are
in their arm there are those
individuals in the state to
somehow perhaps are not
contracted in the launder with
it er and madame chair
representative chavis that is
correct and I think it's
happened several for several
years now where they're they're
no longer contracting with these
evaluators.
Which actually increases
expenses for the state because
usually when I practice in the
in juvenile court the court
would order one first and then
we would necessarily have to get
our own unless we really wanted
to challenge it or the days
sometimes we we would just go
along with the court order
evaluation because that's not
happening now we're both getting
evaluation so that's double the
cost rate and I wasn't in a way
to a couple of years ago that
actually that stopped i'm not
sure why but there are no
evaluators statewide that's who
ever do his contracting with.
Two determined if a child is a
meaningful to treatment which is
very important when you're
seeking adult sanctions and it
they can be very expensive and I
sit on the sentencing commission
for the grants and I and they
are one of the days was seeking
money for that specifically
because they're spending so much
money and it really should fall
on c I
and it would be less for
everybody
and then the other question that
I have in terms of uh I have a
maybe one or two other questions
too but the other question madam
chair is in terms of services
and you mentioned I think maybe
two.
That are in albuquerque and
there's nothing else stateway is
what you're saying
madam chair representative I
there's at one unless cruces and
one in albert those are the in I
believe that miss berlin
mentioned that that there may be
a third
of program I but the the two
that we primarily are judges use
in the father are all a kirk and
lessers and that's a
that that's all yeah
and i'm assuming madam chair
that the kids are on medicaid to
their those would be programs
that accept medicaid is at the
point of the problem madame
chair representative they they
would be a medicaid third and so
I I think it's just a matter of
they only have so many beds
available in the only accept
certain criteria at once they do
that as assessment of where
they're out they'll accept them
into the program they have to
meet the criteria.
And then the other in the other
comment that I wanted to maybe
take a little bit of deeper on
jennifer I think that you're the
one that the basics you talked
about it is you know in terms of
some of these kids are coming in
and you're seeing them at their
at a violent offense rate murder
and you talked about really
looking at at risk at risk youth
so
what would that look like in
terms of identifying in your
mind madam chair at risk youth
um
so that we get them before
they're involved in any kind of
violent madam chair
representative travels I think
that we have to work i'm closely
with
the schools cause a lot of time
they you know a lot of the kids
act up in school first and get
kicked out of kick data schools
and then they have nothing to do
all day and then they get in
trouble I think that also
juvenile probation can handle
some cases but without sending
them to the day's office like
lower level stuff um where they
can seek um assistance and then
I know there's something in the
criminal code and I haven't
heard I mean this the children's
code and I haven't heard of
people talk about it and really
long time it's called the family
a need of services finds
where there are identifying
families because a lot of times
it's not just that children
right it's the whole family that
needs assistance
and I don't know if that is
still up and running I don't
know if it's fully funded I
haven't heard that term and i'll
be honest with you in fifteen
years but they do awful if there
is something already in
legislation in the in the in the
children's call that address is
a it's called family need of
services and it's and it's not
co- it's not connected to the
delinquent acts or anything like
that it's china identified
families before things kind of
blow up madame chair
do you know if there's a
particular agency like a cyfd
responsible for that sort of
interest during that program
representative charities.
And just so you know we do have
a representative from cyfic who
actually was here um yesterday
but I didn't know that so I
don't know I don't want to horn
in but if you have a brief
additional
you might want to take them
to
help you out youtube don't mind
bothers the do think about my
name's core adams on the deputy
director for juvenile justice
field services for see fd so I
oversee general probation
transition statewide to answer
the question in regard to find
finishes very actively used
within so we have to be in j s
it is a theaters are non
delinquent offences and the
youth can be referred by school
officials by the parents by
anybody in the community then
just come into the office and
say I do skinny dealt and they
can fill out a fins referral
primarily what they are used for
right now true into your first
fallen during
fines referrals run away
referrals
don't those are the two that
would do we primarily see but we
do get we call incordibles where
they come in and ask us you know
just that kind of help with
their family but it's used
regularly at
that time well it incordials
just how it gets listed in our
thing I apologize
yeah it is but the old school
I will say if I may just refer
wise number things referrals are
pretty equivalent to our
delinquent or for us we're up
around
I mean they're about forty
percent of our j s.
And madam chair on that do you
have an idea of what the case
loads are like for those gpo
officers that are carrying the
things referrals.
I just need
a representative on the bit when
the officer stay wide their
distributed amongst the staff
was not specific staff only
dealing with friends cases so
they'll get distributed amongst
the normal case we'd like to do
it that way so that we really
have a friend believed that if
the once they come into the
office they need to stay without
that officer through the time
because as was talked about
earlier fair consistency it
works with juvenile as well so
we want to be as consistent as
possible and maintain that so
it'll be a part of a normal case
on for for judges that so madam
chair
court would you be able to pull
out that data so that we know
exactly sort of how those cases
distributed state wide and in
each office and how many cases
that particular worker is
carrying the reset i'm asking is
that I wonder if those cases get
sort of lower priority because
the officer is handling other
cases that may be required more
attention.
Thinking that made a
representative of I that that's
always a concern for us but I
can tell you it's a big push
from for me and my leadership
team those are the cases we want
to focus on because those are we
can make some real impact on
those cases it are our goal is
that if we do a good enough job
on a fins case we don't see them
back on the link with that is
always our goal we want to try
to keep them from coming in the
system so they're very foot
they're very well for example
but there are times when cases
court cases come up in you know
it's a murder case and you have
to go do that and and
unfortunately a fine when was
waiting for you in the meantime
so
we are judged a lot on our
formal cases are in those cases
that go to court we have never
really been examined for the
work that we do outside of court
which I am trying very hard to
convey to people the work that
goes on special when we talk to
fins cases so then when that's
common better so then it sounds
like you go to doing some good
work but it sounds like we're
still missing some kids right
they're not making it over so
that's what we need to figure
out that's the piece that we
need to figure out how do we get
to the kids and their families
that are getting missed and then
they're showing up you know as a
murder with a murder charger you
know some of the violent crime
thinking manager thank you
representative senator delocates
thank you thank you madame
chairs.
Cheese
I just wanted to um
remind people about sp three
which which requires
which the alc is leading
to identified behavioral health
needs in every judicial district
and that I think I really hope
that
both the public defenders and
and the
district attorneys are at the
table for these various meetings
that are being held they're
going to develop a plan
I a judicial district by
judicial district plan
for funding for us in and to
give us input and I think that
um some of the issues you
described could
could be should be at that table
so I I definitely didn't want to
see there's and it made me think
as I was thinking about it that
may be it's not county by county
children's detention center but
judicial district by judicial
district
detention center so that there
is some reasonable um access and
some reasonable you know sharing
of expenses so that it yeah
having when per county when you
only have two two juveniles in
that county doesn't make sense
but when you're starting to get
to seven eight nine ten
juveniles in a judicial district
it definitely makes sense for
those those children to be near
families near courts and without
when you were describing
um
uh daily state the
the hassle you you basically had
with with that case
that's just not I don't I don't
wonder if it even rises to a
constitutional level of of you
know
inadequate prosecutors you know
it was just crazy to me to think
about all everything that has to
go on in the in these rural
counties to make sure that these
kids get a fair trial
so.
I also madam chair was
dishortened that the benny hargo
fact that I could sponsor
is not making a difference we
were hoping that it would give
the district attorney's another
tool to bring in the parents and
to have some accountability and
it sounds like perhaps it's not
and we should think about that I
am she started with an
unconstitutional bill and got it
fixed in then benny hard growth
was murdered.
And she he was a personal friend
of up of representative heard in
and so she took over that bill
and it was fixed in past so it's
really disappointing to hear
that at least in your district
it's just not having any kind of
impact i'd like to talk to you I
find about that
in then I am very concerned
about this amendable to
treatment
issue.
Do we know anything of how that
decision was made and and I
that's a for see what happened
thank you for showing it because
to me that's foundational to our
children's system is that is
this child amenable to trip
treatment in this system that's
the goal we're not trying to
incarcerate kids we're trying to
treat kids
think about it
center
we talk about a mean ability to
treat minutes in this it's
builder incredibly complicated
cases on how that process has to
work and I can tell you
historically
when the department has been
involved in doing some of those
immediate building studies and
surveys it was a lot of push
back in why is the department
doing an immediate ability
survey to see if a kid to be
treated in juvenile court like
aren't we going to be a little
bit dated on how we do that
wanting to keep them in our
system and I i'm just these with
some of the conversations that
have taken place
I can tell you the evaluators
are contracted they're not hired
but they're not department
employees they're contracted by
the department and they are very
very difficult to fight and
you know we put a contract if if
the department put out a
contract asking for the service
and nobody responds is very
difficult then it's hard to find
people to get to do the job but
madam chair now then we're
hiring too the district
attorneys having to find when in
a difficult system and so is the
public defender's office and
then they're both billing the
state anyway so it's just it
doesn't make sense in the reason
I think see fd should do it is
see why fifty supposed to be the
neutral in all of us why if d
supposed to have been a really
be worried about the kid uhm and
so we want to know from a
neutral perspective cause has we
know experts can be
you can pick and choose your
expert cifi should come in with
somebody that has a respect of
both sides.
And and I think that's really
important because to me that's
foundational to the whole.
System and to hear that this
that.
They see whg is just out of the
business was disheartening too.
So did you just giving that
feedback thank you manager
incentive effective only just I
I appreciate the comments on us
being mutual because we do try I
can speak i'm a twenty six years
with the department I work from
the bottom up I worked in a
facility and now i've been this
position I mean i've worked at
every level of this
better than it's sustaination
and it's unfortunately public
perception
is not always that way it's not
we're not always seen as being
neutral in its very difficult
times to express why we're
taking the opinions of the side
that we're taking because of
confidentiality and everything
else that goes into this but I
appreciate the comments and
regards to the neutrality III
that's something I push out for
my stuff that is certainly our
ball always to remain neutral
and it's always what is in the
best insurance that gets the
first thing I start out with
anything I talked to any of my
stuff about so so I I guess I
ask that you take that back um
the
summitable to treatment report
because see why if you returned
a lot of its money and
you know he returning money and
not providing a service
not not a good look
and and I have I want to
emphasize I have enormous
respect for everybody who works
at the wifty it is hard work
in its and I believe it's very
very important work so i'm not
ragging on any employee at just
am trying to provide feedback
that could improve it I just
thank you manager thank you
senator representative
and thank you madame chair I
kind of glad couriers up there
now because i've i've worked
with query my whole life and I
started we were using japio when
I was a prosecutor well pretty
much
although my prosecution years
and so I have a lot of respect
for him he really has done all
different areas so I wanted it
kind of asked some questions to
you and I I have a.
Fee more for the attorneys to
on the the true and see issue
I was always a big as you do it
my district a big that law that
was in place I did go after
parents who did not the right
parents who were let their kids
sit there watch tv and they
weren't of the age they could
run away and that just
disappeared one year a bit
session and I remember that we
did a big study in our office
that we realize that everybody
who had dropped out of school
had besides one person who was a
dentist had committed all our
murders they were all all the
people that committed murdered
had dropped out of score besides
one he was a bike said a dentist
and now we don't have these you
know sure and see laws anymore
and I think there's definite
studies that show correlation
between success and always
benefit pusher of trying to
bring back some type of
accountability to parents and
into kids maybe you know only
whether on probation probably do
they have to go to school I
don't even know if that's even
required anymore
what are your thoughts on that
as you bend in the years all
these years and seen where that
kind of was in and I know you
used to file on that all the
time you know for not going to
school and do you see any
benefit madam chair and
mr adams unlike bringing some
type of true and see
regulations or laws back into
place to help our youth you know
succeed and not drop out of
school and be you know
successful manager
representative thank you for
thank you for the question I
I go back to
unvery proud of what we did
incorrect county when we talk
about absentees and insurance
you said we actually started a
program before the state every
best legislation on it and we
and we found some success in
this was just a go grass roots
effort to try to try to make a
difference and so I appreciate
your support and that over the
years.
Um truth is is is a major issue
it's a it's a contributing
factor to we ran a study out of
county.
Before we did this
we ran a study out of curry
county before we did this and we
found that over the course of
years
to seventy percent of our
clients that came in for true
it's ever for all ended up back
in the office for delinquent for
us within the next year and so
we really wanted to try to
address that so I am all for
accountability for truly I think
accountability on the parents
side of things is is certainly a
part of it I counted believe for
the youth I steer clear of
anything when we start to talk
true and see getting towards the
link won't behavior because we
you know we're struggling in the
capacity to do it the think
what's what we have we
attributed to this and we will
absolutely double our numbers in
the state of our firals
but I do think that there needs
to be some exploration into how
do we.
How do you imprecify the public
and in these the importance of
going to school I think that's
what my staff does on a daily
base when it going and do these
kind of interventions but there
is not a lot of teeth so outside
of us saying.
Hey this is why this is a really
good idea
if if they don't buy in in
really anything they do when I
actually talk talk about this on
any defense stuff that we do is
completely voluntarily on the
family's parts so we have to get
them to agree to to go through
with whatever service is they
have so
something to to push them a
little bit to encourage them
would be are beneficial in my
mind but
they're also needs to be
consistency statewide with how
how it's dealt with and we're
working with pd right now to
find some of that from district
to district on how they're
dealing with the so i'm a part
of a couple groups of of doing
that so i'm encouraged by that
but I think legislatively
something was some backing
behind some of the stuff could
be beneficial appreciate that
madam chair and I felt that yeah
we had a very proactive program
in clovis which was you know
getting given prizes donated
prizes to the kids that they had
perfect attendance and and they
seem to really we had a mass
guard and you know part of that
and then also referring him to
you when the the stuff came in
and then picking the worst of
the worst parents and then we'd
actually go out and investigate
them and you walk in their house
and they're sitting there with
their you know seven year old
watch and tv when you know
that's obviously a kid that they
could be bringing to school not
the one the parents dropping off
in the kids run in off obviously
that's not the parent's fault
and so just even sometimes those
are the publicity of those
straightened up those parents I
don't want to be in the paper
you you know get get it get to
school and I thought I think
that we can do something with
turns that will help our
juveniles and so wanted to bring
that point app and my other
question for you and couriers
which are what's your opinion
we've been talking a lot about
the assessment tool for
detention
and I know see where do you runs
the juvenile probation so how
did you guys come up with that
assessment tool and do you think
that the assessment tool for
detention is is something that's
actually working or that we need
to.
You know there's been talks
about getting getting rid of
that or different things I would
love your opinion on that
matter.
The military who represented the
the state risk assist risk
assessment instrument the rac
tool that we use when we're
determining you know is
developed by examining tools in
use in other states and it when
all this was come about a minute
everything was.
The questions that are asked and
how we score is do those things
lead to further behavior was all
evidence based and so it was you
know is validated in in the
tools come up with an end and
I understand it is not been
incredibly popular stay white
but of a personal my personal
opinion as it does
I I think what we find is the
youth that are being held when
they're ordered to be held on
that they're the ones that are a
risk to their community it risks
to them of harm to themselves or
others are they're not going to
show back up for court there
have been incidents where we've
released people and I know it's
it's created some publicity on
some things on on some cases but
those kids almost.
Always show back they show up
the the they're there if we have
a parent that is engaged in this
taking responsibility for these
youth action.
Although I don't know that that
you've necessarily needs to be
an attention if the family's
going to be there to take care
of enough they're not they
should could attention so there
is the ability within the rate
for us to override and that
information to make a decision
to override is not made by the
jpo what's made by the chief for
a supervisor in the office and
it is made based on the
information that we get from law
enforcement so the information
that we receive or that we make
the decision on his is really
based on what we receive in that
call from law enforcement and so
if if there are times when not
all the information is conveyed
because maybe they're not kidnap
I mean charged with something
so I can't really be talked
about within that can be
determined I can't be a factor
on whether or not we're going to
it needs to stick to this I I
think the ray has what we've
done when we as we looked at it
over the years it has helped our
recent ethnic disparities within
the department we've removed out
ability that's not even a factor
on anything that we do we don't
decisions on the ray or made by
I have a leadership team before
staff it's associated deputies
and chief level above making
these calls are not within that
community there in another
community so it's it's on biased
opinions going off of the
information that we receive to
make this or in my opinion it
does work there were some tweaks
that have been made after the
governor's order in relation to
automatic detention of firearms
and youth and things like that
so we have the ability to adjust
i'll be interesting to see the
last validation report was done
in twenty twenty two we need to
do another one now with these
changes because those changes
there was a push for us to make
those changes and we did not.
I there wasn't an exploration
into the validation of some of
the things it was just a
decision that was made because
we needed to have a reaction we
needed to react to what was
going on and so many chair and
court if we've been hearing that
the only way you'll be detained
as if you have a fire so you're
saying that is that true or you
can override that we can over it
that there's manager and and
representative when I went law
enforcement officer calls jpo
that they've got a youth it's
charged with the delicate act
they will tell they'll tell the
chart they'll tell the gpl and
go over the information that
they have enough scored and
based on the severity of the
allegations are certain
allegations
it comes up with the score and
then they're mitigating factors
or there are all these other
factors that we or parent are
family willing to take
responsibility for there's lots
of different questions that are
on there and that will come in
with a automatic score.
The change that we made was any
fight on the youth it is caught
in a delinquent act as a fire
room in their possession is an
automatic twelfth that was the
change that was made and then
there was also a change made in
relation to uh battery appliance
see why stuff we have a lot of
issues with.
You've
a special in the project of
service like battering some of
their staff and and not a lot of
consequences from that so we we
took that as.
I need soccer and my final
question madam chaired just
because we've been asking this
as far as it mislease and
sporella
the understaffing of your
officers the pay
you know of if that appears an
issue contracts things of that
nature I would love to get you
know like starting with mislease
how fully staffed are you and
and we we discussed is there
amount of money that you think
would draw and prosecutors in
public defenders and and that
issue just so we can follow up
with different offices that
we've been asking I have madam
chair representative currently
the fiftieth has seven attorney
vacancies out of twenty four
attorney slights for the three
counties I am and so my
attorneys are and I put these
numbers before that the budget
committee and I think there we
should think they're made up I
might turn easier carrying a
minimum of two hundred up to
three fifty and those were
talking found in cases we're not
talking missed me I and it's not
workable it's it's not workable
and so the reality is when I say
that we plead a lot of cases
were probably pleading like not
me percent of our cases I and
they're probably beginning a
chance at a really low sentence
because we can't do it money I
we've gotten the grant money
from the sense in commission for
retention I recruitment
it helps spent reality i'm
state wide the second has been
able to hire I everybody else's
maybe the tenth may not be short
staff but all the other days
have vacancies eh it is a
statewide problem it is a
national problem I am we are
working with the national
district attorney's association
they've done how two years of
recruitment retention events
they're doing a training on how
to do recommend recruitment
retention are this fall I and
so.
Higher salaries I could get a
starting salary well what we get
asked we get asked for fifty we
had asked for when fifties are
starting salary brand new no
experience and and we just kind
of laugh because we write a
misbrilliant last two relief you
know we're worse I mean thirty
thousand
i've been and we did improve our
um
we did a new pay skill for the
district terry as we approve
that which the likely means that
the loss is the public defender
going to have to do theirs
because we usually are pretty
close I I now I bet it it's a
it's a problem for us it's a
problem for them more money
would help I think that I am
damacias from the third
suggested active this committee
and house may be one twenty and
I I think perhaps some people
didn't think that that was
feasible but you have to look at
the work load and what are we
asking what do we want people to
accomplish do we want them to do
good work and you have a cases
or proscue correctly in case the
center defended correctly and we
get the move through this system
whether they need to be
dismissed or they need to be
prosecuted I the reality is
still not loaned out I cost of
living I and we're sitting in
the fifth where cost of living
is very hard I raswall rose all
his picked up in what's happened
in leon eddie county with all in
gas lot of people are living in
chavis county and driving I too
it is expensive to live here as
well so it's easier for people
to go work at the second day's
office and live in alberta and
so what is that mean for for us
smaller districts around the
state were were doing oh i'm
going to say more
madame chair and misbrilliant.
Madame chair representative yeah
I would agree with a majority
which is saying that we have a
lot of issues in our real areas
with recruitment and pretention
we're okay now we keep even lost
cruises and in the sanity area
but
yes more money would help
because we we do we don't we're
not equal right now and starting
pay with a lot of
the days off especially in the
second um but we also have to
remember if you if we hit if we
raise up the the you know the
the bottom that the new ones
coming in we also have to raise
all of the other salaries
because we also have a lot of
people with a lot of experience
so yes money would help more
attorneys but help we only have
one law school we get maybe
about ten to eleven people on
the law school and they
primarily stay in albuquerque
because they're the law schools
in our kirkey so we have to do
heavy recruitment actually out
of state in texas arizona
colorado and then compete with
those public defenders offices
as well
thank you manager thank you for
your presentation thank you I
just have one or two questions
and that focuses on parental
responsibility but in the
context of a young person who
has a gun who has acquired a gun
so you know in the press we've
read some stories about you know
young people
acquiring a parents gun or the
parent actually buying a gun for
the the young person in that gun
is then used to you know um
recavicate schools and murder
people in the like and there
have been some prosecutions of
those parents based on the fact
that they don't know if they
were neg I don't know with
theories but some some way of
now maybe it's a negligence
theory or whatever but parents
have actually gone to prison on
an a theory that a ta has
brought forth on when the child
was the.
Person who
engaged in the unlawful conduct
and i'm just curious to get some
thoughts on how we might if you
agree we should be holding
parents more responsible when
their children
gain access still gone and they
shouldn't.
Madam chair that's why I talked
about the the one statute that
we do have it may have been an
accessory theory
that apparent was charged under
uh providing the firm I
certainly we've got to meet the
elements right and that's what
we're talking about and I know
that I could say i've i've came
before this committee many years
pass talked about possibility of
of new crimes and that's always
a favor topic but the reality is
we we've got if you're wear the
problem is am in what we need to
do to stop the conduct so one of
the problems with is
senator talked about on the
thirty day seventies four point
one is it requires great only
harmony death I understand why
that that was part of it
right I understand why that was
that way but it doesn't give us
the option for window conduct is
lower but they've given them the
gun in so unlawful possession of
that firearm or maybe they
committed a burglary with that
but we don't have good body
harmor debt we can't charge the
parent and so I understand the
why III understand the way right
better once again
what other remedies do we have
and it it you become you know
how do we charge accessory is
the crime that can you can
charge accessory there's not
always so this is this is the
issue I and that's what we said
there either needs to be
resources treatment where we
were not ever giving to that
point right or they're having
the gun but certainly if there's
a statute that we can all agrees
constitutional that we can bring
for that helps us to help stop
some of these following crimes
with guns i'm certainly I I
myself is the fifties security I
can't I can't you know hold the
whole association in my other
thirteen colleagues to that
position but I do think that
others as far as the game they
have spoke out.
Uh specifically on this issue as
well
my way in just a quick chip
madam chair and and I do
understand there are some cases
where the guns are you know
coming from access from the
parents but I would say because
a lot of my
ground experience was and burned
within berlin county they're
actually coming from other
places and are very accessible
also i'm online and i've you
know I I just wonder if we could
be a little bit more proactive
with our enforcement trying to
find out also
the kids in albuquerque who are
getting very easily meeting
somebody else corner right from
somebody's trunk of our cars
well and i'm you know I just
find it ironic we want to
prosecute someone for not
getting their kid the score
which I think is important but
we don't want to prosecute a
parent who know how you know has
knowledge about their child's
access to a gun and then there's
you know I just just I just find
that ironic just for what it's
worth
well this was great and correct
glad you raised your hand today
because I think we got some
helpful information from you
representative berego
comma um
so I just wanted to make a
really quick comment but I also
want I had a question
so my comment is you know we we
are trying to create a more
healthy state more healthy
community healthy family
obviously we can't legislate
healthy families
but given that and and that's
always the goal on the back of
my mind having been the city
planner is how do we create
healthy communities
the question I have made of
chair and we had really talked a
little bit about this but the
gap
for kids that are creating these
crimes and then being sent and
store going to treatment
how do we if they don't have a
f.
Family unit.
What do we do
and that that's kind of my
question is like how do we
encourage that or how does how
do you all deal with that.
Well that's a simple question
sure
thank you very much
representative I mean that's
that's the let's that's why I
love my staff so much because
they're in those situations
every single day and trying to
really perform miracles that
times.
I think
I can speak from
it it was it was talked about
earlier the juvenile justice.
And yes we're into the coffee
and relevant really if we start
looking at some of the numbers
on some things juvenile justices
is has been relatively
successful or on a lot of stuff
I know it's hard we we get the
negative.
Policy but if you really just
look at the numbers and and all
those were saying and how we're
able to do that is really is is
is creating relationships and
almost a probation offers
they're not just.
They're not there to be the the
hammer all the time there there
they have to create a
relationship with that family
and with that client in when
they create their relative and
they build that trust with them
then they can start to impact
change
and that's what we try to do and
so especially for those families
that in those youth that we come
across it don't have that family
unit
um we really have to try to show
them hey this is what can happen
when you're supported.
When you gets on the support
from people who need people
really care about what happens
to you this is what you can
achieve and
I mean I get on my I I encourage
my staff to send me positive
emails every time they have one
how these good cases
I mean just within the last six
months I mean I had three staff
from lost cruces drive the sand
one because one of their clients
was graduating from a program up
there in here no family and so
through my staff drove up there
to be there for his graduation
in two end I mean I they send me
pictures in the young man as pro
is just bali
and what that did for my staff
was incredible what they did for
that young man was incredible
but those are the kind of things
that are taking place I think on
a daily basis so that's what we
try to do not I was very
successful and very much
appreciated and I know that's a
hard question man chair and and
I realize but I I just want to I
mean we talk after the law
enforcement and they say it's
the same kids
round and round and you know I
know that we don't have the
answer for that right now but I
think it's it's how do we create
an artificial family you know
and it's it's difficult to admit
it's a difficult issue and I
think that it's an issue when we
talk about healthy communities
and healthy families we need to
really be thinking about that
and then the old days it was
nuclear families with the
hispanics especially but I
really appreciate the work you
guys do I have a neighbor that
works at cyft also
anything okay all right well I
want to thank all of you for
coming and being willing to
share your information I think
everyone found that interesting
and helpful to hear your various
perspectives don't question
about that so we're going to
break for lunch
it is being provided and i'd
like to recommend that we start
at about one one o five okay
that will give us a half an
hour.
Since it's beat well being
provided what what how much time
do any and then we were not off
I can eat in five minutes guys
really maybe down
maybe eleven anyway and then
we're not off kilter and the
justice you know I think the
justice is what calling then how
we cannot set that up all right
very good appreciate all of you
thank you we're going to be on
