about what we've heard today.
Perhaps what we've been hearing
over the course of the last
several meetings if people want
to speak to that or
Going forward, any suggestions
in terms of meetings and, and so
on. Um, our next meetings in
Albuquerque.
And I am working on an agenda
for that and hopefully it's
gonna be varied and much
different from what we've been
spending the last 8 weeks on.
So, um,
You, perhaps you'll all be in
tune to do working on some civil
stuff and other kinds of things,
so.
Members, anything you wanna
voice, I'm happy to listen. I'm
sure people would be happy to
dialogue. um Representative
Chasey.
Um, in the chair. Do you already
have your agendas for August?
Oh, you mean is it set, yeah.
No, it is not set yet.
I mean it's in progress, let me
say.
That, um, having heard the
The Grant's past case.
And the narrowness of the um
ruling.
It seems like with all the
housing.
Insecurity.
Especially in the major cities
in uh New Mexico. I mean, we're,
we're not really major compared
to New York and Chicago, but
still, um, Albuquerque Santa Fe,
uh.
No, um.
We want to.
Hear from people in that area
and and another thing that the
speaker in the area of
homelessness, uh, in the area
of, um, what kind of
Regulation there can be. There
might might be uh acceptable.
And then how, how we can address
that.
Um, I know that.
What the
issues they were talking about
today was you could.
live in certain places in Oregon
if you weren't using drugs or if
you weren't doing this and that
and the other and, and, and just
explore that more um widely. We
I think we learned in
Albuquerque that if you put too
many prohibitions on the living
space for people who are
unhoused, then they don't use
it, but oftentimes if you make
it more readily available, and
they will stop using.
Substances and so forth because
you make care available along
with housing. So just having a
better understanding.
Of the approaches and what is
legal is is one thing, but the
speaker and I were having a
discussion recently and I did
not realize how
Um,
Much are permitting processes
are inhibiting our ability to
build affordable housing.
And he told me something
astonishing, like, you know, all
the money we put into affordable
housing, you could have you
appropriate the money now and it
could take more than a couple of
years.
To begin building something that
we just appropriated and um
He also said that there are
States with very good
environmental laws where they're
moving in a long much faster,
like the state of Washington.
And so we might want to
You know, give that's become
some consideration.
At some point I don't know if
we're meeting in Espanola in
September and one item I had.
Yeah, I think it's um I'm
looking forward to it. Um,
housing is a topic that I
thought we might talk about in
espanola as one as and obviously
they have challenges there on a
lot of these issues as well,
including homelessness, um,
there is an encampment in
Espanola, um, there's an
lawsuit by the tenants against
um um uh housing development or
apartment.
And so I, I'm putting, I'm
thinking about having.
You know, a fairly robust agenda
on housing issues and the like
in um espanola. So be aware, and
also the university in New
Mexico has created um like a
clinic now having to do or a
group.
And I've been approached by a
law student and I thought they
might come and tell us about
what kind of work they're doing,
and so on. So that is it, not a
bad idea, but it may be better
folded into the house, you know,
sort of a different aspects of
the, the grants pass
implications and what could
legally be done and, and then
also just hearing from the
advocates that and we have a lot
of experts on the ground,
especially um the efforts that
were funded during
COVID to try to keep people from
ending up.
Without housing, but that
funding has gone away and what,
what's needed now and
It just seems like we've got a
lot of um
A lot of work to do and
Just recently, I saw a um.
An article
That, um,
Featured a psychiatrist in San
Francisco, who said, you know,
she's an expert on addiction,
and she said the very
Best treatment to start with is
a place to live. Yeah. And you
know we're talking about
incompetency and civil
commitment and so forth. And I
think all of those are so
related to what you your mission
is going to be.
Um
Working on this problem between
now and 2025 session, the more
information we have on that, the
better.
Thank you,
Representative OChen. Uh,
I was thinking that if we're
going to do housing, maybe we
could invite the people from MFA
mortgage Finance Authority to
bring us their suggestions and
ideas. I belong to that the
committee and uh we're going to
have a.
Really interesting meeting uh
Monday. Oh yeah and uh but uh I
think it would be awesome if you
would bring them in and they can
give us an idea of how housing
is working and what they're
doing because they're really
putting it together and, but
it's mostly in Albuquerque.
Because you can't get anybody.
To do anything anywhere in the
state.
You can use can avoid that
front.
Oh you have to have an ordinance
from the local government in
order to use government,
oh, speaking to your mic rep.
I just wanna say uh the the
cities or the towns or the
counties have to have an
ordinance.
In order to use the government
money.
An inordinance shouldn't be hard
for anybody to do they got just
copy whatever somebody else did
and just put your name on it.
That shouldn't be hard to do.
Anyway, with that, madam chair,
I'm finished. Thank you. Thank
you, Representative. Anyone else
wanting to offer suggestions,
comment about what we've been
working on?
Anything on your mind?
OK, great. Senator Cervantess, I
was, I'm glad.
I think um it's, it's, man, I'm
sure it's probably a good time
to talk about something that
we've talked about before, but I
really want to dig into it. It
follows a little bit of what
Cohen was talking about.
You all know one of my daughters
is a doctor, some of us watch
enough TV to know with doctors
you triage a patient. In other
words, when a patient comes in
to the emergency department, the
first thing you do is you stop
the bleeding, you make sure
they're respirating, etc.
We have a crime problem in the
state and I commend the governor
and always have for making this
a central consideration for us
as, as leaders, but
Um, I think we need to be
thinking about triage.
So I'll give you an example. We,
we've spent, you and I, madam
chair of this committee spent.
Last two months looking at and
handling on medians.
On streets that are have a
median of less than 30 inches on
a limit of more than 30 miles an
hour. If you look at the actual
legislation that we were
presented last time around, it
would have criminalized the
state fair parade and it would
have uh criminalized any, uh,
anything on the streets, uh we
would have criminalized
Chimaogrimgrimages, it would,
you know, again, it just there,
there was not enough attention
and care put into the effort.
But, but even that being the
case, the median and
panhandling.
Let's compare that to uh our
drug problem. Let's, let's, um,
I, I just was asked by one of
the TV stations to give an
interview about something that I
presented twice last year.
Which are the illegal black
market of marijuana, uh,
production here in the state,
massive grow operations and uh
of Lords not here, but she was
talking with me about it. We've
got massive grow operation
that's out there today, growing
thousands and thousands of
plants.
Beyond the law.
Um, in some cases with slave
labor, Chinese uh individuals
who were brought in illegally,
um, and or being paid slave
wages and so. This is going on
today.
Um,
And it's been going on for now a
year or longer.
In Las Cruces, we brought in law
enforcement to ask them why.
We did it up in Las Vegas again
to ask why. I was with the
Former Representative Trujillo,
who was the head of regulation
and licensing yesterday in
Socorro.
We, we, we triage, I think, we
look at the, the bigger problems
and, and clearly one of the
bigger problems is the fact that
um we have, we have created an
environment where law
enforcement officers, I think,
don't.
Really believe they're being
appreciated and there's any
support for them to enforce the
laws.
I'm looking at Senator Ay Soto,
he brought up years ago
something that was fascinating
to me. We don't talk about
enough. Albuquerque has a
policies that specifically um
specified not to enforce various
laws.
Um, and, and, um, quite a, quite
a breath of laws that the police
there are trained not to
enforce, certainly not by arrest
or citations or by any kind of
criminal action and you know
I've I've in the last few weeks
brought up the fact that there's
already a panhandling ordinance
in Albuquerque that I believe
has been in place since 2017 and
as best we can tell, has been
affirmed, even though it's been
challenged among with other
laws, but the, the panhandling
on media this ban has been in
effect in Albuquerque since
2017.
How many convictions have there
been of that? Um, I, we couldn't
really find any in terms of
convictions.
Um,
so the
McClendon, I think, is the
ruling that we've talked about
before where um just fascinating
for my member colleagues. I used
to started, I started practicing
law with a module firm downtown.
We were in a big high rise when
the detention center used to be
in downtown Albuquerque, way
back in the day.
We were across the street and,
and because of overcrowding at
that facility, of McClendon uh
case was brought, and because of
overcrowding, there were
agreements to not overpopulate
an overcrowded facility by
arresting and bringing people in
for these minor offenses. That
was a long time ago. Since then
we built the MDC, the
Metropolitan Detention facility,
which is generally half-staffed.
Half occupied.
Um, and, and yet we're still
operating under that policy,
which is we're not gonna rest
for a lot of low-level crimes,
and
From my perspective, once you
start telling police officers,
we're not gonna, we're not gonna
have you enforce certain laws.
And and we're gonna discourage
you from enforcing certain laws
and so forth, then, then it, it,
it troubles me that we're
thinking we're gonna really
accomplish anything up here
passing more laws like
panhandling whatever else that
are just gonna be ignored, and I
think it begins to, I think it
begins to affect our psyche
negatively, and I think that's,
I think that's true right now. I
think law enforcement has a
psyche that why enforce these
things? Nobody appreciate it,
nobody cares. We're told not to
enforce it.
And, and that psyche, I think
permeates the courts.
And the judges and others too,
and so it's an attitude, I
think, which is if you, if you
start putting all the low level.
go and be ignored, then does it
turn into a bigger problem. But
I think, I think Albuquerque is
in trouble. I, I haven't done it
yet, but I've been encouraged
and I need to look at my
colleagues. I've been told to
drive up Central Avenue, as
Louisiana at at any number of
days or time of the day or day
and night, and I'm looking at my
colleagues they're nodding your
heads a firm. I need to go do it
because I'm, I'm told it's like
an apocalypse.
Um, in that, in that part of the
city, and nobody's tolerating
it.
Um, the, the reporter who just
interviewed me, showed me
photographs of a of a drug
market that operates in
Albuquerque, apparently on
Fridays.
He showed me boots that are set
up in a facility with all kinds
of vendors selling all kinds of
illegal drugs, drug products,
mushrooms, and various types of,
of marijuana-based products, all
illegal, um, and he tells me
it's operating every Friday.
Come on by. What does that do to
the psyche of the community?
What does that do to the psyche
of the police and ultimately,
what does that do to the psychic
of people like me who are a
father you all have heard me say
this too many times. I've raised
kids. They went through U&M. I'm
a proud graduate UNM.
They want to be close to family,
they want to be in New Mexico,
and yet they're afraid to even
think of of raising a family in
Albuquerque. We have a home in
Albuquerque, and I've been a
victim of crime there my
son-in-law was just a victim of
crime there at that house. Not a
bad neighborhood right behind
Fatima's church.
But we're losing a generation.
We're losing economic
opportunities, we're losing
employers because of this crime
problem and we really do need to
tackle it.
So I, again, I'm, I'm repeating,
I command the governor, but
there are solutions to all of
this. And to me, that's
exciting.
I didn't think there are
solutions, but we seemingly have
I didn't think there are
solutions, but we seemingly
haven't yet reached the point of
Of accountability but we're
gonna hold people accountable
for, for.
That kind of a way of living.
And I'll just add, man, I'm sure
I'd like to do so with
illustrations in in um
Albuquerque, near the home that
that we owned there.
Um, there's a Walgreens.
I'm used to the Walgreens there
on Central Avenue at Gerard and
there's the one, this one is on
Lomas.
Those of you in Albuquerque are
accustomed now to having your
Walgreens close at 9 or 10
o'clock, uh, um.
Because it's not safe, I'm told
it and, and we, we don't live
like that in Las Cruces, you
know, Las Cruces, Walgreens, and
we have a crime problems don't
get me wrong, but Walgreens is
still open 24 hours in Las
Cruces, right? We can still go
in and not have next to
everything locked up and I don't
have to get a personal shopper
to go to Walgreens away doing
when I'm in Albuquerque to get
every my razor blades I got to
get unlocked and
it's just not, it's not, it's no
way to live.
And, and we don't have to live
like this, and we've, we've
seemingly come to accept it in
the last decade I'd really like
to get excited about working
with all of you to change that
back.
Thank you, madam. There's a lot
in there I know. Thank you.
Senator Ivy Soto.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair, and
uh
Apologize, I didn't, uh.
Join you out for lunch.
Uh, I was
So full from the three helpings
of salmon I had yesterday.
Only 3.
There was a, there was an
unlimited amount actually, but
uh
but anyways, the, no, it's,
it's, you know, what I, what I
find uh really fascinating is,
is when you have a city
councilors like Councilor
Rogers, uh, in Albuquerque.
Who was spending her
discretionary money.
Right now, um, permanently
closing, um, so that, so that
homeless people can't get back
there.
And um, and, and, and, and this
is not cheap to do.
It's, it's, it's, it's close to
$100,000.
Uh, to do this.
And um.
each time, each time she does
it, and of course what it does
is that it, it alleviates a
particular location and then
everybody moves someplace else
and then.
And then there's another alley
that needs to be closed.
Right, but, but, uh, the
Uh,
What the
Um,
You know, what, what it, what it
tells me though is that when
you've got, when you've got
folks who
Uh,
Who were elected
Um,
On a platform of, of compassion
of of one community of
Uh, etc. uh, that they're.
But they're then taking this
action.
Is that, is that.
At some point there's Lus to
hospitality when when.
People who have homes or or
stores can't even get to them.
Because, because the folks who
are
Who are, who have the makeshift.
are, are.
Have taken over.
And um
And that's where, that's why I
think.
At, at, at the very least
there's a, there's a lack of
service, lack of, of.
Um
Providing for
The needs of people.
Uh, in our community.
Uh, that have needs in order to
To be able to.
Um,
But I think, I think, I think
part of the, part of the triage
is.
That Senator Cervantes was
talking about.
is, is your first, you start
with providing services. You
start with providing capacity,
you start with providing.
Providing for
For people's hierarchy of needs.
Right, and then, and then, and
then, and then you figure out,
OK, who's who's not interested
in that and then maybe that's
where then things get stepped up
for that for those folks, but,
but first you weed out
everybody, everybody who's
receptive.
To, to assist them.
And you provide them with
assistance first.
And, and I think if we could
figure out an assistance first.
Policy
Uh, that then follows up after
that.
Um,
I think, I think that's a way
that may be able to address the
problem in a kind of a
comprehensive triage.
Format.
Thank you, Senator. Anyone else?
Oh, Representative Brega.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, when
I think about, um,
You know, the function of
government.
And you guys know I've been
involved in government for a
long time.
Um, I think about the health,
safety in general welfare of the
public.
And really that, in my mind is
our job.
To ensure that everyone is safe
and that people are
Um, you know, they're in the
built environment, whether
that's a state or the county or
the cities, um,
Everyone somewhat has a right to
be there.
And um,
Oftentimes, and I, and I take a
little different um task with
regard to um
The panhandling, I don't call it
panhandling law. I call it
basically a public safety on
medians and how those medians
are designed and unfortunately,
Albuquerque has come up as
number one in the nation on the
USDOT list or pedestrian
fatalities.
And so, in thinking about that,
Bill, and think and knowing the
bill that Albuquerque passed.
Um, and we're sued on.
initially regarding medians, um,
You know, we need to really
think about those little.
You know
What or less um
Mediums where people stand in
are basically in traffic.
I mean, those are things that we
need to think about as a
Public design and how we make it
better for people.
Um, and, and so when I think
about the crime issue, you know,
And, and what, um, my colleague,
Senator Ay Soto said with regard
to services.
So if we take people out of
these environments, like, like,
um,
Um, Senator Cervantes mentioned
on on Central and put them
where.
And that's the thing that we
really need to be thinking about
is where do they go? The
criminals.
The element will be dealt with
at some level.
Yes, indeed. I, I think they
will, um.
But right now, our law
enforcement are overwhelmed.
They're overwhelmed because
they're not only being police
officers, they're taking people
off the street, taking them to
get, you know, they, they,
they're basically their job
descriptions are out of whack.
Because they're dealing with so
much the same thing with the
fire department.
And so, some of it is, in my
mind, getting back to basics.
Providing the, the, the services
for alcoholics, uh, making sure
our veterans are taken care of
and the services are available
to them, making sure that our,
you know, the uh drug.
Facilities are available.
Um, providing transitional
housing, um, in order to get
people into a real house.
And I mentioned earlier, Madam
Chair, um, you know, we built
some transitional housing for
the homeless on 2nd and lowest,
and then they did the casitas
and those have have actually
worked.
Helping people
learn life skills in order to
transition into
You know, the American dream a
real house.
Um, so I think when we think
about all of these things and I,
and I, I mentioned this before,
Madam chairs are transportation
issues, people getting from
point A to point B. Oftentimes
people can't even get to a
doctor's appointment.
And so or or their job.
Um, so I think when we think
about how we are going to
Affect our services and our
crime and all of these other
things. We need to think about
sort of a holistic approach to
providing the services for
All of these needs and, you
know,
Creating a a
And, and really that takes
Like a vision.
Where all of our agencies are
cooperating.
So I just, I just need to
mention that as a, as a city
planner because I've thought
about these issues for many,
many years. Thank you.
Senator Madam Chair,
if I may call on Ms. Gregel Vito
Mar. Would you mind answering
just a couple of questions for
me real quick? You and I spoke
yesterday. This is to follow up
on on Representative Brego's
points. This the notion of the
median safety, um, and of
course, the, the information
that's getting out to the public
is we have this high incident of
deaths and injuries in New
Mexico, pedestrian deaths and so
forth, um, and, um, and she was
educating me yesterday and if
you wouldn't mind educating the
entire community just a minute
or two because
There's an amazing thing about
all this. Facts are stubborn
things. You've heard the cliche,
right? Um, we have data on these
things. We have stats and we
have facts and we have figures,
and this is what Megan in the
back and Christine and I have
been wrestling with for the last
2 months, which is the notion
that we need this media and
safety because of the pedestrian
injuries and deaths for people
standing on meetings, Ms. Gred,
one minute or two, please. Just
give us the numbers so we're
educated together, not just a
few of us.
So, um, Madam Chair, Senator, I
reached out to
Yeah, mic's on. I reached out to
the Department of Transportation
to get the data that serves as
the underlying data for the um.
Governor's Highway Safety
Association report that came
out.
Based on what I understand about
that data, it looks like most of
the pedestrian deaths are
happening in about 7 counties
you can.
Pretty much imagine where they
had Bernlio Sandoval.
Dona Anna Lee County or your
bigger cities are Gallup, so
McKinley County, um.
I want to say there are about
200.
Over a two year period.
Um,
Rough, well, 200 accidents
roughly over a 2-year period. So
I pulled, I had them pull 22 and
23.
Information.
In those instances, the majority
of them are happening in
nighttime hours.
Um,
I want to say about 40%, it
looks like there's some sort of
alcohol or drugs involved.
Um, unclear whether it's
pedestrian or driver, but
there's.
There's substance issues.
Within that, um.
Clearly this is all being pulled
from
Uh, police incident reports, so
there's some coding and stuff
and, and there's not a lot of
detail and data, so it's.
Um, pretty basic information
that I've got.
And and uh my recollation is you
also um educated me that most of
the incident reports that you
have access to or available
we're a lot a lot of them are
interstate, uh, locations, um,
as opposed to medians in the
middle of the daytime, so you
take, so assuming that there's
less panhandling at night, but
that's when these are occurring
and, and they're occurring on
the interstates, which I don't
see a lot of panhandling going
on in the interstates. Um, when
we look at New Mexico
This high statistically for
these injuries and, and deaths
and so forth uh for pedestrians
in traffic, it's, it's not
happening in the medians.
Uh, we're, we're attacking the
wrong problem.
Is that a fair help help me with
the interstate numbers if you
know what that, that looked
like. Yeah, I can get you the,
the exact number. There's a
good, I wanna say it was right
under 50%, 40 to 50% that are
happening on interstate, so I
10.
Um, I-25 and I-40.
Thank you, Mr. Go. I didn't
prepare you to answer questions,
but again, we have data, we have
numbers, we have facts, we're
really capable people, solving a
problem and we're I just mis
misrepresent Barrego when you we
talked about, you know, that
issue and pedestrians. I thought
the committee would benefit,
Madam Chair, by, by knowing what
you and I've been talking about
for now months.
Thank you. I follow up on that
um the schedule. I had
understood also that a large
percentage of people crossing
the street, not standing in a
medium, but actually either
crossing in a crosswalk or
crossing outside of a a
crosswalk that there was a
fairly high percentage of
incidents there. Did you have
any information on that? It's
hard to tell from the data, um,
there is a designation about
where is it happening?
Um,
But I'd say that that that
that's.
Inconclusive based on the
information DOT provided.
Just to the senator's point,
when we were looking at that,
it's the First Amendment.
Question.
That means there's heightened
scrutiny, which means you have
to prove up your case. You have
to show there's a a strong
relationship for the pro
solution to the activity that
you want to regulate, which is
open to the First Amendment, so.
That's why we were focused on
that and, and we're very
skeptical that this particular
statute that we were talking,
Bill, we were talking about
would meet constitutional
mustard, and I, I still contend
that it would not meet
constitutional mustard.
Muster, so, um, really good
conversation though everybody
and um I appreciate it.
Yes, Madam Chair, I just wanted
to remind the committee that I
had sent you the data that I got
from uh National NMDOT regarding
pedestrian deaths.
And it was 2022 data, which is
the the
The soonest that I could find
anyway, um, and
We were discussing this in
Merchcog Transportation Board,
when I sat on that committee, so
I just wanted to mention that I
think you sent that out to
everyone. We appreciate the fact
that there's data. The question
is, is it relevant to a median,
and that's what I think we were
all talking about and the
conclusion is, at best it's
inconclusive. I would argue that
there's a very little
relationship between medians and
the data that we've been
presented, so, um, I think maybe
we have had a
Great um discussion and it's
time for public comment. Now, we
have 2 people online, why don't
we do the online people and then
we can get to the audience, and
I'd asked them.
Are we there yet, folks?
Yeah, we have 2 people signed up
for the
Online.
Ready?
OK.
Is there a nate?
Kiss me
N
Hello.
N
How about Andrew Rivas.
Andrew?
It's tough me swinging my neck
around here.
Where are we?
I'm here. I'm President Andrew
Rivas. Um, OK, Andrew, uh, you
have 2 minutes.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair and
members. Um, I'm Andrew Rivas.
I'm a community advocate, and I
want to thank you for gathering
here today to address a pressing
issue in our community.
Um, the criminalization of
homelessness. This is not just a
problem for those directly
affected, but for all who care
about the well-being and safety
of our community. Criminalizing
homelessness in New Mexico is a
profound injustice. Arresting or
finding a finding individuals
for behaviors associated with
homelessness such as sleeping in
public spaces or panhandling
does not solve the underlying
issues. Instead, it often
exacerbates the problem. Data
from the New Mexico coalition to
End Homelessness indicates that.
Many people experiencing
homelessness are arrested for
minor offenses, which then
creates a cycle of incarceration
and instability, making it even
harder for them to find
employment and secure housing.
Another significant challenge we
face is the underinvestment in
mental health care. According to
the National Alliance on Mental
Illness, New Mexico ranks among
the lowest in the nation for
mental health funding. This
underinvestment has dire
consequences for those
experiencing homelessness
without adequate mental health
services, many individuals are
left to navigate their condition
alone, often leading to crisis
that could have been prevented
with proper support. The issue
of forced treatment often seen
as a quick fix, can have severe
Percussions, research shows that
involuntary treatment can lead
to trauma, erode trust in health
care, and discourage individuals
from seeking help in the future.
We must shift our focus from
coercion to voluntary
patient-centered care that
respects the dignity and
autonomy of those in need.
Programs that offer
comprehensive voluntary mental
health services are more
effective in helping individuals
achieve long-term stability and
recovery.
We must advocate for policies
that focus on prevention,
support and rehabilitation
rather than punishment.
Increasing affordable housing
options, expanding mental health
and substance abuse treatment
programs and providing job
training and employment
opportunities are crucial steps.
The housing first model which
prioritizes providing permanent
housing to those experiencing
homelessness has shown
remarkable success in reducing
homelessness in other states and
can be a model for New Mexico.
In conclusion, addressing
homelessness and panhandling
through compassionate and
practical solutions will benefit
not only those directly directly
affected by our entire
community. It is time we stopped
penalizing poverty and start
addressing its root causes with
compassion and effective
solutions.
Our community must thank you.
Thank you. You're welcome.
Um, is Nate on the line, Nate?
Yes, Madam Chair, Nate Ey here,
um, 2 minutes, please.
Thank you, Madam Chair. A few
comments relating to the Rahimi
presentation and discussion
thereof.
First, I didn't hear it
mentioned, uh, but I may have
missed it. Uh, Rahimi was a
facial challenge to 922 G8
rather than an as-applied
challenge to Mr. Rahimi. Uh, his
argument was basically there
were no circumstances under
which 922G8 could be
constitutional. Obviously,
Justice Thomas thought so. The
rest of the court did not. Uh,
because of that, it's a fairly
narrow ruling, and you see in,
for example, Justice Barrett's
concurrence, she says at the end
that harder level of generality
problems.
Can await another day.
Uh, Justice Gorsuch also
discusses the facial nature of
the challenge in his
concurrence, whereas, um,
Justice Sotomayor, Kagan, and
Jackson kind of has shoehorn
interest balancing back into
Bro.
Uh, as far as the colloquy
thereafter uh between yourself,
Madam Chair, and Senator Shadia
Lopez about common use, um,
common use is
Not for the purposes of self
defense, but common uses for
lawful purposes in Heller and
trickle down cases for defining
what something in common use is,
I'd advise the committee to look
at Catano versus Massachusetts,
uh, where the court found that
200,000 tasers in national
circulation was common use.
Self-defense is a compound test
of the 9th Circuit has been
trying to create over the past
couple of years since Bruin came
out.
Thank you for your time. Thank
you, Nate. um Hailey Zack Haley.
Hi there, um, good afternoon and
thank you to the chair and
committee. Um, my name is Alicia
Olibari and I am a law clerk at
the Southwest Women's Law Center
based in Albuquerque. Uh, our
organization would like to
express opposition to both the
panhandling bill and the
competency bill. It is
concerning to our organization
that the proposed legislation
has not been thoroughly vetted.
Bills that impact people's
freedoms and lives must be
thoroughly evaluated and include
the voices of the community,
without adequate vetting and
community input, there is a risk
of enacting legislation that
will have negative consequences.
Thank you for your attention to
this important matter.
Thank you very much. And the
last speaker online is Austin.
Austin?
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members. My name is
Austin Weai, and I'm with the
New Mexico Working Families
Party, uh, and we are here to
state our opposition to the
policies uh which were outlined
for the upcoming special um
session.
Uh, you know, if, if the
proclamation does happen, um,
for the same reasons that were
outlined before because they are
a um pretty big step uh towards
taking away people's personal
freedoms for infringing on
individuals' rights, uh, for
many of the reasons outlined
earlier, but also because it uh
places an additional burden on
those who are already struggling
either to make ends meet or to
get themselves back.
On their feet, um, that it is an
additionally cruel barrier to
enforce panhandling requirements
and
Um, punishments for folks,
especially and almost as a cruel
joke, financial punishments, uh,
for people who are living on the
streets struggling to um just
get uh standard subsistence for
themselves that we would then
charge them money, um, so that
they don't go to jail, uh, and
some of the other really
important policies which will
have a profound effect on our
criminal justice system and will
tax those individuals
additionally who are trying
The best and to help our system
stay afloat, um, all of those
social workers and individuals
to evaluate mental health that
we simply do not have the
infrastructure to make this
happen, um, and it will continue
to funnel people towards a
private prison system, which is
benefiting and profiting hugely
off of our most vulnerable
populations. So thank you very
much for your time, uh, and we
stand in opposition. Thank you
very much. Um
We're through with the online
participation. We have 3 people
on the list, but I see a number
of people in the audience, so,
um, what I'd like to do, and I
understand you, some of you may
want to participate and that's
great. I'd like to do the 3 that
signed up and then we'll, we'll
go subsequent to that, so I have
um Nat Dean, Gary Hosapien and
Ellen Pines, if you wanna.
Um, let's minimize the the
walking up time, I would like
you to come to the uh
The seats so we can um record
you and for those of you who
want to participate, it would be
nice if you get a little closer
to the front, so we're not
waiting 20 seconds every time
you need to kind of.
Come to the table. So, whichever
one of you wants to go first,
Gary or Ellen, feel free.
Thank you.
Good afternoon. My name, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is Gary Alian. I'm the
CEO of Disability Rights New
Mexico, uh, and I'm here to
speak and reaffirm our
commitment with administration
and this committee to take
action to support individuals
with disabilities in this state,
and also uh the services that
are necessary for them.
Uh,
The governor has urged
Everyone to do something.
We do believe something does
need to be said and done.
But the outrage that we all
should have.
Is a failure.
The administration to provide
the necessary behavioral health
services to New Mexicans. This
roundhouse could be filled.
With people and families
suffering because they have not
been getting the behavioral
health services promised to
them.
Fiscal year 23.
$20 million given to HST.
Unspent.
For health services.
Reauthorization by you.
For $20 million in fiscal year
24.
Less than $100,000 spent.
You reauthorized again for
fiscal year 25, 10 million to
HSD, 10 million to CYFD to see
if they can get it right and
gave an outline form.
There is an outrage we all
should feel.
For the failure of delivering
those services.
We talk about public safety.
Let's talk about personal
safety.
Personal safety, people's
well-being being served.
So the population been focusing
on is misplaced. It shouldn't be
that mass of New Mexicans that
are not getting those behavioral
services.
In the legal world, we call it a
mandamus action.
Do your duty.
It's time for HSD now HHCA to do
their duty and provide the
services necessary for
individuals in New Mexico. Thank
you. Thank you, Gary Ellen.
Oh, thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, Ellen
Pines representing.
The Disability coalition and uh
in that role, obviously, I'm
speaking on behalf of people
with disabilities, including
mental health disabilities. We
advocate for people with
disabilities of all kinds. Um,
first of all, I want to thank
all of you and echo what the
chair said earlier this morning,
um, you have come to these
meetings, they're extra meetings
you weren't expecting to have
them so early in the interim.
You've been attentive, you've
engaged with the issues and um I
really appreciated it.
that and I want to thank you for
it.
On the substance are primary
interest as um advocates for
people with disabilities was in
the bills that the governor had
proposed on competency to stand
trial and involuntary mental
health treatment. It is my
understanding that these bills
will not be moving forward in
the special session, so I'm not
going to get into the weeds, uh,
on the issues related to them,
and I did present to you last
month or at your last meeting
and speak at length to that, so
I'm not going to go back over.
All that. I just want to say
that I was very pleased to hear
that these bills are not moving
forward because I think the
measures that the governor um
had put forward, reflected a
lack of grasp of the issues and
a failure to engage with
stakeholders in trying to
develop real solutions, and I
appreciate the legislature's
position that you want to keep
working on these issues. They're
complex. They need work, they
should.
Couldn't be rushed through and
they should engage all
stakeholders and we look forward
to working with you as you
continue that work during the
interim and during the 2025
session. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, thank you, Ellen. Sir, are
you Nat Nate or I'm not Nate.
OK, but go ahead, if there's
Nate in the audience.
00, I'm sorry now. Why don't you
go ahead, sir, and Nat, why
don't you come on up after him.
Oh, OK.
I have the next person.
OK. Yeah. I really appreciate
the help senators and
representatives.
Thank you.
Go ahead.
Uh, hey there, my name is Beach
Beauchamp on 59 years old. I'm
also a Cold War submarine
veteran nuclear engineer,
Smithsonian queer published
poet, writer, author, ex-drug
addicted prostitute on the
streets of Washington DC and
then back again.
That's a good thing.
Shocking, uh, I certainly turned
my life around and so can others
if we help.
That said, we have organizations
here trying to help those on the
streets like me when I was a
queer mentally ill homeless
prostitute, drug-addicted kid in
my twenties, boast everything
here is privately funded or
mostly so, and volunteers doing
God's work. I have several LLCs
and dotcoms, where I raised
money for charities like the S3
Santa Fe housing Initiative,
totally free.
You know, I'm just trying to
give back.
Our entire representative
democracy has collapsing and
this is why. It no longer serves
citizens, but those who worship
money, worldly temporal power
and the status quo. Will the
status quo won't go anymore. We
are in the fight of our lives
and for our very representative
democracy.
Our founding fathers blessed us
with.
We no longer seem to have focus
perspective, or sense of
proportion.
If you don't get at the root of
the problem, we can't solve
anything.
Reform or die, fight for your
representative democracy now
while being the change you want
to see. Be brave, organize, be
of service now, get public, use
the internet to spread justice
and love and refuse to
participate in violence,
nonviolent civil disobedience is
the way now, tick talk before
it's too late, Vote blue no
matter.
and make it a huge blue tsunami
wave or die.
In the special session.
Excuse me. Good afternoon, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is Marshall Martinez.
I'm the executive director of
Equality New Mexico, the
statewide LGBTQ civil rights
organization.
I am a queer Chicano from Alamo
Gordo, and I have been both
professionally and personally
queer and involved in the
community for over 2 decades.
The same thing has been
consistently true for all of
this time.
Our communities are begging for
help.
We are begging for access to
mental and behavioral health
care that we need and deserve,
and it doesn't exist.
In my personal life right now.
I know and love 5 people, all
queer and trans.
All with professional careers,
employer covered health
insurance.
All living in active addiction
and trying to find treatment.
Not one of them can find space
in a single outpatient facility,
unless it is religious-based.
And for folks who don't know,
religious and religious and
intolerant families are often
the onset of the traumas that
lead us to addiction to begin
with.
Our communities have been
begging for help across the
state. It is clear what we need.
We need more resources. We need
a quick moving state government
that implements the grants and
contracts that it has rapidly to
the providers who can scale up
their services for the
communities that are crying out
for help.
And all of those pieces of
legislation have been
introduced, many of them not
given a message by the
administration. Some passed with
funds undisttributed and
contracts still unsigned.
It is abundantly clear we do not
need punishment. We do not need
incarceration. We do not need
coercion. We need care and
resources and our communities
are begging you all to implement
that for us. Thank you.
Thank you, Chair and committee
members. I'm so sorry I didn't
sign up. I just rolled in from
Las Cruces, so, uh, chairing
committee members, my name is
Kat Sanchez. I'm the policy
director with Bold Futures. Uh,
first, I want to commend the
committee for having for
focusing on community safety,
mental health, addiction and
homelessness, and how they
intersect in such complex ways.
Second, I want to bring the lens
from my hometown, uh Las Cruces,
and from southern New Mexico and
reiterate the call and need for
resources and
Infrastructure.
I have engaged with mental
health providers down south who
are concerned with the proposed
legislation regarding competency
and involuntary commitment. What
I've heard is, at best, it's
troubling, and at worst it's
rife with ways for abuse of
committing individuals.
And as someone who has
experienced homelessness for a
brief time when I lived in Los
Angeles and someone who
continues to use mental health
care. I share their concerns.
My partner works at a mental
health care organization in Las
Cruces, and they have two
facilities, one does secular
counseling, one does Christian
counseling, and between both of
them, they have a wait list of
more than 300 people.
That want health care.
And they don't just serve Donana
County. They serve Odeo County.
As well.
We need providers, we need
infrastructure. We need to limit
excessive renters' fees that
aren't covered by housing
vouchers.
We need better solutions than
changing definitions that do
more harm than good.
Thank you.
You.
Um,
Yes, ma'am.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, my
name is Deborah. I'm a volunteer
and retired public school
educator. Um, I am opposed to
forced treatment and mental
health, civil commitment.
Anti-panhandling legislation and
irrevocable sentencing
penalties.
If the proposed legislation were
to pass, New Mexico does not
have the infrastructure for any
meaningful mental health
treatment. Also, currently, New
Mexico Correction facilities are
horribly overcrowded and
understaffed, which creates
itself unsafe conditions for
both incarcerated people and
staff.
This week of proposed
legislation has no data to show
the original problem will be
eliminated or lessened by these
actions.
For example, in New Mexico, we
have increased the penalty for
committing a crime with a
firearm without seeing a
reduction inelon's possessing
firearms, increasing penalties
is not effective. Thank you so
much. Thank you.
Next,
Is your mic on cause you're soft
spoken.
Is it green?
OK, is that better? Yeah, OK,
sorry, please forgive me. I
don't have my service dog with
me.
Um, I just want to thank you,
Madam Chair and committee for
giving me the opportunity to
cry, cry out to you guys for
help. I'm speaking on an
individual level. I'm also
joining the committee soon, but
um, speaking out.
Personally, I've been impacted
by the system in multiple ways.
One, I was incarcerated because
there was not any help. I was
literally crying and begging for
help. I've never done drugs in
my life. I mean, I, you know, I
experimented, but like, I didn't
want to do it because I saw the
ramifications and how it makes
our lives worse, so I was always
told to be a good citizen. My
parents raised me to be a good.
Human being and, and to do the
best we can, but
We did not have the resources to
get the mental health care that
we needed, that I needed, and um
I couldn't function in a world
that did not allow me the space
and allow me to give me the
space to heal and to grow, um,
and after I got my felony
charge.
I was denied mental health care
for 8 years. I was running and
begging and begging. I literally
went and I cried and I cried for
help. I said, I can't handle
this anymore. Where can I get
help? So now on another level,
the now my, I don't have the
felonies they've been deferred,
but there's other systems, other
barriers that are I'm facing,
um I tried cause I'm, I took a
medical leave of absence because
I had a mental breakdown at
school. I was not prepared
mentally, although academic.
and intellectually they thought
I was great, but
Psychiatric wise, I was not able
to withstand the pressures even
with my dog and all that, so I
had to take a mental.
Healthcare and here in New
Mexico, there's no, I'm
literally was on a wait lists
for practically a year, so I
missed the deadlines to enroll
back to school. So I don't even
know if that's an option for me
anymore, so when we try to
improve our lives, there's
constant barrier after barrier
after barrier, and I got so fed
up with it at one point in my
life that I literally tried to
commit suicide because I said if
this system wants to continue to
dehumanize me and tell me I'm a
piece of shit because that's
what they basically did every
time they slammed the door on my
face. I was, I could not move
with my life, with trying to get
a degree, trying to be a
productive citizen as everyone
dictates how we're supposed to
be. But when those barriers are
there, it is not possible
because even now, because I'm on
Medicaid, there's a certain um
program, they do not allow you
to enter if you can't pay. I
said, I have people who will
help me pay, but because I have
Medicaid, they will not allow me
to enter because they're not
allowed to take money from
private funding from recipients.
have Medicaid. So where the hell
do I get the goddamn help I need
so I can be a productive citizen
like all of you guys. I admire
you, but I can't move forward
because the system does not
allow me to move forward.
So if there's anything I can do
to help or whatever because I, I
even a job, I can't even get a
job because when they discover
you have a mental illness or
you've made a mistake or you
have to come and explain your
service dog. Like I didn't bring
him now because I don't have his
vest.
I can't. How, how am I supposed
to function? I'm doing my best,
but the system keeps knocking me
down no matter how hard I try.
I apologize. Thank you for
listening, but I'm just, and
it's not just me, it's my family
and my friends we're all talk
about this together cause my
friend, her daughter.
could not see the mother
psychiatrist, so they have to
give the mother had to break her
medicine to share with her
daughter because the
psychiatrist in Santa Fe decided
to quit.
The child psychiatrist, so she
has no place to go. So the
mother, they're, they're,
they're, it's broken people
holding broken people together
and expecting us to function,
expecting us to function when
we're out there reaching out.
We're constantly reaching out.
So, an investment in humanity,
not an investment in
criminalization is what I'm
pleading. Thank you for that.
Thank you for sharing that.
Thank you. I appreciate, thank
you for listening.
Sir.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Justin Allen, and uh I'm
a formerly incarcerated
individual who found myself
homeless at an early age because
being queer wasn't something
that was accepted in my
household.
Um, I'm a resident of the
International District, and I'm
here today to oppose this
anti-panhandling bill that
perpetuates criminalization.
How we treat our most vulnerable
citizens is a reflection of our
humanity.
Criminalizing panhaly is not a
public safety measure, but a
direct attack on our unhoused
community.
It is unconscionable that we
already have instances of
Albuquerque Police Department
and solid waste terrorizing and
destroying the personal
belongings of our unhoused
relatives and this proposal
would only add another layer of
state violence by criminalizing
their means of survival and
infringing on their First
Amendment rights.
Instead of addressing pedestrian
safety, this bill would
perpetuate harm. If we truly
care about public safety, we
should invest in road and biking
infrastructure like street
lighting.
Let's work together on real
solutions that keep everyone
safe rather than finding or
jailing individuals and are
already understaffed detention
facilities.
I implore you to oppose this
proposal and choose compassion
over criminalization. Thank you.
Thank you.
Yes, miss. Madam, um, yes,
Senator me real quick before
Justin sits all the way down.
Uh, I was, I was wondering, I, I
know that we're pressed for
time.
But if, if, if, if I could ask
Justin to just take one minute,
just one minute.
He educated me.
On an issue of since since one
of the issues come that, that's
supposed to come up later this
week is about felons in
possession of a firearm.
educated me on, on referring to
individuals as felons.
And if he could just take one
minute to show that with the
committee, please. Sure.
So, um,
Our society has been conditioned
to dehumanize individual and the
way we talk about crime and
public safety.
Uh, when I talked to Senator
Daniel Abioto. I urged him to
move away from language that
justifies state violence and
dehumanization. What that looks
like is using a person first
language when we're referring to
our most vulnerable members of
society rather than calling
people their crimes or referring
to people as criminals or
felons, we should be using the
person first language. The
reason why is
Because when we're constantly
being called felons, criminals,
and our crimes, we tend to act
accordingly that label is
internalized and it becomes an
excuse for everything. I can't
because I'm a felon.
So I encourage this committee to
think about intentional words
when we talk about public safety
and crime. Thank you. Thank you.
And, and real quick that would
look like a person.
A person who's been convicted of
a felony.
A person who has been convicted
of a felony, a person who
committed a murder, a person who
made the mistakes. We all make
mistakes. None of us is the
worst thing that we've ever
done. Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you.
Ma.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
committee members. My name is
Rihannon Montoya, and I'm a
resident of Valencia County. I'm
here today to urge you to oppose
the criminal enhancement bill
for people convicted of a felony
and possession of a firearm.
Research has shown that criminal
in
do not deter crime. Instead,
longer prison sentence.
Longer prison sentences force
individuals to assimilate into
prison culture, making it harder
for us to reintegrate into
society upon release. This bill
would not only perpetuate this
harmful cycle but also remove
the good time incentive for good
behavior, creating a dangerous
environment that breeds prison
violence. People become more
dangerous when they have nothing
to lose, rather than addressing
the root cause of gun violence.
And access to firearms, this
bill would only serve to expand
our already understaffed
prisons. I implore this
committee to consider the
consequences of this proposal
and oppose it. Let's work
together to create a safer and
more just society that addresses
the true causes of violence
rather than per perpetuate
harmful cycles. Thank you. Thank
you.
I am.
Um, good afternoon. I'm Diane
McCash. Um, I first want to say
that no matter how I feel or
have felt about particular
legislation that you all have
sponsored. I really respect the
process you all have chosen and
have been elected to uphold and
to engage in. What I can't get
my head around is why the
governor is choosing to propose
this particular set of bills in
a special session where it is
not possible to fully implement
the process you all have sworn
to uphold.
Indeed, legislation with such
significant public impact often
takes years to get through the
legislature.
The governor's slate of
legislation is best suited to
full legislative process, given
her recent public relations
efforts, it seems that the
governor is using her position
to promote this complex agenda
in platitudes and sound bites.
At best, it offers an incomplete
picture of the potential impacts
of the proposed legislation, and
at worst, it uses fearmongering
and mistruths to drum up support
for this very misguided use of a
special session. Um, I honor all
of you and good luck with it.
Thank you
Yeah, I know.
All right, you're next.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Diango
Williams. I'm a policy advocate
at the American Civil Liberties
Union of New Mexico and during
committee discussion just now,
Senator Cervantes referred to
conditions in some parts of
Albuquerque where I live as
apocalyptic, and I was struck by
that word, the Greek roots of
the word apocalypse literally
mean unveiling. It refers to a
truth being shown that had
previously been hidden.
The problems of community safety
that all of us and our
communities have witnessed and
experienced.
I believe, truly an unveiling.
They have unveiled the failure
of years of relying on the
criminal legal system and its
logic of punishment to create
safety.
They have unveiled the ways that
police, the courts, prisons, and
jails are inherently
ill-equipped to provide the care
and support that our community
truly needs and deserves.
And in the face of this
unveiling, it is regrettable
that the governor's proposals
for the special session continue
to default to a tough on crime
approach that has failed to keep
us safe, and we'll continue to
fail to keep us safe.
Exposing more people to the
criminal legal system will not
keep us safe, never has.
As you know, New Mexico has one
of the highest per capita rates
of people killed by police in
the country, and tragically, far
too many of these deaths involve
people experiencing mental
health crises.
The tools of the criminal legal
system are simply not tools
designed for the care, let alone
the thriving of our community.
We all want to live in safe
communities.
We need real solutions to make
that happen, and not more of the
failed approaches that have
never made us safe.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee. My name is Maura
Silva and I'm the executive
director of the New Mexico
Coalition in Homelessness.
We oppose all of the proposed
bills for the special session,
but I'm here today. I just want
to throw it out there. Um, I'm
here today to speak specifically
on the panhandling bill.
This bill disguised as public
safety bill will not solve
homelessness because it does not
address the root causes of
homelessness. We need to call it
what it is, an attack on those
experiencing homelessness.
It has been stated that the
reason for this bill is because
New Mexico has one of the
highest pedestrian fatality
rates in the country, and this
is true.
But nowhere in the data does it
say that those involved in these
fatalities are people that are
panhandling.
The Governor's Highway Safety
Association states in their
report on pedestrian fatalities.
We must address the root causes
of pedestrian safety crisis.
Speeding, other dangerous
driving behaviors, inadequate
infrastructure, and roads
designed for speed instead of
safety in order to reverse this
trend.
Nowhere does it state that
people that are panhandling are
the cause and the rise of
pedestrian fatalities.
However, we do know that
panhandling is directly related
to the lack of deeply affordable
housing, lack of wraparound
services, lack of well-paying
jobs, and the infrastructure
that does not support the most
marginalized in our state.
This is where our focus and
energy needs to be be.
Criminalizing those experiencing
homelessness is not the answer.
We need to address the root
causes and make sure that those
experiencing homelessness and
their expertise are part of
these conversations and
decisions. Thank you.
Anyone, anyone else?
Oh yeah, I'm sorry. Go ahead.
Bye.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, my name is Nathan
Savera. I am a 22 year old from
Berle, New Mexico, and I'm
currently on staff at Equality
New Mexico.
Uh, in early 2020, at the start
of the COVID-19 pandemic. I was
graduating as a high school
senior.
Shortly after that, I began my
first year of college at the
University of New Mexico.
Arguably one of the hardest
years of my life in a large
number of my peers.
These unfortunate events pushed
me and others to pursue help,
the help of professionals. My
personal experience through this
process was not uncommon, and it
was not easy. Finding providers,
especially those who might
specialize or have experience
working with youth and LGBTQ
folks was hard then and is still
convoluted and frustrating
today.
In the end, I couldn't find any
help, and neither could anyone
that I knew, at a time when it
felt like our lives were falling
apart. The system in New Mexico
was extremely overwhelmed at the
time. I put myself on multiple
waitlists that year and either
never heard back or was that
right rejected due to
availability?
I remain in consistent
conversation with my peers from
then, and the landscape here in
New Mexico has not changed. This
help is still extremely hard to
find and unavailable. I am
asking the committee do not
allow these inhumane,
half-finished policies to stress
these systems even more than
they already are, so that those
who want access are still able
to receive it. Thank you.
Yes, sir. Uh, good afternoon,
uh, Madam Chair. My name is Adam
John Gregory on committee. Um,
I'm currently a member of the
Justice Advisory and
Accountability Board to the
American Civil Liberties Union
here in New Mexico and also a
member of OLA.
Uh, today I'm here in support of
humanity and people. The
barriers individuals face daily
to access appropriate
programming and treatment at
times is insurmountable.
These most needed service,
services are precisely what is
missing from the current
carceral system along with the
immense destabilization that
occurs to families and this lack
of services is why and with all
due respect, I oppose
incarceration and
criminalization in general
today.
There's absolutely no evidence
to support that in any way, this
is a cure for our current public
health crisis.
Programming is an essential
component to the cure for this
issue. People need housing,
social benefits, and jobs for
stabilization. The lack of
access to this is inexcusable.
Harm reduction.
Should not be an afterthought.
People need love, compassion and
empathy. Studies need to be done
on why people offend. Again,
incarceration will just further
deepen the powerful grip the
system has on individuals and
their families, labeling people
by a crime or crimes removes the
personal nature that is required
to treat people as human beings
and not allowing them to be
defined by a crime or multiple
crimes. Please
Consider that we are all human
beings and members of this
community regardless of race,
class, or gender. We must seek
humanity and provide programs
for those that have nothing. Why
are we not asking the folks that
need the most help, what is it
that would create the paradigm
shift.
How can we help you reintegrate
back into society. Again, I'm
just coming from a position of
love.
Why is that not present?
Thank you.
Madam Chair, my name is Ruth
Baumgardner. I'm an attorney
with the New Mexico Center on
Law and Poverty.
We appreciate the committee
taking time to address the
important issues raised by
Grant's Pass and considering
what the state needs to do to
combat homelessness. I'll just
say, um, I personally really
appreciate you noticing the
case, Madam Chair, out of
Espanola, where we're
representing unhouse people and
trying to preserve affordable
housing there.
What is abundantly clear through
the data is that the solution to
homelessness is housing, not
punishment.
Vanishing unhoused people from
public will only worsen the
housing crisis.
The state should focus on
creating and protecting housing,
not punishing our most
vulnerable neighbors.
As you all know, New Mexico is
in the midst of a housing
crisis.
The supply of affordable housing
units has declined by 50% and
has doubled in Albuquerque and
Santa Fe.
And that housing crisis
inevitably leads to
homelessness.
According to HUD, the number of
unhoused people in New Mexico
doubled in just the last year.
Albuquerque Public schools alone
reported more than 10,000
unhoused students over the
course of a single school year.
And the majority of people
experiencing homelessness in New
Mexico or from New Mexico.
Punishing people for their
housing insecurity is
counterproductive.
Jailing people increases
homelessness. Small fines are
unpayable by unhouse people,
convictions, arrests, jail time,
all this creates barriers to
housing and employment.
being cruel, punishing people
for being unhoused, only deepens
those barriers to housing and
becoming integrated into society
and doing well on their own.
The solution to homelessness is
housing, not punishment. We know
the solutions to homelessness
and, and I commend so many of
the representatives up here and
senators who've made such
strides in trying to improve
access and protect access to
affordable housing.
So please take the state's time
and money.
Don't waste it on
unconstitutional and
counterproductive laws and work
on creating access to affordable
housing.
Um, Mr. Baumgartner, would you
shoot me an email because I
wanted to talk to you about that
lawsuit. Yes, that's why I'll
get your contact and you could
visit me. Thank you.
Yes, yes, yes.
Good afternoon. My name is
Winter Torres. Um, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, I am
the CEO and founder of New
Mexico Eviction Prevention and
Diversion. And um you will find
in your email I sent over some
reports that came out of LFC
yesterday one analyzing crime in
New Mexico and another analyzing
behavioral health.
You will see that the problem is
is administration and
implementation of dollars and
already existing law. The
current administration is
looking for a scapegoat.
And we don't like seeing the
homeless. It makes us
uncomfortable. It points out the
economy we live in. It points
out what we have and the hurt
that others experience.
And we don't want to see it.
But you'll see in those LSC
reports, it's the police, it's
the prosecutors, it's losing
evidence, it's witnesses.
It's suppression of evidence.
That is a primary driver of our
increase in crime. It's not our
homeless.
We've got to as a state get
dollars out.
We reauthorized, we
reauthorized, we reauthorize.
But what needs to happen is
there needs to be uh needs to be
an across the board massive
infusion into both behavioral
health.
And crime and housing.
All at the same time, not just
little pieces and not cut if
you're gonna do, you know, um,
workforce housing, then cut
affordable housing.
And we've got to figure out how
to get the money out the door.
I've been visiting Colorado with
this purpose of trying to figure
out what they've done over the
last 10 years to reform their
housing. They haven't done it
all perfectly, but they're
learning, and there are ways to
do this.
Staffing is another issue. We
don't pay what people are worth
here in New Mexico, including
yourselves. So that then there
means that we don't have the
time to educate you folks all
the time. Um, housing is
complicated. Homelessness is
complicated, and it's not
something we can talk about in a
few hours.
Um, you'll also note that I, um,
attached my um op ed from this
weekend's New Mexican, and that
has um one proposed solution.
Thank you. Thank you. Anyone
else? Oh yeah, thank you, miss.
Yeah.
I think I might be the last
person, um.
Madam Chair and committee
members, my name is Brittany
Rodriguez, and I work for the
New Mexico coalition to End
Homelessness and hold a master's
degree in public health from New
Mexico State University, and
I've been working in housing and
homelessness for over 10 years.
My work is based here in Santa
Fe, and while I passionately
advocate for my hometown, the
proposed legislation on
panhandling and involuntary
commitment slash criminal
competency poses to be
detrimental for the state as a
whole.
Collectively, these bills are an
attack on people experiencing
homelessness, mental illness,
and addiction. However, rather
than point out the imminent
negative impacts that these two
pieces of legislation will
undoubtedly cause. I'd like to
take this opportunity to
highlight solutions, uh, many of
which have already been
highlighted by most people
who've spoken um before me.
Um, so here they are.
Housing solves homelessness.
Civil rights matter.
Healthy communities require
access to voluntary health care
and safe communities demand
resources.
Easy enough, right? Um,
legislators, you are our voices
and advocates. Your constituents
include professionals and
advocates like me, but more
importantly, they include
individuals who are unhoused,
struggling with mental illness,
and battling addiction.
You are surrounded by experts,
all who want to be part of the
solution.
We implore you and the governor
to take time to lean into your
communities to search for those
solutions.
I also implore you to include
people with lived expertise to
be part of those conversations.
I have never been homeless. I
have never had to panhandle.
I've never been committed to an
institution, and I've never been
mandated to complete any type of
treatment in order to get my
rights back.
I have book smarts.
And we need people.
With street smarts and kind of
intended.
To create meaningful and
sustainable solutions. I'll go
on, but I'll wrap up by
reiterating that solutions to
actually get to the root causes
of homelessness, crime, and
health require inclusive,
thoughtful discussions, and we
are all committed to show up and
help you do that hard work.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Anyone, any one last person? Uh.
Well, um thank you all for
participating in public
comments, um, go back to the
committee.
closing comments before we
recess till tomorrow.
Senator?
Thank you, Madam Chair. Just
briefly, I'm repeating what
we've covered in prior meetings,
but there was a mention of the
felon in possession and some
concerns from the public comment
about that. Just as a reminder
for everyone to refresher
because we're all starting to
get pounded a little bit in the
press. So how about a little bit
of a refresher, uh, before 2018,
the penalty for felon in
possession was 18 months. It was
a 4th degree felony.
I was under the Susana Martinez
administration.
Under the Susana Martinez
administration in 2018 we
increased the penalties from 18
months to 3 years for serious
violent offenders.
In 2019, the first year of
Governor Luhan Grisham's
administration.
We expanded the felon in
possession to not just felons,
but to misdemeanor certain
specified misdemeanors. It was
the first year of the present
administration.
In 2020, the second year of this
administration, we eliminated
the distinction between serious
violent offenders, and we
increase the penalties to all,
both serious and non-serious,
with 33 degree felony.
For 3 years, a penalty, serious
or non-serious.
In 2022, 2 years later.
Again, now, probably in the 4th
year of this administration,
we expanded the penalties for
serious violent offenders to 6
years.
We left the nonviolent offenders
to the same 3 years.
And this year we were proposed
to take nonviolent offenders to
a second degree felony for a
9-year minimum.
Um, and violent offenders to 12
years mandatory.
Uh, without any consideration
for a good time, uh, refresher
for all of us. The suggestion
that we're somehow soft, we're
not responding, we're not
dealing with these
circumstances.
It it it again it's inconsistent
with the facts.
Um, and so I wanted all of you
all to go home feeling like
you're doing good work. We're
doing good work here. We're
responding to a serious problem,
but we're also not um putting
band-aids on, on problems or
thinking we're solving things
with them, with meaningless
really changes that we've heard
the testimony really is showing
no results at all, by increasing
these penalties year after year.
I thought the refresher, madam
chair would be helpful for the
committee. You keep it in mind
when you go home.
That it was extremely helpful
and I could just add one thing
sometimes when I'm meeting with
constituents in town halls and
stuff.
I like to remind them that we
all want simple solutions. We
all, you know, we just gravitate
to something that seems simple.
You know, complex problems
sometimes demand complex
solutions, and we have to be
willing to to recognize that
instead of looking for silver
bullets or, you know what I.
Use that phrase reluctantly
given what we're talking about,
but, you know, it's a kind of
along the lines of what Senator
Cervantes is saying, you know,
we just can't pass one law and
expect the world to be suddenly
fixed that these things take
time, they take study, and they
take collaboration, and I want
to emphasize the collaboration
between both the legislature and
the executive. It's, it's a
partnership and we should be
acting accordingly instead of
We have been, um, Adam um
leader. So thank you, um, we're
in recess until tomorrow at 9
o'clock. Thank you very much.
