Saa Lopez. Start over here.
Thank you, Madam Chair. My name
is Antoinette Sidillo Lopez, and
I'm the state senator for
District 16 and um I'm really
happy to be here. This is really
important committee. Thank you.
Morning, Madam Chair. Good
morning everybody. Janelle and
Eor state representative for
House District 19, that's the
Albuquerque International
District and the fairgrounds.
Morning, Madam Chair, Antonio
Maestas, Senate District 26, uh,
which is Burne County, west side
of the river, up and down Coors
Boulevard in about 2.
5-year lawyer, eighteen-year
member of the legislature.
Uh, good morning, everyone.
Peter Worth, Senate History 25
in Santa Fe.
Hi, I'm Joseph Cervantes. I
represent Donana County. It's
about 1/4 of the county in my
district goes all the way down
to the border with Mexico and El
Paso.
Martinez
will be.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Alan
Martinez, House District 23 in
uh.
Rio Rancho in the west side of
Bernalia. Happy to be here.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Greg
Nyber Senate District 27, which
is Clovis to Tatum, Roswell to
Fort Sumner. Oh, I know.
Good morning, Madam Chair
Representative Lara Cadena and
Donana County.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members, um, Cynthia Brego, uh,
District 17, Albuquerque's west
side, closer to Cottonwood Mall
in Rio Rancho and Corrales.
Um, good morning, everybody.
Christine Chandler, chair of
this committee, representative
from Los Alamos, District 43.
OK, so I think we're ready now
to go into executive session, so
people who may um stay in the
room are we probs, Mark Melo.
Daniel Lang, James Grayson, um,
Justice Thompson, I don't know
if he's here yet.
And Karl, whose last name I can
never pronounce correctly. Now I
know there are some staff
associated with those
individuals, you're welcome to
stay as well, but I'd appreciate
it if everyone else would um
excuse themselves.
And we have staff for our
majority leader, she may stay
staff for LFC, she may stay.
