Give us a minute while we get
the video rolling, ready to go.
Wondering if we could just work
off of our paper slides for a
little bit and if we get it
going somehow during the
presentation so we don't get too
far off track, you know, that
seems like a lot of people were
just doing, um, paper slides
with us. I do love video. I
mean, I think it's helpful, but,
um.
Let's try to move on. So just a
few things about the agenda we
have Mr. Duet here with the
Workers' Comp Administration and
another person, so tell me your
name, sir.
OK, um,
and I'm gonna adjust the agenda
a little bit, so we had
allocated about a half an hour
or so. I'm gonna add about 10
minutes on that because we
included an additional piece
with a more expansive.
If we don't use all the time,
that's OK too, um, and then
we'll talk about the house
memorial. That's about a half an
hour-ish assigned to that. And
lastly, we have um some
practitioners, a workers' comp
practitioner and an insurance
industry representative. My
thought is on the 22 pieces
will have questions to both of
those panels at the same time
because there are going to be a
lot of topics that are similar
and it makes more sense
efficiently so.
For this one, we'll add a little
bit of time at the end if we
need it. There will be questions
to this panel, but for the
second two panels will save them
and we'll question all of the 4
of them or so together. OK. Does
that make sense? If it doesn't,
it will, it will all reveal
itself whether or not it makes
sense, so, um, Mr. Doucet, uh,
the floor is yours.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Good afternoon committee. My
name is Robert Doucette Junior,
and I am the director of the
Workers' comp Administration.
Thanking you for allowing me to
talk this afternoon about worker
comp, administration, and what
we do. I've been involved in
some form of workers' comp for
close to 20 years, and this is
the first time I've been able to
go to a committee, explain what
workers' comp is. It's one of
those agencies you don't hear a
lot about unless you know
someone that's going through the
system. It usually runs pretty
well. We're self funded so we
don't ask for general fund
money.
So thank you for the opportunity
to explain kind of what we do
this first part with myself and
my judges we're going to explain
what workers' comp does a little
background, some of the main
issues, especially what the
judge sees and if there's any
questions about anything that we
do or any questions about the
slides, I hopefully should be
able to answer those.
I am currently the 10th director
in the workers' comp history.
The agency has been in existence
since 1986, 1986, the number one
movie was Top Gun. So if you
like that movie, not Maverick,
Top Gun, um, that gives you a
little project where we are.
Um, the director position, my
position is appointed by the
governor, it's confirmed by the
Senate. And thank you for the
members on this committee who
voted yes for me in 2022. And
that's unique, um, I'm currently
the president of the Otis World
Comp Association in the country,
and they're an international
company.
And most of my positions are
part of either the Labor
secretary or
A general manager position and
this position directly reports
to the governor. We in New
Mexico, I think our forward
leaders on that. I don't have to
go through 3 different levels of
bureaucracy to talk about
workers' comp issues.
Um, ironically, the first
director for the Workers' comp
administration was the former
state senator and mayor of
Albuquerque, Martin Chavez. So a
little history about us there.
And workers' comp to me is a
passion, um, it's one of those
things when you get in, it's
hard to get out. I've tried to
leave. This is my 2nd time back
in the administration. I was
back there about 1010, 11 years
ago, um, came back and I've been
doing it since, and it's a
passion for me because it was
personal for me. My cousin was
working on a 10-story building
in a safety harness broke and he
fell and hit the ground. Um, he
survived.
He had to go through the
worker's comp. It wasn't in the
state, but seeing firsthand what
he had to go through and to
understand he lived in one state
and he got hurt in another
state. How the workers' comp
works. So I take that with me
every day when I go into the
office being neutral and trying
to do the best that we can.
You know,
few things workers' comp is not.
A lot of we get a call. They
think we are the insurance
company for workers' comp for
the state. We are not. There are
plenty of companies that do
workers' comp in the state. And
we don't pay benefits. That's
another call we get a lot. Can
you help me with our benefits?
We don't do that. We also don't
set the rates for the workers'
comp. that is the Department of
Insurance, and I know that
because I was there and I helped
set the rates when I was there.
So if you wanna go to the
slides, I.
Slide one is the agency mission
I think it's important this
mission statement for the agency
was picked in 1986, and we try
to live that in the
administration every day to
ensure that quick and efficient
delivery of indemnity and
medical benefits to injured
workers at a reasonable cost to
the employers.
The next slide on 2 is just our
agency barrels.
How I look at how workers' comp
is, we have two main functions.
We have a core. I have 6 judges
who are govex, but they're
interesting cos first year
probation, then it's a 5 year
term. Then after that it's a
5-year term after.
Slide 3, we are all over the
state from Albuquerque, the
Farmington, the Hobbs, the
Crusis to Roswell.
Currently we have we're
authorized 123 FTEs. We have 7
vacant. 5.69% vacancy rate.
Our Albuquerque office.
We have 95 FTEs. We have 88 that
are filled.
And most of our field offices, 5
in the 3s, we are filled. So
we're just not in Albuquerque
agency. We have offices
throughout the state, which is
important because when someone
gets hurt or they want to see a
judge or they want to go through
our system. We want to make it
where they don't have to come to
Albuquerque for everything.
Our next slide, page 4, when I
was talking about the dispute
resolution the court side. We
have a clerk of the court in
2023, over 37,000 total
pleadings were filed.
Our mediators are close to 1500.
They wrote closely to 1500
recommended resolutions with a
75% acceptance rate. So what our
statute says, if you have, you
can't agree with your employer.
About what benefits you should
get
it mandatory mediation by our
statute. You can't skip that
part. So around those 1500, 75%
of them were taken care by our
mediators. And if there's no
resolution to that, it goes to
one of our six judges. So,
mandatory mediation is very
important.
And
our judges approximately carry a
case about 110 cases per judge.
So our next slide slide 5.
Um,
the other house that we do our
ombudsman program, our
compliance, our return to work
and safety
or a budsman took around 3600
calls in 2023.
And what happens, you can see on
the slide what somebody calls
how how it's complicated system.
We do not give legal advice. We
cannot give legal advice, but if
they ask for a list of attorneys
we have sanction lists that all
these attorneys, how to help to
fill the form, where the, you
know, when someone's frustrated
I got hurt here. I'm not gonna
response. Our budsman is
probably the first person that
they talked to, and they're all
in all our.
Offices and we have ombudsmen
who speak Spanish and English.
We created a few years ago a
return to work program where we
an injured workers, one of the
missions of workers' comp is
someone gets hurt, we want to do
everything possible to help get
them back to work. So the
statute doesn't allow us to
return to work, but it's a
program that we created a few
years ago where we reach out to
employers, employees, how we can
help them, help that worker if
they need to find another job or
another vocation.
Our safety program
Without to 292 232 inspections
last year. Our safety program is
something I would encourage all
of you in your communities to
talk to any anyone that does
business. It doesn't cost them
any money for one of our trained
professional consultants to go
out and look at their business
and write it up of hey, you need
to fix this. This is trip trip
and fall. This, this could lead
to accidents. We don't turn it
into OH. There is not a penalty.
To that, but we want workers to
be safe when they go to work and
they're already paying for the
safety consultants by their tax
dollars. So if you could let any
of your constituents who have a
business know about this
program. Please let us know.
It's going so well. We've just
created one of our current
positions into another safety
position, and we also now with
our return to work consultants
are working with our safety so
we can work with them.
So, on slide 6, some of our
additional service um services
that we do, we have an
enforcement bureau and 2023, we
collected a little over $27,000
in penalties. We had 33 total
cases filed, um, 3 permanent
injunctions
and our enforcement if a company
supposed to have workers' comp.
We go, we check it. They don't
have workers' comp. We ask them
to get it. We work with them.
Sometimes they get it for a week
or so, we'll go back because
workers' comp has two funds. We
have the general fund, not
general fund money, the general
part of what we do is by our our
taxes, um, sorry, our
assessment.
And then we have an unemployed
insurer fund that is if you work
for a company, who should have
workers' comp, you get injured
on the workplace and they don't
have workers' comp, that fund
takes care of those injured
workers. Then we'll go after the
company.
Who should have had workers'
comp. So when an injured worker,
if they have workers' comp or
don't, we try to, we, our
mission is to take care of them.
Our medical costs had 771
billing disputes received in
2023, 711 disputes, they were
able to resolve our
self-insurance after yellow
freight went bankrupt, WCA had a
call to our surety bond in the
amount of $600,000. They were a
self-insurance company. We were
the first in the nation to get
money from that company, and
we're one of the few in the
state in which the general fund
that received any money for that
because we knew what to do and
knew who to ask to get that
done. These are some of the
things that when you think of
workers' comp, that we do that a
lot of people do not understand
what we do.
And are uninsured employer fund
in 2024 paid out roughly 224,000
on workers' comp claims and in
2024, you have opened 33 claims
and we collected about $110,000
from uninsured employers in
reimbursement.
That's a general overview of
What we do at workers' comp. It
how I look at it is we're kind
of like a sweet onion.
You know, you cut it, there's a
lot of layers. You might water,
your eyes might water, um, but
if you cook it right, it comes
out so delicious, but I truly,
you gotta have analogies. That's
all anyone ever is gonna
remember. Um.
But I truly thank you for asking
me generally what we do. There's
the, the issue with workers'
comp is there's so much that
hasn't been looked at for so
many years that it's gonna feel
like a tidal wave. I will tell
you from my C as the director of
Workers' comp Administration,
both sides who practice work
workers' comp, it's a small
community. Generally we all get
along really well because
there's not a lot of us, um, we
get calls from either side
asking for
Information or data, we give it
out. We try to collaborate and
work with everyone to make this
as good a system as we can
because at the end of the day,
it's about the injured worker.
The person who went to work like
my cousin who just was lucky to
survive that fall, who just
wanted to get well enough to
come back and go back to work
and be productive, in his words,
not. So what I'm going to turn
it over to is Judge Cor, um,
he's going to go over some of
the other.
Mean questions about workers'
comp, his perspective of a judge
and some some of the other
things that we do. So thank you
very much and after his
presentation, if you have any
questions, I will take them.
Right
Thank you, Judge.
Representative Chandler, members
of the committee, thank you for
having me here today. I
appreciate it. Um, I've been
doing work comp for quite a
while also, um, I've given this
presentation similar to this
one, to either it might have
been this committee, it might
have been another committee, it
was 10 or 15 years ago and it's
been that long since I've been
asked back so hopefully I'll do
better this time.
Um, I,
I am very passionate about
workers' compensation law. It's
a it's the area of practice I
know it's the
The area practice I really know.
Um, what director Doucette has
asked me to do is kind of go
over what exactly workers'
compensation, um, adjudication,
the adjudication process, and
what benefits the workers'
compensation Act gives to both
employers as well as to workers,
um, so I'll start with just a
little bit of history on
workers' comp. Workers' comp, in
my opinion, has been around as
long as there have been.
Jobs as long as people have had
to have other people work for
them, workers' compensation is
necessary. If you want somebody
to do something dangerous for
you or anything at all, you
better be ready to take care of
that person if they are injured.
And that's the history of,
that's where workers' comp came
from. You can go back
historically in workers' comp
all the way to
You know,
Um, you can go back further than
pirates if you want. Um, the
Romans had a system of workers'
comp, um, the Babylonians had a
system of workers' comp, the uh,
First recorded Western workers'
comp is about 1100 with Henry
the First, um, and then we get
into the modern workers' comp
system, which indeed does have a
pirate connection. Um, so
Pirates had a workers' comp
system which is unique to
piracy, um.
And uh we, uh, we in the in the
western world kind of developed
workers' compensation law
systems as a as a response to um
Both injuries, the injustices
that were being seen in the
legal system as well as kind of
a push back uh honestly against
the movement of the communist
movements and things like that
of the 18, 1900s.
So workers' comp started off in
Germany and then it kind of
moved over to the other western
countries and then it moved over
into the United States and then
it moved over into New Mexico
and we have had workers'
compensation some in New Mexico
since I believe.
Oh, I should have written this
down, but since the early 1900s,
um, and then the current
iteration of workers' comp that
we have here in New Mexico came
in.
Depending upon how you define
it, somewhere around 1986 to
1991. Um, that system has been
in place. The New Mexico
legislature created the New
Mexico Workers' Compensation
Administration, I think in 1986,
um, then we created the
uninsured employers or the
legislature, excuse me, created
the uninsured Employers' fund
after that, which is a benefit
system for employers who don't
have insurance, workers' comp
insurance in New Mexico.
There are requirements that most
employers have work comp
insurance in New Mexico, um.
If they have 3 or more
employees, certainly if they're
regulated by the construction
Industries Act, and they are
pretty much always required to
have workers' comp.
And workers' comp is broken into
different divisions. We have the
executive division, if you will,
and then there's a judicial
side. It is a fully functional
court. It's a unique
administrative court in New
Mexico in that we, we as
workers' compensation law judges
are appealed directly to the
Court of Appeals. We are not
appealed to district court, um,
the Court of Appeals refers to
us more often than not as
district court judges.
Although they will sometimes
refer to us as hearing officers,
so there is a little bit of
personality split there. Um,
workers' compensation judges,
there are 6 of us. We are not
subject to the state Personnel
Act, but we are subject to the
director's discipline, I
suppose, uh, as long as
following the canons of
judicial, uh,
The canons of judicial behavior.
Um, we're funded, the WCA is
funded by an assessment. It's
not a tax. It's an assessment, I
think Director Doucet talked a
little bit about that. Basically
to have the workers' comp system
in New Mexico. Workers pay about
$2 on a quarterly assessment and
employers pay $2.30 on an
assessment, so none of the money
comes from taxes. It comes from
an assessment. So we're a unique
entity in many, many ways with a
long
History in New Mexico. Um, if
you're gonna get there, there
are components that workers have
to show if they want to show
that they are entitled to
workers' comp and those
components are essentially there
has to be an accident at work.
Clearly that makes sense.
Accidents can mean many
different things, accidents, um,
I think initially when the act
was enacted an accident was an
accident. Now there are
different forms of accidents as
both the leg
as well as the courts have
interpreted the act to mean
different things and now an
accident can just be when you
know that you were injured in
some way. Um, we also have an
occupational occupational med
portion of the work compact,
that kind of overlaps these
days.
Um, so you have to be injured at
work. You have to be injured at
work doing something for your
employer in a place where your
employer expects you to be,
which also can be a very broad
term, um, that can mean anything
from I was at work and I stepped
in a gopher hole and I broke my
leg to I was playing basketball
on Saturday with a bunch of
people who were with my
employer. Those things can all
be coarse and scope now, um.
Over the last 33 years, the
Workers' Comp Act has expanded
dramatically from what it used
to be.
Once you have an accident, once
it's, you can see it's in the
course and scope of injury, then
you have to have notice. The
employer has to have notice of
the accident. That's generally
15 days can be as long as 60
days depending upon certain
exceptions. And then you have to
have an injury and that injury,
if you're going to get indemnity
benefits, has to take you off
work for some period of time,
um, and there's a one-year
statute of limitations on the
indemnity portion, but
No statute of limitations on the
medical portion of benefits.
Most of the claims in New Mexico
are handled without the WCA.
That's the really good news. Our
system in general works very
well in New Mexico, and I think
our system actually when it gets
to the WCA works pretty well.
Um, so I'll, I'll give a little
plug to the WCA. Most of our the
claims that make it to the work
comp administration are handled
at a at a lower level than
adjudication. Only about 10% of
the claims ever go into
adjudication. Our mediation
department is phenomenal.
And
um that's my personal opinion, I
suppose, so I should withhold
that. But I think they do a
really good job, um, about 75
76% of claims get resolved
before adjudication and then
Only a small percentage of that
actually go to trial or formal
hearing. Um,
When
That process from injury through
mediation is pretty quick. And
I'm just being, I'll be honest,
once you get into the formal
litigation process, it's not as
quick as, um,
I think anybody would like
because we are a court, we
aren't a purely administrative
agency. So the rules of civil
procedure do apply the rules of
discovery generally apply, um,
there is motion practice, um,
those things all can take a long
time once the cases do end up in
litigation and in front of a
worker's compensation judge or
assigned to a worker's
compensation judge. The process
is
Essentially district court and
um
I don't know how many district
court cases make it through in 6
months. Um, I don't know how
many workers' comp cases make it
through the formal litigation
process in 6 months, but it
takes time to depose doctors. It
takes time to engage in
discovery. It takes time to
gather medical records as the
years have gone by in my
practice, what I've seen is it
takes longer and longer to get
those records as the regulations
get harder as the providers get
fewer as the uh doctor.
Get more um rare and
recalcitrant to dealing with our
system, which I do think is a
thing. And then discovery is
also limited. Discovery is also
limited just a little bit by the
cost advanced to the workers,
which I believe the committee is
actually thinking something
about, um, but there is a $3000
cap on the discovery cost that
is advanced to a worker and with
a deposition costing $400 an
hour for the initial
I think is correct. Um, and then
additional hours afterwards,
it's essentially one doctor
deposition that the work that
that the workers discovery
Advance covers.
Um, in general though, the good
news also is the workers'
compensation administration will
always, all of the judges at the
Work comp administration will
get a case heard in 30 days if
the parties tell us they're
ready. So we are always
available to hear a case within
30 days. That doesn't happen as
often, um.
As often as I think anybody
would like, and I'm not, I, it's
just the process. The process
takes longer than what we
expect.
Um,
the work comp administration,
the judges do monitor our cases
to make sure that if there's no
activity for 90 or 180 days that
were pushing a little bit to try
and keep the cases moving. Um,
we're always eager to move
cases.
The work comp administration or
the Work Comp Act is a no fault
act. So one of the things you
don't have to prove when you
come to the work in front of a
work comp judge is that somebody
is to blame for the injuries. So
that does speed things along a
little bit compared to
litigation that would be done in
personal injury, um.
Whose fault it should shouldn't
matter. It does sometimes.
Honestly, there are uh there are
some exceptions with drug,
alcohol, and other things that
have been carved out over the
years, and then there's some
penalties for safety devices and
things like that, but in
general, it's no fault.
Um, wage benefits, so I'm just
gonna kind of move into now what
you get if you've had an injury.
Wage benefits, there are two
Um, wage benefits, so I'm just
gonna kind of move into now what
you get if you've had an injury.
Wage benefits, there are 22
different kinds of benefits, and
we always argue them separately.
You get an indemnity side and a
medical side of your claim.
Medical benefits are one thing,
money benefits are another. Um,
money, I'll go over money
benefits first. If you're
injured at work, you're entitled
to two-thirds of your
Average weekly wage. That's up
to a state maximum which in 24
is $1,041.79.
So the most you could ever get
in wage replacement if your
injury was in 2024 would be
$1,041.79. It doesn't matter if
you're making $3000 a week, the
most you can get is 1,04179 that
goes down as the years go
backwards in time, um, with a
few exceptions.
So to exceed the state average
weekly wage right now, you'd
need to make $26.10 an hour to
exceed your average to exceed
the state average weekly wage.
Um, if you're injured at work,
you get and you're taken off of
work. The employer is encouraged
to bring people back to work. In
general they do a good job with
that. Um, but if you're taking
off work or if the employer
can't offer you work, you get
one benefit. There's many
acronyms in workers' comp. It's
painful when you listen to us
talk because we can speak in
sentences that make no sense.
Um, you get temporary total
disability TTD, um.
CD is what you get for the
period of time between the
injury and another acronym, MMI,
um, which is maximum medical
improvement, um, that, uh.
That is two-thirds of the
average weekly wage, so if you
were injured in 24, you'd get
the 1,04179 a week if you were a
max wage earner, if you were
earning less, you would get you
would get less, um, once you get
to MMI, meaning the doctor said
you're about as good as you're
going to get. The treatment's
not gonna make you better. You
might not ever get back to 100%.
You're not 100% well, but we're
not expecting you to get much
better or much worse, um, then
you get either.
PPD or scheduled benefit, those
are the defined benefits that
you get over time, um, PPD is
benefits that you would get to
anything to your torso, that's
based off of age, education,
training, um, or SVP training
point, um, and then it's a
lifting multiplier. So the
statute is very closely tied to
how much you can lift. When the
act was created and when CP was
created.
The concepts were you should get
more money if you're older
because it's harder for you to
go back into the workplace. You
should get more money if you
have less training because it's
unlikely it's less likely you'll
get a job if you're, um, history
is you're a ditch digger versus
somebody with a PhD, um, and
then lifting while we lifting is
what labor used to be and still
is in general, so lifting is a
big part of it too. Um, and then
if you have an injury to any of
your
Extremities, you get something
called scheduled injury benefit,
which is a benefit that's
defined by a different portion
of the statute that can go
anywhere from a few weeks if
it's your finger to 150 weeks if
it's your elbow or your knee.
I have 7 minutes.
Um
um.
So, basically, if you, if you
have a uh injury at work
somewhere about 26,000 to
210,000 is your value in PPD
scheduled injury value is
somewhere between 160 and 30,000
is what workers can expect to
get. Death benefits are $7500
for a funeral and then 700 weeks
at your wage. Medical benefits
are whatever is reasonable,
necessary care related to your
injury. Those are fights that we
see a ton at the work.
Trump administration because
those qualifiers all exist. It
has to be reasonable. It has to
be necessary, and it has to be
related, and there's a way to
fight all of those arguments,
um.
Choice of healthcare provider is
another common issue that we see
things on, and that is the
employer gets to each side gets
one choice, employer gets to
decide who picks first.
Um,
So that's kind of a nutshell of
general benefits. I'll go into
the.
Attorney's fee concepts, um.
A little bit because I know the
committee's interested in that.
The attorney's fees are
determined based on the benefits
obtained for the worker by the
worker's attorney from the
worker's perspective, and then
from the employer's perspective,
um,
The fees are paid by the
employer. There is a statutory
fee cap. The fee cap is $22,500.
With the employer doesn't have
to.
argue their bill or present any
evidence about what they're
paying in their bill. They can
pay their attorneys up to
22,500. The worker's attorney
has to request a fee from a
worker's compensation judge and
a worker's compensation judge
will then make a determination
of what is a reasonable and
necessary fee for the worker's
attorney, um, based on factors
that we have to consider how
successful was it, um, how
complex were the issues.
How well do I think that
attorney behaves in the
community, the standing skill
and experience of the attorney,
so that is actually something
weirdly enough that attorneys or
comp judges have to look at cost
of living, um, time and effort,
things like that, and then if
the worker's attorney is asking
for a fee.
They come in and the employer
can dispute that fee, and we
have to have a hearing where
there's an argument about how
much the worker's attorney is
entitled to, in general, that
fee is somewhere between 10 and
20% of the benefit gained for
the worker. Um, how you define
the benefit gain for the worker
can be argued, um, and the fees
are paid half by the employer
and half by the worker. So if a
worker gets
Large recovery and it's a 22 and
a large recovery in comp would
be say $3,000,000. That's a very
large recovery in income. Normal
recoveries in comp are probably
in the tens of thousands as
opposed to the hundreds of
thousands, um.
So as you can see if it's a
$22,500 fee, that's 12,250 from
the worker's pocket out of their
recovery. Um,
There are issues around the FCAP
that I think have historically
been discussed and that is
workers' representation over
time whether or not workers want
the f fee has been exhausted,
can find representation, um, and
then also the other issue is
probably the lower wage the
worker, the harder it is to get
an attorney because the less
monetary value there is for an
attorney, and it does cost money
to litigate these cases because
they are.
District court cases
essentially. So it can be a very
expensive process for the
workers, attorneys, and
certainly a time consuming
process. So there's a lot of uh
There's a lot in the in the
attorney's fee issue that I
think the parties need to
consider the committee needs to
consider.
Um.
And I think, I think that's all
I have prepared, so, um.
Directors, as I stated earlier,
we are a sweet onion. There's a
lot of complexity to this. We
sent a lot of, we've given you a
lot of information. No matter
after this or not, if you're
ever interested, please call me,
we'll come visit you. We'll
explain from our perspective and
also I've been neglected. We
have advisory on board and our
chair is here. So Marty, if you
could stand.
We have a great advisory board,
it's made up of both sides, 3
and 3, they're really involved
with the administration, so.
That's a general overview of
work comp. Yes, there will be a
test, but it's only a 50%, you
know, it's good, it's a big
curve representative Reams here,
so you'll be OK.
Um, well, thank you, thank you
very much for that. Um, people
questions, yes, representative
Barreco, who else?
Oh
Really, no questions. I can't
believe it, Madam Chair. I'm
trying to think of a really hard
question because Robert Deetta
is my neighbor and so I told him
that I had to give him a really
hard time, we need to give them
OK, Representative Lu Han, all
right, Representative Brego.
Madam Chair, that was just
Oh, I don't have any, you know.
OK. Representative Lujan, thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you, uh,
for the presentation. I think
that, you know, it is a really
complicated and complex, um,
process, um, and unless you,
you've either worked at doing it
and participated as uh like on
the HR side, you know, the
factor are are from the work,
um.
Uh, the task force side all
those, those, um, the spaces
where your interaction,
interacting with workmen's.
Madam Chair, it's a lot, it's a
lot of paperwork, it's a lot of
follow-up, um, Vanessa, I want
to say thank you to you and to
the board and to everybody for,
for what they do. I guess my
question is I'm looking at this
is, you know, uh, what are the
uh, the recommendations we're
looking at is the raise the
existing fee cap from 22,500 to
30,000 and then the other.
portion of this um.
So no judicial discretion to
award fees above the cap and
legislature retained sole
authority over future increases.
I would ask, would you look for
language if we were to produce,
you know, some legislation, um,
with this, uh, pertaining to
this to, to maybe do an
incremental, um, increase as,
as, um.
You know, um, costs go up in
everything else, um, with that
language be included, man. Can I
just jump in for a second? Sure,
there's gonna be a full
presentation on the. You can
certainly answer, but there's
gonna be a full presentation on
the fee issue. There was a
memorial, but a kind of a study
that the question for the, for
Herndon was kind of the driving
force on that, so she'll be on
the next p.
you can always speak sometimes
it's risky though.
And Representative, I was going
to say I was going to punt that
because
Representative Herndon who we we
dragged in saying this isn't a
hard issue work come, come join
us. And now she's she's helping
out there, Madam Chair represent
Wuhan,
the next part of the
presentation will be talking
solely on that issue. Thank you.
Um, so I, I, um, used to when I
in my early years practicing, I
did a little bit of workers'
comp for my company and I have
to say, no disrespect to any of
you. I was very happy when there
was a junior lawyer came in
after me and I got to ask
someone else to do that.
Um,
because I found it sort of, some
of it was counterintuitive to
me, just truthfully. Um, and so
it is something you have to
learn for sure and sort of
understand the underpinnings on
and I just, I wanted to
establish a few underpinnings.
We do have a little bit of time,
so.
I always viewed it, you know,
and this is how it described to
me when I go to trainings on
this. There's a trade off. OK,
what's the trade off? So you're
a worker, you get hurt at work.
You want to be taken care of
quickly. If you had to bring a
negligence claim, that would not
be a quick resolution, right?
Because you'd have to prove up
negligence, you'd have to show
that the, you know, your
employer's responsible. You
might get a big recovery from
that. You might, you might not,
but it's, it's a long and
tedious process to sue on
negligence. So they took
negligence out of the statute,
and the trade-off is there are
fixed.
Um, payment schedules and the
like and there are caps and
things so that, you know, and,
and there's a process to try to
get somebody back to work
quickly and there there's a bias
in the statute, and I mean that
in a positive way to get people
back to work and, and there's a
management of the medical care
and you know, the payment, you
know, wage replacement and so
on. So that's the trade-off and
that's how we always talked
about it prompt, hopefully
resolution certainty in terms of
how much you're going to get
generally, but um, not as
potentially as large as if you
could prove up negligence. Now
there are some exceptions to
that. Sometimes somebody else is
also responsible, like there was
a defective piece of um
equipment, so your employer's on
the hook for workers' comp, but
there's also potential for
litigation against some the
manufacturer of the equipment or
if there's a third party.
who was involved, you might be
able to address it through that,
but that's a longer process, but
the trade-off always was, you
want the person to get medical
care. You want those bills to
get paid promptly. You want that
person to have wage replacement,
so that's what I guess you call
that the indemnity in your
world. So that's kind of the
under kind of philosophical, you
know, thing, so it's everybody
hopefully wins. The employer
wins, the employee wins. They're
also the other trade-off and you
guys didn't.
mention this is it's the
exclusive remedy.
It's the exclusive remedy as to
the employer. You can't sue in
negligence. Am I wrong about
that? Did I, did I misstate that
or my memory is fading from so
many years ago, Representative
Chandler, you are generally
correct about that. There are
exceptions that have been carved
out over the years and it's
gotten, it's gotten to be less
of a true statement, but it is
the intention. OK, so, um, well,
give me, so there could be in a
case where what the employer,
um, was willful or something
like that or they.
created a really bad safety
situation and then you might be
able to sue beyond workers'
comp. Give me an example where
you might. So the classic
example is Delgado,
I
I was thinking that's what I was
thinking of that was in my brain
when I was referring to
Representing Barrego and that
one is a and that have an
explanation, you don't know at
all what we're talking about.
Sorry,
um, that, that Delgado claims
are constantly kind of flexing
back and forth.
But yes, it does have to be a
willful and essentially a
willful intentional injury and
the employer had to have done
something really, really bad or
negligent for pecuniary gains so
because even though they knew
somebody was gonna get hurt,
they said, oh, it's gonna be too
expensive to reduce this risk.
OK, OK. All right, um, that's a
helpful example cause I, I,
that's perfect, that wasn't me.
No, it wasn't, um, it wasn't
representative Barre.
who's really not named Delgado,
so, um, OK, that's helpful. I
just wanted to get that out
there, um, so that people would
kind of at least share my why I
look at workers' comp and how I
look at it. The other thing is
I, I know we're we're probably
going to have a bill on the cap,
the attorney's fees cap, coming
up in the next session.
Certainly there was one this
past, so I thought it'd be
useful for everybody to have
sort of a basic um foundational
understanding of what
Workers' comp is because we
haven't had much conversation
about it in CCJ that I'm aware
of, at least, obviously not, we
think maybe 15 years or so, so,
um, helpful and in all respects.
So thank you, um, anyone else
after that long.
OK, very good. Well, thanks,
that was super helpful, yes,
director, thank you, Madam
Chair, I think you would be a
great future director of the
Workers' Comp Administration.
No, no, I'm not looking for
another job. I'm kind of busy.
Nor was I, Madam Chair, but I
have two. Yeah, you do have to
Secretary of what General
Services Administration also. So
he has two secretary hats,
believe it or not, must be fun.
OK, thank you. I think we're
ready for our next panel.
And that is representative
Herndon and Michael Holt.
Welcome, representative. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee.
May 18th, 2023 was an
extraordinary day for New
Mexico. That was the day that
House Memorial 83 was signed,
creating the task force to
primarily do 3 things. It's sort
of up there with when we were
made a state,
huh? Absolutely.
So that task force was designed
to do 3 things to review whether
fees paid to attorneys should be
raised to a new maximum, and if
so, what should that new maximum
be? And it was also to review
whether the statutory amount
allowed for discovery should be
increased and to determine
whether judges should have the
discretion to increase
attorney's fees beyond the
statutory cap when the facts and
circumstances are warranted
And additional increase should
be allowed. For one year.
The 12-member task force
examined information and
reviewed documents. Finally,
after much deliberation, the
task force made evidence-based
rational recommendations in
their final report. The final
recommendations raising the
attorney fee cap included going
from $22,500 to $30,000 with the
legislature reviewing the cap
every 2.
Years to determine if
adjustments need to be made
further. There was also the
recommendation to increase the
amount available for discovery
from $3000 to $3500. The task
force did not recommend allowing
judicial discretion beyond the
statutory cap. It should be
noted, Madam Chair, that like
the legislature, none of the
members of the task force were
paid for their diligent and time
intensive work.
Determining whether to raise the
attorney cap fee was one of the
most critical decisions that the
task force had to make. The
decision was made with a cross
section of people. I want you to
pay attention to this. A cross
section of people that included
insurers, workers, and attorneys
all being on the task force,
working for that one year
together to make this uh
collaborative decision and like
a jury, we are asking you to.
Listen to the evidence presented
today and support the task force
recommendations. Our ultimate
goal is to present legislation
to this committee and have you
adopted, adopted as the
legislation to adopt it as
priority legislation of this
committee. You will hear
testimony and evidence of other
concerns about the workers'
compensation statue, and we
welcome those discussions. They
are discussions that should be
occurring.
But we ask you to address your
attention to the responsibility
that the task force was assigned
and that was to look at the at
the attorney fee cap. They did
and they raised it and are
recommending $30,000 and to
increase the amount provided for
in discovery to $3500 and to
make sure that we as legislators
look at those fees on a regular
basis every 2 years to determine
when they should be made. Now,
you will hear
From Michael Holt, the architect
of the task force report.
Michael, talk to this committee.
Is that all you're going to say
about him? You're not gonna
like.
Thank you.
Mike on. All right, everybody
can hear me? Great. Uh, my name
is Michael Holt. I'm general
counsel for the Workers' Comp
Administration. Thank you,
Representative Herndon. Thank
you, Madam Chair and members of
the committee for
Um, suffering through workers'
compensation and nauseating
detail, um, it, it, it is, uh, I
don't think there's anybody more
wonky than Judge Tony than
myself when it comes to workers'
comp. I've been doing about 25
years, most in another state.
I'm a transplant here to New
Mexico and I'm very honored to
be here. Um, so I was tasked by
Director Doucet after House
Memorial 83 uh passed to be the
um director's designee on the uh
task force, um.
And initially, uh, we began
meeting um and let me back up,
hopefully everybody's got a copy
of the report, um,
It's, it's about 45 pages, um,
if you need something to sleep
at night, I recommend reading it
because it'll help you fall
asleep, but it is chock full of
data, um, and I'll get into that
in a minute. Um, but it was uh a
considerable effort by a number
of individuals, um.
It it it was a stakeholders. Um,
it was born out of a House bill
that, um, made it through one
committee in the 2023
legislative session, um, and,
uh, that, uh, bill kind of
framed the work of the task
force, um, that bill was House
Bill 455, uh, kind of similar to
the recommendations we have
here, but it was 225 to 325 on
the attorney fee cap in, uh,
House Bill 455, um.
The discovery figure that we
talk about $3000 it was from
$3000 to $10,000.01 of the more
important things we talked about
in the task force report, which
was in this bill was this
concept of judicial discretion.
You know, we have this hard fee
cap of 225, um, and should we be
given our judges, our workers'
comp judges like Judge Tony
Coutu, some discretion to go
beyond the cap in certain types
of cases, um.
So that bill tried to delineate
what types of cases we would
raise uh
the cap, um, but the bill didn't
make it, um, but what did make
it is the house memorial through
Representative Herndon, and it,
it tasked our agency to study
this attorney fee cap, uh, which
we did. It asked us to study the
$3000 discovery cost advance
that employers pay over to the
worker to help them fund the
litigation.
that they're pursuing.
Um
We also were studying this
concept of additional judicial
discretion, should we give our
judges additional discretion,
um, and, and what are the
triggers of that? And, uh, if,
if they have this judicial
discretion, how much more should
it be beyond the cap? Uh, so
those are some of the issues we
studied, um, and this slide up
here that we, I have up there,
um, gives the various
stakeholders, so we do have a
lot of stakeholders and workers'
comp.
Um, 11 of the stakeholders
that's not up there that are
very important are the doctors.
So this was an attorney fee
issue, so the doctors didn't
really have a seat at the table,
um, but they are very important
as stakeholders. Um, I, I was
the director's designee.
And the task force has noted.
And um.
That there were 2 workers'
attorneys, um, they're actually
here. Ben Sherman's here and
Kate Luer Eaton's here, um.
And then we had 2 employer
representatives, I'm sorry,
two employer attorneys. I'm not
sure if they're here or not, but
uh that was uh Ben Sherman, I'm
sorry, Chris Elmore and Megan
Coolman, um, two employer
representatives, uh, one from
the state of New Mexico and
Jane's Corporation was present,
uh, Matt Sanchez. We had two
labor union representatives, uh,
Jeffrey Steele of the
Ironworkers, and then Greg
Montoya, the firefighters.
Uh, we had two,
essentially insurance
representatives, um, both are
here, Dan Gulamo, New Mexico
Mutual, and Randy Aiken, who's
the administrator of Builders
Trust, and if I talk too fast,
just slow me down.
And then, uh, we also had uh
this was all per the house
memorial.2 injured workers on
our task force whose workers'
comp cases had been completed.
Um, so that was essentially the
stakeholders, uh, for the, uh,
legislative
Uh, for the task force, um,
We we met between May of 2023
and April of 2024, initially it
was pizza and soda. We got to
know each other at the agency,
um, and just started talking
about these issues generally and
over time, the task force, um,
you know, came to these
recommendations that we'll we'll
talk about, um, the task force
report is on our website, one of
the earliest things we did, uh,
all the work product of the task
force is on our website. All
the, after every meeting, we,
we, they weren't minutes per se,
but they
A summary. So every, every
meeting that we had, there's a
summary of it. All the economic
reports that we developed are on
our website, um, of course, we
couldn't put them all in here
verbatim, so we summarized them,
but the website has a wealth of
information, um, because we
wanted to be transparent and we
knew this, uh, uh, subject would
be moving forward, um, through
the legislative process and we
wanted anybody who was
interested to have access to
that information.
Um,
The report was due for the House
Memorial April 30th of 2024, uh,
and we met the deadline, um, and
it was to be presented to the
advisory council, uh, and we did
present, uh, formally the report
of the uh of the House Memorial
to the advisory Council on May
2nd of 2024.
Um,
So on this slide, um, a little
bit of history of the, of, of
the, uh, fee cap.
Um, it's, it's gone through
various numbers through the
years. Last year was raised in
2013. So in 2013 it was raised
to this 225, uh, figure. Uh, so
we're, we're looking at 10 years
plus to the present day since
when it's been last raised.
Um,
I, I do want to give a shout
out. We, we at our agency, one
of our bureaus is the Economic
Research Bureau, uh, these are
highly educated individuals
individuals and in the field of
economics, um, and, uh, I called
on them a lot to help me wade
through and help develop data in
support of the task force.
Um, so, um.
Go into a little bit of detail,
uh, about the data call we did
under our statute, our director
has authority to knock on the
door of carriers and ask for
claims data, which we did, um,
so one of the first things we
decided as a task force is, we
needed data. We, we, we just
didn't want to uh make up
numbers we wanted to see what
the claims data showed in terms
of this attorney fee cap in
terms of which cases hit the cap
and why?
Um, so we knocked on the door of
10 of the 10 largest carriers by
claims volume, um, and ask for
their, their data. And that was
between 2013 to 2022, and we
ended up receiving about 100,000
data points in terms of claims
100,000, um.
So what we did the next after
that data came in, our economic
bureau wanted to compare it to
our cases on file, right? So we
wanted to correlate all that
data to our cases on file, and
we ended up coming up with about
5500 cases where there was an
attorney fee award, and that was
over a ten-year period. Um,
And we, we, we were trying to
answer the question, one of the
calls of the House Memorial is
um how many cases per year hit
the fee cap, right? That was
something we wanted to figure
out.
So it's about, I'm gonna it's
4.5%, um, maybe as high as 12%.
And, and it's kind of hard to
figure out because the how the
insurance carriers report that
data, uh, sometimes we could
tell when the when the case hit
the fee cap and sometimes we
couldn't. So somewhere between,
I don't know, 5 to 10%.
Give or take, right?
Um, so, uh, that, that has to be
put in perspective. There's a
huge volume of worker injuries
per year in New Mexico, um, and
only a certain portions of those
get filed with our agency, um,
most of those get resolved at
mediation.
Um, so we're somewhere between,
you know, 5 to 10% of the cases,
uh, in New Mexico get file with
our agency that hit the fee cap.
Um.
So we're also asking what are
the what are the drivers of the
CAP and we, we, we, we kind of
struck out with the data call,
um, we, we, we, we could tell by
looking at our court filing
systems. We call them suffixes.
Every time somebody comes to our
courthouse, it's, you know, the
Jones versus Smith case if they
file 3 times or 4 times there's
a suffix. Um, so the more cases,
more times they come to our
court on a case, the more likely
it's going to hit the fee cap.
That's common sense, um,
appeals, if the case goes up on
appeal beyond our court to the
appellate court.
Um, that would be a driver of a
feeCAP case, um, one of the
other things we did was a survey
that was an idea of one of our
task force members. Let's, let's
do, it's kind of like one of
those survey monkeys, you know,
we did this question and answer
thing that we sent out to all
the practicing lawyers and
workers' comp in and measured
their sentiment on the fee cap,
but also their sentiment on that
$3000 discovery cost.hould these
figures be raised? Should,
should they stay the same? Uh,
why? uh, so we asked
of probing questions, um, the
attorneys survey, uh, is, is
that is on our website. The
results of that and, and the key
components are summarized in
the, uh, uh, the, the task force
report.
Um, so,
But
The attorneys survey a little
bit more on that, um.
We, um
We asked lawyers um there's
about 75 responses we got the
small workers' comp attorney
market in New Mexico, but we
thought it was a valid survey
and it really shed light on um
What the attorney's sentiment is
on this issue, yeah, the
attorneys believe they're
undercompensated. The estimate
was about 80 hours annually that
they feel that they're not being
compensated because of the the
uh because of the uh fee cap,
the results of the fee cap, um,
And uh we, we asked him, are you
refusing clients? This was a big
issue for Representative Herndon
and access to justice. Do we,
are we having lawyers turning
down clients, you know,
individuals who are hurt on the
job because of the fee cap.
Um, and, and yeah, they are,
it's it's more so on the worker
side than the employer side, um,
but it's it, you know, it's more
than just anecdotal now. We we
have credible lawyers telling us
that they're refusing clients
because of the fee cap and that
they're undercompensated because
of the fee cap, um, and we asked
them, should we raise the fee
cap? And do you think the
lawyers wanted to get paid more
money? Yes, 3 out of 4 lawyers
agreed,
um, it's like 4 out of 5
dentists prefer Crest, I don't
know, but so 75%.
10% of lawyers, 3 out of 4,
thought the fee cap should be
raised.
Um, on the worker side, uh,
there was, um, a pretty strong
vote that there should be no fee
cap, and that's probably going
to come up today and in the
future. Uh, but for those that
said keep the fee cap, but let's
raise it. It was somewhere
between 10 to 150, uh, uh, on
both sides. So we, we, we were
kind of measuring that
sentiment, um.
Uh, and how much it should get
raised, um.
So we talked about this
additional additional judicial
discretion.
Um, 100% of the workers'
attorneys thought there should
be additional judicial
discretion to award attorneys'
fees.
Beyond the cap, um,
And it was, it was, uh I think
it was 60% of the employers'
attorneys were just flat out
against it. Um, so there's a
split opinion on that, as you
can imagine.
So the um
The 3000 discovery costs and we
ask a lot of questions about
that.
Almost all the lawyers believed
almost all the workers'
attorneys decided to be raised.
60% of the employers' attorneys
say don't raise it at all. Um,
we did discover though, it's
it's very rarely exceeded it it
it it it's very rarely exceeded,
and when it does get exceeded,
it's, it's only exceeded by a
small amount.
Um
So that was the the attorneys
survey gave us a lot of good
information on, on, on attorney
sentiment, um.
We also got claims expense data
from N New Mexico Mutual.
which we use in our task force
report on claim expense.
Um, a couple of other things we
did.
We, um,
Did an inflation assessment.
We looked at um what's the
proper inflation assessment for
this category.
We use PPI and this comes from
our economic bureau, um, and
they look from June of 2013 to
October 2023 using the PPI
index.
And, and it came out to be 32
750, uh, a little bit, a little
bit more than the than the
ultimate recommendations.
In the 3000 discovery costs, the
inflation assessment was 6250.
Um
But that's just inflation.
There's other considerations
beyond inflation, but we did do
an inflation assessment. Uh, we
looked at prostate case filings
in our agency. If, if there was
access to justice issues, you
would think that filings would,
would, um,
would increase over time because
lawyers are saying, hey, I don't
want your case. But it really
wasn't born out. We, when we
looked at the prose filings. It
stayed roughly the same over
about a 10 year period or so.
Um, and we also did what was
called a benefit proportionality
analysis, and I'm almost done,
um.
We, we were asking the question,
um, you know, we've been told
today it's a 50/50 fee cap
split, right? Workers pay 50%,
the employers pay 50%.
But if we were to raise the fee
cap from 225 to 325. What what
impact is that going to have on
workers in terms of what they
put on their in their pocket.
And when you measure that
against wage inflation over the
same period of time, it's about
a wash. Um, so I wanted to look
at that because I know people
would be concerned about workers
having less money in their
pocket.
Um, so all these economic data,
all these economic studies that
I've talked about, um, are on
our website. We talk about them
in the task force and, um,
Let's see where I'm at here, um.
So we talked about judicial
discretion is one of the issues
we looked at, um, should there
be a separate award for
appellate work? That was one of
the issues. Should we have like
a $5000 kicker if you go up on
appeal.
Problems with that is, does the
appellate court award that? Do
our judges do it on remand? Do
we use a prevailing standard
prevailing, you know, you
prevailed on appeal, so you get,
you get the uh incremental
amount. Um, we talked about
director authority, maybe we
should kick this to the
director.
To raise the fee cap, um, every,
every few years by a prescribed
formula that the legislature may
prescribe.
Um, and then we talked about
legislative authority to adjust
the fee cap for inflation,
you know, 10% every few years or
something like that.
Um.
And these are the
recommendations, um.
After all the meetings we had,
we, we, we struggled on this,
but we ultimately came to
raising the existing fee cap
from 225 to $30,000.
Um, Discovery got advanced from
3000 to 3500.
Um, we decided in the end to not
give judges judicial discretion
to go beyond the cap, um, we, we
struggled with trying to figure
out which cases, you know, what,
what is a serious workers' comp
case, right?
Um,
If you ever broke your arm, it's
serious, but that's a pretty
routine case in workers' comp.
So we struggled with
um uh what are the triggers for
additional judicial discretion,
and then how much? How much
should we give is it an extra
$500 extra 100. So in the end,
we just decided to keep it just
a hard cap. That's the that's
the existing legislative
structure, uh, for the statute
in question. So it's a hard cap,
no separate fee for appellate
work for the same rationale.
And um we, we thought the
legislature was in the best
position to measure the
stakeholders at any given time
in the future.
Um, only the legislature, um.
can take the pulse of of New
Mexico in 3 years from now or 4
years from now and figure out
whether uh the fee cap should be
raised again or not. Um.
So, uh, that's, that's
essentially the recommendations.
Am I out of slides?
So yeah, um, what it comes down
to in the end, there's the
workers' compensation Act and
then there's the occupational
Disease Act. There's two
different acts that deal with
injuries in a slightly different
way. But those that $3000 number
and the 225 number are in both
acts, so.
Boiled down to its essence we're
changing 4 numbers or that's
what the task force recommended,
um.
So,
Yeah,
that's it. So I got,
um, thank you.
Questions from.
Members.
Um, Representative.
Thank you, Madam. I had to leave
the, um, room for it. So it was
my question answered during the
conversation is the CP, Madam
Chair.
I'm sure Representative Lujan,
why don't we repeat it so of
information being.
How's that? Remember, remember
when?
You're thinking about Elgar. I'm
just kidding, I probably was.
It's on my mind.
No, uh, if there were any, if
there was a recommendation for
adjustment for uh cost of
living, Madam Chair. It was
addressed, but why don't we make
sure it's clear to what people
are all on the same page, Madam
Chair, Representative Lujan, in
the end we decided not to go
that route, um, just because of
the unpredictability of the
economy that if we built into
the statute some sort of
mechanism 1% over three years,
Y% over why, you know, those
kind of things, um.
it would be better just for the
uh legislator to revisit it, um,
at whatever time period you
thought best rather than to
build in some sort of formulaic
uh edition based on inflation or
some other metric because
economic c circumstances change,
um.
And uh we thought just keeping,
keeping the recommendations
simple, um, and, and not having
this inflationary index built
into the statute.
Thank you. I, I might have an
issue with that. I think that
good intentions you have there,
but I just find that when we
don't do those sorts of things,
then it gets, they don't really
get addressed as certain uh with
certainty as, as you may think
they do, but I'd like to see
when we have the full project
I'd like to visit that. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Thank you,
Representative. Anyone else? OK,
um, Senator, yeah.
Only you and I
Well, I'm sorry I had to step
out of the room. We've been
dealing with some of the
mornings things, but I just a
question, I hope that you all
haven't covered this, and if so,
just tell me you've covered it
and I'll talk with you
afterwards. The, the fee cap,
the discovery costs, I did
workers' comp many years ago as
a very young lawyer for a few
years, probably about 4 or 5
years, is a good place to get
trained as a lawyer. Uh, the,
um, uh, the fee cap, it seems to
be when I'm looking at the
analysis quickly, your numbers
are, you're taking into account
things like inflation and years
of, of without increase and so
on.
so forth. In in Las Cruces, my
understanding, I'll look at the,
the members of the Plainsburg.
In Las Cruces, I don't believe
there's anybody doing workers'
comp work in Las Cruces anymore.
Am I right about that?
you think there's one?
Who, who do you think it is?
Do you know?
I, I don't think there is, and,
and, and I'll just tell you when
I started out practicing law 30
years ago, there were probably 4
or 5 people doing workers' comp
in Las Cruces. There's nobody
doing it now. So when I get a
phone call from somebody with a
worker's comp case, I've got to
send them to Albuquerque. Um,
and, and there's very few of you
in Albuquerque doing it too, so
in my mind, I hope I'm sure the
discussion earlier was around
the marketplace. What you know
what is the marketplace for the
services because it doesn't
matter to me what inflation is
and what the number would be
years past and what it would
amount to. Now that
That assumes that the number was
right in the first place, right?
If you do that, that assumes
that that we're, we're, so did
you all discuss that already?
Did you talk about whether the
fee is enough to attract lawyers
to doing the work, that didn't
come up at all. No, no, but we
are going to have a panel of
lawyers and I broke my own
suggestion that we hold on
questions till we got them, but
that's OK, and that's my own.
No, no, no, I think that's good.
I didn't realize we had a we
have some practitioners, I'll
wait and hold my questions in,
but that's, that's my, my thing
is, again, I'm pretty much a
Free market capitalist sort of
guy, you know, if there's not
enough uh lawyers if there's not
enough. What are you laughing at
me, Republicans? Quit that.
Uh.
Well, I've owned my own business
for all my life, so, uh, again,
the, the issue is this, if you,
if you don't have people
providing the services you can
say that you got an inflationary
increase, whatever from 22 to
$30,000. Um, I don't, it doesn't
make any difference to me what
the inflation rate is or that
assumes that 22 is right in the
first place, right? That's a
fallacy. It's a fallacious
argument. Uh, the issue is, is,
are you paying enough to get
people to do the work and, and
right in Las Cruces, and I think
most of New Mexico, the answer
is no.
you're not. So thank you, Madam
Chair. I'm sorry to interrupt
you. No, you didn't. It was my
my not managing the meeting
correctly. So this is what I'd
like to suggest. You two are
welcome to stay at the at the
table, but if you move over to
the end so that we can bring up
um a couple other people will
have the practitioners and I
think there may be a client who
wants to share some information
and after that we can have uh
additional questions, Senator,
and I have
Bunch of questions as well.
So, um
Thank you.
So, and we have Jeremiah
Ritchie, you represent, um, New
Mexico Mutual, you also have a
person with you, so I guess
we're gonna have to have maybe
people sit.
The current two panelists sit in
the audience for a minute and
then we'll have, we're gonna
fill this up and we're gonna
have to figure out how to manage
that for questions, but let's,
let's do this.
And so we have Michael Doyle,
um.
And we have Peter White.
Right? And we have Jeremiah
Ritchie who was with, um, he's a
general counsel vice president
in New Mexico Mutual.
And
And
Dan.
Gil.
Glamo and tell me your title
again, Dan.
OK. Vice President for Claims
New Mexico Mutual, and we have
James Gonzales, who I is with
Flo and Moore Inc. so you are a
client, I guess,
or a,
um, and the request has been
made of me to allow um James to
speak first if that's OK. Is
that still the request or not?
OK, all right, um.
Mr. Doyle, so we'll do that, um,
and James, uh, you know, we try
to manage our time. We're doing
pretty well on time for the
afternoon, so it's OK, but feel
free to share your story and
then we'll go to, you know, the
people who work on the actual
cases and so on so the floor is
yours, James.
OK, would you like me to start
over?
Sure
OK. OK.
I'd like to thank everybody for
the opportunity to hear my
story. Uh, I bring a unique
perspective into this as an
owner and also uh an employee as
well. I had an instance uh back
in October of 2022, where I was
uh working in my warehouse. I,
I'm a very hands-on, uh, owner
of the company. I'm, I don't
just sit behind the desk. I'm
very proactive. I believe in
servicing my customers and doing
everything I poss.
can to make sure that they're
taken care of and then also my
employees are taking care of,
um, I was working in the
warehouse, I was cleaning up,
moving some pad rolls around and
they weigh about 100 pounds
apiece, but I mean it's
something that we handle all the
time.
And I picked it up. I took a
slight step backwards and I felt
a pop in my hip. And I also felt
a burning sensation in my
stomach. I dropped the roll,
kind of pushed me forward, and
at that time I knew that I had
really hurt myself.
I, uh, gave it a, uh, the
evening and then the next
morning when I woke up, I
realized that this was serious.
So I went in and went to urgent
care and they, uh, from there,
they sent me to specialists and
I had torn a hole in my stomach
the size of a baseball, and I
fractured that part of my hip
that that the ball that goes
into the socket.
And it was uh an impact.
Fracture is what I was told, um,
I went through the normal
procedure. I filed everything
that I was told to file. Uh, I
spoke to my insurance
representative and everything
was going very well. She was
very receptive. We had a very
good relationship. We spoke
quite a bit on the phone. We
shared emails. She was just
wonderful at following up on
everything that I needed. The
hernia surgery was taken care
of, uh, and I was
Taking care of as well for the
time off that I had to miss, uh,
and then I, uh, was able to come
back to work. I was very happy
at that point, but my hip was
still a very much an issue.
uh, literally.
2 weeks before my surgery that I
was scheduled to have. I was
sent a denial letter, no reason,
nothing. And when I called tried
to call back and try to get some
kind of explanation. I was
basically ignored. I at this
point had to find out, find an
attorney, which was very
difficult to do as mentioned
earlier, uh, by Senate Chair
Cervantes. I think that was an
excellent point he brought up.
But I was able to find a very,
very good attorney who's
passionate and was able to
Come to my defense.
And to make a long story short,
we went into mediation, and they
showed up and they had
absolutely no explanation for
why they denied my claim. So
when big insurance companies can
do this to an average person out
there and not to mention I'm the
employee, uh, the I am the
employer and not even the
employee that raised serious uh
flags as far as what I think is
wrong with the system. When a,
when a big
like that can put corporate
greed in front of the needs of
hard-working brothers and
sisters of New Mexico. There is
something very wrong. So if it
takes, you know, attracting
lawyers by incentive measures by
increasing the cap or whatever
it takes, I suggest you please
consider that.
And when again, how can somebody
just deny a claim without any
reasonable explanation. They
showed up to mediation and had
nothing, 0. So they exactly what
they wanted to try to do is put
me off. And I'm sure they do
that to employees all the time,
you know, they'll maybe throw
them a few bucks and then they
go away or they use their
private insurance company to get
whatever's fixed. And yes, our
business is extremely physical.
There is a lot of pre-existing
conditions that happen within
our business, but that's part of
it. These guys work hard and
they use their bodies and
everything's heavy. if you want
to, you know, point blame at
anybody, maybe it's the
manufacturers because they make
just stuff so heavy these days,
but we still have to handle that
physically. And when we get
hurt, we look for help. I have
paid for 32 years, workers'
comp, and I never filed one.
Claim and the time that I went
to file that claim and it was
for me. I was treated like this.
God forbid if it was one of my
employees. Now I would still go
through the same thing. I would
make sure that they had an
attorney and I would make sure
they're taken care of cause I'm
passionate about who works for
me. My guys have been with me
for 30 of the 32 years. Yes, I'm
going to take care of them. But
when this happened, I realized
that there is a problem. You,
you need to to please consider
putting teeth.
And to the law, or else these
people are going to continually
get away with this. And it's a
real problem and and and
basically.
Just, I just can't elaborate
enough that, you know, you're,
you're who we turn to.
You're our representatives.
We're, you know, we count on you
to support us, to get her back
because there's so many people
out there that just want to
steamroll. These big companies,
they come in and they don't
care. They perfect their
practice in larger states, and
then they come to poor little
New Mexico and then they hammer
us. Please, please help.
Thank you, Mr. Gonzalez. Um, so
the way we are on the schedule
is, um, Mr. Doyle, and then
we'll hear from the insurance
side. Is that how you were
planning on doing it.
Yes, madam. Very good.
Thank you, Madam Chairman,
Chairman and committee members,
thank you for your time this
afternoon and you're
consideration of workers'
compensation. I almost feel like
seeing my time to Mr. Gonzalez,
um, very, very eloquently see
what a lot of workers feel, uh,
does everybody have my much
smaller handout than the
workers' compensation
Administration provided, um,
who I am? Oh,
OK, OK. I didn't know if it was
going to be up on.
Thank you.
Just briefly who I am, I've been
practicing workers' compensation
about 22 years from the workers'
compensation about 22 years from
the worker's side only. I am a
member of the board of governors
of the College of Workers'
Compensation compensation
lawyers, that is a group of
lawyers made up of practitioners
over 20 years, you have to be
practiced 20 years and publish.
There's judges, defense
attorneys, workers' attorneys,
and law professors, and the goal
of that of that is.
Try to make workers'
compensation better across the
nation. I'm also a member of the
Workers' injury Law and Advocacy
group, which really is focused
on helping look across the
states what helps workers across
the nation. Um, and so I, I
think I'm in a unique position
to look at what other states do
and to consider what other
states do and look at what New
Mexico does. on the second page
of my handout, I, I really think
it's.
I, I think the administration
has done a very good job of
explaining the basic workers'
compensation. The idea is the
trade off, the grand bargain.
Some of you may have heard the
grand bargain where
And and what Representative
Chandler was talking about, uh,
really, the employer gives up
rights and defenses and the
worker gives up the right to sue
in district court in most cases
and really under our Act 1978
Section 5251 in the top left
corner, really, this is the two
competing interests that there
are in the workers' compensation
first and both of these should
be met.
The it's really important the
quick and efficient delivery of
indemnity which are money
benefits at a reasonable cost to
the employer.
And we're looking at those when
we look at.
Why, why do we have workers'
compensation at all. It's been
addressed a little bit, but what
happens if you don't pay injured
workers, if an insurance company
denies the injured worker's
case, the injured workers don't
just disappear. They're gonna be
applying for Medicaid. They're
gonna be applying for food
stamps. They're going to go on
the public dole and, and they
don't want to, but they will
because they'll do what they
have to survive and there's very
limited ability for them to
survive, um.
Really.
The next slide I have talks
about just the real basics of
workers' compensation.
A worker gets injured at work,
that worker notifies their
employer within a certain amount
of time, the worker supervisor
creates a report and the
insurance and company approves
or denies the claim and we go in
and we look and the next part's
down, talk about what happens
when it when it gets approved.
When we get that quick and
efficient delivery of benefits
to a worker we have.
The worker begins treatment.
They get treatment from their
doctors. They get their money
benefits. It's 66 2/3. Now this
is really a simplistic form of
this, but what happens when it's
denied.
A worker hopefully has
insurance, but they don't always
sometimes they have to apply for
Medicaid through the state, but
a worker gets injured and now
they're told, well, you have to
figure it out. You have to find
a doctor
and really they start looking
and do what they can. They have
a year to file a claim with
workers' comp, and there's a
mandatory mediation and I will
definitely, the, the workers'
comp administration, I will echo
what's already been said.
Fantastic job.
Just wonderful organization, the
director, the staff, the judges,
the mediators do a great job of
what they do, but they are just
problems. Uh, what happens with
a denial there's a recommended
resolution and it could end up
in litigation.
Really, we talk about attorneys'
fees and why, why workers need
attorneys at all. This system
should have been designed so
that it's not complicated, but
it is very, very complicated,
lots of ins and outs, lots,
anytime you're dealing with
doctors, especially, uh, it was
mentioned at the time it takes
to get a deposition, you know,
and some of them from the
workers' perspective, what we
see is, as Mr. Gonzalez
mentioned, employers can.
And I clean without
claims for medical treatment
without showing a reasonable
basis at all. So Senator
Cervantes, if your doctor says
you need a surgery, the
insurance company can just say
no, um, and it's just something
that creates delay in the system
and creates a need for
attorneys, employers, insurers
can act in bad faith with little
or no fear being held
accountable. There is a statue
that deals with bad faith, 52 1
28. It really just has no teeth.
The
Workers
Hm
Have trouble with doctors
wanting to be involved in this
system. There's a lot of red
tape. They barely get more than
Medicaid would pay, and they
have to deal with a lot more
insurance. One of the things
mentioned also is a stopping by
Mr. Gonzalez stopping of
treatment right before and the
workers' compensation is
supposed to deal with what we
were told you were told earlier
about reasonable necessary care
is to be provided to a worker
and it's to be quickly, but
there's no me
under the current law for a
quick reasonable necessary here.
Someone like Mr. Gonzalez gets
injured and they deny the
surgery, we have to file a
workers' compensation complaint
and not at the fault of the
judges or the administration
just because doctors are hard to
get depositions at. We have to
get their testimony. It takes 6
months to a year. That's 6
months to a year where there's
not a decision on reasonable
necessary and there's got to be
a presumption if a doctor says
it's reasonable.
Necessary. Right now there's a
definition of misconduct that's
creating lots of litigation and
it's dealing with it basically
defines misconduct very, very
broadly and can let an employer
uh terminate a worker if they're
terminated for misconduct they
can lose tens of thousands to
hundreds of thousands of
dollars.
So we're going to be asked that
that be looked at. We'll ask
what we were talking about is
this is a very complex case.
and it is hard to get attorneys
to new attorneys on the workers.
Next slide just talks about some
reasonable ways to change the
act, require the employers here
to have a basis to deny a claim
or a procedure that a doctor has
requested. Remove bad faith from
the workers' compensation Act
and work require the worker
compensation insurers follow the
same rules as every other
insurer.
Require more training by the
administration for doctors, pay
doctors better, limit insurance
denials and red tape when
treatment would not be
reasonable necessary or
evaluation of when it would be
reasonableness. And finally,
that create a mechanism for
quick resolution of reasonable
and necessary medical disputes.
Final slide, there's been
discussions in the past about
whether or not things can be
afforded the slideshows.
Claims for workers' compensation
are decreasing and.
And benefit profits for insurers
are on the rise, really, I think
that the system we're gonna come
to you this year and ask for you
to look at the whole hack, and I
think that's been asked by the
administration is being
addressed.
Thank you. I'll stand for
questions or, well, I think
we'll now go to the insurance
side over here, um, Mr. Ritchie.
Sure, it's hard to, hard to know
exactly where to begin, if, if I
may, I'll give a little bit of a
background on our company, so,
um, and to do that, I'm going to
go back to Judge Coututure's.
Uh, comments and he mentioned
the fact that there were a
number of workers' compensation
reforms made between 1986 and
1990.
Um.
The reason that we, the reason
we saw those bills is because
the state was experiencing a
crisis within the workers'
compensation system. More than
6000 employers in New Mexico,
primarily small businesses,
could not find coverage in the
voluntary marketplace. There are
a number of attempts at trying
to control rates and make uh
make coverage available that
were largely unsuccessful until
1990. There's a special session,
um, again, the task force was
convened and met all summer to
study the issue.
Made comprehensive reform to to
the act.
Um, a number of things came from
that, uh, one of which is the
creation of our company in New
Mexico Mutual Casualty Company.
We are a New Mexico uh based
workers' compensation insurer.
We only write workers'
compensation insurance and we
only ride it in New Mexico.
You're created by the
legislature to provide some
stability to the market to make
sure that when larger national
carriers found this to be an
unfavorable unfavorable market,
that there would be somebody
here to provide that coverage to
employers.
Um, and we've done that, I
think, successfully for the last
30+ years.
We're very grateful to uh
Representative Herndon for uh
bringing the memorial and
establishing the task force. Now
one of the things that that I
think you've all heard today is
that workers' compensation is a
unique system.
Uh, in some ways it's complex
and complicated, but in other
ways I think it simplifies the
process and provides some
certainty to the people that are
involved there.
The courts and work comp are a
little bit different from state
courts. The rules of evidence
are a little bit different. The
standard of proof is different.
The way we determine liability
is different from, uh, tort.
It's a no fault system.
Damages that are available are
different. The way we calculate
them is different.
And the way we provide benefits
and pay medical costs is also
different, so having a task
force like the one we've we've
seen over the last year is
extremely beneficial in that we
get the input from the
stakeholders, the people that
deal with this specific system,
and all of its complexity or its
nuance, um, and, and, and its
little ticks that make it
special. Um, we brought all
those people together and we
appreciate the work of the task
force Represent Herndon and
making some recommendations that
we think will advance the
interests of.
That community and of the work
compact.
The uh
One of the things that I like
about workers' compensation is,
is the alignment of interest
and, uh, and I had the chance to
speak with, uh, you know, the
attorneys here just before the
meeting, and I'm always
reminded, you know, we, we have
an adversarial system.
For a reason and they're looking
out for their, their clients,
um, we hire council to represent
the employers and by bringing
together those two viewpoints, I
think you really help start to
find out um what's real and and
where we can make a difference
policy-wise. Uh, I think it's
good to have these conversations
because I'm always reminded that
my perspective isn't always, um,
uh, complete and, and as I
listen to them, I'm also
reminded that they don't have
the full picture as well. I
think sometimes there's a
tendency to focus on.
The, the most exceptional, uh,
or the most disappointing or the
most egregious, uh, uh, cases
and incidents and overlook the
ones where the system works
well. Very disappointed to hear
about Mr. Gonzalez's experience.
It's not the way that it should
work. Um, that's not the way
that we undertake to to do our
jobs and meet our obligations to
our insureds or injured workers.
Um, going back to the lament of
interest, it's, it's, it's not
good for
For the employers or the workers
if the system takes too long.
It's not good for the employers
or the workers if, uh, the, we
can't find doctors to provide
treatment. It's not good for
either side if we can't have
competent and qualified
attorneys representing us when,
when that need arises. Um,
For the vast majority of
workers' compensation claims.
We pay the benefits and there's
never any need for involvement
of attorneys or formal process
the workers' compensation
Administration.
That's how the system was
designed, uh, you know, in, in
1990 in that special session,
one of the things that then
Senator Marty Chavez said was
that the intent was to alleviate
the need for attorneys. They do
that in a number of ways. They
provided certainty on on the
benefits and the injuries that
provided definitions. They
provided a fee schedule, um,
and, and they also implemented
the attorney fee cap, and I
think that that uh one of the
important things that that does
is if and when we do need
counsel, if and when we do.
need to go and have some formal
dispute process at the WCA. The
attorney fee cap serves to set
some guidelines. Um, it, it, uh,
it sets the parameters, I think
kind of the upper limit and both
sides have to then evaluate
their case and say, OK.
Um, here's what we've got to
work with. Here are the most
critical issues. This is the
reason we're disputing this.
Let's focus on those because we
can't exceed the fee cap.
I can tell you from our
experience that the feed cap
absolutely informs how we
litigate certain cases. As I
mentioned, it forces us to
concentrate on the things that
are most important.
Um, and, and not mess with some
of the other ancillary things.
I, I think some of the, the, uh,
attorneys, uh, on the, on the
dias and uh and here at the
table we could all speak to
cases where it seemed like the
other side was trying to paper
us to death or, you know, drag
out litigation as intimidation
tactic. You just don't see that
on the same level of workers'
comp, and part of that is
because of the way it was
designed and the feed cap, um,
the limited discovery and the
fact that workers don't have to
prove that the employer was at
fault
So, um, in short, I think, uh,
and I'm happy to answer any
questions that I can, but um,
In short, we, we appreciate the
work of the task force. We
didn't agree with every
conclusion that they reached.
Um, it was a compromise of all
those stakeholders there
involved after looking at all
the data and doing the research
and doing the work and having
all these conversations, um, but
we think that the outcome is,
is, is beneficial to the system
and, and it doesn't harm the
system.
One of our main concerns with
the fee cap is, is not just that
it diverts dollars from injured
workers and employers.
Um, the other part is that it
has potential as, as the cap
increases or is removed, or as
the advanced discovery costs are
are are increased exponentially.
It has the potential to create
more litigation and slow down
the system. Um, a lot of these
things, you know, where we talk
about additional process being
held in the WCA has a risk of a
new burden on those resources
and again, the availability of
judges and staff to process
these claims.
We think that it's best to to
look at these things and make
sure that we take into effect,
take into account the impact
that this may have on the number
of claims being litigated and
the amount of time it takes to
resolve those claims and as part
of the intent of the act and one
of the areas that our interests
align is that we all want, um,
these cases to be resolved
quickly, as quickly as possible
so that everybody can move
forward.
Um, and, and hopefully get the,
the work or the care that they
need and return to work as
quickly as possible.
So that I'll, I'll take any
questions, madam chair.
Thank you, Mr. Ritchie. Anyone
else on the panel wish to add
anything before I invite back
Mr. Holt and Representative
Herndon.
Um, yes, Mr. White.
Yeah,
Madam Chairwoman and members.
I, I was here, um, with, uh, I
had a client. I want to thank
Mr. Gonzalez for his
presentation. He did that on the
fly, really, really, uh,
Very impactful and very
representative of a lot of uh
the clients I represent, I
represent David Staszewski who
is supposed to be here today,
and I have a brief statement
from him.
Uh, he's a gentleman who had a
severe neck injury in 2006 and
um required surgery as a spinal
cord injury and I still
represent him. It's been 18
years.
And I, I'm
Talking to him regularly as we
speak. I'm just not getting paid
for it anymore and it hasn't, I
haven't been paid in a long time
on that. Um, but he had a
statement saying that he's, I've
been battling this system for 18
years and it's exhausting.
Problem with Mr. Stazuki is, he
has an injury that's ongoing.
It's never going to go away and
they're constant disputes in
terms of his need for ongoing
medical care. He's been able to
take on a lot of the burden of,
of negotiating issues.
issues with his adjuster and
trying to get treatment, but I'm
still helping him and, and the
system is not geared for people
like David Staszewski who have
long term injuries. Uh, he said,
uh, my greatest fear is not just
for my own future, but for what
will happen to others like me if
we can no longer afford legal
help and critical medical care.
We need a worker's compensation
system that truly supports us,
not one that leaves us fighting
big insurance alone.
When we're most vulnerable and
talking about when workers are
most vulnerable, Mr. Gonzalez
was one end of that spectrum
when you need your immediate
surgery and for reasons unknown
to you, you get denied. Mr.
Stazski is on the other end. He
has a surgery. He's got
long-term problems, medication,
he's on opioids that have caused
his teeth to fall out. Who's
going to take care of that? Is
there going to be an issue? What
caused that? This is years and
years
On the road.
You would think that lawyers
would want to have
the chance to represent
seriously injured people. I have
a call, a message waiting for me
for someone with a serious brain
injury. When I see those calls
come in, I want to run the other
direction. I don't, I don't want
to represent somebody for 30
years and get paid one time and,
and, and I don't have the
responsibility.
To stay on and represent people
after I've been paid, a lot of
lawyers don't do that. Prom is
I've been doing this and I'll
introduce myself. I'm Pete
White. I represent workers. I've
been doing it for 32 years. I,
I've been under each and every
fee cap. Uh, I don't know, I've
been able to make a living doing
this, but I have a son now.
Who's finishing law school.
Years ago I thought it would be
great to bring him into my
practice. And frankly, I can't
really in good conscience
recommend it to him.
Because
It's just not, it's not the way
it was when I started. It really
isn't.
Um, and, and I appreciate the
efforts of, of Marty Chavez to
set up this system and the and
the intentions were good and it
solved the problem that I was
never part of, uh, when I got
involved, when I got involved,
all the lawyers were already
leaving and somehow I found a
way to to get my foot in the
door and make a living doing
this, but, uh, folks, it's just
not happening anymore. You don't
have lawyers, there's no lawyer
in Las Cruces.
There's, there's very few
lawyers who want to do this
work. There are very few doctors
who want to undertake all the
complexity of the system and
get, um, unfortunately, the
abuse that sometimes happens
when when you get lawyers
involved. So it's, it's really a
system that's
It's changed over the years and,
and I appreciated when it was
more simple, when people got
along better, but it seems like
just the complexities of
litigation and things or
stretching things out and making
it so very difficult to get a
case heard. It doesn't happen.
It used to happen faster. I
don't know why it's taking
longer and longer, and we don't
get paid. We don't get paid till
case is concluded. We get it. We
get it. We do, and there will be
questions I'm sure that will um
give you allow you to have some
more exams.
And to touch on one thing,
um.
I was involved in the
legislature years ago when we
changed the the statute to
address a problem that was
perceived with this Hawkins case
where somebody was accused of
misconduct and still got
benefits in a court decision.
We tried to define what
misconduct was back then in
front of the legislature, we
could not get agreement, and now
we have a decision that defines
that misconduct is simply poor
performance that can rob a
worker of thousands of dollars
of benefits. Uh, so that's one
of the things that we're pushing
for. I appreciate the efforts
of, of the task force
representative turned in for all
the work to try and increase the
fee cap and of course the
Council for Workers Ben Sherman
and Katie Luer Eaton, who did
that. We appreciate that. Thank
you. Thank you very much. So
we're going to need a little
space for Representative Herndon
and Mr. Holt, so maybe Mr.
Yes, and Dan perhaps and then um
right. And if, if there are
questions, we can certainly
invite people back up to answer
specific questions too. Let's
try to ferry gun. All right.
OK, good.
OK, all right.
So, um, before I go back to
Senator Cervantes, other others
on the committee have questions
for any of the panelists here,
um, Representative Barrega.
Thank you, madam.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
OK, um,
um, thank you all for being here
today. Um, I just wanted to
mention, Madam Chair, so, um,
one of the things that you all
didn't mention and I wanted to
mention, Madam Chair, was when I
served on the PERA board, um,
many of the state employees who
were injured came to the
disability committee, which I
sat on, and so this process, as
Mr. White was talking about, the
length of time that
goes on, um, and I've seen it
for a lot of city employees,
state employees, um, you know,
that process itself starts, it
starts kind of the whole
disability question and then
I've, I think Mr. White, I think
you came before the Disability
committee when I actually sat on
that, and I just wanted to
mention that um I wanted to
thank Mr. Gonzalez also for
being brave enough to come
forward
Speak, Madam Chair. Um, and, you
know, I really am empathetic and
sympathetic to this whole plight
because I've watched the process
and it's like, you come to the
disability committee of PERA or
ERA or whatever the pro the
system that you're in and then
you go to workman's comp and
then you go to Social Security,
so it doesn't end there, Madam
Chair. It, it begins sometimes
at PERA or ERB and then it goes
on to.
These other areas and I just
wanted to know, has the law ever
been changed before this and
when was that, if it was.
Or is this the first time?
So
Representative, um, it was
changed in 1986 and 1991, but it
hasn't been really addressed as
a big picture item since 1991.
There have been changes
throughout, I think there was a
change in 2015, but.
Um, not a lot, and in 2013, but
it's been very piecemeal.
Thank you. And Madam Chair, I
just wanted to point out that
whole process because it's
really important that we
understand, you know, how long
these things really do take and
I sympathize with you, Mr.
White.
Uh, thank you, Representative
Representative Madrid.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for your presentation
that was, um, something I guess
I've been needing and waiting
for quite a while, quite
frankly, uh, Mr. Gonzalez gave a
really true scenario that I can
relate to because uh as an
employer, uh, for a bigger
company, you know, I saw these
cases come through readily.
You know, yearly and, and
everything and I guess having
experienced it in another state
and watching the process, it
was, it was handled, you know,
we just handled the situations
and favored the employee because
it was an investment we made in
this employee from the time we
hired him to the time we trained
them to the time they gave us so
it didn't make sense to us to do
such a disservice of not
utilizing two services the.
Unemployment aspect of workman's
comp that helps them sustain
some level of living at home
while they're being medically
treated or whatever.
And yet when it's done and and
you're on the other side, which
kind of happened to me being in
management and working for a
company in Texas and then coming
and working in New Mexico as an
educator.
And watching the treatment
process was appalling and it was
one of my biggest motivators to
help education because I was
watching how we were treating
other colleagues. There were
truly educators and, and had no
reason to lie, no reason to give
up dollars on a cent for for a
compensation packet by workman's
comp to not want to be at work
inevitably, what did it do? It
changed.
This is the culture of the
individual that's highly needed
to be functional at their task
and to deliver the output of
productivity.
And while this is still in what
I'm listening to you all present
to us, particularly uh the
clarity like Mr. Gonzalez put
and that's just two sides to the
coin.
And what you're asking of the
state and us is to make it fair,
make it equitable. It doesn't
put one against the other. It
doesn't make an employee lose
self value.
Based on opinions of others of
higher up management on one
side.
To the empathy of the side of
the employee that has to go
home.
Knowing that they're in misery,
we must get back up the next day
to go back to work and subject
himself to a lot of things that
I'm gonna tell you comes out of
this PTSD.
OK. I did this in education and
I got PTSD.
From a 14 year old young boy.
And you see my size, it's not
about size.
It was the trauma of not being
trained correctly to deal with
the circumstance and then forced
by threat of job or loss of job
or loss of contracts.
Because of this.
And then still do it.
And then come out of it with
injury to the point that I'm
impaired.
Not only on emotional mental
side of it, that came way later.
But on the physical side of
impairment because of what the
the young gentleman did, and it
wasn't this uh young men's
fault.
He was severely handicapped.
I was severely uh deprived and
undertrained and not qualified
to be doing this job, clearly
indicated that forefront and let
me tell you, if it wasn't for my
management background, I would
be at no advantage, but I have
had, I had to stand up for the
entire time that I remained in
the educational system.
Dodging
Proving and standing up.
To my employer, to my school
district.
To see it from different
perspectives and if they chose
not to, to understand, as you
all have indicated, there's not
without recourse to making
litigations take a long, long
time on both sides.
And the one that can wait the
longest is the one that's going
to get the most payout.
So I say to you all, and I say
to this body.
In my exit, work on this guys,
because this is something that
this a disservice not only in
our public but also in our
school system.
The autonomy of today's times
that inhibit employees and
employers to being able to speak
because of detriment of
repercussion, or settlement is
what's causing our dilemma.
We're not being people to
people.
We're being law to law.
And you know what happens when a
law of law gets in.
Then humans are lost.
Homes are broken.
Unemployment rises.
And taxpayers pay.
So I just had to make that
statement, Madam Chair. Thank
you for allowing me. Thank you,
Mr. Gonzalez for being truthful
as I am being truthful too and
saying that the coin falls on
both sides of the fence and to
your credit, kudos for standing
up and acknowledging that one,
you did it the right way with
your employees, why would they
have any different to expect
from you to to be doing it for
you. So I thank everybody for
this presentation, uh.
As well as my colleague
Representative Herden, she came
in the first year and I scared
her a couple of times
because I showed her a presence
of what a role of a state rap
has to be sometimes and uh and
to you, you're doing a great
job. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative. uh,
Representative Lujan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Thank you, Richard, for, for
your comments. It's.
It's not an easy business to
understand workman's
compensation. I always say
unless you've gone through it
and so.
I have, as someone who had to to
to receive it when I was working
in a medical profession and I
got uh stuck by a needle. So,
but the
But the process and protocol
were all very much in place and
there's immediate action and and
immediate documentation and all
those sorts of things. So,
When we have a claim that is
being denied on the insurance
side or on the medical side
because there's there's there's
multiprongs where things can,
you know, things can, uh, go,
um.
Against the claimants. So my
question is, how often are you
seeing medical um denials and
how often are you seeing the
insurance denials, I mean,
where, where in that process are
you not?
Um, are we, we, we're seeing
those denials and, you know,
what are those numbers, I guess,
Madam Chair.
It it's hard to say everybody
who comes to me is being denied
usually. I, you know, I do, I do
take a number of calls where
things look like they're, you
know, they said I just got hurt
and then I asked a few questions
and then say, well, you're,
you're doing OK right now. Call
me back if something gets
denied, but the vast majority of
the calls we get are when people
are being denied a procedure or
money or both.
Mr. Ritchie, did you want a
supplement? Thank you, Madam
Chair, and thank you,
Representative for the question.
So, um, and, and I think that's
where we can give a bit more
perspectives that.
In terms of in terms of the
claims that come across, uh, the
claims that are submitted to New
Mexico Mutual. Uh, we only deny
about 2 to 5%. Every year there
are thousands and thousands of
workers for which the process
works, as you described, uh,
the, the protocols are in place.
They receive care quickly, um,
and, and to to step back even
further as, as an insurance
carrier.
Those motivations for us are
baked into the word compact. We
Part of the reason that we have
some of these very challenging
cases that last a very long time
is because the employer owns the
employee's injury for life.
We're, we're, we're obligated to
provide medical treatment for
that injury uh for as long as it
takes. And so, so sometimes,
unfortunately in the most severe
instances those injuries can
take years and years, and they
have, they have residual issues,
you know, well down the road.
Those are very exceptional
cases. For the most part, what's
in our best interests is also in
the worker's best interest. We
want to get them the best care
as quickly as possible and make
sure that they get the treatment
and the the rehabilitation that
they need to get back to work.
What happens if they don't, what
we see and something that we
were very sensitive to.
As we see that workers that
don't get back to work quickly
don't get the proper care, don't
see the right doctors can, can
develop all kinds of other
issues, and it can be a downward
spiral from there. So we want
them to see good doctors. We
want them to get back to work.
And, and that's all those
motivations and those incentives
are baked into the act. It's
better for us. It's better for
them. And so that's the way that
we operate. When, you know,
recently we've seen, we've seen
challenges with access to care,
um, that, that are not unique to
the word compering.
I think it's something that that
our state and even some other
states are experiencing. We've,
we've taken steps and working
with outside vendors to try and
place workers with uh doctors or
or programs outside of the state
if we need to, because it's
better for everybody if we need
to take them somewhere else to
get care and the right
treatments. We'd rather do that
than have them wait and languish
waiting to to see a doctor here
or something like that.
So in terms of the denials, it's
2 to 5% of all the claims that
come.
Across our desk
Most typically, when there are
disputes, um, they can be for a
number of reasons, but we
already know that if it happened
at work, then we're liable for
it. So a lot of times there
might be a dispute around did
the injury actually arise from
work?
Rotator cuff and and and there
might be some reason or some,
some fact question as to whether
or not they actually tore their
shoulder at work or if it's
something that happened before,
Mr. Ritchie, I think you
answered the question,
which was it's very interesting,
but I think it was a little far
off,
Madam,
Chair,
Rotator cuff and and and there
might be some reason or some,
some fact question as to whether
or not they actually tore their
shoulder at work or if it's
something that happened before,
Mr. Ritchie, I think you
answered the question which was
it's very interesting, but I
think it was a little far off,
Madam,
I address you have on the denial
rate is.
You probably anecdotal.
I can't give you numbers, I hear
you, but that's what the
question was, we could talk
anecdotal, we can talk about
that after. But I'm trying to
get out is, you know, on, on the
information you may want to
respond is there is a handout
you gave us, there is no
insurance crisis in workers'
compensation. Um, where you see
workers compensation is the most
profitable type of insurance.
So,
And workers' compensation claims
have declined as profits have
climbed. So with that 2 to 5%
are those high amounts of
claims. I mean, because there's
a dollar amounts associated with
those claims that are being
denied as well. So, I guess what
I'm trying to get is like why,
one, why they're being denied. I
know there's multiple reasons,
and one of the reasons I know
that that I've been told because
I've been trained on workman's
compensation as an HR director
for the state, where there's
there
Timely, I mean, you had to, if
you missed a deadline of turning
in or submitting information,
then you are deemed, I mean, it
was, it was very time consuming
to keep a case or a claim in
order and making sure that that
employee met all those deadlines
and had all that medical
information where I became the
contact to the hospital if
that's where the employee went
to.
So where there's there for the
state and I can only speak from
the perspective of the state in
managing those claims, that
there is a very timely and
orderly process.
That there's a responsibility to
the HR, you know, um, human
resources that are, are managing
those claims and the claimant's
records.
I, I'm not, I'm just missing
like when or who I want this
data, we're not going to get it
today. Where are those claims?
Are they in small businesses?
Are they who are with the
majority of those claims? What
are those claims? How often are
they, they, they coming up and
that sort of stuff. And maybe
that was found with the, with
the study, but I don't know, I
don't think we're getting the
full picture here, but I can
just say from my, I'm only
speaking from my own experience,
but I can tell you, Madam Chair,
that if I missed a deadline as
the human resources.
or not getting that information
submitted to work workman's comp
that there were, there were,
there were consequences, right?
So,
Something's amiss here and maybe
we need that needs to be that
could be addressed through that
process and procedure and maybe
I I hear from my small
businesses that that could be an
issue because they don't have
HR. They don't have that they
have to manage it themselves, so
I don't know if that's what
you're hearing, so thank you,
Ma.
I'm not, I think the workers'
comp administration could
probably give us data on.
The claim number of claims, and
and that sort of thing. Is that,
is that what you were asking
representative. I don't think we
see all the data, but except for
this, where I have concerns or
workman's compensation claims
have steadily declined as
profits have climbed. I think
that that's an issue, as in
sure, I think that was a that
was a presentation by the
workers' attorneys and insurance
profits have gone up, um.
And I think we're going to be
addressing probably through
legislation, Madam Chair, that
cap for attorneys' fees, right?
Just like we did for other
things that it will be an issue.
So my question is, you know,
This, this is, these profits are
going up, but our, our fees for
our attorneys are capped. Um,
I'm sure we're going to be
addressing or looking at that,
so this is, this is another
conundrum we're going to have to
face, but I think, Madam Chair,
there, there's somewhere in the
process that we could follow and
help better manage. Thank you.
All right, thank you. Um, yes,
Mr. Ritchie, briefly. Yeah, I
just wanted to speak to to the
the profitability portion, um,
while, while the number of
claims is decreasing historic,
you know, historical claims has
been decreasing, um, severity
isn't necessarily decreasing, so
the amount of money that each
claim costs. Um, in terms of, in
terms of the rates for
insurance, uh, there is a system
in place, you know, with the
state superintendent of
insurance and they have, they
have
Rating agency that looks at the
lost cost and says here's how
much money of every premium
dollar it's taken to cover
claims. And based on that they
made recommendations on, on the
insurance premiums and we have
seen 7 years, at least 7 years
in a row of, of those lost costs
being lowered, in fact, you
know, over the last two years
we've seen double-digit
decreases in the last couple of
players. So the, the, the
premiums, those rates are, are
overseen by the superintendent
of insurance and
Adjust based on the market, so,
um, I just wanted to, to make
sure that that's understood just
to clarify if I can, did you
just say rights are being
lowered?
Uh, yeah, yes, the, the, the
base cost of if you look at the,
the lost costs across all of the
different job classifications.
Those have been lowered the last
7 years in a row. For any
particular field or industry or
worker classification based on
the loss experienced, those
rates may have gone up, but
overall the rates have been the
last cost multiplier has been
dropped 7 years in a row. Well,
that's useful. Thank you. That
is useful information and so
rates are
Based on the market and so
that's, that's useful. That's
part of this whole scope that we
need that information to
understand. I wish OSI was here
as well. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Chasey.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I may
have quick questions, but
I don't know. I hope they're not
long answers.
Um, I'll try to manage that
better. The, the bargain was
workers gave up their ability to
sue.
Because they were going to get
paid, right?
But
Sometimes they can be denied. Is
there a legend statutory or
regulatory definition of denial.
representative.
There, there is not.
That there was a brief answer.
Thank you.
Yeah,
so, um, Madam Chair, it seems to
me we do need to make some
serious changes here. I want to
introduce one of my classmates
who's the past president of the
state bar, Ben Sherman is here
and he's, he practices in this
field and I asked him if he
wanted to say anything, and I
don't know if you will.
I'm happy that.
I actually, I don't think that's
appropriate. Um, thank you, uh,
Representative. Nice to see you,
but
yeah.
All right. Um, any other
questions, Representative? OK.
um, Senator Cervantes.
Well, thank you. Uh, kind of an
interesting question, I hope.
New Mexico Mutual casualty
Company. I actually did work for
you all long, long time ago in
the past. Um,
you make some mutual casualty
company. It's an insurance
company that's a creature of
statute. Is that fair to say,
uh, creature statute created by
the Workers' Compensation Act,
we were created in the statute
and when we talked about the
current version of the act
generally being adopted in a
special session. I heard that
and then I got hives, um,
thinking that that that we could
have done anything in a special
session.
This big back then, but the,
the, the reality is the work,
New Mexico works Compensation
Act was modeled largely after
California model wasn't it? In
other words, we use California
cases for a lot of our uh
interpretations, case law
precedent. Is that fair to say
still?
Uh, none of you were around
then. None of you were born
then, probably,
I guess I've done, I've done
quite a bit of research on this,
but I think that it was modeled
from various systems. I know
they had experts from from
Florida, um, uh, Minnesota, and
so I think it's fair to say
certainly that it borrowed
principles from various states
and
Right now, as I understand it,
New Mexico Mutual is a policy
carrier that's available to
employers in the state and that
you all maintain your solvency
by the rates that you charge for
the coverage that that you offer
to employers. Is that a fair way
to say it? Yeah, yeah. Any, any
insurance uh company has to
ensure that they charge enough
premiums to remain solvent and
meet these obligations for
decades into the future. that's
sort of except for the patient
compensation fund in the state.
I don't mean to get off on a on
a on a different subject
altogether, but
Also a creature of statute, the
patient compensation fund right
and can't maintain solvency. In
fact, we put tens of millions of
dollars into that fund every
year. Do you all come to the
state to maintain solvency by
having the state put money into
New Mexico casualty company. I
think that that I'm aware of is
that the PCF was created as as a
fund within the state and Mexico
Mito was created and and
specifically made distinct and
apart from the state. So I think
at the time, frankly, there was
concern.
That we wouldn't make it and the
state didn't want to be liable
for all of our losses. Um, so
the statute is explicit that uh
um
It is not a state agency for any
purpose. Um, it's liabilities
are not liabilities of the
state. It does not receive any
state funding, uh, so it's, it
was created in statute, but
Same statute made it very much a
part and I don't want to get too
far off the topic, except I'm
trying to figure out whether you
all present a model for how we
should be handling patient
compensation fund take them
outside of the state agencies
and, and do the same. Uh, the,
on the, uh, attorney's fees I
already addressed that, Madam
Chair. I do think that it's a
fallacy to say, well,
it was number years ago and
inflation means it should be X
number today that again I said
this earlier, it assumes the
number was right in the first
place and that there's some
resemblance between the
the fees and what the
marketplace will bear, but I did
hear some confirmation of my
understanding. I don't think
there's anyone in Las Cruces
that's doing this, and please
keep again always in my 2nd
largest county, 2nd largest
city. So we got, we got a big
economy down there and the fact
that there's not a single lawyer
doing this kind of work I think
is reflected in part by the, by
the fees structure and I'll be,
I'll be thinking a lot about
that, um, subject maybe that
hasn't come up yet. I think one
of the issues that has been
touched on a little bit is the
idea of employee misconduct.
As a a limitation or preclusion
of recovery, right, certain
conduct of an employee bars a
recovery, just real quick, how
is, how is our new marijuana
laws, uh, working into the
workers' compensation area when
it comes to employee misconduct.
This is one of the big concerns.
Well, how, how do, how are we
doing that? Is it working?
silence in the room, it's the,
the act provides for payment or
reimbursement of marijuana
expenses, but if an employer
prohibits marijuana use, then uh
right now that's considered
misconduct.
so, so workers who remain
employed, um, basically can't
take advantage of using medical
cannabis if they want to keep
their jobs.
So, so as I understand it, an
employer, you're saying an
employer can prohibit marijuana
use by its employees.
Yes, that's that if that's the
policy, then that a worker using
medical cannabis would be
considered to have committed
misconduct, which would preclude
them from benefits then there
are some states that actually
have it in enacted laws that
protect workers basically
because THC metabolites stay in
a worker's system so long that a
worker could smoke medical
marijuana on a
Saturday and on a Monday test
positive where it can be
misconduct. And again, I'm
trying to get too far afield of
the fees and what we're talking
about, but it's an opportunity
with all of you here to figure
out how some of this is working
altogether. And I, and then, um,
on the subject of a death
benefit, what is the death
benefit today for a dirt death
within the course and scope.
Madam Chair, um, Senator
Cervantes said 700 weeks of
benefits.
Based on whatever that worker's
compensation rate is, is it the
average weekly wage in 700 weeks
it's AWW correct. It would be
two-thirds of his wage, so
workers compensation rate
two-thirds if he makes 300 bucks
a week, he'd get 200 bucks a
week for um 700 weeks, if he's
the maximum wage earner would be
$1000 a week. So if you had
somebody that
Making that much money would be
$7,000,000.
Over the course of how many over
the course of 7, it's paid out
over 700 weeks.
Trying to do the math. How many,
how many years is that?
How come on, come on guys.
1400. Look at this. Come on,
come on, come on, come on
14 years.
Yeah, somebody pull out the
account. OK, alright, I'm just
trying to figure that out. So
yeah, I'm I'm trying to get an
idea of where, where that
benefit is at right now too,
um, because that a lot of what I
do is wrongful death cases, of
course, and that that's a hard
to, yeah, that's a hard number
to for me to fathom as a benefit
to support a family when a, when
a wage earner loses their life
and and tragically that happens.
So thank you, Madam Chair, just
some, some education for me.
Appreciate it. Thank you very
much, Senator. Senator Maestas.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you presenters and thank you for
all the work of the task force
and your leadership,
Representative Hern, just, just
a quick point, Madam Chair, on
the, on the attorney's fees.
You know, the
It's not because lawyers, you
know, lawyers want more money,
it's cause it, it's, and maybe
they do, but if that's not the
reason, it's it's the policy
reason. It's creating a market.
It's creating a market so that
lawyers go into this profession
so that these folks have legal
representation when they
experience these, these losses.
So is it fair to say that like,
you know, there's a sole
practitioners, there's firms,
every now and then a lawyer will
do a
We'll do a will, we'll do a,
we'll do a divorce, we'll do a
criminal case, but workers'
comp, it's it is it, am I on the
right track to say it's very
difficult just to take one
worker's comp every couple of
years. In other words, Madam
Chair, as you know, the vast
majority if not all of the
workers' comp lawyers, that's
what they do. 51% or more of
their practices workers' comp,
am I getting that market?
Describing that market
correctly.
Yet this practice will chew you
up if you try and do one case.
You, you have to be, it has to
be the majority of your practice
if you have any chance of making
a living at it.
My really it really is, um, a
slow process and that's hard for
an attorney to making money a
new practitioner and and really
it's not like personal injury.
Some attorneys will think it's
personal injury. It is nothing
like personal injury. I do thank
you for that.
So it's not a question of
incentivizing the bar to take
workers' comp cases. It's
incentivizing lawyers to become
workers' comp professionals. And
that's why, that's why this this
conversation of the fees is
important, I think.
Once again, we're, you're just
capping, you're raising the cap
on a very small number of cases.
I think what we should consider
is simply reworking the formula
for the vast majority of those
cases so that the average of 100
cases equals more.
As opposed to raising the cap on
what I believe is maybe 2 or 3
other cases. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. Um, I have a few
questions.
Uh, it's, it was presented
during, I think the task force
report that only 10 number of
cases, what, 5 to 10% of the
cases reached the cap of um
right now of 22 500, but did the
committee consider whether or
not attorneys were self
You know, with holding work that
they felt was necessary to a
case because they knew they were
going to be bumping up against
the cap. Was that discussed at
all? Do you see where, where I'm
going with that? There's sort of
self denying or actually denying
their clients, frankly, work
potentially because they know
they have a cap that they're up
against.
I don't, uh, Madam Chair, um,
I don't know if that
specifically came up, um,
Senator Cervantes raised the
lack of attorneys in certain
areas that came up for sure. Um,
lawyers deciding not to take a
case.
Like Mr. Doyle, you know, gonna
lose his shirt on a case because
it's very complex and the cap is
in place, um, but I think it's
consistent with that that a
lawyer may not be as vigorous
with a case in representing a
client because they're concerned
about the fee cap, so they have
to pick and choose.
Path A or path B or which
deposition to take kind of
thing. I'm sure that's part of
it, but I don't know if that was
a specific discussion point. OK.
Yeah, OK. I mean, I think it's
something we should, we should
think about because there are
opportunity costs, you know,
you're working on one case or
you could be working on, you
know, a wrongful death case that
doesn't have a cap, so that's
something to be thinking about
as well. You want those cases to
be worked out and you know, I'll
just share her perspective. I
was an employer's lawyer. So
what did I have access to and
what did my insurance company
have access to, although I think
we were self-insured. All the
witnesses. So we're talking
about a discovery cap.
I'm not surprised the employer
lawyers or the insurance company
lawyers didn't care about a cap
on Discovery because they have
access to probably a very large
number of the witnesses. They
don't need to worry about a
deposition. They just call up,
uh, the employee and say we need
you to come in. We've got, um,
our workers' comp lawyers coming
in and you need to talk to them
about the case. So, you know, I
think um just in terms of
perspective, um, the employer
apparently the employer's
lawyers, meaning the insurance
company.
Laws also didn't think the cap
should be increased. Why is
that? Probably because they can
get a lot done off, you know,
they have in-house counsel, they
have HR people who go and get
the documents for them. They
don't need as much support when
you're a plans lawyer. You rely
on everything that the employer
is willing to give you.
And if there's a fight about it,
you have to fight about it. The
employer has a lot of resources,
um, to be able to take care of
that without incurring the, you
know, monies that go up against
the cap. So I just want to share
that because I was an employer's
lawyer. I unders, you know, I
had a lot of access to things
that these guys would not have
access to.
Um, so just sharing that
perspective, um, the fees that
we pay, you know, that like, um,
on your
Pace tub, you'd see the $2 or
whatever and then the employer
pays to a little bit more. That
pays for the administration, is
that right? Did I get that
right? OK, it doesn't play for
the insurance or anything along
those lines. OK.
Other thing, um, in terms of the
establishment of a New Mexico
mutual, there was some seed
money for that, wasn't there?
Well, how much was how much seed
money did the state put in?
There was $10 million that was
appropriated for the creation of
Messing Mutual and then it was
repaid I believe in 2 or 3
years. OK, so it was repaid.
Good to know. OK, that's a
helpful analogy for some other
things we might be thinking
about in terms of helping
workers in the state. Um,
OK, I think, um,
I have a question about getting
access to doctors. Are there
fixed fees for doctors when they
do an evaluation and and that
kind of.
For the worker and the employer
evaluations. How's that?
Madam Chair, there is a fee
schedule um.
We publish it every year and um
you know, it's, it's on a
procedure code basis, so doctors
are paid according to our fee
schedule for workers' comp cases
is that fee adequate to get
doctors willing to participate
in workers' comp evaluations.
I, I have a personal opinion on
that, Madam Chair. Um, I mean,
11 of the studies that maybe we
should do, um, is, is getting
greater, greater doctors to
treat workers' comp patients in,
in New Mexico, um, what, what
are the barriers that are
occurring? I is it our fee
schedule for example? Is it the
deposition costs, um, lack of
electronic billing, um,
because access to care, access
to medical care.
is of interest to both sides,
uh, really, so,
um, I'm not a doctor, but it
could be a dismotivation for a
doctor to take a comp case
because the fee schedule, but I,
I think our fee schedule is
pretty competitive relative to
other states and Medicare.
Oh, I'm sorry, Mr. Ritchie, did
you also evaluated every year um
with the panel of providers and
various stakeholders, so it's
adjusted every year. I would
hate to think that workers who
are worked who are injured at
work are having trouble getting
high quality care because
doctors aren't getting paid
adequately. That would be not a
good thing as well, because
obviously we want our workers to
be taken care of to maximum
extent, um.
One other thing that I had on my
mind.
But suddenly popped out of it.
Um.
Sorry, I just, I just, it just
like left me when I started
talking, so I will let you, um,
anyone else with questions or
comments that, yes, yes, sir.
Yes, Mr. of course, that's all
right. That's OK I think part of
the problem is what we raise his
doctors just aren't trained and
they're uncomfortable doing
engaging in the system. There's
no training, there's no
recruitment of doctors really to
understand the system and how to
get paid.
And I think that's a problem. We
have doctors that would be
willing to talk to the
legislature about that. OK, I
may offline my concern about I
did see one of your
recommendations as training
doctors. Well,
That means they're gonna want to
get, you know, that's time that
they could be spent treating,
you know, they're gonna say,
well, how is it to my advantage
to get trained as a doctor on
the workers' comp Act when I
could be treating patients or,
you know, you know, learning a
new technique of laser surgery
or something, you know, there
are trade-offs when you suggest
somebody go to training and
believe me, I work for a big
company where I was always being
sent to training and it was
incredibly annoying so um that's
there's a down, you know, you
can be over.
in that kind of stuff, um, the
thing I was, I, a point I wanted
to make is when a claim is
denied in workers' comp. Does
that disadvantage an employee to
get covered by the regular
medical um insurance because I'm
sure all of you when you go to
your doctor or you fill out some
form, you say, is this a result
of a job in uh job injury. And
if you put yes on that and
obviously you have to be
truthful. You are in trouble. I
mean, if you're de
I think because there's going to
be this debate between the
insurance companies about who's
responsible. Do you see that
happening when a worker's comp
claim is denied by a worker's
comp insurance company.
Madam Chair, I, I don't see that
in my practice. What I see in my
practice is workers whose claims
are denied who had insurance
through their employer lose that
insurance and then they go to
Medicaid. That's all they don't
have another unless their spouse
has insurance, they don't have
an option for other insurance
maybe when they return to work
another job I haven't seen
enough of my clients who come to
me and said, uh, I can't get
insurance again, but what we see
is they lose their
insurance through work because
they no longer employed by the
employer
in those situations where
they're not, where they're
denied the claim and they can't
return to work. Oh, OK, yeah,
and they can't afford the cobra
uh costs.
All right.
Did you have a comment, Mr.
Ritchie? I don't want to cut you
off on that question, you know
it goes back a little bit to, to
all the various reasons why a
claim might be denied, but you
know, I think it's conceivable
that could happen if they, if
they, uh, the claim is denied
because it didn't happen at
work, for example, and they
don't come back to work and so
yeah, I think there's
circumstances where that could
happen but not certainly not in
every case, and it depends on
why it's denied not in every
case, but it would worry me if,
if you're denied by workers or
workers' comp insurance and then
you go to
Your regular insurance and
they're going to say, was this a
job in curd industry? You're
going to have to say yes,
because you just put in a claim
for a job incurred injury, that
would be fraudulent then to go
to your regular insurance
company, you say, uh, no, you
know, you see where I'm going
with this. That's a big
responsibility to deny a claim.
That's what I'm, I'm,
I'm getting at, and I think in
that situation what they would
need to do is just provide
evidence that the claim was
denied by the work comp and
carrier, um, uh, we, we, we
agree that it's
A big responsibility to deny
claim. We don't do that without
an explanation. We don't do that
with manager, you know, without
a manager signing off, so we
realized that that's a
significant event and and it's
an unusual event for us.
Um,
uh, yes, Mr. Doyle, Madam Chair,
maybe I misunderstood your
question at first, but I, we do
see that. So we do see where a
worker, the insurer denies and
the word comp case, and we
advise our clients, you need to
contact your own insurance care
and they're always worried or
they'll always ask us, well, can
they deny and and they can, but
under the Affordable Care Act.
It shouldn't be denied, but it
still is OK that's interesting.
OK. Anyone else, um.
With questions, um, I, I just
say to that, Madam Chair, um,
when it is a workman's a
workman's comp incident in the
workplace that, you know.
That information has to get to
that employee that they have to
go through this, uh, through the
workman's comp um process and
insurance process, which is a
bit foreign to people. So it's
it's a bit of education. It's a
bit of, it's a lot of follow
through and
It used to be we would really
make sure that they followed
through because if then they
wanted to go to their
independent insurance. Isn't
there a clause that said if
they, if they do do that, then
they can be denied just for
clarification, Madam Chair. So,
so, um, I, I can't speak for
the, the health insurance
company, uh, in my experience,
they've covered that and then
and then they'll seek
reimbursement from the Worldcom
carrier. We do receive requests
for reimbursement from the
personal health insurance
companies frequently.
And if it's a covered work con
claim, then we pay that. Oh, OK.
All right, one last question,
does the death benefit differ if
there's no like surviving
dependent or is it, it doesn't
matter?
Yes.
Oh, it does. So if there's no
spouse or
or minor child no dependence,
then the benefits very limited.
Oh, so it doesn't go to the
estate like I don't know, um,
wrongful death bent, but I
imagine there's an estate that
gets the big chunk of change
that.
Senator Cervantes is known for.
OK, all right, thank you. Um,
any, any,
uh, I'm being, I am
complimentary. That is a
compliment to your legal skills
and reputation.
um.
I anything else, uh, I think
we're going to terminate this
panel, but super um, at least I
know, well, I didn't mean it
like that. Terminate the
discussion.
Of, of all of but very
appreciative of all your
willingness to participate. I
found the conversation pretty
interesting, so thank you very
much, Madam Chair, I would just
like to offer that in the
audience for the, for the panel
in the, I mean for the committee
in the future. Gerald Kennedy,
would you please stand.
Um,
quite a bit of history that he's
willing to share with the
committee when you need it. OK,
very good. Thank you,
Representative.
All right.
My favorite part
This is the best part according
to my vice chair.
Well, I think it was an item you
added to our agenda, so we.
Um, here we are, we are at a
committee discussion.
Um,
Thank you, thank you, everybody.
Let's, um,
If people are leaving, could we
take it out into the hallway, it
would be helpful.
So we can.
Appreciate
Yeah.
OK.
Thank you.
Committee discussion. So this is
an opportunity to really discuss
anything we talked about today
or in the future, um.
Anyone or a Senator Cervantes.
Madam Chair,
I think we've all um folks in
the in the audience, if you need
to have a conversation, could
we, could you go outside,
Senator
Senator Maestas, Senator Maestas
I think we
I, I, I asked for a little bit
of order because um
I think most of us have read in
the in the press in the last few
days in the last few weeks, but
a tragic death in Santa Fe.
An 83 year old man who'd come to
New Mexico had given him a good
life and was very active in the
community and giving a lot of
his time and effort. He went
into the Best Buy store in Santa
Fe, something that I do all the
time. I imagine most of you all
do all the time. Middle of the
day, um, shot and killed. Um,
they're, they're in the, in the
parking lot.
A few, few days before that in
Santa Fe also a young person
working in Sonic driving.
Shot and killed somebody working
there too.
There's a lot of misinformation
that is going on about these
crimes and, and we're fortunate
to have Brandon, who's worked
with us, Brandon Cummings, you
know, and, and Lorraine and I
and Senator Worth and others
have been really trying to,
whenever we see these tragedies,
we will try to turn them into
something to the extent we can
constructive and so I want to
help the committee disabuse some
of the public information that's
out there, so you understand
really what happened um in, in
the case of the at least the
person who's accused and I'll
recognize there's a
Civil liberty right to a
presumption of innocence, but,
but the individual who's accused
of the crime, first of all, I
think it's important to
recognize the good work of the
Santa Fe Police Department, the
good work of the Albuquerque
Police Department who work with
them in the good work of Las
Cruces Police Department who
very quickly apprehended this
individual and without greater
tragedy, so I think it's
important to do so, but we we
should know a few facts. The
individual who's accused of the
crime, came to New Mexico from
California. He was on the run.
He had absconded from the
State of California for a
carjacking offense. Now that's
important because the death at
the Best Buy was a carjacking,
the one the arrest in Las Cruces
of mercifully did not result in
any injuries or death, but that
was also a carjacking that led
to that arrest in Las Cruces. Is
this individual was running to
New Mexico from a carjacking. He
came into New Mexico in a course
of about 2 weeks, and Brandon's
back there he'll fill in the
details about getting this
wrong, but in the course we've
been doing this every time we
see one of these tragic, uh,
murders and deaths, we
In in the Senate Judiciary
Committee, and I know the House
is doing the same. We dive in
deeply into the crime, into the
history of the accused and, and
we try to figure out what could
we have done differently? What
could we, what, what did we
miss? It goes back to my
watching the game films, right?
What do, what do we miss here?
Uh, this individual who's
accused came here on the run
from California, he in a span of
about 2 weeks in 2018, committed
six robberies.
Um, he stole a vehicle. He was
charged with methamphetamine. He
was charged and jailed in
Albuquerque while in the jail in
Albuquerque in December, he was
discovered to have a deadly
weapon in in prison of shank,
um, and, um, and was charged
with all of these crimes, the
shank, the deadly weapon, the
methamphetamine, the car
robbery, and the 6 robberies,
all that occurred really in a
very brief period of time in
Albuquerque.
The charges that we're facing
this individual under our
existing law total 41 years.
And I, and I take the moment to
do that because the media, the
press, and even the police chief
in Santa Fe and chief police in
my home community of Las Cruces.
The suggestion that they're
putting out in the public is
that the legislature is the
cause of the problem.
That are inadequate sentencing
that we're too soft on crime,
but we don't have more years in
our sentencing. This individual
was looking at 41 years on these
crimes, for all of them.
They were pled down.
They were played down to 10
years.
The plea was something
negotiated with the district
attorney here in Berlio County
at the time, district a
different district attorney than
the present one.
Um, that plea was agreed upon by
the judge, and that individual
who was looking at 41 years for
all of these crimes, uh,
excepting was given a sentence
of 10 years.
Now under our our existing laws,
so you have a little bit of
understanding too, and again I'm
not a criminal lawyer, that's
why I always look to Brandon and
make sure that I'm good and
represent Ree you are so you can
help me if I get this right too,
but, but under our laws in New
Mexico, an individual who's
sentenced for a criminal conduct
gets a one for one, we call it
meritorious deduction. You all
have heard the term use it's um
a good time. We call it good
time, right? And you do a day,
you get a day credit. Now that's
true for some crimes but not
true for others. In the case of
a violent crime, you do not get
the one for one.
unmeritorious deduction or the
good time, you are required to
serve as my understanding, 85%
of your sentence, and I'm
looking to represent Reben,
she's nodding her head for those
of you that they can't see it.
So I'm getting this right. You
got to give me credit for a
civil lawyer getting some of
this right. So, so if you're, if
a judge in this case and the
judge here did not do so, the
judge had determined these
crimes to be violent crimes,
this individual would have had
to serve 85% of his sentence,
but he, but he, the judge did
not determine these to be
violent crimes. The judge
determined.
To be eligible for the
meritorious one day for one day
deduction. So when he was
sentenced in 2019, he pled down
to 10 years with the district
attorney's blessing and the
judge's blessing and got 10
years and then he served his 5
and that's why he was released.
So when you hear the the police
and others saying this
individual should not have been
on the street.
Don't let please and for those
of you that are listening at
home in the public and the
press, please don't buy into the
notion that the legislature is
responsible for this because we
don't have a great enough
sentencing.
Because you're not only fooling
yourselves because you are
fooling yourselves, you're
fooling the public, and you're,
you're not dealing with the
problem. When you, when you say
we need to have a special
session, we need to have more
sentencing, we need to have more
time on these laws. You're
you're you're shifting the
responsibility from where it
really belongs and where we can
really solve these problems and
do some good to saying let's
just pass more laws, let's add
some more years to the to the
deal and we can add all the
years to those 41, we could have
made those 41 6.
or whatever it may be, but let's
be honest with each other. And
let's be honest with the public,
and let's ask the police and the
judges and everyone else to be
honest with themselves too. The
solution to this is not
enhancing more and more years on
these sentences.
We're kidding ourselves.
And, and the best example that I
like to give of late when I
speak to this subject is the
following for years and years,
New Mexico has had some of the
worst crime statistics on DWI in
the country, if not the worst,
and whenever we hear that, we
always hear you in the
legislature are too soft. I'm
going to have my own town hall
next week in Las Cruces, and
that's what I'm going to hear.
I'm gonna hear a room full of
people saying, you guys in the
legislature are too soft, and
they say that because that's
what the mayor has told them.
That's what the chief of police
has told him. That's what the
mayor of Santa Fe has told
people, and we need to push
back. We've got
To push back because when we see
those DWI statistics, people
say, you guys in the legislature
are too soft on DWIs.
And we can, we can be pushed to
increase those sentences and
those penalties up and up and
up. But what good does it do
when the cops can be paid off in
Albuquerque to dismiss hundreds
of those.
What good does it do for us to
increase the sentences when the
people that are responsible for
enforcing the laws.
are susceptible to something
less.
Now,
I began by commanding the law
enforcement of our of our
respect because I look at video
and I look at body cams. I
passed that law. I look at cops
and they do an incredible job.
I, I look at the respect they
show people. I look at the, the
temperament that they display,
they do a great job and and I I
don't want to ever paint them
with a broad brush, but, but to
say that it's us that we're not,
that we're not imposing harsh
enough laws really is not true
to the public and and until we
get through with the public and
true with ourselves, we're never
going to solve these problems.
So Madam Chair, I wanted you to
understand this background, and
I'll just, and I'll just end on
this one little tidbit because
it will boggle your mind.
This individual who's accused of
the crime at Best Buy.
was subject as you would expect,
is always the case subject to
what we used to call the Arnold
tool. You may remember in the
last couple of years, Senator
Stewart and I and others on the
Senate Judiciary Committee have
had hours of hearings on the
Arnold Tool and the, and from my
perspective, and I think our
consensus, the dubious use of
the Arnold tool.
So get this, this individual who
ran from California, committed 6
robberies, had a shank in jail,
cut off his GPS monitor,
methamphetamine, stolen car,
carjacking in Santa Fe kills a
man, comes to Las Cruces, tries
to carjack again. They ran an
Arnold Tool assessment on him in
the last couple of days.
You want to guess what the
Arnold Tool suggested?
That he be released.
So, yes, so, and we and we will,
we will be happy to present that
and and give Brandon has a copy
of it. You're looking at him out
in the audience, we'll show it
to you. The, the pre-trial
assessment for this individual
in Buro County is that he be
released.
What is damn right.
So the problem here, folks, is
not us.
And our sentencing and our laws.
So I hope I gave you something
to think about and talk about.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you very much, Senator Senator
Stewart.
So miniature, I would like to
ask Senator Cervantes a
question.
Uh oh.
OK, can I do that? Shoot.
Uh, I guess.
I don't understand where the
plea deal comes from.
No, it is, if with all his
crimes if he could have been
sentenced to 41 years. Why?
Why was he offered a plea deal.
To for 10 years. I don't quite
understand who's in charge of
that? Is it just always the
DA's? I mean,
Did he, why would we do that?
Why would we offer someone a
plea deal at a quarter of what
the.
years he could serve.
So, Madam Chair, I'm gonna ask
Brandon and my representative
colleagues over here to just
kind of give us our attention
for a little bit more. We'll be
happy to share this with you in
a little bit, um,
everything I've told you,
I'm prepared to document and
back up.
You know me, I'm not gonna, I'm
not gonna tell you something is
that it's not.
So Brandon will stick around as
long as we need to. We'll show
you the, the pre-trial
assessment. Senator Stewart, to
your question, why was this
done? I do not want to be unfair
to the district attorney and the
assistant district attorney at
the time. I don't want to be
unfair to Judge Weeks or her
decisions or former DA Torres. I
wasn't there. I don't know. They
may have had problems with
witnesses. They may have had
problems with evidence, they may
have any number of different
things. I'll tell you, I rely a
lot on Brandon. He's an
incredible resource to me in my
committee. Um, he's got
Experience in the area, he told
me when you when you when you
charge an inmate with a deadly
weapon, a shank in prison. It's
a slam dunk case for a
prosecutor. It's pretty hard to
with all the security and the
cameras and everything else to
argue that I don't know where
this came from when they find
you with a shank in your jail
cell. So I don't know, I've
never been a prosecutor. I, I
don't know why the district
attorneys felt that they felt
they couldn't prosecute all
these crimes or that they needed
to plead it down. I don't know.
I don't know why the district
attorney would have accepted the
plea for less. I don't know why
the judge would have accepted.
The judge, my understanding, has
the discretion to not accept the
plea.
But I think that one of the ways
that we can begin to change the
crime problem is to call things
the way they are, and you all
have seen probably more of this
from me than you want to in the
last couple of years, but I'm,
I'm at the end of my rope and
I'm not gonna, I'm not gonna
pull punches.
And so when we're accused by
anybody, mayors, police
department are being solved on
crime as a legislature. In this
case, the governor's proposal
and the and the former district
attorney's proposal for pretrial
detention would not be one bit
of difference. Not one of the
laws we looked at in the special
session would have made one bit
of difference.
So, uh, Senator Stewart, I know
that doesn't answer your
question. I wasn't there. I want
to respect the work those people
did. Perhaps they'll have a
reason that they did it. I hope
they do, but I think we need to
ask ourselves why the question
you're asking, why? Because
until we start asking that and
start asking the people who
should be asked the questions,
then we're going to continue to
have the simplistic solution
which is the legislature just
needs to have a special session
and increase more and more
penalties. And Senator Stewart,
you remember we had 8 years of
that under the last governor.
Uh, we, we didn't do it because
we knew better and we shouldn't
begin to start thinking that
it's a simple solution today.
It's not.
Well, chair, and sit Cervantes,
I appreciate you bringing this
up because I struggled to answer
these questions from my
constituents and trying to
explain to people plea
bargaining when I barely can
understand it myself. The fact
that you mention lack of
evidence or witness issues or
corroboration evidence, all of
that, um, I mean, we can't be
that bad. It seems like after
yes.
after today, it's like we're
just really bad at this.
Bad at this, we've got all the
laws on the books. We continue
to work on this. We get so much
money and yet we're still so bad
at it, so, you know, until the
fingers are pointing in the
right directions, uh, we're not
going to solve this cause it's
not our fault,
and I, I was called by our mayor
in the middle of this meeting to
say, you know, why didn't you do
anything in this
session
I had to start explaining.
That's why I was so loud
outside. I had to have uh Miss
Coop tell me you're a really
loud
explaining why those bills
wouldn't work. So I am very
frustrated by the lack of
understanding of this issue at
the real level that it's at. So
thank you for bringing this up
and thank you and I'll just
invite all of you to tune in on
the 19th. I, I will very bluntly
in Canada.
as I have with you, speak to the
public in Las Cruces and tell
them exactly why we didn't hear
every one of those bills, and
I'll just tell you, um, I met
with DPS after their
presentation this morning.
Um, they confirmed everything I
said about the data remember we
had the data sharing
presentation this morning, a
bill that's already on the law
and they tried to do it again,
and we then tried to tie their
funding to compliance, and the
governor vetoed it without a
message. All of that's accurate,
and I confirmed it with DPS and
I'll confirm something else.
They said that when we talked
about retention mons this
morning.
What I've learned is that APD
did not even apply for retention
moneys in the first year. Beroe
County Sheriff's Office did not
even apply for retention monies
in the first year was available.
In the 2nd year that it was
available, Albuquerque failed to
apply or they applied in their
application was was defective
and was not accepted. Burnleyo
County's application, the second
year was defective. They were
able to correct it and get some
of the funding. This is to
retain cops. So we hear, oh, we
can't get cops, we can't hire
cops. We make the money of
Albuquerque didn't even apply
for it.
I didn't even try. Um, and so
now in the 3rd year they're
applying for it. We've got to
start talking about the truth.
Thank you.
Little fed up. Thank you,
Senator. Senator Stewart,
anything else? Did you have
something? I, um, in response to
Senator Stewart's question about
or comment about the mayor
asking her why, I don't know why
I'd be calling here today, but,
um, you might, um, ask him to
read the report we just got July
15, 2024. update on crime in New
Mexico and Bernalio County, he
wanted to send his own report.
Oh, OK. Well, we have an
independent
report and I guess we have his
potentially his report, but you
know, the kinds of things we saw
is, um, the number of police
officers in, um, Albuquerque's
down from a high of 1000 now to
about 850 or so, um, how can he
explain that to his
constituents? How can people
here in Albuquerque accept that
if there is a crime issue, and I
believe there is a serious crime
issue in Albuquerque, that's
This report certainly reflects
that.
Why is that OK? Why is there not
accountability at the executive
in Albuquerque. Why? Why isn't
Bernalio County being held to a
higher standard than apparently
their constituents, and I think
it's a deflection. It's
deflecting, um, and it's not
accepting responsibility for
what I think, um, uh, city
managers and executives are,
what is it? Public safety is the
first respons.
of
a municipality, right? That's
right. That's what it is, and
they're failing. And instead of
accepting that and working to
improve on it, all we hear about
is, well, if we just got this
one more law. How how many laws
do we need to enforce against
criminals? We have a lot of
criminal laws on the books. What
we're seeing is they're not
being enforced and reported
crimes far exceed arrests and
convictions. That's on page 14.
And the data is here that rests
there's the accountability
mechanism which is arrest and
conviction is not being fully
utilized or or utilized
correctly. That is what the core
problem is with the crime and
Alba in the Albuquerque area and
perhaps in other communities
it's not just Albuquerque, but
the main driver of our
statistics in this state are
being is Albuquerque, and we're
seeing here in this report a lot
of discouraging information
about how the laws that the
abundant number of laws that we
have are not being adequately
utilized by the people
responsible for public safety
within their community. The
mayor, the police chief, the
county commission, and the
that those are those primarily
responsible for enforcing the
laws and deterring crime, and
we're seeing in this report that
that is not happening and it's
based on numbers that we're
getting from the courts and
other places, so I mean this is
just um a similar comments to
what, um, the vice chair was
saying.
Yes, we want to help and yes, we
have helped. How have we done
that with almost $500,000. Well,
actually I think the number was
80,000 if you count behavioral
health money as well. That is
how we are helping and what I
just heard the vice chair say is
for the 1st 2 years of
availability of recruitment. It
wasn't being utilized by the
local government that buy down
here. So you know we can only do
so much, but we can't police the
streets.
That's responsibility, the
police and the state police, and
we can't file the applications
for additional monies for them.
That is the responsibility of
the executive branch and those
charged with enforcing the law.
So I think we need to start
understanding that, happy to
help some more, but really the
place is who is responsible law
enforcement and the chief
executives in these, in these
communities. So, um, I don't
know if anyone else wants.
To weigh in, but um
happy to, yeah,
sure,
again, thank you and thank you
for the report as um.
Representative in Santa Fe and
having
this incident happened in my own
hometown along with other
Uh
Crimes when you weren't here and
I said I witnessed and had to
take somebody who is getting
beaten, brutally beaten up to
the emergency room.
Right in front of me. I think
that
We do have to start telling the
truth of of where what we've
done.
Where we are right now and how
we move forward and how we all
work together because there's
absolute disconnect with
misinformation and if we're
going to continue along those
lines, I don't know what how
that's going to inhibit us from
working together for this next
60 day session, and I, I just
hate to see
CS at at ends with each other
because we all have the same
goals. We all are working to
achieve this.
same outcomes, and that's for
our constituents to be and live
in safe communities, and we're
not seeing that. I don't think
we are really coming together
holistically to to meet each
other, um.
In the same place, uh, Madam
Chair, I think I've told you
there was a conference here for
local government with our
executive.
And I was the only legislator
there, and they were talking
about our homeless issues and
the message was for the local
governments to go back to their
legislators and tell them that
we needed, you know, we needed
to do certain things and to have
a special sessions, those sorts
of things. So there is, there is
miscommunication or there's not
efforts for us to be
communicating fully and I want
that to be, I want to state that
and I want that to be remedied
because it's upon all of us as
elected officials whether local
government.
State government, even in our
federal government to come
together to
To bring um
Safety and to
Confront these huge issues,
these 21st century issues with
21st century remedies and we're
not going to do that if we're
going to keep, if we're going to
be at each other and I just want
to say that, thank you. Oh,
thank you. Anyone else before we
go to public comment? Yes, Mr.
Hall, Representative Hall.
Madam Cham new and I'm generally
quiet, but I served almost 34
years in law enforcement, both
federally and locally.
My son is a police officer in
Farmington, um,
A lot of friends are on the wall
in Santa Fe and Washington.
We have to support our officers.
As a legislative body.
We represent our constituents. I
hear all the
I'm going to try to be polite
here.
Concern for people who have all
these issues.
Las Cruces police officer was
stabbed to death.
That video was made available
under our IR laws.
If you ever want to watch
something that will disgust you
and turn your stomach. Listen to
the man die.
We have to stand behind our
officers and our legislative
efforts.
I've held them in my arms while
they've died.
And it angers me when everyone
just passes the buck.
So if we can genuinely as a
legislative body.
Come together.
Um, instead of, well, that's so
awful what the police does.
Strap a gun and badge on.
The days of saying, you know
what,
they shouldn't be doing that. Go
find another job. We can't get
people to apply.
Even the FBI when I joined the
FBI, 100,000 people applied for
750 jobs.
Less than 10,000 apply annually.
Sheriff's departments, police
departments, they used to be
lined up to get the job.
Why now?
We have my son's academy class
graduated the first weekend of
June.
19 young people.
I believe 9 have quit.
Either from being spat on,
Spouse is saying this is too
dangerous.
I even told my own son, why are
you doing this? Well, it was a
great job. You did it. You know,
Dad, it's a different, it's
different, right? It's always
different for dad.
And I said, well,
Why did you do it? Because of
the incentive pay.
He was, well, I don't get that
till I finish my 1st 2 or 3
years.
He did it because he wants to do
it.
A lot of our officers do it
because they want to do it. The
incentive money is wonderful.
I think it's a cool thing, but
how do we incentivize someone to
come out and do it? And I
listened to all the best of
intentions.
And no chief should blame
legislators. The legislators
should not blame the cops.
Somewhere, somewhere in between,
they've fallen through. We have,
we don't need, trust me, we
don't need more laws. I talked
to my son every day he gets off
shift.
I said, what'd you do? I made 2
arrests, 6.5 hours of paperwork.
You take an officer off the road
on a ten-hour shift. He's made
one arrest.
So if we can avoid more laws,
It all costs or simplify our
laws.
Why not? That's where we're
going to get these people to
apply.
Being a poor APD they've been
under a Department of Justice
decree for how long?
I, I don't even know. It seems
like forever.
And
Probably some of that may have
been justified. I don't know all
of it, but I can tell you from
department to department.
I don't know how we do it. We
have little tiny departments in
this state who are so poor if we
did take their funding because
they didn't report their
criminal stuff. How are they
going to continue to operate?
Little tiny departments.
On the New Mexico Academy, I sat
on their academy board meeting
they had just a couple of months
ago. The sheriff from the county
out on the
Oh, what's that town just before
you go to Texas on I-40.
Um,
Quay County. The sheriff had
just been shot 2 weeks before.
His best stopped the bullet.
He's one of 7 deputies, and he
responds.
He's not blessed like some of
our bigger agencies, so I get a
little frustrated because
I totally agree it's not a
legislator's fault.
And some of our elected
officials who sit in these
communities, they're hard as
heck on their police officers,
then they turn around and say,
well, they're not doing their
job.
Then they blame us.
And the cops, all they see is
it's too hard. They go to the
prosecutor and the prosecutor
says,
This will be a tough case. Maybe
we can just plead this out. Or
there's, there's not enough
evidence. So goes to the court
record, and the court record
shows not enough evidence. The
officer didn't do anything
wrong.
They're under the gun. It is a
nonstop situation in our state.
And I don't know how we fix it.
But it's got to start here.
We're all called to do this for
different reasons.
When we look at our law
enforcement.
They step up every day for
30 bucks an hour?
Maybe in some agencies, some
agencies last.
To go out and
be spat on.
And the only part you see from
their body cam is when they get
upset and cuss back.
I'm frustrated just as you all
are, but having done the job,
Having a
Family member who does the job
and literally had people die in
my arms who did the job.
It's unacceptable. The blame
game's got to stop, but it's got
to stop being the pissing, but
pardon me, the back and forth
negativity.
We should take the high road.
We're articulate, uh, most of
y'all, very articulate, very
intelligent.
We can make the point, and I
know Senator Cervantes well. The
chief in Las Cruces is a great
guy.
I know him personally.
But he's getting heat from the
mayor.
How do we stop it all just like
we got heat from
The executive branch.
I, I'm probably not going
anywhere with a point, but I've
just sat here today and, and you
just get, you know, I look at
qualified immunity in the
pretrial and it goes, someone
goes and kills somebody, and now
we're concerned. It's also an
election year.
I hope to hell no one in here is
doing this because it's a
freaking election year.
If they are,
Shame on you.
Thank you
Thank you, Representative. Any,
anyone else, um, Representative
Barrego.
Thank you, Representative Hall.
So on both sides now, um, city
council, and I, I, I mentioned
earlier and I want it to be on
the record also that city
council also is responsible, um,
we have two branches of
government at the local level.
Yeah we got the mayors and the
city council.
At the um, you know, the state
level, we have the executive
branch and the legislative and
part of the, the reason we have
that in public policy is to
ensure that we hold each other
sort of accountable.
You know, and that people are
being responsible. When I heard
you, Madam Chair, say that.
The city of Albuquerque did not,
um, apply for those retention
funds.
I went to Washington.
Like in 2018, I think it was.
Because of those grants to
ensure that I lobbied for those
grants that those grants are
coming to the city of
Albuquerque. So it really pains
me to hear you say that we're
not even applying for those.
That money that is so important
for our retention of officers
when during COVID, we worked so
hard to ensure that the funding
was there to increase our police
force.
So I, you know, and I, I agree
with Representative Hall. I
think, you know, there are
people here.
Republican, Democrat, whatever
we care about our communities,
and we see what's happening
around us, and we care about our
state and
We need to, I don't know, I
don't know what the answer is. I
don't, I mean, it's, it's, it's
difficult, but I think what we
were talking about today.
You know, when I think about
good public policy, I think
about efficiency. I think about
effectiveness, how effective
programs are if they're working
if we should be putting more
money toward those programs or
not?
I mean, and.
You know, we can't just keep
throwing money at a problem.
I mean, if the laws are there,
then.
What's um rep Senator Cervantes
said is, maybe we just need to
make some statements and public
statements about these things
because I just went to a a
neighborhood meeting the other
night.
My first neighborhood meeting
since the special session and
people were like, why didn't you
guys pass these bills?
These bills were like.
Our constituents, the people out
there are looking for answers
too.
And they're looking at us
saying, why aren't you guys
doing this? And I had to explain
to them. I mean, it was kind of
like a test case for me because
I was like I had, I was on the
line, you know, and I had to
explain to him that those bills
had not been vetted properly.
Those bills came to a sort of 2
months before our special
session.
they those bills, you know, we
were.
We had to, and we have to do our
due diligence to ensure that the
any laws that we are passing.
You know,
If there's something already on
the book.
That's not being enforced, then
we need to bring that to light
and, and, you know, it, it's
really disturbing to me. I, I, I
feel very disturbed tonight that
APD did not apply for those, um,
for that money.
That will help us keep our
police officers and remember
guys,
Our police officers, if you
think about it, they're just
employees of the of the city or
the state working for their
para, going home every night to
their families, same as all of
us. I mean, they're trying to
make a living.
And you know their job, yes,
it's more hazardous, but that
does not mean that Democrats,
first of all, I have to say this
because it's bothered me for a
long time. Democrats do not
support our police force.
I think there's some vocal
people out there that might not,
but I think in general we all
live together, we support, you
know, those hazardous duty jobs.
I'm sorry, I'm, I'm.
A little upset, but thank you
for that. Thank you,
Representative. Um, it's time
for us to get to public comment,
um, so I see that we have some,
do we have any electronic public
comment? Oh,
that's um electro OK.
Um, net.
Uh
Yeah, Nat Dean.
Is on Zoom
Is that right?
Nat, can you um unmute yourself
if you're in the sky somewhere
or something. Thank you, Madam
Chair, uh, is very low now. It's
your is it your volume or our
volume?
Can you turn up your volume on
your end?
Is up as far as it goes.
Hm
Madam
The volume elevated now.
Test.
That's good, that's good, I
think. Thank you, Madam Chair,
Mr. Vice Chair, thank you for
the opportunity today to give
public comment. Um, I'll go
fast. As an advocate in health
care and disability, many folks
are discouraged from filing
workman's comp claims, both by
large employers and also small
employers and 501c3s that can
tend to be a barrier. Domestic
violence cases are
heartbreaking, including
Uh, the fear for someone who is
a victim, uh, to proceed with
the courts, we are often told,
and I'm saying we, because I've
lived through this, we're often
bullied and excuse me,
experience bullying type of
tactics when we want to bring
forward motions in the court
where an order of protection or
an order of no contact are
violated. We're told that it's
too small, that it's not, it's
very minor, it's not large
enough. Those many, many small
infractions make up.
A large scenario and having had
a family member in law
enforcement, I am very, very
well aware he's retired now, but
very well aware that the DV
cases and those calls can be
some of the most deadly. Um, we
do not want to feel that we are
a bother.
I knew uh Gordon and Judy
Wilson. Um, Judy is Gordon
Wilson's wife. There will be a
memorial at the First
Presbyterian Church on Grant
Street in Santa Fe at 11 a.m. on
Wednesday. Um, we need to just
observe that the grief and loss
is huge, but I do understand
something very, very well.
I learned this from a sponsor,
sponsor of a bill that was
passed.
Through Senator Rodriguez.
She said to me, I don't enforce
the laws. I sponsor the bills,
the enforcement is an entirely
different matter, and that is
why, thank you, Madam Chair, Mr.
Vice Chair, members of the
committee and staff, I will
always show up and I will always
try to follow up. Thank you so
much for your commitment, and I
really do appreciate your time.
We also have Connie um V Hill on
the list, but I don't see her in
the audience. She was here
earlier.
OK, so, um,
I want to thank everybody for
your active participation. I
thought it was a good meeting.
Um, we'll be back tomorrow.
