OK, um, good morning, everyone.
Um, we are in our final session.
It's the 3rd day of courts
corrections and justice and our
agenda today is focused on UPO
and I always get that
abbreviation wrong and I always
get what it stands for wrong,
but it's extreme order of
firearm protection. Did I get
that firearm protection and it's
embarrassing.
Because I have been a co-sponsor
on the bill from time to time,
but every year I, every time I
think about it, I have to go
through my head what exactly it
stands for, but
Our, um, the purpose of today's,
um.
Agenda item is to talk about how
it's been utilized thus far in
the state have a conversation
about where there are some areas
where we might be able to have
some improvement and then help
on its effectiveness and
usefulness primarily to law
enforcement but certainly
families who've been affected
by, um,
The problem of having someone
with a firearm who may have a
serious mental health issue and
we're all concerned about mental
health in general we've been
talking about over the summer.
So with that, um, I would like
to introduce our first panel and
if you would all, um, maybe
start who's gonna be kind of the
lead on this one.
It will be
You will.
OK
Yes, and you're the Albuquerque
Police Department and Extreme
Rik Firearm Protection Order
process and perspective and you
are the, the SIT team, which is
the
Crisis intervention team,
correct, right? And we have
Chief Medina here as well. So
why don't you all introduce
yourself we have Judge Levy, who
is a 2nd judicial district judge
who has handled a number of of
these orders and been involved
in the process. So hopefully we
can have a really good
conversation about how the
process has been working. So why
don't we, each one of you
introduce yourself, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, I'm
Harold Medina, Chief of police
of the Albuquerque Police
Department. I want to thank you
guys, uh, for having us here
this morning, and I want to
thank
CIU unit, our CIU unit probably
has issued more of these orders
than the rest of the state
combined, uh, in terms of
ensuring that we do everything
we can to protect victims within
the state of New Mexico. I also
want to thank the state
legislature for all the
assistance over the previous few
years with everything that
they've done. Uh, I'm, I will be
around the next 3 hours and if
there's any questions about, uh,
the wonderful success we've had
in retention and recruitment at
the Albuquerque Police
Department. I'll be here to
speak about it. If you'd like to
know.
The success we've had in crime
reduction. I'll be here to speak
about it, but just to kind of
highlight that last year we had
a 19% reduction in homicides
this year, year to date to right
about 29% reduction in homicide.
There's a lot of misinformation
out there and I'll be here for
any questions if there's any
untapped funding that we could
use or that we're not aware of
that we could use to assist us,
uh, we'll more than happy to
work with the state legislature
to make sure that we get uh
information on how we could tap
into some of those funding
sources, but like I.
Said earlier, I want to thank
you all for the investment
you've put into law enforcement
over the past several years. It
has been greatly appreciated and
it has been a game changer uh
for the Albuquerque Police
Department and we're more than
happy to answer any questions
during the course of the day,
and I want to thank all the
detectives from our CA unit for
all the work they do, uh, day in
and day out and dealing with
individuals who are going
through crisis for the most
part. Thank you.
Thank you, Chief.
Make sure I have the mic right.
I apologize. I did not turn it
on. My name is Matthew or Matt
Tinney. I'm the sergeant of the
crisis intervention unit with
the Albuquerque Police
Department. And as mentioned
before, we have Judge Levy here
and then to the left of me is
Cody Maxwell. He's one of the
detectives in the unit and then
to the right of me is Jeffrey or
Jeff Jones. He's also a
detective in the unit. I just
wanted to cover some things
because we're obviously nervous
and we typically get stuck in
police jargon on that. So for
some reason we use an
Acronym or police jargon, by all
means, call us on it to explain
it.
We're gonna be talking about the
extreme risk firearm protection
order. And like you mentioned,
we will refer it sometimes as
Earth bow or the red flag, and
we are referring to it as all
the same. I do just want to give
out kind of a trigger warning.
We are gonna kind of talk about
some examples or case studies
that do involve people who might
have completed suicide.
And so these are gonna be some,
some hard topics to talk about,
and I just want everyone to be
aware of it. We are also going
to do our best to de-identify
the stuff. But if you do believe
that it's someone you might
know, give them a, a benefit of
the doubt. It's probably not.
And if you are concerned of
anyone, I just encourage you
guys to please reach out to that
person you're worried about.
But with that just a kind of a
recap about the Albuquerque
unit. We have a crisis
intervention team. We changed it
to unit when we expanded on that
role with Albuquerque, we
started in 1997 and the goal of
that is inclusive collaboration
with the community to create new
responses to those in behavioral
health crisis and then to
increase our training around it.
So just in our unit, which is
very unique in the state. We do
have 12 full-time detectives,
part of their role is to
Work with the community, provide
training, and then another
section of it which are the
detectives here.
And actually behind me, they do
follow up from referrals from
field officers and also
community members. And their
referrals are in regards to
someone who might be
experiencing mental health
crisis that has a higher
likelihood of ending up in jail
or having a community tragedy,
and our goal is to give
successful interventions to
reduce, uh, recidivism or reduce
them going to jail for that.
Albuquerque also has 4 mobile
crisis teams. I'm not sure if
you guys have ever heard about
this, but what that is is a
uniformed officer and a marked
police vehicle who is assigned
with the clinician, a mental
health clinician, and they
respond to active calls for
service to provide intervention.
Our unit also has 2 full-time
clinicians as well, and they
help us with threat assessment,
um, resource mitigation, and
everything in that sense. The
mobile crisis team is actually
the clinicians are part of the
Albuquerque Community Safety
division. If any of you guys
heard about that, so it's a nice
way to see the city, you know,
continuing their, their push for
collaboration.
And so I would like if Detective
Jones could kind of give us a
recap just so we all know again
about Earthbo. Yes, uh, Madam
Chairwoman and members of the
committee, thank you for this
opportunity this morning, um,
uh, I'm excited to be here to
talk about the work that we do
because I'm very proud of it. I
think it saved some lives and
has given some hope to families.
Um, so, a little recap, the
extremist firearm protection
order was passed by the state
legislature in 2020, and what it
does is it is a way for New
Mexico law enforcement to, uh,
petition the courts to
temporarily prevent someone who
is an imminent risk of
committing suicide or homicide
with a gun from possessing a
firearm. Uh, when I say
temporary, these extremist
orders can last for a duration
of
Up to one year. Um, the
Albuquerque Police Department,
uh, specifically the crisis
intervention unit began using
extreme risk orders in the
middle of 2022. Uh, and since
that time, uh, APD has filed
about 50 extreme risk order
cases with most of them coming
from the detectives from the
crisis intervention unit.
And I think one of the, the
stuff we get often asked is kind
of how APD uses the process to
kind of start it and I'm hoping
that Detective Maxwell can kind
of fill us in on that. So how,
how does
An extremist fire protection
order work. Um, so if a
community member or reporting
party requests an extreme risk
fire and protection order, um,
to law enforcement, law
enforcement will provide an
affidavit affidavit to that
individual. An affidavit is a
sworn, um, not a swarm, but a
form approved by the district
court, um, that can help that
individual articulate why they
believe this person is, um, a
danger to themselves or others
and why they shouldn't have.
access to a firearm.
A detective will follow up with
that individual, collect this
affidavit, uh, and then began a
thorough investigation into the
allegations as to, you know,
what's going on and why. Um, if
that detective believes the
allegations are not credible,
that detective will not file a,
a, an EFPO and we'll complete a
police report articulating his
or her findings, um, and file
that with the Bernalleu County
Sheriff's Office. If the
detective
Find that
There is credible information to
believe that that person is a
danger to themselves or others
and does have access to a
firearm. Um, that detective will
complete a petition, file that
petition with the collected
affidavit in the district
courthouse, um, a judge will
review both of those, um, the
petition and affidavit, um, and
determine if a temporary order
is necessary.
If a temporary order has been
issued, um, a more
Traditional court hearing will
be set within 10 business days.
Now, like I mentioned before,
and I just want to warn everyone
again that, um, we're gonna go
over some cases and how we've
used this law to help
individuals in our community.
And I know Detective Maxwell,
could you give, uh, your first
case study? Yes sir. So, um,
this is a case that I worked
with where uh an individual
disclosed, um.
Threats to his mother, um, where
he, he had a desire to kill his
neighbors, um, and then complete
suicide with a firearm. Um,
during my investigation, I found
that this person had access to
13 firearms including 11
high-powered rifles and 2
handguns. This person also
disclosed to me a a mental
health diagnosis of depression
and a history of suicide threats
and attempts, this person
refused to engage in services,
um, or treatment.
So I filed an extreme risk fire
protection order, um, in an
attempt to protect him and the
community from, uh, those
threats of violence, um, during
my follow-up with, with this
individual, he agreed with me
that this person um was not in
the right mind. He actually told
me he was not in the right mind,
um, and should not have access
to firearms. He also took it
upon himself to surrender these
firearms to the APD evidence
unit at the crime lab, um,
And he did that in a safe way
by, um, coordinating with them,
uh, leaving his firearms
unloaded in his vehicle, um,
while, uh, evidence technicians
collected those from his vehicle
in a safe manner. Uh, he also
testified in court during our
traditional court setting, um,
that he
Did not have a desire to contest
the order and agreed with it.
This order did expire
approximately 6 months ago. He
does have access to his firearms
again and has not generated any
police contacts since this, this
issue.
Thank you. And I know Detective
Jones also had a case that he
wanted to go over.
As well.
Yes, sorry if I made that mic
loud, Madam Chairwoman, members
of the committee, um,
As, as Cody was just discussing,
uh, the Albuquerque Police
Department is is using the
extremist orders to try to, uh,
to prevent suicide, uh, when it
appears imminent. We're also
using it to in an attempt to
prevent uh homicide, uh, mass
tragedies targeted, uh, targeted
violence, uh, and sometimes, uh,
concerns of school violence. Um,
the unit, uh, had another case
involving a student at an
Albuquerque school.
Uh, now this student was
alleged, uh, and pending charges
at the time for having
threatened, uh, another student
on school grounds with a knife.
Um, and during the course of the
crisis interventions work, uh,
units work, excuse me, um, we
were provided with some
concerning social media
photographs and these
photographs showed this person
uh posing in a threatening
manner with, uh, what appeared
to be a semi-automatic handgun
with an extender.
And extend it was kind of a
slang term for a an extra high
capacity magazine. Uh, it can,
uh, take a gun that might
normally have 1012, 15
cartridges and allow it to fire
30, 40, 50 cartridges at one
time. So we're seeing this
photograph, uh, posted on social
media, this person's posing a
threatening manner, uh, with
this firearm. Um, we're also
getting additional information.
We've got some information from
the
school that despite being banned
from that school, this student
had returned, had snuck onto
school grounds on at least 2
occasions, so that's heightening
our concerns.
Um,
And, um, I guess kind of the
final, the final and highest
level concern came that while we
were doing this investigation,
we got information, uh, excuse
me, I do want to go back. In
addition to that photograph, uh,
with the extended magazine, we
got information from the school
that this student had specified
a specific upcoming school day
in connection with without
posting. So we're doing the
Math and obviously it's
concerning, um, and it was
concerning for folks at the
school as well. We were told
that on that particular day of
school, there were a bunch of
young people who didn't show up.
There were a bunch of parents
that were showing up to get
their kids early from school
because obviously, this is scary
situation, but I guess kind of
the, the top thing that, that
really concerned us was we got
information several weeks into
this investigation that this
student had gone to a gun shop
that is near that school.
And had inquired about magazines
for an AK-47 assault rifle.
Um, so not only did this cause
us high concern, um, our unit,
uh, Sergeant Tinney, uh, has
helped, uh, spearhead a threat
assessment task force. That's
where we get all, uh, all
stakeholders in, into a room and
talk about threats to the
community, oftentimes threats to
schools. Um, it's got federal
agencies, state agencies, APD is
a part of it, probation,
juvenile probation, and we staff
this and, and there was
consensus
this big group in, in, in a, in
a large meeting that this was a
possible high risk for targeted
violence. So we took that
information and we were able to
successfully petition the courts
for an extremist order to
prevent this person, uh, from
having legal access to a
firearm.
Thank you. I know one of the
things that often comes up about
this law is kind of the vetting
process, how law enforcement
goes, and, and if anyone makes a
comment, and I, I don't know if
Detective Maxwell, if you could
kind of talk about how we vet
the referrals. Yeah, so APD
conducts a thorough
investigation into the
credibility of all of our
Earthlow requests. This includes
a look at the person of
concern's criminal history. Um,
it includes, uh,
A review of police reports
involving that individual, uh,
interviews with the reporting
party or the community member
that brought this information to
law enforcement, interviews with
family, um.
Or in anybody else that might
have information relevant to
this investigation. Uh, we will
also complete interviews with,
uh, the person of concern, um,
to try and figure out, you know,
what's going on and why, um, and
try and, and mitigate that
threat of violence. Um, and then
lastly, we will look at social
media, um, to try and collect
any additional information.
Sometimes in social media we can
find like Detective Jones said,
um, a picture with an
individual.
possessing a firearm, um, or
specific threats that they've
posted on publicly, um,
accessible social media
accounts. Um, if information is
deemed credible, uh, not
credible, and Earth will not be
filed and a police report will
be completed articulating those
findings and forwarded to the
Bernelio County Sheriff's
Office.
Thank you, and like any new law,
I guess of law enforcement in
general, we have tons of
challenges. Um, this is a newer
law. We didn't start doing it
like, uh, Detective Jones
mentioned until about 2 years
after it was there, kind of
figure it out. So we did see
some challenges that we wanted
to present of what we're seeing
locally for this kind of stuff.
Um, Detective Maxwell, do you
want to kind of talk about the
first two points? I think
Detective Jones is going to talk
about the first two.
Yes, thank you. uh, Madam Chair,
members of the, of the
committee.
Um, we have encountered some
challenges with this law that
we've we've attempted to work
through. And the first one is,
uh, the current extreme risk law
does not specifically provide a
mechanism for law enforcement
to, uh, seek a search warrant
for somebody's home or vehicle
if we develop probable cause
that they're violating the
order. Um, so what this
basically boils down to is in
many cases we're
Taking somebody's word for it
and uh I guess a little bit
surprisingly for me and I think
for other members of the unit is
that in many cases, folks are
completely honest with us.
They'll tell us I've got 10
number of guns. Here's where
they are. I'll get them for you.
I'll bring them to you or I'll
bring them to evidence. So we've
had success with that, but
obviously there are folks who
aren't, uh, fully truthful, uh,
and, uh, some folks really are,
um, they're really tied to their
weapons, and they don't want to
see them taken.
Uh, for a temporary period. So,
uh, recently we had a case where
one of the impact teams for the
police department. That's a,
it's a group of detectives that,
uh, investigates, uh, a wide
variety of felony crimes. Well,
they had obtained an extremist
order, uh, concerning a person
who had made threats of mass
workplace violence. So we have
the extreme scorer in hand, uh,
and we went to talk to the
subject of the extreme.
quarter and this person said,
hey, uh, detectives, uh, I have,
uh, only 2 guns. I'll tell you
what they are. Uh, you're
welcome to go to my house. You
can talk to my significant other
and you can, you know, take
those guns. We presented him
with the paperwork. So we did
that, uh, then we traveled to
this subject's apartment. And,
uh, this subject's, uh,
significant other was there. And
we said, hey, we've just talked
to this person, uh, they've
given us permission.
coming in the house, we want to
take these guns safely, tag them
in pursuant to the extreme risk
order. Well, uh, this person
didn't know what, uh, the
subject of the Extreme Recorder
had told us about the number of
guns, uh, and, uh, this person
told us he's got more than 2, he
has many times more than 2 guns.
Um, and so we were allowed in
the house, uh, giving consent to
go in. We are directed to a
closet. And when the detectives
from the
That team, uh, and our
detectives walked into the
opened this closet. It looked
like somebody had taken a pile
of guns, including, I believe,
at least 2 assault rifles and 2
or 3 Glock handguns, all with
activated red dot sites, all
loaded with high-capacity
magazines and drop them on the
floor of his closet. This was a
closet in a room where while we
were in there, there was a small
child toddling around that had
access to, uh, to that closet.
And these guns were one.
Trigger pull away from, uh, uh,
devastating tragedy for
obviously for the family and any
officer who had to go in and
investigate something like that.
So that's an example. Not
always, a lot of times we have
people, most of the times I'd
say we have people who are
honest with us about, about this
and we present them with a court
documents. Um, but we do have
some people who are not are not
truthful and we don't have a
mechanism to seek a search
warrant.
Um, the other issue I want to
talk about is, is the issue of
reporting parties.
So, uh, you know, as the law
stands, you've got a reporting
party, uh, who says, hey, often
it's, it's a loved one, it's
somebody who, uh, loves this
person off a mom or a dad or or
a kid, uh, you know, an adult
child, and they'll come, uh, to
law enforcement
with information that leaves
them concerned this person's a
high risk for homicide or
suicide.
Um,
And they are comfortable with
telling law enforcement, but
where they sometimes are not
comfortable is being the
official reporting party, uh,
and there's a couple of reasons
for this. One is fear of
retribution. A lot of times, uh,
the people who are reporting
this to us are the same people
who were threatened by this
person with a gut and so they,
uh, they're concerned for
retribution that, if this person
knows that I am the person, I am
the face.
Of this extremist order in
court. I'm worried what's going
to happen to me. I got to go
back to this person. I'm gonna
go home tonight. Um,
The other issue we have is, um,
when somebody's dealing with,
uh, a major mental illness or
they're in a crisis. The circle
of friends and family is very
small. It's a, it's a lonely
existence, uh, horribly lonely
in many instances.
And the person who's dealing
with that crisis may only talk
to one or two people or one
person. And that one person
might be that person who's come
to law enforcement.
And so that person is afraid
they're going to lose that bond.
The sometimes the only bond this
person has with another, with
another human. And so that
causes some hesitation in them
wanting to be the reporting
party. Now, in these cases, when
we do get information that as
Cody said, we've investigated
and we find it to be credible
information we've gathered, uh,
other information from other
people, maybe from court records
or police reports, the
Albuquerque Police
will serve as both the reporting
party, uh, and the petitioner in
those cases, using that
information to bring to court,
but there is, we understand
some, um, differences of opinion
in what reporting party means.
OK. So next, I'd like to talk
about, um, there currently is no
capability to file an extremist
prior protection order after
hours. And what that, what that
looks like for, for us is if we
come across credible information
that somebody is a danger to
themselves or others with a
firearm, say, at 5 o'clock
Friday evening. Um, we don't
have a way to prevent that
person from gaining access or
purchasing firearms until the
following Monday. So that's,
That's pretty concerning. Um,
the, the current law also
doesn't give any direction on
whether or whether or not law
enforcement should collect.
Ammunition, um, I, I think
that's probably something that
we don't talk about a whole lot,
but if somebody doesn't have
access to a firearm or shouldn't
have access to a firearm. Why
should they have access to, to
ammunition.
I think like what Detective
Maxwell was saying, I want to
reiterate because I think we
take for granted at Albuquerque
police that we are the largest
law enforcement agency, but
smaller agencies don't have a
follow-up detective unit. So if
they are presented after hours
with an extreme risk that
they're concerned about. They
may have difficulty with
personnel if that personnel can
still work in the morning hours
to go to court or if that's
their day off, who kind of takes
over for that?
The other thing about that which
this the law how it sets
requires a notary for respondent
parties, a lot of smaller
communities don't have access to
that, especially after hours,
and there's a financial burden
to that to someone who is
concerned. We've also
experienced this where it can be
difficult, you know, someone is
very worried at the time being
like they mentioned, um, but the
time that they can get to a
notary is during the work day or
weekday for that, and at that
time, you know, family dynamics
kind of play into that, but
that's a
consideration to think about in
all the communities throughout
New Mexico has access to this
stuff.
One of the other things that I
think the law unfortunately does
is it it I don't want to say a
false sense of hope, but I, I do
want to point out it doesn't
solve the underlying issues. So
if someone is concerned about
mass violence because of gangs
or domestic violence, you might
be able to prevent access to a
firearm from those individuals,
but it doesn't solve that
underlying issue of the domestic
violence or the, the home
situation or the access to
gangs. It also doesn't
serve as a cure for behavioral
health disorders. If someone is
chronically suicidal or their
illness makes them want to kill
themselves.
Preventing them from owning or
having access to a firearm for
this brief period does not cure
or solve that mental illness.
And I just want everyone to, to
be aware of that.
I know there were some expansion
talks about this, and we talked
about the reporting parties.
Another thing that comes up that
I see a lot is I'll get a lot of
calls from healthcare providers,
um, psychiatrists and
psychologists were concerned,
but their legal teams at the
different, um,
Community organizations
interpret the law differently.
And it's really just about the
reporting party. And so
sometimes they're concerned
about if they really have a
patient that may not, uh,
benefit more from in-person
hospitalization and they have to
release them. Maybe the courts
are telling them they have to be
released back to the community,
but this person has an ongoing
delusion, um, about neighbors
trying to attack them so they
have guns. They don't feel like
they can serve as a reporting
party.
The, the courts, at least
locally have been great whenever
we do have providers, they allow
them um to do virtual meetings,
which is great, but that is
something how we're seeing
reporting parties come up as a
barrier.
The other thing that they
already mentioned is about
authorization from the court.
I will also say this kind of
comes to training to law
enforcement, New Mexico law
enforcement training is all
around criminal code. So this is
really the first one that we had
to try to figure out that's in
the civil side and family court,
which we're not, we don't ever
do on that. And so they really
put the burden on law
enforcement, and it's been a
big, uh, learning process. But
looking at it versus civil
versus criminal, when we have a
domestic violence situation and
we get an after hours emergency
restraining order, we have
access to an all-call judge.
We get a court date for that.
We're able to serve somebody,
but then there's also a criminal
code element that's attached to
it that gives law enforcement
the opportunity to further
protect that victim. If someone
is violating that.
And so what I am concerned
about, and, and really this is
more with Judge Levy and, and,
um,
Attorneys on this is more of it
is a search warrant. Can you get
a search warrant on civil code?
I'm not sure. This is the DA
brought up concerns about that
locally, you know, is it a writ
and what, what?
You know, access would give law
enforcement to make sure this
person is safe.
The other thing about is the
clarification for the uh
National Incident Criminal
background checks for NICS.
That's really done through the
administrative office of the
courts. We haven't seen a
problem here with Albuquerque
for that. So if someone has a
temporary order or they have a
trial, it's automatically
entered, and that's the system
when you go to purchase a
firearm, they call to check to
see if you're legally able to.
And there's multiple different
reasons why you could be a
prohibited person.
Another thing that came up that
maybe some communities are
experiencing this problem with
returning firearms to the
respondent. We haven't had an
issue here. I would honestly say
the majority of the ones we get,
those individuals ask that we
Just keep the firearms. They
relinquish the rights. A lot of
times they realized that was the
eye opening thing for them and
that their illness is, it's
probably not best for them to
have access to a lethal means
because of the impulsivity
that's related to suicide.
But any time that the orders
have been done like Detective
Jones mentioned before, or
sorry, Detective Maxwell, the
person goes to our evidence and
they, they get back their
firearms, but of course
Albuquerque has its own evidence
lab. A lot of uh smaller
communities do not have that.
They share those evidence
things. So I could see in
smaller rural New Mexico, how it
would be difficult for someone
that lives in one community to
have to drive 23 hours to where
that firearm was stored.
Another thing I wanted to
mention
About when it came to this false
sense of hope.
And, and this is unfortunately a
tragedy, but
Earthbos have helped us with a
lot with helping individuals.
Take that immediate means to
take their life. And then we're
able to work with them as a unit
to get them into services,
reconnect them with their family
and get them a, a, a, a network
of care for them.
We haven't unfortunately had
individuals where we did get uh
extreme risk firearm protection
order. They turned over guns or
said they didn't, and then they
later completed suicide with a
firearm.
And we lost them. We did have
one actually, I think it was our
first one ever. He was really
struggling bad with his mental
health. So having false sense of
belief with a neighbor, and I
apologize for saying him, but
they had a false sense of belief
with their neighbors. They also
had numerous firearms through
our contact with them and the
mother was really concerned. We
obtained an earthbo. We were
able to work with that person
for over a year, get them back
into services. That person did
well, the er expired.
There was no problems, he moved
to another, uh, location, and
then he completed suicide with a
firearm.
So it is not a cure for some of
the underlying issues. But what
the mother did say to us,
because these ones are very hard
to us, we develop relationships
with these individuals.
Sometimes we are their only
voice of advocacy. And the
hardest thing that the mom had
and we really took this one to
heart. It was very upsetting.
Um, but the mom did tell us
that, uh, sorry, that we gave
him one good year that we gave
that family one good year
because of the earth.
And so even though he did end up
dying by suicide, that family
did have one year to try and,
and cherish that person. And I
know even the psychiatrist we
talked to let us know like I
know it feels like you might
have lost on that one, but we
did give that family and that
community one good year on that.
I do want to thank all you guys
for your time for listening to
this and even considering some
of the updates on this bill and,
and how we're using it. This is
our information in case you guys
have questions, but at this time
we're we're.
Open from questions from the
committee.
Before we go to questions, I
wanted to ask Judge Levy if you
wanted to add anything, any
observations on the issue and
before we, you, of course, be
open to questions as well.
Thank you, Chair Chandler and
members of the committee, just
briefly, I, I wanted to, um,
Echo what the chief said,
actually, the in Berlio County,
we've had 69 total, um, Earthbo
cases, uh, most of those, the
vast majority filed by, um, the
crisis intervention unit
statewide, there had been 123
total filed. Not all are
granted, um, but the, um, the
numbers are, uh, have been
upticking over time over the
last
78 months, there have been 33
filed, uh, in Berlio County.
The, um,
The vast majority of these
cases, the folks that come in
who are the respondents, um, are
agreeing to, um, that they do
need an emergency order in
place. And I think that speaks
volumes to, um, the work that
the crisis intervention team can
do, um, and of course, I don't
know if that's possible to
replicate throughout the state
because of, um, limited
resources. But
It has been, um, it, it is one
of those moments where we get an
opportunity to talk to folks
about their mental health and
talk about what they're going to
do during that year to try and
remedy the situation.
Thank you, Judge. And Chief, did
you want to add anything before
we go to questions. I just want
to add that uh this, Madam
Chair, committee members, you
guys have our, uh,
Word that we will continue to
fully staff and give CIU the
resources they need. We actually
have more members in CIU than
there's no field squad bigger
than CIU. Uh, we take criticism
at times because calls hold, but
we'd rather see non-priority
calls hold an emergency
situations happen where people
don't get resources so we are
committed to ensuring that we
have the resources in
Albuquerque to continue to get
these orders of protection when
they're needed.
Great, uh thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
apologize. I'm in an actual
county, uh, county, Torrance
County commission meeting
because we have huge issues with
marijuana out there, illegal
grows, and we have Chinese
people actually coming from
China and buying land, taking
the water, uh, I've got human
trafficking. I have got young
children working in there
illegally and you know, I'm
timing you,
right? I know you can use your
time doing can ask questions
that are relevant to this
topics.
I need Cervantes over Senator
Cervantes over here to agree
with me because we, we passed
that bill and I got no
regulations. So it's a free for
all. It's a wild west out there,
so I'm listening to that and
trying to talk to you. So
briefly, how many people were
filed with the red flag, you
said like 123, but 69 of those
stuck.
So, um, Madam Chair and
Representative Lord, the, um, it
is total 123 statewide. The
actual granted is 117 total.
OK, my other question is, so
they go into the Nick system
immediately when they are then
cleared, is it who who clears it
off of the Nick system and how
fast is that done? Is it done as
immediately as they were put in?
So yes, um, uh, Chair Chandler
and Representative Lord, yes,
the, um, administrative officer
of the courts puts them in and
tracks and removes them at the
same date, and when we do an
order, it has the date and time
that that, uh, that order
expires have any way to appeal
or is there a grievance process
if it doesn't come back in time?
Yes, yes, Chair Chandler, a
member of members of the
committee, and Representative
Lord, yes, they have, uh, in
fact, on the order itself, it
says you can appeal, this is an
appealable order, and they do
have the opportunity to appeal
30 days to appeal. OK. And then
how long before they get their
evidence back, is that that same
day or what's the time frame on
that?
So, um, uh, Chair Chandler and
members of the committee,
Representative Lord, there's, as
far as evidence goes, if they
submit evidence to the court of
a representative, uh, I'm sorry,
a, um, respondent submits
evidence to the court. They, um,
have, uh, the court keeps some
of keeps one copy and they have
one copy if it does to firearms,
they can be returned as soon as
the order expires. OK, um, Madam
Chair, is there a liability like
if they had 10.
Handguns and they only got 9
back. What's the, what's the
process for that?
Well, is there one?
Uh, Madam Chair and committee, I
don't know, but I'm assuming if
that was to happen in at some
agency kept a gun it'd be a
lawsuit. Imagine I would hope
that no agency would take
someone's gun like this.
That
OK, those are all my questions
and I'm going to go back to my
marijuana issues, which is
horrible.
All right, um, thank you,
Representative. We now let me
get back to my list.
Uh
Oh, Representative Martinez, I
can't read my own writing this
morning.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, uh,
thank you very much for the
presentation. Um,
Thank you for what you do every
day to protect, uh,
Not only the citizens of
Albuquerque, but anybody that
comes to the city, I think you,
uh.
You get a bad rap.
In the press.
Because
I know some officers in, in APD
and
They're very dedicated.
Um, and they do a great job. I
do have a couple of questions.
Um.
What do you do?
In the case of
Somebody that's gonna report.
Somebody, um.
Out of spite.
Um, I had a situation where, uh,
a young man called me.
said his
Soon to be ex-wife had reported
him and.
There were cops all over the
place. Neighbors were asking
questions. It was very
embarrassing.
Um, and it, it, it was not the
case, he had not threatened to
harm himself or others.
What do you do to mitigate a
case like that?
Where
You know, they can be very
convincing when they call 911 or
they, they contact the police
department. But what do you do?
In a case like that to mitigate
the damage to.
The man or woman who's been
reported.
And Madam Chair, and
representative, that's a great
question. It comes up a lot
unfortunately, in a lot of um.
Domestic situations, especially
with breakups or divorce. A lot
of parties do use police a lot.
They'll call and make false
allegations, and this has been a
concern of ours. And so like we
mentioned before, I think one of
the
1st or 2nd request actually for
Earthbos in, in our jurisdiction
was something similar to that,
and we went out, we met with the
person requesting it, we
interviewed them, we interviewed
the, the report respondent
party, um, to see what's going
on. We found out that it was
this big split up and there was
other allegations made with CYFD
and we checked with them and we
determined it was domestic and,
and we didn't file anything. We
wrote in a police report our
findings on why it seemed like
this was retribution. Um, there
was no
Threats and we, we file for that
and let the person know that at
this point, we couldn't file it.
I would hope that every
jurisdiction, if an officer is
presented with that, that that
officer would follow up on it.
This law is so
It's not as simple as someone
claims that I was hit by my
spouse and you could fill out a
quick, uh, summons to go to
court and have a third party go.
There's a lot of steps, so it
does require law enforcement to
feel like they have enough to go
and present to court.
So if you don't have any of
those other uh circumstances
there any kind of evidence to to
lead one way or another,
they're, they're denied there.
Other ones that have come up
where we had um a provider, say
this person, this person is
elderly started having some odd
behaviors. They thought it was
because of dimension, dimension,
dementia, and then they were
having a firearm, um,
We didn't have enough to say one
way or the other on it. We
presented it to court, the
provider did not show up and
another provider showed up and
it was dismissed then. Um, and
that's kind of the way it should
be. Um, unfortunately, the only
one we don't have control over
that's kind of similar to this
is domestic violence restraining
orders on those ones, it is kind
of hearsay on it, but I hope
that answered your question.
If I can add something as well
to what Sergeant Tinney said. I
think the protection, uh, Madam
Chairwoman and Representative
Martinez.
I think the protection lies in
the process that we have in
place where we'll get this
information, uh, and it really
is just step one. the detectives
will go out, uh, we will talk to
providers if we're able to, uh,
we're going to talk to that
person to get a fuller picture
than just what they've reported
on the 911 call or even on the
affidavit. Um, and a lot of
times they'll say, hey, it's not
just me that this happened to.
It happened to my, my husband.
This happened to my husband.
as well. And we'll go to that
person. We'll get additional
information, um, and a lot of
times as, as Detective Maxwell
said, we'll go talk to the
person themselves, and, uh, in
many cases, it's basically from
their, from their own words into
our ears directly. Yeah, I did
that and here's why I did it.
Um, oftentimes it it has to do
with the major mental illness.
I'm, I'm hearing things. I, I've
been directed to do this. I,
there's something in the wall,
something, something else, you
know, light of that nature.
So we're getting direct
information, uh, from that
person. We'll also look, uh,
we'll check police reports, says
Detective Maxwell said. Um, and
a person may not have been
charged with a crime in a prior
instance, but they may have been
in a crisis and indeed, and they
may have said some things that
were threatening that led to
them not being charged with a
crime, but then, uh, needing to
go to the hospital to be
detained and brought to a, a
facility. Um, and finally, in
our unit, um, it's often not
just a detective.
Or Sergeant Tinney and a
detective making that decision.
We, uh, we routinely staff our
cases. A lot of times with the
whole unit we've got 2
independently licensed
clinicians, and we'll lay out
that information to them and
say, here's what we have. Um,
what do you think? Uh, and from
there, that's when we move
forward with the extreme risk
order.
Did you want to add something?
Yes, Madam Chair, Representative
Martinez, I think what you're
hearing above all is there has
to be thorough good strong
investigations, and we believe
in that as a whole at the
Albuquerque Police Department.
When I took over as chief of
police in 2020, our clearance
rate for homicides was 55%, uh,
it was pointed out that we
needed to improve that. We've
developed a detective academy uh
for all of our.
Detectives in the department and
all of our field officers. It's
a 3-week academy. It's the luon
of its kind in the state and
it's that kind of training that
we believe is bringing validity
to these types of investigations
where our detectives know to ask
the right questions. They know
to conduct a strong
investigation to make sure that
we are treating people fairly
and it's helped us on the
criminal side and it's obviously
working very well on the civil
side of, uh, our investigations
and we will continue to vote the
resources and we're actually
offering those.
Resources and that training to
detectives from outside of
Albuquerque. We currently have
one academy and we have 6
outside detectives from outside
of Albuquerque, uh, included in
that training at this time.
Thank you, Madam Chair, can I
ask just one follow-up,
and keep your, uh, answers tight
also guys, because we've got
quite a long list of people who
are interested in this topic, so
of course, go ahead. Thank you,
Madam Chair. I appreciate that.
The initial contact is not gonna
be a full SWAT call out.
Because to the person that's how
it's going to feel. But in
reality, it's, it's a detective
that shows up at the doorstep to
interview. It's not a full.
Wake up the neighbors, all kinds
of mobile units outside.
And Madam Chair, Representative,
I hope not. I can only speak for
APD, so I mean it depends on how
that 911 call came out, um,
there is terms like swatting
where people do that, but no,
if, if an ex or a spouse or
anyone request an emergency
restraining or
And Earthbo or emergency
restraining order, it would just
be two patrol officers that
would go out for the initial
one. If we get that referral,
like an officer says, hey, can
you guys follow up on it? It's
just two detectives that go out
and talk to them.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you very much. And again, uh,
Thank you for all you do to keep
everybody safe. I appreciate the
fact that you.
Put on the badge and the gun
every day and walk out your
front door, never knowing what's
going to face you, but you do it
on a daily basis to keep us all
safe. So thank you very much.
Thank you,
Representative, um,
so I'm keeping people to 5
minutes, you can use that 5
minutes however you want, but
just keep that in mind. Thank
you.
Represent, uh, Madam Chair,
you're calling on me
Representative Barrego.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair, and
I will take the rest of, uh,
Representative Martinez's time,
um, so do you want the negative?
Well, no, not really, but I
I just want to make sure that I
get my full 5 minutes. Um, first
of all, I just want to thank the
Albuquerque Police Department
for the work that they do. I was
very proud to serve as your city
councilor and your city council
president and to have worked
with all of these fine young men
and women, um, and some older
and the chief, I was really
extremely proud to have been on
the hiring committee for the
chief and, um, I, I know that
APD.
He has always sort of in it's
kind of that that football that,
you know, negative and positive,
and it's, it's a tough place to
be and, you know, I just want to
say that I admire you guys
because I know that when you go
out daily, um, you know, you're
putting your lives at risk and
in these situations where we
have unfortunately a lot more,
um, mental health issues, it
seems, uh, my mom asks me every
day, what is going on?
In the world, it seems like
there's so many more people out
there that are struggling, and I
said, yeah, mom, it's, it's,
it's real reality, but having
served as Madam Chair, uh,
council president and, and on
the council, I had a cell phone
that dinged every time there was
a crime committed. And so I knew
where and what type of crime was
being committed.
Um,
One of the questions that stays
in my mind a lot as we talk
about guns and gun control is
the question of illegal guns.
And so I have, uh, two questions
really. One is the percentage of
illegal guns on the street. Is
there anybody here that can kind
of give me a
possibility of a percentage of
100%.
80%, I mean, what are we looking
at really Madam, Madam Chair,
uh, Representative Barrio and
thank you for all your support
over the years, uh, we do miss
you on City councils, you were
great advocate of ours and I
just want to talk a little bit
about illegal guns and what
we're doing. It's very hard to
find out exactly. It takes time
for laws to come into fruition
and for us to utilize them to
the greatest extent. Uh, I did
support the background checks,
um, somewhere around 2019.
I believe and uh background
checks are assisting us in this
manner because we now have
documented history of where a
gun has to be. So, uh, with that
paper trail, we're able to track
some firearms and we've made
great progress. We're only the
3rd department in the United
States to have been uh selected
for automatic e-trace on
firearms through ATF. So we are
now going forward as of about a
month ago every firearm that
comes into our inventory for
Criminal activity will
automatically be generated in
eTrace so we could trace back
the gun, but a lot of times some
of these gun transfers and
purchases, they predate the
background check law, so it's
hard for us to tell what the
life and where that gun traveled
to and who owned it, but we do
find that the vast majority of
firearms that are used are
generally stolen firearms. We do
average about 1200 firearms, uh.
A a year that are stolen out of
motor vehicles within
Albuquerque, so we'll continue
that education, but, uh, we
could work on getting you some
exact figures of what we
currently have and we'll be
reaching out to you and get you
those numbers. Um, it would be
good to see that over a couple
of years to deter, you know,
just have a really good feel,
you know, I, I talked to people
who work for APS and, um, their
security and
on a daily basis, kind of afraid
to go to work because of the
situation that we see in our
schools and not to say that all
the youths, you know, all the
guns are used related, but that
are illegal, um, but one of the
things that really concerns me
is that, you know.
Tracking and and that tracking
system will be very important
because it seems to me that a
lot of these guns are bought out
of, you know, a trunk or, you
know, exchanged through
illegally through a process that
we can't control.
And, and that I think about that
a lot and I just wonder, you
know, how we can, as legislators
get a handle on that situation
and help you to, or, or at least
pass some policy on some laws
that actually address that
situation of the illegal
transfer of firearms. And so I,
I think about that a lot in
terms of how, how we could write
some sort of policy that would
actually address that
situation.
And so I don't, I don't know,
you guys might want to get back
to me on that because I'm
serious about um how do we sort
of get a handle on those that
illegal transfer of firearms,
and I don't know if you want to
have, have any thoughts on that
your time is up.
So
Thank you. They'll get back to
you on it, Representative. Madam
Chair, can I ask for just one
more minute, please.
The topic is IPO.
And you know, of course you can
use your time as you wish, but
keep in mind we're talking about
a specific topic, your topic is
different from what we have on
it,
so I'd have to disagree on that
one, I'm sure, but that's fine.
Thank you.
Hall.
Madam Chair, guys, ma'am, thank
you for being here. I can't
imagine the difficulty in
combining the civil world with
the criminal world.
Um,
Having that was what fed my
family was working in the
criminal world forever, not as a
criminal, just as a side note.
Um,
Couple of my questions are when
you, you seize the weapons.
And you enter the individual
into nicks. Are you allowed to
take the weapons that I'm just
not, I've been trying to read up
as we're talking. I'm new here.
Are you allowed to check the
weapons that are taken against
NCIC or neighbors or enter the
And Madam Chair and
Representative, you know, that
falls under our evidence. I'm
honestly not sure if they, they
check on that as far as I know,
when we, at least on, on the
Albuquerque side, how our
evidence is set up, we have to
label what the evidence is
under. And so I shouldn't even
say evidence cause it's not. If
we were to label the gun as
evidence, then that would. But
these are labeled in a
safekeeping earth. And so I
believe it's just a storage
process. They're not looking at
it as
A crime
But we can get back to you. I
can check with our evidence lab
to see if we have a policy on
that.
And get back to you on it.
I, I would imagine you wouldn't
be able to.
Because of what you're saying,
but I, I, I would be curious if
you could get back because a lot
of what APD drives.
Does drives what our other
agencies throughout the state
do. So the other question I had
a couple, keep me on track, man.
Um,
When you, you mentioned
reporting parties, and I
realized this isn't even a
crime, so you can't, it's
victimless, yet it's not.
Because there could potentially
be victims. So when we're
dealing with RPs and with
reporting parties and you're
attempting to keep their
anonymity.
Because it's a civil matter,
does it not?
Keep itself from falling under
IPRA, so it can't be discovered
unless it turns to a criminal
matter.
And Madam Chairman
Representative, I don't know if,
Your Honor, if you want to cover
that,
uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Hall, yeah, the, um, under IPRA,
so there are certain of these
orders that would be sealed, and
that would be pursuant to Rule
79, um, if there are certain
situations, they would be sealed
only as to the public, not to
law enforcement, so we do keep
that back because the statute
does require law enforcement to
be able to see it. But as to
what IPRA would allow, generally
speaking, um, these kinds of
cases are unse
And so they would be available,
um, under IPPRA because they are
a civil case.
So maybe if we
Looked at changing a portion
that we could keep the.
Even though it's not a crime.
Because it sounds like your
investigation's very thorough.
That's always been a concern of
this red flag
issue. But since the law is here
and we are dealing with it, the
reality is if we have people who
are afraid to report.
And then really, you all aren't
the RP so you can't do that
twice.
I mean, someone calls you and
I'm just.
Trying to, I mean, then, then to
follow that up, do, do you use,
even though it's not a big, and
I'm sorry, I, I can only think
on the criminal side. I'm trying
to come over.
When you have a, it's not a
crime, but you have these people
who report it and many times
they're extremely stressed out.
I've seen it personally there.
Very worried. It can be as a
mother or father who were
worried.
Do you, is there any provisions
that y'all can offer them as an
agency or is not because it's
not a crime. And I'm not trying
to stir the pot. I'm curious.
And Madam Chair and
Representative, I think what we
do see this a lot. So family is
concerned about, uh,
retaliation and if it would show
up. So if that is a concern, but
they really have enough, we, we
just do a, a more intensive
investigation. So we try to see
what their concerns are
firsthand. So talking to the
person, you know, if it was a
post on social media that we see
it firsthand, that then we can
bring it to the courts. Um, and
then we work with that family on
their dynamics and then see if
let's say it was.
A mother to see if she's willing
to go to court for us. Um, if it
is, let's say, I don't even know
now, we'll get ones when it's
friends that are concerned and
typically those folks will
always come and be a
representative. The really the
biggest barriers we have as
parents to to children, to be
honest with you, and, and
they're worried about their
relationship. That's, that's
across the board is the biggest
barrier we have.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Chief,
Madam Chair, Representative
Hall, I just want to add on
that, uh, Chief, I think we're,
we're, you got an answer to your
question, right? Yes. OK. Thank
you. I, I, we have a limited
amount of time. I totally
appreciate where you're coming
from. So,
um,
next person on the agenda.
is representative of our.
You woke me up, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Uh, I just have one
question. What happens to the
gun that is not picked up. What
do you do with it?
Sure, madam, uh, chair and
representative. I think every
agency will have their own
policies on, uh, destruction of
property with APD, I don't know
the timeline and I came back to
you, but if property is not
reclaimed. I know on, on this
one specifically, we reach out
APD reaches out to that person
to check with them if they want
the property. They also send out
letters, certified mail, but if
they don't hear back, um, and I
can get back to the policy just
for us, the, the property is
destroyed, and it follows the
same.
With like backpacks or bicycles.
And the only reason, Madam
Chair, that I am worried about
this is because the way I
understand it, it says that the
judge may
Order the gun to be destroyed.
It does not say shall.
So, uh, that's my big concern. I
know that if you have the excess
ammunition.
Uh, a statute in that one it is
a uh
Judge shall order the ammunition
to be destroyed. In this case,
those weapons could go.
Back out on the street, which is
kind of scary to me, but I hope,
and I really hope that the judge
would just uh take that bay as a
shell.
And get every one of those
illegal guns.
Especially there they go on the
street anyway, thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
OK, Senator Cedila Lopez.
Thank you. I'll take that. Um,
again, thank you all for your
service. Um, it's, it's so
important, um, I, I'm always
talking about my father who was
an undersheriff in Valencia
County. I know how hard the work
is on you and your families. Um
I had a couple of questions. Um,
I got confused by the
presentation and maybe it was a
misstatement about not being
able to get a search warrant
because violation of of URA is a
crime. It's a misdemeanor. I
don't know. Uh, could you
clarify
I think you ought to be, if the
evidence is there, you ought to
be able to get a search warrant,
um, did, or did I misunderstand?
It may judge you might be in a
good position to answer that.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and,
and Senator Cedil Lopez. So the,
um, as to the search warrant
right now, it says the statute
says that, um, having a firearm
when there is an earthbo in
place is a misdemeanor. The
question is
who, who issues the search
warrant? Is it the, is it the
judge and so this isn't a civil,
it's in the civil in a civil
statute. So the judge who holds
the hearing would be sitting in
a civil position even if they're
general jurisdictions.
So the question is, who would
issue that search warrant and
what would be the specificity
necessary to do that because
there's not a separate.
Criminal case that's necessarily
open because it's under the ERFO
itself. And so unlike the family
Violence Protection Act where we
have a criminal code that
Matches that actually
corresponds. There isn't one
for, for the Earthbo and so
that's been the question about,
um, whether a search warrant can
be issued and if so,
Whether that is something that
should be done in the civil
arena or if it should be filed
in a criminal case and then that
process go forward. Just because
it seems to me that all judges,
all district judges are judges
of general jurisdiction, so they
ought to be able to do it, so it
just it confused me. Why would
not they they not, would an easy
fix be adding a provision in the
criminal law? Um, I, I don't
know, um, because it just
doesn't seem necessary to do
that since it states it is very
clear in the statute that
violation of verbal is a
misdemeanor.
And they're, you know, I I
probably those judges in courts
where they don't have the
specializations would have an
easier time because they know
how to do it.
So
Madam Chair, and Senator Cio
Lopez, I think the question is,
do you, if there's not, do you
have to file a new criminal, you
have to file a criminal case, or
do you do it under the IRO
itself and an issue a search
warrant. I agree. We all sit in
general jurisdiction. You need
to be able to do a search
warrant and approve search
warrants if necessary. But if
that is the, it's a question.
It's not necessarily that we
couldn't have, if that question
was presented to me in a case,
I'd have to answer it. I haven't
had to answer it yet. Fingers
crossed. Well, I hope you have
to answer it.
So, um, and then second, um,
this case study about the
individual who had all of those
psychological problems and, and
now 6 months later, he's he
hasn't had contact with law
enforcement. I was just curious,
do you happen to know what
happened during the pendency of
the proceeding or proceed where
services offered to the
individual and how did that
happen?
Um
I, I forgot what it's case
study.
Madam Chair, and uh Senator, um,
in each of our cases that we
follow up with, we do go out
with mental health professionals
and officers offer services to
those individuals. Um,
unfortunately with our program,
it's voluntary, so I can't
mandate or force somebody into
treatment or services, but we do
make those, those referrals, um,
are, um, independently licensed
social workers or licensed
clinical counselors, um,
Will make referrals, um, that
are most appropriate for that
individual and their needs. So
there are services that are,
that are trained to, we are
trying to connect people with.
Thank you. um, and just to
follow up on that, you could,
um,
services of the individual was a
threat to himself or a threat to
others.
Isn't that correct? A danger to
himself and others.
Under New Mexico's um.
Madam Chair and, uh,
Senator under New Mexico state
statute 43,110. If somebody, if
law enforcement finds that
somebody is a danger to
themselves or others, um, in
immediate detention is required
to mitigate that that danger.
Um, we can detain and transport
that person to a mental health
facility, um, but that that's up
to the hospital to offer those
services at that point.
Absolutely, thank you, Madam
Chair, and, and one of the
issues is there aren't enough
beds.
for that.
Is that correct?
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator,
with the, this, the law in New
Mexico allows for an evaluation.
And so I think there's a big
misconception that that also
means services. And so really
the hospitals evaluate to see if
the person qualifies for
admission to the hospital. So a
lot of, uh, uh, trouble we have
is folks that are struggling
with substance use, so they
could be suicidal, but with
alcohol and the hospital won't
admit because it's a substance
use. So it is something just
broadly in New Mexico where
We are struggling with and a lot
of the cases that we mentioned
because they're going to court,
it kind of encourages
individuals to stay in services.
So they go to court with their
own doctors or receipts showing
that they're getting services,
which is nice. Thank you, Madam
Chair. That's really helpful as
we explore these issues of how
to fix the little problems and,
and fix these gaps that, that's
extremely helpful. Thank you,
Senator, and I'm done. Thank you
Senator Nibert and then
Representative Ream.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
too have, was shocked to hear
about the, uh, search warrant
issue because
To me
The court has the ability to
Issue a search warrant if the
police officer
has reasonable, uh, suspicion
that the person did not hand
over all of the weapons that
they are in possession of. I
think it would be a slam dunk if
you had sufficient evidence that
you get the search warrant, but
I agree. I don't think the, I
just read the act. I don't think
it needs change to deal with
that issue. With respect to
IPRA, I, I would note, Madam
Chair, that
Uh,
Since we are dealing with
people.
And their constitutional rights
and things, this probably should
be an exception to the IRA
statute, and this stuff should
not be, uh, available for public
inspection. So I would encourage
us as we look at exceptions that
we may be pushed back on fog on
that and, and make sure that
there is an exception in IPRA
that this stuff can be done
without being subject to public
review. Uh third point, how do
you propose to get
sworn statement if you don't
have the, uh, if you don't have
a notary or some other.
officer who's authorized to
issue or administer owes to get
the client to
make a sworn statement. What's
your proposal if you don't want
the notary to do it.
Madam Chair and Senator, thank
you for that one. That's
actually something that we've
been struggling with and we've
been working with our City legal
and and for Albuquerque, the
supervisors in the unit, we are
going to go through the process
to become notaries so that we
can respond on seeing as a third
party if needed. The other ways
that we've adapted it locally is
to plan a notary so we'll find
someone that's a notary and plan
or pick up that person and bring
them to the notary the following
day. But this is just
logistically for smaller.
Communities, I don't know how
they would do that. We are
fortunate enough, like Chief
said, to be fully staffed, so I
can pull a detective and be
like, Jones, I need you to meet
with this family, pick them up
and bring them, but smaller
communities, I'm, I honestly
would not know unless they could
get some of their own staff to
become certified as notaries.
And I mentioned that, Madam
Chair, because we felt it was
important that if you're going
to make these allegations that
it be under oath and that the
person
Who's making the allegations be
subject to perjury should they
be falsifying this information
because we're talking about not
just
normal thing. You're taking away
a person's constitutionally
protected rights. So if you do
that, it has to be under oath
and there has to be a mechanism
by which they, the person making
the allegations can be held
accountable for the things that
they're saying. And so I, you
know,
For me, the notary is not a big
deal. I know it's it's another
step, but it's an important step
in making sure that that the
statements are, are
Truthful and if they're not
truthful that there's some
recourse by the state to go
after that person for untruthful
allegations. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Senator.
Representative Ream. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and I'll try to go
through these quickly. um, Madam
Chair and Sergeant, would you
explain your interaction with
ATF on violations.
Of course, uh, Madam Chair
Representative, we do work
closely with ATF as mentioned
before, we're on a, we create a
multidisciplinary task force for
it. ATF has a lot advised me
that locally they cannot enforce
this because it is a state
statute. What we have used them
for, as mentioned, uh, I don't
know if we actually mentioned
it. We went out to retrieve
firearms on a, on an earth bow,
and we went there, the
girlfriend did say, oh, he has
all these and brought us duffel
bags and in the duffel bags were
a lot of non
Serialized firearms. We're like,
I don't know and we met with the
ATF for them to review it to see
if those were legal or not for
them. But we staff with them and
a lot of times ATF actually
brings us cases, so someone will
make a report that someone's
trying to get a firearm to do
mass violence, but that doesn't
meet the federal statute
somehow. And so we will work
with them to do intervention,
but they don't have any say when
it comes to the Earth bowl.
Uh, Madam Chair, and I agree
with you about IPO, but
When you look at the current uh
regulations they have, they have
a lot of authority to go ahead
and confiscate weapons under a
whole myriad of violations.
Let's move on, uh, Madam Chair,
and Detective Maxwell. So on
your case study, here's an
individual that you've done an
investigation on you've
determined that
You know, you have probable
cause to take his weapons, you
contact him and he says he's not
in right mind. Did you take him
to UNM Mental Health? And if so,
if not, why?
Madam Chair, and Representative,
that's a good question. Thank
you for asking that. Um, so I
think, you know, us as a crisis
intervention unit went out and,
and not went out, but talked
about this case in great detail
and determine that this person
is experiencing a crisis or was
experiencing a crisis, but
during the time of our follow
up, um, that crisis had passed.
Um, we talked about, uh, you
know, if this person makes
A threat to hurt somebody else
or them themselves, you know,
what's, what's the window, how
long is that information good
for and
You know,
If
If it's appropriate to take that
person to the hospital at that
time, um, we did offer offer
this person resources and
services for treatment. Let me,
let me go ahead and cut you off.
So you didn't take him and let
me go to the next question.
Detective Jones, uh, let's see,
you've got a student. It sounds
like this individual is a high
school student, so, uh, he's in
possession of a pistol and he
snuck on the school grounds
twice, so.
You can't write a search warrant
to go get that pistol. He's
violating federal and state law.
Uh, Madam Chair, and
Representative Ream, thank you
for the question, uh, and, uh,
kind of a
Broader answer in that
particular case, representative,
there were some factors that
allowed us to seek and obtain a
search warrant. Now in this in
in in this incident though, uh,
we had information from the
person that that person no
longer possessed that gun and I
also want to be clear, we don't,
we did not have information that
the person had brought that gun
onto school grounds on the two
occ
that this person was reported to
have snuck in. We don't know
that, um, but in that instance,
we did have some unique
circumstances where we were able
to, we work with our federal
partners and we did obtain a
search warrant for that person's
residence. OK, thank you. And uh
Madam Chair, and Detective Mass
Maxwell, you testified this
pistol had an extended magazine
that could expend
All the ammunition at one time.
So is it a machine pistol?
I think, uh, Madam Chair and
Representative that was
Detective Jones.
Yes, Madam Chair and
Representative Ream, uh, I
wouldn't classify it as a
machine pistol. I didn't examine
the pistols. It was just through
the photographs that we saw. It
appeared to be a standard
semi-automatic handgun, but it
had one of those really long
stick magazines, Madam Chair and
Detective Jones, so is you
testified that he was trying to
obtain
Magazines for an AK-47, an
assault rifle. So that is a
machine gun, correct?
Uh, Your Honor, I believe we
refer to those as assault
rifles.
No, um, Madam Chair, assault
rifles are machine guns if
they're illegally modified, they
could be a machine gun, but they
are not machine guns. OK, Madam
Chair, you're correct that it's
an SKS that's been illegally
modified and that's the problem
that we're not using the proper
language of the firearms.
And we're in or mixing them.
That's a very good point. I
agree with you. We tend to do.
Uh, Madam Chair, I have, um,
communicated with a real close
friend of mine who's a medical
provider and the way that the
medical providers, mental health
providers can contact you is a
court case and it's called
TerraSoft, T A R A S O F T. So
you may want to look at that. I,
I hear all this testimony and I
hear that, you know, if I had a
Credible threat, your time is
up.
OK, just finished this, uh,
credible threat and you did a
proper investigation, you would
be able to go ahead and obtain a
search warrant.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um,
I really appreciate your, um,
joining us today. Representative
Garrett and I have had at least
2 meetings talking with you
about the work that you do and
have been very impressed with
your dedication and your, um,
you know, willingness to
interact with community members
and try to keep the community
safe, so very much appreciate
your willingness to share your
experience with IPO. Thank you,
Judge. It sounds like you're one
of the more experienced judges
in implementing it, so well I
appreciate your insights and
thank you, Chief, for joining
us.
Appreciate that.
Did they say that they want to
have the authority to.
Yes, yeah, I mean I can ask him
directly, but.
So gentlemen, I just want to
clarify,
um, based on your experience, I
believe you indicated that you
would like the law changed so
that you could be a reporting
party directly. Did I get that
correct?
Uh, Madam Chair and committee,
that would be correct.
Thank you.
We're on to our next segment,
um,
Jane Madrid.
Good to see you, Lieutenant.
Oh
So have a seat, um, we, I think
we emailed out the task force
report, so members have seen
have received a copy of the task
force, OK? So, OK, good.
And we've allocated, it's also
posted on our, our, our website
for this committee meeting. So,
um, so Lieutenant introduce
herself and um, the floor is
yours.
Oh, put your mic on, yeah. Is it
working now? Yeah, it's great.
Good morning or good afternoon
for some of us um my name is
Lieutenant Janice Madrid. I
oversee the investigations
bureau for the North region, for
the state of New Mexico.
Furthermore, I was the previous
commander for the crisis
negotiations team, crisis
intervention team, and advanced
crisis intervention team created
by the Department of Public
Safety, uh, under the scope of
the New Mexico State Police. I'm
here to provide you a briefing,
um, as it relates to the
emergency risk task force
created in 2022.
John Hopkins Center for Violence
Solutions examines fatalities in
2020, which marked the highest
gun-related deaths recorded.
Recorded by the CDC. It will
further indicates that states
with stronger gun laws
experience lower rates of gun
violence.
The earth report
Highlights the disparity in the
impact.
Related to gun violence as it
relates to age, gender, and
religions, regions, excuse me,
with gun violence being the
leading cause of death under the
age of 25 in suicides, uh,
correlating to the age of 75 or
older. To address the alarming
rise in gun violence,
particularly in New Mexico, the
extreme Protection Order Act was
enacted in 2020 with its intent
to grant law enforcement the
ability to seize firearms from
those individuals who pose a
significant danger to themselves
or others.
As a result of this
underutilized preventative tool
to keep firearms out of the
hands of those that shouldn't
possess them. The extreme risk
uh task force was created and
aimed to identify those
instances and to raise public
awareness as to what exactly
Earthbo uh, was intended for and
what it does.
However, challenges still
remain.
Challenges to include reporting
parties, the ability for law
enforcement to seek search
warrants, to obtain firearms for
individuals who pose a
significant danger to themselves
or others. It also addressed the
demographic breakdown of
Petitioners, respondents, and
the importance of tracking
relinquished firearms and
firearms in general, as there is
no state repository at this
time.
Significant funding has been
allocated by the statewide
crisis intervention program.
Funded by the Feds.
The task force calls for
legislative amendments to
clarify reporting party
definitions and to allow for law
enforcement to serve as
petitioners and expedite the
Earthbo process for the citizens
of New Mexico.
As the Earthbo involves
continual education efforts and
potential for expanding legal
and medical training are hoped
to further mitigate.
Gun violence in New Mexico.
To further enhance the
preventative tool that saves
lives and assists with the
facilitation with those who
suffer from acute mental illness
to ensure that they get the
resources that they need to
rehabilitate in order for them
to be able to establish a point
in their life where they're able
to obtain their firearms, uh, to
to obtain their firearms back
without posing a significant
danger to themselves or others.
I'm open for any questions
because I know that we're
running short on time and if I
need to clarify any questions as
it relates to the state and the
rural communities as it relates
to Earth bows, I'm willing to do
that.
Um, maybe I could ask a few kind
of foundational questions before
we go to the members, so could
you tell us like when the task
force was formed, you know,
maybe, you know, who was on the
committee, you know, what was
your goal and I'm not sure you
touched on all the
recommendations. I have looked
at the report and I think there
were 3
recommendations in the report, I
think would be helpful if, if
the, um, is it, uh, reporting
party search warrant and what
There one other.
In tracking of relinquished
firearms.
OK. All right, so maybe you
could give a little background
on why the task force was formed
and you know, a little bit about
what you're OK, Madam Chair.
And members of the committee.
The reason the task force was
created was to identify why the
emergency risk Fire and
Protection Order Act was
underutilized.
They were to go in depth and
basically get gained data and
statistics as to what what the
issues were, why we were not
able to, why law enforcement
wasn't able to actually go in
and implement that law when it
was warranted.
Um, in 2020, in 2020.
You are enacted a state law,
which was earthful.
AKA red flag.
Although there was no training.
Put out to any law enforcement
agencies. There was no, this is
how you do it, this is what the
intention is for. This is what
we need to do in order to make
this work for our citizens. At
which point, um, in 2022, the
Earthbo task force was created
in order to establish a process,
at which point in 2022, a
curriculum was devised by New
Mexico State Police, um,
in, in correlation with the task
force. Um, we took that
information and we provided.
The training throughout law
enforcement, free of charge, any
law enforcement entity that
wanted to take this training, we
provided that training.
Furthermore, um, we, we were
able to break it down for law
enforcement and for anybody who
wanted to know what the actual
process was, what the legal
requirements were and the
appropriate way step by step on
how to do that.
So as the task force identified
all of these deficiencies within
not only the statute but within
what the abilities of law
enforcement were along with uh
mental health providers because
the task force is comprised of
law enforcement, civilians, uh,
licensed clinicians.
And the sheriff's department to
work together in order to figure
out what the underlying reason
is as to why it's underutilized.
That was, I think that was
really helpful and so um would
it be fair to say you had kind
of a wide array of people on the
task force like law enforcement,
you know, what kinds of folks
did you have on the task force?
I think people might be
interested in that crisis
intervention officers. We had
supervisors, we had the
sheriff's department. We had the
Department of Health, uh,
civilian clinicians. We also um
had our counterparts,
Albuquerque Police Department
also was involved in the task
force.
So it was a variety of
individuals looking at the
looking at the state statute,
looking at House Bill 27 and
saying, OK, what can we do to
make this better in order for it
to work appropriately for the
citizens in New Mexico in order
for law enforcement to have
grounds to remove firearms from
people who pose a significant
danger to themselves or others,
and in order to ensure the
rights of
Of the citizens.
Right.
Thanks.
So I see someone else.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for for the briefing
and the and the report and I
apologize maybe because of
travel. I haven't seen a copy of
the report, um, is, where is it
located I believe Nancy did
email it out to uh I I'm really
trying to avoid having tons of
materials printed, you know, but
it was sent out, is it on your
website or anything like that,
uh, Madam Chair and, uh,
Senator.
Dio Lopez, it is on the
Department of Public Safety
website. It is posted. It was
also provided to the governor's
office who, uh, reviewed and it
was also disseminated uh by
Miss, um, Martinez. OK. I, I
apologize for it, it was my
mistake and not, not having it,
but would you mind kind of
because we got some ideas, um,
from the last group about like
they would like an officer to be
able to be
a reporting reporting party. So
I thought that was a good idea
for
Change, could you just briefly
summarize some of the other
things you think to tweak this
to make it better. So, so, um,
there's a lot of things that we
could clarify because um.
I'm with the New Mexico State
Police with the Department of
Public Safety. I cannot speak on
the practices, protocols and
procedures that the Albuquerque
Police Department do. Um, I can
only speak for what we do for
our citizens, uh, for all the
rural communities along with the
municipalities and the sheriff's
department, uh, being a
reporting party is a
It is not a question of can we
change or should we change? Yes,
we definitely need to change
that for law enforcement to be
able to go in as the reporting
party and file these petitions.
Right now, um,
As the statute reads, you have
to be a commissioned law
enforcement officer and or the
district attorney's office or
the attorney General's office,
right?
civilians in the state of New
Mexico that do not work in the
law enforcement realm are
neither of those things.
For them to be just the
reporting party that they don't
have the ability to go into the
courts and petition for an
extreme risk firearm protection
order.
because I think it's really,
there I am, OK. Um, even though
there's only been 123 filed, I
believe that lives have been
saved because of this, because
of this act or this statute. And
so I will go ahead and read the
report and and see how we can
make it better and and save even
more lives and make it easier
for law enforcement to do their
important jobs, but I mean the
issue of the search warrant, for
example, and I don't know if the
report says anything about it.
You can't get a search warrant
without.
Probable cause hearing.
So so that that's a process and
that has to happen. It's already
set up. We don't have to say
that in in the bill in the
statute. So it was a little bit
confused by some of them, but I
will go ahead and read the
report and if I could just add
something we have our next last
segment, we're going to have
Sheila Lewis, who is one of the
trainers, and as you know, also
an attorney, and she can talk
probably in a little bit more
detail about the search warrant
issue because there is a belief,
um,
Amongst some and perhaps many
that it is needed, at least
those people who've been
operating within the system,
just FYI I could explain that as
well.
So you're absolutely right,
there is a need for a search
warrant clause to be entered
into the state statute. Reason
being is law enforcement
operates in the criminal realm.
We don't often dabble in the
civil realm aspect of state
statute. Currently, as it
states, the statute indicates
that a district judge shall.
Sign a search warrant for us to
seize firearms as it relates to
Earthball. It does state that,
ma'am, you are absolutely
correct, although law
enforcement, if you violate an
earthbo, it is a misdemeanor
charge. Standard practice
through judicial practice is we
are not able to obtain a search
warrant for a misdemeanor
charge.
search warrants relate to
felonious charges, right? But
Law enforcement does have the
ability to which we train all of
our law enforcement officers as
we break down the earth. They do
have the ability to ask the dis
to ask the judge in one of these
hearings for a civil writ, which
is a court order establishing
grounds for law enforcement to
obtain those firearms.
For the clarification of
language is super, super
important within this earth. OK.
Thank you. I appreciate that and
I will read the report. I just
found it.
Thank you. Great. Um, we have
Representative Garrett and then
Senator Lopez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Lieutenant Madrid. I know
that, um, former representative
Damon Eli, and we met with you.
Could you just clarify we've
heard from the APD crisis
intervention team, how important
that training is for officers.
What are the requirements for
crisis intervention training,
like at the academies for
existing officers because I
recall you saying something
about 40 hours, but really.
80 hours were needed. Can you
just touch on that point, uh,
Madam Chair, and, um,
Members of the committee, there
is a requirement.
So by working with the task
force and seeing that there was
a deficiency for crisis
intervention trained officers,
New Mexico State Police mandated
that all state police officers
to include command staff would
be 100% crisis intervention
trained. At that point, it takes
the specialty out of the
modality, out of the training
that is a 40 hour training.
Everybody went through it with
that being said, New Mexico
State Police devised a plan in
order to keep the specialty in
place.
Which we now have 2 advanced
crisis intervention officers.
That's an 80-hour course
positioned throughout the entire
state in each district of the
state to assist with overseeing
not only red flag, but to
oversee a response for crisis.
Thank you. So Madam Chair, that
doesn't, there's nothing in
local law enforcement. Oh, yes,
absolutely, so.
Crisis intervention training
does occur.
But in order to be a crisis
intervention trained officer,
you have to be a commissioned
law enforcement officer. So when
we go through the academy, we
teach an extensive block of
mental health, uh, to include
several aspects of it. And then
as soon as you graduate the
academy for state police, you go
directly to advance crisis
intervention training.
Uh, Senator Lopez.
Um, Madam Chair, thank you so
much and I appreciate the
information you have shared with
us, um, but Representative
Garrett just asked my question,
so thank you. Great minds think
alike. Um, anyone else with a
question or comment?
I, I, I'm, I'm gleaning from
these questions that there's a
lot of confusion or maybe even
disagreement about this idea
about a warrant and not and
we'll have a further discussion
in the next panel, um, you know,
as Sheila is a practicing
attorney, and it could be I
could ask to have a legal
opinion written. We can try to
sort it out because there's
obviously disagreement and we
can have further conversation
about it as well, but I, I,
there's obviously some
disconnect there and I'm looking
at Senator.
And I'm sorry for doing that.
But I know he's one of them.
And I'm gonna miss him when he's
no longer with us because he's,
he's been one of my foils for
the last few years, and I've
enjoyed it.
um
OK, well, this is your time to
clarify any questions as it
relates to Upel and as it, uh,
relates to the entire state, not
just one municipality, um, so if
you have any questions, as it
relates to the entire state and
what it is the state is doing.
I'm willing to answer any
questions.
Anyone else?
OK, OK, well, um, I'm a civil
lawyer.
I know.
That's why I said it. You're,
you're absolutely right, so we
can get a search warrant. The
only way we can get a search
warrant is if there's a criminal
offense attached to attached to
the report of UFO, we are not
able to obtain a search warrant
if it deals with just mental
health and there's no criminal
aspect to it. At that point, we
have to request for a civil
writ. Yes, the language in the
bill is
as it states agency has
Probable cause that the person
failed to relinquish.
The firearm you have the basis
on which to get a search
warrant. Yes, sir, but the
problem also lies where uh
district courts are not allowing
for search warrants to be
obtained for misdemeanor
charges,
right that they have the
authority to do it whether
they're doing it, that's beyond
us, but you're you're absolutely
right there, sir. We, we can
tell them to do anything, but
That's another branch of
government that's going to do
what they want,
apparently, um,
anyone else with questions for
the lieutenant clarifying
questions about the report. The
report, um, yeah, go ahead, no,
absolutely, go ahead, Senator
Cydia Lopez. Thank you, Madam
Chair, for the 2nd for the 2nd
time. I have the report and I'm
interested in a lot of the data
that's that's presented, so it
does look I'd like to hear a
little bit about the stories in
the communities.
Side of Albuquerque that have
gotten these orders like we got
we got case studies, um, the
last time. Do you have any
information about sort of
examples outside of Albuquerque?
Absolutely. So the Earth Bowl
has been utilized in several
cases, uh, within the state, um,
at the beginning of the Earth
ball coming out, there was only
41 from the year 2020 to the
year 2023. Uh, currently to date
this year, 2024, there's been 51
Earthbos filed.
Um, there's an instance where we
had a gentleman who was
suffering from acute mental
health crisis and what he was
doing was he was actually
contacting the dispatch centers
over 100 times within a
three-hour period, repetitively
calling bogging up the 911
lines.
He was not, there was no
criminal nexus to it because our
admin, they admin lines, they're
not actual 911 lines, so you
can't even charge them with, um,
you can't even charge him with a
crime at that point. So what we
did was we immediately
intervened.
We are advanced crisis
intervention team made contact
with that individual. Um, there
had been reports that he had
several homemade knives to
include at one point he did
possess firearms, although at
the time he didn't have any
firearms. What we were able to
do is do a threat assessment
with him, gain independent
information. We validated the
information um and
Completed the documentation as
required and we were able to
obtain earthba on it. Um, the
gentleman did end up violating
his conditions of release. He
also did get charged with
aggravated stalking which
assisted with us obtaining and
getting the order granted.
Currently right now, he's in a
psychiatric facility because he
is deemed a continuous danger to
himself and others.
Thank you, thank you. I, as I
said, I really think that this
has had a huge benefit and save
lives, so I'm really happy to
hear these stories. Thank you,
Madam. Thank you, Senator. Thank
you, Lieutenant. We really
appreciate the work you've done
on the task force, which I know
was a tremendous amount of work
and appreciate the information
that's in the task work. So
thank you for sharing that and
um.
I'm sure if people have
questions they they will reach
out to you and, and, um, do
that. I did want to share one
thing. I think it's on your
website, you can see where Upos,
how many Ipos have been done by
year and how many have been, I
don't want to call it
successful, but actually we're
deemed to be meritorious and is
that not on your, uh, state
police, um, website, I think it
is, Lieutenant, is it not?
Actually, it's not the, the
state of New Mexico does not.
have a state repository for
tracking firearms or for
identifying earth balls, what is
on the website is the um Earth
balls in the totality, um,
there's no repository that
obtains demographics or uh
tracks firearms that were
relinquished, um, currently as
it stands now. OK. All right.
Thank you, Lieutenant. I
appreciate your time and I think
we're ready to go to our next
panel. Oh, is there? Oh, I'm
sorry, I didn't see you
represented.
Of course, yeah, go ahead.
Madam Chair, Lieutenant.
Are you saying that the State is
not tracking those guns that are
relinquished? What's happening
to those guns?
as it stands now, uh, Madam
Chair, and, um,
Mr. Martinez, currently, as it
stands now, New Mexico State
Police, what they do is we
receive a statewide report from
AOC, from the administrative
offices of the courts, we
receive a report daily at 5
o'clock. That is every earthball
that is filed within the state
of New Mexico we have two
assigned personnel that go
through each individual report,
each docket number, they do the
research to see where these
earth balls are being filed.
They document them. If it
relates to New Mexico.
Police, we assign advance crisis
intervention officers to
immediately respond to those
individuals in order to do
threat assessments.
There is no website or
repository for the tracking of
firearms, for example, if
somebody in Moriarty, New
Mexico, seizes a firearm based
off of an earth bow, they have
to go in per state statute, and
they have to write a return of
service to that individual,
letting them know, hey, on this
date and time, we seized your
firearm, at which point they
take that return of service and
they file it with district
court.
That in turn gets associated to
the file in district court. AOC
does not go in there and
identify this firearm belongs to
this person. It's just a
document that they attach to
their documentation. State
police has seen that there's a
deficiency there. So what we do
is now we go into each earthbo
and we look to see if there's
any supplemental information
that relate to state police. We
take that information and we
document it and we ensure that
we are keeping accountability
for New Mexico State Police.
Earth balls that are filed, but
there is no infrastructure in
place or a repository for
relinquished firearms to
adequately be tracked in the
state at this time, sir.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So
APD does a gun buyback. There's
no tracking of those firearms
either.
A if APD or New Mexico State
Police does a gun buyback, yes,
we take an adequate account of
those firearms. State police has
a very different process as to
how we track those firearms.
Those numbers are individually
tracked along with where we
obtained them from, and we are
responsible for them as they
enter into our property. So we
actually track where the nexus
of those firearms, uh, where
they came from and who they
essentially belong to.
So we as state police do track
that.
I cannot speak for what APD does
with that tracking.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
That's interesting.
Thank you sir.
Thank you, Representative. Thank
you very much, Lieutenant. I
appreciate your time and
attention to this. Thank you. Oh
yeah, absolutely, Senator,
sorry. I'm sorry, just
on that last topic, when you do
the gun buybacks, um,
Are there any circumstances to
your knowledge where the parts
are then sold or the components
of the guns are sold at all, are
they always destroyed, Madam
Chair and Senator Cervantes,
yes, I do. So the Department of
Public Safety New Mexico State
Police has clear, concise
policies and procedures as it
relates to firearms, the
disposition of firearms and
where they go to following. The
Department of Public Safety
seizes those firearms they are
put into property at which point
we will hold them, we will
ensure the tracking and
document.
is adequately completed, at
which point if we're not able to
identify who these firearms
belong to, whether they're
seized through UPO, whether
they're seized through evidence
or whether they're seized
through property. What we do is
we petition the courts for a
disposal order providing
adequate documentation and
obtaining a disposal order from
the district court in order to,
uh, dismember those firearms and
destroy them to where they're
not resold or put back out in
the streets, and I'm sure you're
aware and we hear that some
some.
Some of the buybacks involved
buying them back and then
reselling the parts and
components, otherwise doesn't
have safety does not,
does not do that at all. OK,
thank you, Madam Chair, just for
the, any of my colleagues who
are looking for some legislation
to carry in the next session you
want to build actually if you
look at the existing law,
the buybacks are illegal under
existing law, uh, because you're
transferring ownership without
having to go through the
background checks and so on and
so forth. So if you, if you
actually look at our existing
law, all of the buybacks with
done by you all any local law
enforcement or any organization
when you do that, you're
actually violating our law. We
we need to make an exception to
some of the transfer
requirements, um, to allow for
buybacks without any difficulty,
and that law could include you
can't not, um, you have to
dispose of the gun, not resell
the gun. That could be something
that could be included. There's
been a national reporting on, on
the fact that there are these
buybacks and they make it back
into the market because they're
given to contractors and then
just resell them the guns.
So, um, that's an issue that's
kind of a nationally focused on.
So thank you very much,
Lieutenant. I really appreciate
your, your presentation. Thank
you. Absolutely. And if I could
just add that um we are here on
behalf to to get the reporting
party portion of the state
statute changed so that law
enforcement can be a reporting
party, um, with the training and
experience. I just want you all
to know that since the
implementation of the task force
and the curriculum to get
everyone trained, the earthba
process has gone up 220.
8% and is showing to uh prove
that it is a preventative
measure and a preventative tool
to help prevent mass casualty
events.
Thank you, Lieutenant. Thank
you.
OK.
We're on to our 3rd and last um
substantive item.
And this is kind of a review of,
we're calling it House Bill 27
from um this past session.
But it's, it's really kind of an
overview of recommendations um
for maybe fine tuning a little
bit or and tweaking what has
been perceived as some gaps in
terms of implementation. So we
have with us my good friend
Representative Garrett, and
Sheila Lewis, who um works on my
house judiciary staff, but she
also has been a trainer for the
state police and active on this
particular issue.
Very knowledgeable on on
implementation things. So with
that, um, the floor is yours.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you everybody for being
here on this 3rd day, um, I'm
just gonna say a few things.
First, I want to thank Senator
Joseph Cervantes because in
2020, uh, Damon Eli and myself
worked with him. He became the
Senate sponsor. We started the
URO legislation in the Senate
where it passed and then it came
to the house, so, uh, kudos to
Senator Cervantes. I think a few
things have been demonstrated
today. The
importance of education, um.
Now everybody's on board with
education before people didn't
know how to use it or implement
it. The reason why Sheila Lewis
is here is she was the first
person who started training law
enforcement and health officials
around the state. The other
thing I want to say is the
importance of behavior health. I
met with Sheriff John Allen of
Berlio County last week. They
did not have a behavior health
unit now as they observed what
happened in APD in the
Incredible crisis intervention
team that focuses, as you heard
on behavior health, the BCSO,
the Berlio County Sheriff's
Office now has behavior health
and what he said is that's
what's making it possible to
effectively, accurately and
helpfully apply UPO because the
officers have that foundation.
And with that, I'm going to, oh,
the other thing I wanted to
share is Chief Mike Heel was one
of our witnesses in
020. He is the chief or was the
chief of the Aztec police
department and what he said
about the importance of officers
being able to be the reporting
party is that so many of our law
enforcement officers across the
state go into homes and they see
situations that are boiling.
They go to the same homes and
then later they go to that home
and there's been a murder
suicide and so he
said when officers who are on
the ground, especially in rural
areas, when they see these
things they would like to have
the right to be a reporting
party. So you've heard many
people talk about that today,
uh, but both him and Chief Hebbe
from Farmington who couldn't be
here with us today, have made
that point as people working in
rural areas that I'll turn it
over to Sheila Lewis.
Thank you very much, Madam Chair
Representative Garrett, uh, I'm
here today in two capacities as
the person who has put herself
out of a job training law
enforcement. Now they do it and
they're very good at it and I'm
pleased that they no longer need
my input on how ERPA works
they're experts at it. Now what
I do is I go around the
communities and I speak to
various community groups. So far
I've reached about 500 people in
the last couple of years, and
this past week, I got up to
Clovis to tell them about IPOs.
So I'm getting feedback from the
community and trying to bring a
message to the community. What
I'd like to do today is answer
some of the questions that got
brought up and really briefly
talk about how we can make this
a little bit better. And when I
talked to people in the
community, I tell them that Urpo
is like your grandma's car that
she gave you for graduation. You
get from here to there, but the
windows don't work. The, the
locks don't work, we can make it
better. It's a great law. We
just need to improve it.
OK. So I was going to go over
what we have so far. I think you
all got a handout on, on, on
what the law looks like,
I hope, if, if, if not, yeah,
um, so I, I just want to
actually talk a little bit about
some of the questions that got
raised while I was here in the
room and not rehash what people
have already said. So one of the
things that got brought up while
we were here was what do they
check these firearms when they
take them in? And the answer is
law enforcement checks the
Farms when they give them back.
And that's right in our statute.
Before they return a firearm to
somebody first they make sure
that they're lawfully entitled
to possess a firearm. They don't
have a felony or some new issue
and also that the firearm is a
lawfully it should be lawfully
possessed, so that's in our
statute. We've got that covered.
The biggest issue everybody
talks about is search warrants.
The issue really is we're
talking about police officers
who are trained to do many jobs
in many communities. URO is just
one of their many jobs. They
need a law that tells them
exactly what they can do. No
questions about it. That's what
I get repeatedly from law
enforcement. Where does it say I
can get a search warrant? Where
does it say I can be a reporting
party. Then I go into a legal
song and dance, they're not
happy about it. They want their
statute to tell them what to do.
So yes, we've had a lot of
information about ways people
could get a search warrant, um,
but why not make it clear for
everybody. That's one of the,
uh, big issues. Another issue
that comes up is what happens
when there are false
allegations, and people bring
that up in the context of
domestic violence cases. One of
the things that the statute says
the court must look at in
deciding in Ipo is whether or
not there's other litigation
going on. Is there a family
court matter? Is there a
divorce? Is there custody going
on?
There's two ways to look at
that. One, the court could say,
oh,
I understand what's going on
here. There's a divorce going on
and this person wants to, uh,
stick it to the other guy.
Um, that's a possibility. I'm
not ruling it out, but the much
more likely possibility is that
when somebody goes into court
for a domestic violence order of
protection.
And asserts their own autonomy
and stands up for themselves.
That's when things get really
dangerous. That's when having a
a perpetrator in possession of a
firearm really aggravates the
situation, and we know it
increases 5 times the risk of
somebody getting murdered.
In a domestic violence situation
is after they file for the
petition, the domestic violence
petition, or the divorce or the
custody. So we want to not jump
to the conclusion that she's
just piling on, and I apologize
for using the traditional
pronouns, but you know it can go
both ways.
This this person may be
vindictive, but they may very
much more likely have a very
serious problem. That's why our
law is so is written in such a
good way because reporting
parties must go to law
enforcement. They can't just run
into court and they have the law
enforcement we've heard does an
excellent job at uh
investigating these, these
issues. That's what they do for
a living and they're good at it.
So we want that put that to stay
in place, but as you've heard
We also want law enforcement to
be able to be reporting parties
because
Reporting parties back out.
They get scared and rightfully
so. They want to maintain a
relationship. They don't want to
aggravate the situation and for
a lot of good reasons they don't
want to follow through. But now
law enforcement has the
information. What are they
supposed to do with it if they
don't have a reporting party. We
had started out with a lot of
judges being on the fence. Well,
they're not listed as reporting
parties. They may be covered by
the statute because the way the
statute's written, it could
include them. The answer is
let's make it clear.
That they can be reporting
parties just most states have
their statute, very clear on
this issue.
Um,
There was a question that was
raised about, so is this
working? What do we know happens
to these people after they have
erpas. I had the good fortune of
being on a panel with people
from California who gave me the
following information about a
study they did.
They looked at all the erpas
that were issued for people who
were suicidal.
And they went back 3 years after
that to look for all the death
certificates to see how many of
them committed suicide in the
three years following, and the
answer was none.
Uh, now we can't say it was
because there was an IPO, but
that's a great indicator that
it's making, it's having some
success. We know also that
sometimes these case studies are
a little bit complicated and
I got to sit in on one case
where the judge said, Well, I
don't have a reporting party
here and there's no firearms in
the house even though the child,
this was a young man, said he
could get, wanted to get a
firearm and shoot up his school.
He wasn't legally authorized to
get a farm. He's still 17. So we
get these kinds of stories at
the end, the judge said to this
young man sitting in the
courtroom.
We're all here today to keep you
alive.
We want you to stay alive and we
want you to not commit a crime
against other people. And I
believe that's one of the best
aspects of our, our UPA law is
it puts eyes on a person who
needs eyes on them.
Um.
OK, so now that I've answered
what I thought I heard with some
of the things that came up. Here
are the big changes.
You've heard about them. They're
not, they're not.
Surprises to any of you. We need
to make sure that the list of
reporting parties reflects what
we need. That is law enforcement
and some kind of mental health
or health care provider
provision has to be in there. It
is true that healthcare
providers have a duty to put
under Tasarov to prevent crimes.
That's based on their client
coming in and telling them
something. What happens when a
wife comes in and tells the
healthcare provider or her
therapist, I think my loved one,
my father has Alzheimer's and he
has guns. I'm scared about that.
Those that case law does not
cover that situation. It covers
the situation where the patient
is a threat. So what we need is
to give um mental health service
providers and certain healthcare
providers, the ability to be
reporting parties. Somebody
said, does that include my
dermatologist? I don't think
your dermatologist is gonna find
out about a firearm. The people
who are in a position to provide
health care or may learn about a
firearm. They should be named in
the statute so.
They know they have that legal
coverage to break
confidentiality.
The issue of the search warrant
has been very clearly
articulated already in our
current statute there is a 48
hour period that allows the
person to relinquish their
firearm for people who are in a
mental health crisis who have
been addressed by police
officers who have been served
who
are agitated by a legal
proceeding 48 hours is a very
long time to come up with a very
dangerous plan. We want the
retrieval to be immediate, which
is either relinquishment is
immediate, or seizure can be
immediate.
The seizure being pursuant to a
search warrant when the person
says, I don't have firearms, or
here are my two firearms. I
don't know why my wife told you
I had 15, so we need that that
immediacy, um.
And the last thing you heard
from the last speaker that we
have heard from law enforcement
a lot is when this law gets used
more, we don't want to have a
pile of firearms right now
apparently they have to get a
court order when a firearm is
not returned to the to the
party.
It also says in our statute that
it it implies that the duty to
find the gun owner is on the law
enforcement agency.
That puts a big duty on people
because these people may
disappear. They may just not be
in the, in the district any
longer. The statute would be
improved if it said that they
have to make efforts to reach
the person who has the firearm,
tell them their time is up. Tell
them to come in, tell them how
to come in, but if nobody shows
up for that firearm, they should
be allowed after a certain
period of time, a year, whatever
you all think is appropriate to
destroy that firearm without
having
To go get a court order cause
that's what's required now.
OK, so we've talked about law
enforcement and mental health
people. We've talked about
needing to get rid of the 48
hour grace period. We've talked
about firearms scene in a
returned.
And this is what we're trying to
avoid. That's the whole purpose
of this
statute is to not see a scene
like that. We don't want a SWAT
team. We want mental health
providers and trained law
enforcement officers to come in.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
Representative Garrett
absolutely, unless you have
anything you want wish to add
before we go to the committee?
No, OK, I have Senator Nibert,
anybody else represented
Martinez. I see Ram, anyone
else? Anyone else? uh Ceda
Lopez.
OK.
Well, we have a relatively short
list, so if you each want 7
minutes.
I can give you that.
I'll take what I can get.
Uh, couple things. I'm not gonna
talk about the search warrant
thing again, but um
the
There are two issues that I
think need discussed, making the
police officer, the reporting
party means that that person's
going to swear under oath.
That these elements exist, so
how is that officer going to be
able to make those statements
under oath.
And not
Perjure themselves.
Because they're not going to be,
they're not gonna have firsthand
knowledge of this stuff. So how
does that work, Madam Chair,
Senator Nibert, actually, they
will have firsthand knowledge
when they are approached from a
reporting party, a family
member, they're going to
investigate it and they're going
to have their own knowledge. We
don't want them to just say
somebody came in and told me
something. We want them to
investigate, which is what they
do best, and they will be able
to file just like they do with a
crime. They will file a criminal
complaint saying that.
These are the allegations, so
that officer's going to state
under oath the name and address
of the respondent maybe.
Description of the number types,
location of firearms, ammunition
of the petitioner, uh,
that believes the respondents
has custody control zones or
possesses.
Description of the relationship
which the officer would have
done,
uh, lawsuits, complaints,
restraining orders, other legal
actions between the reporting
party and the respondent.
I don't, I don't know how a
police officer is going to have
firsthand knowledge of that that
stuff that they can do it.
The police officers is the one
that files it based upon
information provided by a
reporting party,
the making the police officer,
the reporting party puts him in
the position of having the very
knowledge on which the order is
going to be based
and
I can't imagine even 1% of the
cases that they would have any
of that knowledge, firsthand
knowledge of that stuff.
Madam Chair, Senator Neibert,
you heard from the officers in
the first panel with a thorough
job they do investigating it.
They handle it as if it was a
crime, even though it is not a
crime. They gather the
information. They gather
information from people who have
knowledge of that information
and they're basing their report
to get the
process going upon sworn
information from a reporting
party who has firsthand
information on that.
Madam Chair and Senator, in some
states I believe 29 states in
the District of Columbia have
some version of the URL or red
flag law. Some states only law
enforcement can be the reporting
party, so we need to look at
that also. Well, only law
enforcement in our law can be
the party that brings forth the
action, and it's based upon
sworn statements of a person who
has firsthand information, so I,
I, I'd be careful about.
Making that change and then the
second one,
your, you know, New Mexico does
have a, uh, a law for unclaimed
property, and that's what these
guns are. These guns are or the
guns that the owner hadn't come
back to receive.
His unclaimed property and you
want
This unclaimed property be
treated differently than any
other agency treats its
unclaimed property. We have a
whole process to go through and
and uh uh Senator Cervantes and
I
are very aware of how
complicated it is. I had a bill
about that thick that he went
through this past session, uh,
dealing with unclaimed property
and, and yeah, it'd be nice if,
if agencies and banks and
others.
go through a very easy process
after a year, just destroy it.
Don't get you your money back
that the bank owes you or what
have you, but that's not the
process. The process is if it's
a person's property, and this is
not evidence. This is a person's
property that needs to get
returned to them. We have an
entire statute that deals with
unclaimed property, and I would
suggest that that this property
should not be treated any
differently than any other
agency treats its property. So
if you overpay your taxes or
the, the state owes you money.
There's a process that the that
agency has to go through to get
to try to find you and to try to
get you your money back and it's
not a one year process. In fact,
it's a many year process and
your name gets published in the
paper and all that stuff, but uh
I would, I would not, uh, create
a special exception for, for
this type of property,
um, for a variety of reasons,
uh, I, I just don't think it
warrants it, so I would push
back on that as well. Thank you,
Madam.
Thank you, Senator. I'm looking
for my list now. I think
Representative Reem was next.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and you
know, I want to weigh in on the
search warrant. So the issue on
the search warrant is you're
going to take the firearms
because of a criminal threat of
harm to yourself or to another.
So, yes.
Yeah, I don't, you know, because
you're making that threat, it's
a violation of law. It's a civil
process of seizing the firearms,
but if I'm making threats, I can
always go back and obtain a
search warrant. Then the other
issue is you were talking about
domestic violence protection
orders.
On the domestic violence
protection order once the court
issues a TRO, it's entered into
Nicks and um ATF has the
authority to go pick up all the
firearms.
I mean, that's already current
law.
Anyway, I don't know if there's
any comments you want to make on
it or not, but.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative.
And the firearm destruction
issue that was raised by police
departments, and they felt that
it would be helpful to them. I
don't operate in a police
department, but, um, I wanted to
represent what their request was
in terms of the domestic
violence law at the end of the
process for getting the TRO, the
domestic violence order. The
court must advise the respondent
that they are not authorized.
They may no longer possess a
firearm. That's the first part,
and they do that.
And then the last part of the
order says, I am ordering you to
relinquish it and, and to my
knowledge that is almost never
done. The courts do not order
respondents to relinquish their
firearms. So they are authorized
to do it, but they haven't been
doing it, authorizing the court
to order somebody to relinquish
is not the same as authorizing
the police to seize.
Madam Chair,
let me for a moment, let's go
over.
So ATF, let's go to their form.
It's a 4473, and this is for
purchase or possession of a
firearm. And the question is,
Are you subject to a court order
including a military protection
order issued by the military
judge or magistrate restraining
you from harassing, stalking,
threatening your child, or
intimidating partner and child.
ATF.
Who, you know, I, I've got
friends at ATF.
They go out and seize the
weapons if they're made aware
that there's an order, they go
and seize the weapons. They have
authority to do that.
Right now
And they do that.
But you know what you're talking
about, the judge can
Go ahead and tell them to
relinquish but doesn't follow
through. Well, that's an issue
with the court.
They need to follow through
more.
But
Anyway, I'm saying those things
are there already.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative.
Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Representative.
Garrett and
Do, um, on slide number 6.
Hm
Why not apply for a court order.
It seems like there's
Court involvement all through
the process but now to destroy a
firearm.
You don't think that's
important. Can you tell me why?
Madam Chair Representative
Martinez.
What I have been told by law
enforcement is, is they are
concerned about having firearms
in their possession that are not
requested back, that are not
picked up, and they feel, and
they this is their position that
they need a court order to
destroy that firearm.
And they would like this statute
to say that after a certain
period of time that this item is
in their possession and they've
made certain steps to try to
return it to the person that
after a certain amount of time
they can destroy it without a
separate court order. That's
what they have expressed to me.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I have
concerns with that because we
heard testimony right before you
that there are some agencies
that don't even track those
weapons.
So, um, I'm a little concerned
about that. Um, I think that.
Involving the courts in.
The entire process is a good
idea, including
Uh, getting a court order to
destroy a weapon. Um,
My next
Question
Um, Representative Garrett, you
said that there are 29 states
that currently have.
Some form of this.
And the majority of those
Um,
Majority of those do not require
a court order.
Uh, thank you for that question.
Um, Madam Chair, and
Representative, know what I said
is that, and I'm, I'm not sure
if the 29 is accurate, if that's
up to date. No, they, many of
them, the reporting party,
there's a petitioner, but the
person who goes to the judge who
who can
Uh
Actually ask for it is law
enforcement. The laws vary by
state.
Uh, in Florida, I think they've
had 8000 erbos, something like
that, uh, so we've looked at
their law in forming this law,
but the laws vary in those
states and the District of
Columbia.
Thank you for that, Madam Chair.
Representative Garrett, I'm not
sure if you're aware of a case
in I believe it's the first
judicial district that
A judge has ruled that
A law enforcement officer cannot
Be a reporting party.
Um, so.
We may want to do a little bit
more digging into that and to
see if that is.
Um, I don't remember the exact
exact specifics of the case, but
I think there was some.
Constitutional questions on
that,
um but I'd be very curious to
see.
These other 29 states in what
form of statute they have and
what.
Those states that do that will
allow a law enforcement officer
to be a reporting person how
they work that in.
Um, so if you have that
information that you could share
with me offline I'd, I'd
appreciate that, Madam Chair
Representative Martinez, uh, the
case that you're talking about
is on appeal. I tried to find
out yesterday if it was been
decided yet. But the issue
wasn't about a constitutional
question of whether or not a
police officer could be a
reporting party. The issue is
whether our statutes setting a
law enforcement officer could be
a reporting party, the issue
being that when the list of
people who are
Reporting parties was drafted.
It was preceded by the word
includes. So the following
people including these people
can be reporting parties and
case law in New Mexico says that
that word includes means,
includes but is not limited to,
so if you kind of play that into
your mind, you realize that
means I'm going to give you a
list of people who can do this.
But really everybody can do this
because of that word includes
that once again is one of the
most difficult things I have
discussing with police officers
that they can do this under this
law because it has the word
includes. That's why they're
asking to just have their name
put in there. Get rid of the
word includes and list who can
do it.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
So is it the majority of law
enforcement agencies that are
asking that this be done.
I believe so. I, I, you know, we
have so many law enforcement
agencies in New Mexico. I have
only dealt with a handful of
them. We have many that are 34,
and 5 officers.
Um,
But I do believe that they have
um the chiefs of police are
holding their conference. I
believe it's in November, and
they have asked me to come in
and talk about hers. So there
will be chiefs of police from
all the departments, and I'll
get a better sense at that point
how the smaller departments.
Respond to this law.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'd I'd
be interested to see the outcome
of of that. Um, thank you, Madam
Chair, I appreciate the time.
Thank you, Representative. We
have Senator Cedil Lopez and
then Senator Duhid.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for the training
because after the training that
the use of this went up, so I
think that that was really
important. So I've been going
over the the report that was
filed by the task force, and
yeah, it's it's also consistent
with what you're suggesting, but
it also seems to contain some.
Well, and we've talked about the
search order thing.
I don't think we want to put
something that would make.
It possible for police to get a
search warrant without a
probable cause hearing. So I,
I'm kind of worried about how
this language, if, if you do it
goes because what the way I'm
reading it is they want to be
able to just go forward and and
I don't think we should,
um, is that correct? Because and
then yours just says, um.
Currently a respondents expected
to comply with it anyway, I, I,
I, I just think it's really
important that we make the point
that they can do it now and that
a civil judge has general
jurisdiction and can do it now
and that that it is going to
require a probable cause hearing
no matter what happens. I
actually don't think it needs to
be amended. It's just the system
needs to be developed and then
extend your training maybe to
the judges, um, and to
Others who, who don't seem to
understand how the process
works.
Uh, Senator Cedila Lopez, um.
Because you're a lawyer, this is
clear to you. Law enforcement
officers who have so many
different jobs, it is not clear
to them, and I just want to make
something clear to get a warrant
you need probable cause. You
have to go to court. This isn't,
you know, dial a warrant. You
have to have, you have to file a
petition and you have to present
probable cause. This is using
the existing search warrant
procedure.
Exactly as it's written now, but
making it clear that it can be
used in this context. That's
what the law enforcement
officers are asking for, OK,
well, um, I don't think it's
necessary. I hope they, they go
forward with it and then, um.
This court order to destroy the
weapons, the court order is
actually an exception to the
regular che process of property
which requires notification,
publication, I believe it takes
a total of 6 years, if not more,
to actually have property to the
state so they could destroy it
or sell it or do whatever they
want. This court ordered to
destroy it is an exception to
that, so it just seems to me
they ought to be able to go to
court, maybe just join a lot of
them and have a mass.
procedure for um destroying guns
that have been
around for more than 5 years or
whatever, I don't know, but
again, that seems like a problem
that can be solved if you
understand the law, because I, I
think, um, this automatic
destruction.
is a little bit worrisome to me
because people don't pick up
property for many, many reasons.
They could be, um.
Ill, they could, you know,
there's so many other reasons
and this at least gives them
notice that it's going to be
destroyed, um,
whatever, and it could be, it
could be constructive notice
like it is in these due process,
so my suggestion is um.
More education about how to make
this easier and not so
burdensome using the existing
court processes, just in case we
don't, we're not able to to make
these little tweaks, um, because
I just, it, it's, it's not
impossible, um, at all. In fact,
I think, you know, with proper
training and pleadings, it, it
wouldn't be as bad as people are
suggesting it is to comply with
existing law.
You know, I understand it make
it easier and they would
understand it, but maybe a
lawyer should explain to them,
you can do this, you have
authority. Courts should explain
to them you could do it. You
have authority. So, um, that's
all I have to say and thank you
so much for your work on this.
The, the both the statute that
you passed, Representative
Garrett, and the training, I
believe, has resulted in saving
lives and with the expanded use,
I believe it will save more
lives, so thank you.
Uh, thank you, Senator. Senator
Dewhig and then Representative
Barrego.
Thank you Madam Chair. Um, and I
just wanna kind of highlight the
tension and I think it just came
up in hardwood C Cia Lopez was
saying between the convention
that we generally follow in
Senate Judiciary of if it's
already true, don't say it. Um,
and here we're hearing from
practitioners that are who are
law enforcement who are working
under the statute saying, but we
want
A lot, we want more clarity. We
want to be able to look at the
statue and know exactly what we
can and can't do, um, and I just
want to kind of acknowledge that
tension there because and I
don't, I don't necessarily know
how we resolve that tension, um,
because I totally understand law
enforcement wanting that
clarity, but also the reason we
have that convention about if
it's already true, don't say it
is because otherwise, uh, at
some point, some judge is going
to say it's not true unless you
do say it.
Um, and so.
I just think that as we're we're
heading into session with this
bill, that that's a tension that
we're going to have to address
in some way.
Um, and then I probably
shouldn't even try to explain
this because I think it's
Senator Maess who actually
understands it, uh, but I think
just when talking about probable
cause and, and the word hearing
was used often, um, and I don't
think there's a full on hearing
like when you're going to get a
search warrant.
You don't have like a full on
hearing you attest to probable
cause, and the judge signs off
on it, um, but I think we just
want to be careful about not
requiring a higher standard of
an actual hearing to be had for
these, these ones cause that's
gonna slow things down
dramatically in time limited
situations.
not specifically about the
search warrant, but the process
itself, the initial
Proceeding for getting an IPO is
an ex parte proceeding. It is
done on paper. It is not in
court. It is 10 days later when
you have a full due process
hearing.
In the and now returning to the
search warrant issue.
The there already exists in the
domestic violence arena, a way
for law enforcement officers
24/7 to reach a judge, present
their probable cause and get a
warrant because sometimes it's
that much of an emergency. We
heard from the officers, most
people are very agreeable. Most
people have been cooperating
with law enforcement when they
come in, but there will be those
times where the tension is high
or the person is not
cooperating, that they need.
Immediate action. This would
just um duplicate or not
duplicate, it would be the same
as what happens in the domestic
violence world. It's already
there in that statute. Thank
you.
Thank you Madam Chair.
Senator, Representative Barrego,
thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, ladies for your, um,
Insights on this, um, I, I
wanted to go back, Madam Chair,
to the question about um
Whether or not APD um tracks
their um
Confiscated firearms and I
talked to the chief in the hall,
and I think he's still here, but
I just wanted to clarify that
because I did a gun buyback
program when I was counselor and
I, it was very clear that that
tracking was very, very evident.
So I just wondered if the chief,
if he could just address that
issue because I think there's a
misunderstanding about that. Um,
I think APD does track every
confiscated I think that's fine
because frankly I was confused
by
answers that the state police
represented was truthfully, so I
didn't answer for them so if you
could take a minute and do that,
Chief, I'd appreciate it.
Madam Chair, Representative
Barrio, the Albuquerque Police
Department on gun buybacks. We
do track firearms coming in
because we're accountable to
them to our evidence lab, and
generally the process is what
Albuquerque does is we do not
resell firearms. There's a lot
of law enforcement agencies
across the state that when they
bring firearms into their
evidence or into other places
that they may recycle these or
they may release them to a third
party at a certain point in time
once they have an exit strategy
where they have a court order to
get rid of the firearms at
Albuquerque Police Department,
all firearms that come in that
have been either surrendered or
are unclaimed property after
certain time frames if we end up
with those firearms, we destroy
those firearms so that they
don't go back into
recirculation. So we do track
them coming in. I'm verifying,
but I believe we still do Nin's
testing on those firearms
because we want to ensure that
that firearm isn't part of
evidence of an active case, and
then it goes to the process of
us disposing of the firearms,
which is in Albuquerque Police
Department is destruction.
OK, thank you, Chief. Thanks.
You sure.
Uh, thank you, Representative,
and lastly, we have Senator
Cervantes.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I think
it's always useful for a little
bit of background, a little bit
of history at times, so, uh,
representatives write the, the,
the bill began in the Senate. We
don't have the advantage that
you all in the house do. You can
cut off debate after three hours
Senate. We have unlimited amount
of debate. I was on my feet for
about 5 hours on this bill. It
was amended, I think 12 times on
the floor. It was amended on the
floor, um, so you get into my
state of mind, uh, to try and
bring along, frankly Republican
support because the goal here
was to try and make this a
Partisan issue, and I was kind
of given some reason to believe
that that if I'd made certain
amendments on the Senate floor
that I would bring along some of
that center, and there were good
amendments. They were, they were
thoughtful, and we can always do
better with some of our writing.
So I kept agreeing to the
amendments the debate kept going
on and unfortunately in the end
I didn't get that support.
The, the, the reporting in the
press and some public comment
has suggested that there was
that the absence of law
enforcement being specified as a
potentially reporting party was
an oversight on on our party. It
was not. We debated this at
great length on the floor. We
debated at great length on the,
in the Senate committee, and I
think it's useful for everybody
to have a little bit of that
history that, that the, the,
this legislation was opposed
very strongly by a lot of gun
rights organizations.
NRA and others, um, very, very
aggressively opposed by those
groups and the the argument was
being made, as it oftentimes is
that this is part of initiative
for government to take our
weapons, right? Um, and that,
um, that this is a law that will
allow the government to begin
seizing weapons and the and the
concern at the time was that by
giving law enforcement the
authority to initiate the
process that was part of the
grand conspiracy, right, that
this was part of their grand
Democrat, uh, left, conspiracy
to get the government to get
their law enforcement to
petition to begin seizing
weapons and then give them the
authority to go to court and get
the weapons, and this is part of
the whole thing. So I think it's
useful to have that history to
have an understanding of what
the backstory to to all of that
really was and and I, I think
it's important for all of us to
anticipate we'll probably get
the same arguments again when we
when we try and make any of
these kind of amendments,
anticipate that you'll have NRA
and the other groups saying this
is the grand.
conspiracy to take your weapons
and send us money, by the way,
uh, send us lots and lots of
money, uh, and, uh, so, um, I, I
think the the background is
important. I, I also think it's
important to probably
reemphasize Senator Zig's point.
And offer a personal
observation. Uh, we, she's
right, we don't, uh, try to put
into legislation every
permission that everybody wants.
Uh, we would be inundated with
requests in our statutory books
would fill rooms if we had to
put everything into statute that
people are authorized to do.
Uh, my personal observation is
that oftentimes that's an excuse
for people not doing things that
they can do. Um, and, and
frankly, sometimes doing their
job. The best example of, I'm
sorry, Representative Lord's not
here. He and I've been talking
all day long about the marijuana
farms that are growing, uh, pot,
thousands and thousands of
plants illegally in her
district. She's got a county
commission meeting going on
right now on that issue. And,
and the issue is on, on
marijuana, who enforces that
law, and the argument is right
now is nobody enforces that law.
Because we didn't put in the
statute that the state police
can do it. So the state police
says, well, we don't have
authority or or the shirt or we
didn't put in the law, the
sheriff has the authority, so
they'll say, well, we don't have
the authority and on down and
the department and the
regulation and licensing rights
says you didn't tell us that we
have authority, so we can't do
it. And, and so right now nobody
does it. So you've got
a you got people that are
essentially operating with slave
labor in the st growing
thousands of plants illegally,
and nobody's doing anything
about it.
It's been going on for a year or
longer and, and it's going on
all over the state and the the
reason that we're not enforcing
the marijuana laws is because
the legislature didn't say that
all these law enforcement
agencies could do it. So they're
saying, you, you didn't tell us
we could do it, so we can't do
it.
Um, that's, that's often aside
from this issue, but it's an
illustration of what Senator
Dude was saying, which is, look,
we don't try to put into the law
every authority that that people
have, uh, and, and in my
experience is oftentimes a way
of just saying we don't, we
don't, we're not, we can't do
it. I, I really, the honest
answer is they don't want to do
it. Um, and, and we have these
marijuana laws that frankly
nobody wants to enforce, um,
and, and they will say that
because we didn't give them
express authority to do it. So
back to Senator Doick's point on
this bill.
I would agree with you that the
in Ms. Lewis's point, it's, it's
not, it's a non-inclusive,
exclusive list, right? When we
say including yeah, here's some
examples of who can do this, but
it doesn't mean that if you're
not listed, you, you, you can't
do it. Uh, the other good
example I'll give committee
members, um,
As a kind of an illustration too
is it's come up I'm, I'm happy
to say law enforcement at UNM,
uh, when, when I passed the body
cam legislation, I was talking
with the Chief Medina outside a
little bit ago when I passed the
body cam legislation, we listed
law enforcement aid. We defined
what law enforcement agency was
in the bill and we put in DPS,
state police, local municipal
county sheriffs. We put them on
there. I wrote it, I didn't put
in university police as
required. And so
and you uh
Put body cameras on every other
university in the state did, but
you and him said, well, you
didn't list universities of
police, so we don't have to do
body cam and they didn't do it.
Um, and when I was called by the
press and said, well, Joe, why'd
you leave off university police
on body cam. I said, we've
screwed up, right? We just
didn't think that we had to list
everybody in law enforcement and
so UNM was taking advantage of
that to not do something. So
it's another example of where we
don't give them permission or,
uh, then they, they sometimes
take advantage of it, right? And
So, uh, on the press story, I
said, well, just wait, we got a
60 day session coming up. We'll
take care of that pretty quick
in 60 days, and I'm pleased to
say you and him took that as a
pretty good clue, uh, that they
ought to do this and they
started last week, I think they
announced last week they're now
doing body cam at UNM and so,
you know, sometimes we got to
tell you, OK, let's be clear
that you, you, we, this is what
we expect. This is what the
public expects. So, Madam Chair,
again, just good examples I
think of some of the
Shortcomings in the bill and the
reasons why some of these are
shortcomings, oversights. Some
of them were very deliberate. We
very deliberately considered law
enforcement being the initiative
party and I'll I'll remind all
of you the bill passed by one
vote on the Senate floor. Uh, so
I was scrambling for every vote,
making every deal I could, uh,
and, and worrying till the vote
came in that it was going to
pass Senator Lopez was there. I
know, and I know Senator Cedilo
Lopez, you all probably remember
all of that. It was, it was a
pretty tight
vote and and hard fought on both
sides, and credit to both sides.
So thank you, Mister Chair.
Um, thank you, Senator.
Just I really feel that we do
need to look at the reporting
party in particular, of all the
handful of issues that we
brought up, um, we know there is
one district court opinion in
the First District that has
ruled notwithstanding what an
appropriate analysis of
including
um has ruled that at least in
that district, they will not
they the police will not utilize
her but.
They're not utilizing it.
Now I understand that it is up
on appeal, but that was also a
signal to some other police, you
know, it raises concerns then
for other police departments
wondering whether or not that
district is gonna have influence
or other district courts will
not view the reporting party in
the way that is more
appropriately, you know, uh,
applicable. So, you know, I
think we should be looking at
that for sure. I think a number
of you brought up other issues
about the warren, and I think
We need to look into that and
try to understand that better,
but at one point I would make is
police often swear to things
that they have relied on as
evidence. It's called hearsay.
We all know that, and they can
do that. So if a if a a wife or
a spouse or you know, goes to a
police officer and says my
husband or others, you know,
spouse has said X, Y, Z, police
then swear to that, and that's,
that's the basis for their
probable cause. So let's be real
about it.
If they didn't, they could never
do their jobs if they weren't
relying on reports from
witnesses to get search warrants
or other sorts of things to
which they have to swear they
could not do their job. So I
think that's a little, you know,
it's, it's an interesting
argument, but it's off base. So
I just wanted to make clear they
do it all the time. It's, it's
appropriate and then they're not
perjuring themselves when they
rely on someone else's evidence,
and they have deemed it
credible.
If they didn't deem it credible,
then arguably then it would be
perjury. But, and they go
validate it because we know that
they're required to go check
other things before they, they
seek a nerd book. I just wanted
to clarify that two points. One
is reporting party is important.
We want to, I do think we want
to think about that and um the
warrant I've, I've got to
understand that better and so
I'll be reaching out to those of
you who have a better
understanding of how the warrant
system works because I'm a civil
lawyer and I don't have to deal
with that much so um.
I want to thank you for the work
you've been doing Representative
Garrett, and you as well, um,
Miss Lewis, um, appreciate the
work and we'll be talking some
more, I'm sure, um, as we go
forward on this. So thank you.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Madam Chair and everybody here
for your thoughts on, um,
so last item on our agenda is
committee discussion.
Any discussion or everybody
wants to leave.
Uh, Representative Chasey, thank
you, Madam Chair. I'm sorry I'm
late. I've been waiting on a
doctor for a long time this
morning, um, Senator Cervantes,
I saw a news report last night
with details about the um,
The the saga of the man who
committed the.
Allegedly committed the crime
and um I was just wondering, I,
I don't think I noticed there
was some coverage here, but um I
just wondered if, if you are
aware of that.
There were. Which one are you
talking about? We have the Best
Buy we've talked about and then
we talked about the Sonic.
Uh, you know which one you're
talking about.
It was 13. It was the Best Buy.
Yeah, I, I, I think it's, it's a
good opportunity for
for you. No, that's OK. And if
you're asking the question, I
hope that with the chief here
and the other law enforcement
that were here, one of the first
things that I, when I presented
the case the other day was to
give kudos to law enforcement,
not just of Las Cruces, which is
where the kudos were being
directed, but really to APD and
to Santa Fe because they worked
all was a manhunt that was
statewide, of course, and began
in Santa Fe, but it, it, it was,
um, many of the clues and, and a
lot of the, uh,
The manhunt was centered here in
Albuquerque and so I think all
law enforcement cooperatively
got a very bad person behind
bars, I believe, and I
appreciate your clarification.
It's an accused person, uh, so
there's some presumption, but
give me a break.
I guess what I
What amazed me is they were
bringing up the, the, um,
exposure of the perpetrator.
And, and it was quite heavy in
the news report that surprised
me. I hadn't heard that on
we we went through that
represented very thoroughly in
the first day of this committee
where again we're hearing the
legislature getting blamed out
of the special session that well
we need to increase sentences
that came out of uh Albuquerque.
It came out of law enforcement.
It came out of district
attorney, mayors around the
state, it came out of
politicians. They all say the
legislature needs to increase
sentences. It came out of the
district attorney in Santa.
Yes, and what I've tried to make
a point in the last few days of
pointing out that the charges,
for example, against the Sonic
Shooter, there were 22 charges
against him over 8 cases. They
pled it down to 1, and as
opposed to him getting the 40
years he was exposed to, he got
8. The same thing was true with
the Best Buy, uh, accused.
Again, multiple cases, multiple
charges, pled down that was in
that was pled down here in the
district attorney in Burnlio
County, the, the sonic was
played down by the district
attorney in
Santa Fe. And so we can keep
adding years we can keep
listening to the, the media and
the public getting whipped up to
think we need to add more and
more years to these sentences,
but it's a dodge. It is, it is a
dodge, uh, because we can keep
adding years to the potential
sentences, but if, if it's not
going to be imposed, it's not
going to be utilized. We're
we're really avoiding true
solutions to our crime problem
by just by pandering and, and
you were here yesterday,
Representative also when we
talked about the Sentencing
commission.
Um, I didn't get quoted in the
press, so I'll try again. We
don't, we don't pull this stuff
out of our ass. Uh, we, we, we,
we have very knowledgeable
people in the Sentencing
commission. We have district
attorneys represented there. We
have public defenders
represented there. I'm not a
criminal lawyer. We have very
knowledgeable people
participating in this process.
They compare our sentences to
federal sentencing. They compare
our sentencing to other states.
They make sure the sentences all
align themselves with all the
other areas of the law, and, and
they
us good advice and, and so the,
the notion that we're just going
to just keep adding more years
and we have one of those bills
in the special session. Let's
add more years for felon in
possession,
that'll that'll combat crime.
It, it's, it's a dodge, right?
It, it is a Dodge and it's not
going to solve anything and it's
going to make it look like we're
not doing our job and that's
just not true. We, we, there's
plenty of years there for the
DAs, there's plenty of years for
the judges. They're not, they're
not beginning to use it.
Did you want to add anything,
yes, Madam, Madam Chair, uh, on,
on Monday when we were talking
about these things, I asked
Sean, our staff attorney,
because I knew we had amended
felon in possession recently,
but we have amended it 4 times
recently, 2018, we amended it to
increase the penalty if the
previous conviction was of a
capital or a serious violent
offense. In 2019, we amended it
to expand.
Definition of a firearm in 2020,
the penalty was increased from 1
year to 3 and in 2022 it was
elevated to a second degree um
for a serious violent felon.
And I think what we need to know
is if that had any effect. We've
asked, right, and, and if we
don't know that it had any
effect then it would not be.
Prudent to amend it again, so.
Yeah, Madam Chair, we, we asked
the governor's staff at a prior
proceeding. We asked him exactly
that question. They said there's
no appreciable impact of, of
increasing those sentences a
number of times we've done so
and um so your, your point's
well taken, and you and I know
this representative we've heard
this for years. Every time
there's a tragedy, every time
there's a tragedy, the
politicians get in front of the
camera and say we need to
increased sentences and, and,
um, our job is to try and be
levelheaded and slow that
thinking down because it's, it's
just an
reaction and it's not a
thoughtful reaction. and Madam
Chair, finally, that what, what
you've brought up with the
sentencing commission is they're
looking for data-driven, um,
recommendations that they can
make to us if they don't have
them, we, you know, or at least
we should be asking them, is
there a reason to do this? and
they say no and we say, OK,
we're not going to do that one,
but, um, clearly they did not
see a um.
A path, a rewarding path with
doing thinking,
Madam chair, if I may just, I
know you're trying to move this
along, but yeah, my, my
amusement just for the fun, just
for the fun here representative
is, again, uh, we, we created
among those changes we we passed
in the law, we changed a
different track for violent
violent offenses, felony
possession versus nonviolent,
and again, with some amusement
to my colleagues over here, you
know, we've got, let's say for
example, an individual who, you
know, so, let's say
hypothetically that
Individual, uh, pays off a porn
star, um, and, and doctors, the,
the, the records and, and maybe
that person gets convicted of a
felony, or, or maybe 34
felonies, uh, should that
individual then be under the
governor's initiative, mandatory
9 years with no discretion for a
judge if that individual should
ever come into possession of a
firearm,
you know,
are we worried that Donald Trump
might have a gun, and should he
have mandatory 9 years
Because he is today a convicted
felon, a nonviolent offense.
It's a good illustration of the
fact that we really need to be
putting some of these things in
some kind of context and and the
the big, the big change in the
governor's initiative was to
take away discretion of the
judges. That would have been
mandatory, no good time.
Um, and, and mandatory 12 years.
That's a, that's a big step.
Madam Chair, but when you remove
good time, you remove a tool
that keeps prisons safe. Yeah, I
think that's a very good point
to make, um, because again, I've
been reading in the paper, oh,
good time is horrible,
good,
it saves lives in, in prisons.
It saves correctional officers'
lives by giving someone the
opportunity to show that they
are working to rehabilitate and
if you take
That way, then people lose hope
and when people lose hope, they
don't behave in the best ways
and can be violent in prison.
There is a policy reason why
there is good time. There is.
So, um, representing Madrid and
then representative Rene.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Let's,
uh, you know, I've voted a lot
of things and, and uh I don't
have any regrets of it, but
here's a perspective this
morning at 6 o'clock, I wake up,
I turn on my, my TV to watch the
morning news.
Guess who's on the news. My
community is chaparral.
They uh they confiscate, they
did a raid in a property there
on the Donana side and
confiscated many, many weapons,
over 100,000 rounds.
Plus pipe bombs.
OK. So understand rural
communities like mine that are
underserved.
Do not have the capacity to meet
capacity from the county's
perspective, and I can truly say
that because I'm operating with
5 only on a side that has
15,500.
So,
That's perspective, guys, that
I'm here 300 miles away or about
close to that, and these things
are my own backyard.
And I've fought in heart.
For both sides.
But that's balance.
That we have a society that
thinks that 100,000 rounds is
within the right of the Second
Amendment. Somewhere we got to
put a balance to this.
And the balances I'm not
against, uh, what do you call it
either side, what I'm for is for
the people.
And people have us here in
representation and have to speak
our truths. So while we hear our
truths,
Both sides please, please, as
you heard the gentleman finish
yesterday's um thing and that is
executives got to work with us
and we got to work with the
executive.
And I don't, I don't say this
with disrespect.
But with respect.
Nothing looks better in our
state when we come together and
do bipartisan.
And we started it with a lot of
effort was uh Senator Cervantes
on the House side.
Representative Ream has been
pushing for stuff for years and
we finally did something on a
joint venture and got it through
at least on our side. So I mean,
it can be done.
And now I got to go back and
face some music in which I'm
going to and, and, and say the
same thing, balance. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative.
Representative Rehm thank you
and, and thank you, Chairman
Cervantes for pointing out what
a bad plea deal was made in
that. Now, I don't know the
exact answer to this question,
but here's one of the things
that I'm very worried about. So
you have a person with a very
bad bad past criminal history.
You allow him to plead to
habitual offender
Which I don't think would
qualify as a new conviction.
So you couldn't charge him now
with a habitual offender again.
I don't know the answer to that,
but I'm afraid that that plea
bargain was sap that.
Uh, rather than having him plead
to one of the 22 charges or one
of the 21 other charges.
The um
The other thing is, is on the
felon in possession of a firearm
when we look at our prosecutors,
they're always going, we need to
take it federal.
Why do they want to take it
federal? because the base begins
at 5 years.
For a firearm, uh, violation.
Uh, they use, uh, score then to
determine how many years a
person has. I think that it's a
very good point that we say our
base is whatever.
But if you use it in the
commission of a crime.
Then we're gonna have a higher
penalty, and I think that's a
good way to go ahead and address
felon in possession of a fire.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. Anyone
else?
Uh, Representative Barrego.
Thank you Madam Chair.
I just want to say something
about jurisdictions, um, you
know, I mean, we're all in this
together. And as long as we keep
saying, you know, that's not my
jurisdiction, that's not my
jurisdiction. I think there used
to be an understanding and
they're probably still is to
some extent with law
enforcement. Um,
That you know if a crime is
committed so many miles out into
another jurisdiction, there are
some overlap, and I think that,
you know, when I hear the vice
chair talk about, you know, the
Fed's not getting involved in
the whole marijuana thing. It's
like, oh well, that bill was
written by the state. I mean, if
we're ever going to get a handle
on the, on the our crime
situation, we all have to work
together. When I was counselor,
I used to say,
We have to be smarter than the
criminals, you know, and the
criminals are pretty darn smart,
and I, I will sit down, but
pretty darn smart, um.
You know, we, we got to handle a
little bit on the retail crime.
Um, we, I mean, we really need
to think about what we're doing
in terms of priorities and, and
I'm gonna say this again, my
automobile theft crime bill has
gone nowhere in two years, and I
saw it when I was on the flood
control board. I saw it when I
was in city council, and then I
brought it to the state and it's
gone nowhere and I, I even tried
to get the
Governor to put it on her.
Specials on her call for special
session and it went nowhere and
I just heard yesterday or I
think it was when they gave the
report on crime that automobile
theft is like one of the, I have
two brothers who are in the car
dealership business, and they
are in northern New Mexico. Both
of them have had cars stolen
right out of their lots. They've
taken them to Los Alamos areas
into the Arroyos and burned
them.
New cars that they bought, you
know, and they've lost.
Thousands of dollars in their
businesses. So I'm just, I'm,
uh, you know, really, let's talk
about our priorities and let's
talk about listening to each
other and working across
jurisdictions, and I'm saying
that with knowing that APD is
here, and I know that you guys
do a great job, but
I just have to say that, thank
you.
Thank you, Representative.
Anyone else? Yeah, of course. So
it's, it's good to have this
discussion, good to have the
dialogue. So Rivers and Barrego,
I, I think it's important, a
couple of things I, I leaned
over to the, the chair, hope you
don't mind chair outing our
private little whisper over
here. I said, did it die? Did it
die? Did your bill die in the
house or did it die in the
Senate, it died someplace,
right? Um, let me just, let me
just make sure that, that you're
clear that everybody here is
clear. Nobody here is not aware
of the auto theft problem in New
Mexico. None of us are.
Where the statistics we got
those presentations the other
day it's through the roof. If
you introduced a bill on auto
theft, and it didn't go
anywhere, uh, we should talk
about it and we should figure
out why. My guess is you're
going to probably find out with
great certainty. I'm going to
tell you, it's already the law,
um, and, and of course that we
saw that during the last special
session when the governor
introduced a bill to require uh
data collection from local law
enforcement to DPS and as much
as we would point out to the
governor, this is already the
law, um, they didn't.
I hear it. Um, but it is a law.
It's already a law and I've,
I've been amused the last couple
of days, the governor's
spokesperson has tried to say,
well, the governor's bill was
specific that it included not
just data in crime reporting but
also ballistic information as
well to DPS can do that anytime
they want. They, they DPS
determines what reporting is
required to DPS and DPS could
just say, give us your ballistic
information too. Um, so,
due respect to whatever your
bill is, I'll, I'll look forward
to talking to you about it and
You're trying to see, but, but
we don't just kill bills, the,
the two committees in the House
and Senate for sport, uh, we, we
try really hard to do what we
did with the governor's
initiative, which is say this is
already the law. We don't need
to say it 2 and 3 and 4 times.
In fact, it's, it's not a good
idea to do that because the
courts are then trying to
reconcile why we have one law
that says one thing and another
one that has any difference to
that. So we'll,
we'll work together I appreciate
that, um, Madam Chair, I'm
sorry. um, Mr. Vice Chair.
Um, I will just say that with
that particular bill. We had the
insurance people behind it. We
had the automobile dealers
behind it. We had APD behind it.
We had the DA behind it. So, you
know, I, I appreciate, I really
want to work on that because I
think that it can be improved
and it can and it can be better
and it can make things better in
terms of
And I know that there are people
that don't want higher
penalties, but in some
situations,
Like, not everybody can be, you
know, re-educated and
behaviorally adjusted, I guess,
but thank you for that.
Anyone else? Well, I want to
thank all of you again, we had,
I think, a great 3 days of
meeting and conversation and
debate and discussion and.
Yes, Senator.
Thank you. I was like, Madam
Chair, that's just a small
point, but I think today's
presentation showed that we need
to be really careful with any
amendments and tweaks to the
bill, um, to the, to the UO
bill, um, and, and take a little
bit more time to study what the
impact of the recommendations
would be. I'm all for passing a
bill and making it, making it
better by amending it, but it
seemed to me that there's a lot
of misconceptions about what the
bill.
And so I just wanted to make
that point.
Thank you. I appreciate that.
Sure, so I just want to thank
all of you and I want to thank
um uh.
CNM for the hospitality and the
support, um, I got great support
in terms of getting the room and
all, all of that and thank you,
Martin, really appreciate it and
thank you, Marla Schultz, who
helped, you know, arranged a lot
of this and helped us with
refreshments and so on. So just
want to thank everyone as
always, CNN was great and really
appreciate all of you. So thank
you very much and we and Nancy
and all the staff definitely
because it's a hassle getting
all this stuff set up, I know,
so thank you.
We are, well, we'll be in
