OK.
OK, thank you very much, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee for this opportunity
to be here today, my name is
Dina Mascola and I am the CEO of
Espanola Pathway Shelter. Um, I
am returning as of March of this
year, I was the original CEO
that helped open the shelter
back in, uh, 2019 when we first
got our funding. I was here for
about 2.5 years, um, left and
just returned to help with some
The problems that we're going to
be talking about today. Thank
you.
Madam Chair, esteemed members of
the committee. My name is Jake
Stockwell. I'm the operations
director of Pathways Shelter
currently, but I've been serving
the shelter since it opened, um,
mostly doing direct care, so I
have a very, um, day to day
relationship with people who are
using shelter services, older,
uh, overnight services and etc.
Thank you.
Uh, good afternoon, uh, Madam
Chair, and the committee. Thank
you for your invitation to be a
part of this process. Uh, my
name is Rob Ve Hill, and I'm the
program director of Eagle
Village, uh, through Espanola
Pathway shelter are recovery
housing program uh located in
the middle of Espanola. Um, I'm
a native of Espanola. I was born
and raised here and uh I am in
recovery myself 6 years in
October.
So, um, I, I know about what uh
what we're trying to do over
there at, at Eagle Village. But
thank you again.
Keep the presentation to about
15 to 20 minutes and then we'll
have some time for 15 minutes or
so of questions, so.
OK, Madam Chair, committee, uh,
I'll go ahead and go first. So,
um,
I have been with uh Espanola
Pathway shelter, uh, 5 years,
uh, Dina, uh hired me 5 years
ago. I come from a background of
corrections and probation and
parole.
And so it was a an interesting
move for me to get into working
with the unhoused and people in
recovery, but uh Jake and I have
been there the longest as far as
staff, um, in that time, as we
moved uh.
Eagle Village, which was an old
motel central here in Espanola,
uh, that Representative Cynthia
Brego is familiar with, um.
When we started, we were
basically trying to get people
housed during COVID and using
the rent the units there at the
old motel. There's 14 currently
there's 14 units there, uh, to,
uh, house people during COVID,
get people sort of off the
streets and and trying to save
lives basically, uh, and then
eventually we uh looked at a
model for recovery housing.
And what that meant for us was
sort of raising the bar of the
clients who would have access to
those units, uh, recovery
housing now is, uh, we work with
the local treatment providers in
Espanola, primarily Darren's
place treatment center for uh
clients they get referred to us
after 6 months of verifiable
sobriety. So in order to get a
unit there at Eagle Village, uh,
you need to have a minimum 6
months of sobriety.
And then uh we transitioned the
client to Eagle Village, uh,
where they, they can stay up to
18 months. Uh, we charge $350
per month. Uh, we don't call it
rent just because we tend to
avoid the language of rent for
tenant landlord purposes, we
call it program fees. So they
pay $300.50 350 a month program
fees to stay in the unit. I'm
the primary caseworker there, so
I assist with job placement, uh,
find locating.
Finding jobs and then eventually
housing, uh, which we have
already heard is quite rough. I
mean, it's
It's the Hunger Games out there,
really for housing. Uh, we're
trying to do the best we can. I
recently was able to help a
client move into permanent
housing last Monday. So we had a
client move out, um, right now,
uh, I can say that over the last
2 years, uh, our success rate
there at Eagle Village is around
70%.
And um.
I will put those numbers against
anything here in the state,
simply because we are in the
heart of Espanola and we're
right next door to an all subs.
So I tell my clients, you can
walk 20 yards and trouble will
come knocking. Uh, we have, you
know, as everybody here uh
presented before, several issues
with the fentanyl problem here,
the explosion of fentanyl here
in this community. Uh, but
again, having a 70% success rate
there, and that means clients
who are
Getting jobs here who are
contributing to the GRT here in
this community, uh, our clients
there at the village, um, are
actually some of the graduates
are actually choosing to stay in
Espanola. They come from other
parts of the state through
treatment, sometimes
court-ordered mandated
treatment. A lot of my clients
are on probation and parole
through Department of
Corrections.
And when they complete the
program and find housing, they
are choosing to remain in
espanola. And I know earlier uh
there was a discussion about,
you know, espanola being the
butt of of jokes and things of
that. Um, I'm from here, so I do
take those things personally,
but I would like to say when you
have people who say they feel
safer remaining here in the
recovery, it speaks volumes
about the work that we're doing.
So, uh, I think that really
needs to
Be heard. Uh, we have uh clients
who, in fact, the client that
was recently housed who are
managers here of big big box
stores here in the valley. So
they are now employing people.
So that cycle is contributing to
the GRT of this community. I'd
like to say, you know, right
now, as Eagle Villages as a
program of recovery housing,
we're adding to the community,
not subtracting. And when I
first got there, we were kind of
a drain on.
Resources from the city, meaning
law enforcement, uh, first
responders, a lot of those calls
were generated because of things
happening at Eagle Village, uh,
as we, you know, raised the bar
and, and became recovery
housing, I would venture to say,
uh, those calls are pretty much
nonexistent. And if there's any
calls for services, they're
something from the outside
coming into our program. So the
clients there, we've created a a
recovery housing community and.
model that our clients take very
seriously and they come here,
they, they after treatment and
they're getting an array of
services and so, you know, with
that, once again, I'd like to
just reiterate that uh it's
working, what we're doing at
Eagle Village is working. We're
having people who are staying in
their recovery red recidivism
rates are low, so therefore,
we're not draining on Department
of Corrections and having them
sent back to jail, uh, they're
here.
They're purchasing goods from
this community. They're putting
gas in this community, and
they're eating in this
community, which all contributes
to the GRT of
of espion. So on that end, you
know, we, we, you know, are very
proud of what's happening there
at Eagle Village. Uh, again, the
housing is a concern because uh
what was mentioned in terms of
uh and, and Mr. Schlegel said it
very succinctly is, uh, the
rates that have gone up, the
rates that are being
charged even for what was in the
past considered lower income
housing is now $1700 a month.
Uh, a lot of my clients
single-handedly can't afford
that. So they have to double up
and sometimes 2 to an apartment
and then if they get other
roommates, I have to worry about
their recovery. Are their
roommates, you know, in their
addiction. So there are other
factors that have to be thought
about when it comes to housing.
Uh, recently, we were given the
connection grant through the
governor's office with the help
of Representative Herrera, uh,
Representative Joseph Sanchez,
Senator Leo Jaramillo to do
renovations to Eagle Village.
Uh, when, uh, that's gonna
happen, uh, Santa Fe County is
our fiscal sponsor, so things
are flowing through them, but we
will be able to uh have
renovations to that old motel to
include kitchenettes for the
clients and things of that
nature. So it's a, it's a huge
upgrade for us there at Eagle
Village. So
I'm very happy that we do have
that, and I will wrap it up by
saying thank you to all of you
for being here and listening to
us right now. Thank you very
much. Thank you, Mr. Vijona.
Thank you, Rob.
Mhm
Hello, Madam Chair and members
of the committee, I thank you
again and, um, and I'd like to
talk about the, um, the state of
emergency that we are in as we
are so proud and excited about
all of the wonderful things that
are happening at Eagle Village.
Um, we're still dealing with a
state of emergency at the
shelter itself. So our shelter,
um, was opened in 2020 and uh
thanks to the Capitol Outlay and
we have been funded through
that.
recurring fashion throughout the
years and that's been wonderful
and we're super grateful and
we're still challenged with that
because it has not given us the
capacity to open 7 nights, um, a
week, 365 days a year. So what
we've done is we've, we've run
seasonal shelter and we have
opened throughout the cold
winter months as much as we
possibly can based on the
funding we have and we've since
have um acquired additional
funding through, uh,
and private foundations and and
that's been, that's been really
helpful. We have the capacity at
the shelter to have 10 men, 10
women stay overnight, um, and
throughout the years, our agency
has grown incapacity each year.
So we were able to acquire the
building that Eagle Village is
in. We also were able to acquire
the building that our shelter
was in, which was wonderful
because now that gives us the
opportunity to have tenants and
some, some income coming.
And, um, so we've been growing
the challenges that we haven't
been growing financially as much
as we need to in order to open
up those 7 nights. So the state
of emergency comes in because
they, as we all know, there's a
homeless crisis in Espanola and
the pathway shelter is the only
homeless shelter within the
area. And we right now are
beyond capacity and that's
largely due to the increase in
homelessness that's happened in
the past few years.
You know, we had the two
apartments closed down. There
have been multiple encampments
that have closed down. There is
a lack of housing, you know, as
we all know, and there is also a
huge increase in fentanyl that
has been keeping people out of
shelters because with the
fentanyl use, they're not able
to stay in a shelter all night
long without using, and then
what happens is their
withdrawals kick in very quickly
and they are in extreme pain and
they have to leave the shell.
So there are so many challenges
that come with all of this, and
as a result, we have anywhere
from 30 to 50 tents in our
parking lot at a time, um, which
equates to about 60 to 75 or
more people within our parking
lot
with a lot of the financial
challenges that we've had, we
haven't been able to work more
with more than a skeleton crew
in quite a while. We closed down
our overnights in, I believe it
was May.
And at that point in time, and
even prior to that, we were
focusing on day services, trying
to provide meals, trying to
provide medical referrals to
medical referrals to, um, rehab
and you know, anything that
people need on an emergency
basis in order to manage the
challenges that come with so
many people in our parking lot.
And that has challenged our
organization because we are
underserving, unfortunately, and
we are also not, um, we do not
have the safety.
That we need in our parking lot
in order to manage that we have
2 full-time people in our
parking lot right now. That's
it. Only Monday through Friday 8
to 4. Um,
and, you know, so this means
lots of resources are drained.
We are constantly reaching out
to, um, the police force to
medical in order to help manage
this. Um, and we have a lot of
extra, um, extra expenses that
have come with this.
We want to make some changes. We
want to make some positive
changes. We want a drastically
change the operations that we
are providing and so right now
we are redoing all of our
operational policies. We have,
um, we have redone our financial
management system. We are
looking to grow in 3 major
categories. The first thing that
we want to do is we want to open
up to be available to people to
come in for overnight shelter 7
nights a week, 365.
Days a year. We also want to
open up a warming center on the
other side of our shelter, and
we believe that a warming center
will give people that are not
eligible to come into our
overnight shelter because of
this fentanyl increase, um, to
give them an opportunity to have
some safety, have a break from
the elements and um, and stay
for maybe a couple of hours.
That gives us an opportunity to
build rapport with people during
that time and then
hopefully lead that lead them to
make decisions to make changes
in their lives, start to have
some goals. Um, and so the third
aspect of the change that we're
looking for is to acquire some
pallet homes. We're already
working with Santa Fe County on
this. Once we get down to, um,
1520 tents, then we're gonna be
eligible to apply for that. We
got to that point. We actually
got to that point and maintained
it for a couple of months. We
were getting ready to go to the
city for permission.
And the um Santa Fe County knew
this because I just want to just
add that we are in Santa Fe
County, even though we're in
Espanola. Um, and then when we
were just getting ready to do
that, that is when the
encampment within the city on
the river had to close and so we
went back up to 50 tents
overnight again. So we're back
at square one again, but we're
working on it and, you know, one
by one we're working with people
to get on tent agreements. You
know, we, we really believe that
despite the challenges that are
there,
we have to work with everybody
individually to find out what do
people need, who wants our help,
who wants to get on a tent
agreement to follow the rules,
follow the law, those are the
people that we're allowing to
stay in our parking lot and we
are holding people accountable
to those rules, um, and working
on, on getting them to the next
step. Uh, but this takes some
time, um, and we believe that
pallet homes will be a great
transition once we get down to
that, those 20 to 15 tents, then
we'll be able to
Transition people into palette
homes, which would be a
transitional move, and this
would be a great,
Great next step for our
organization and desperately
needed in the area. Currently,
we have the funding to
reopen our overnights come
mid-October. We only have the
funding to open 3 nights a week.
Um, mid-October is chosen
because that's when our, um,
that's when the temperatures get
cold and 3 nights a week is
better than nothing. But as you
can see, we're still not
reaching, you know, capacity. So
if we open 3 nights a week in
mid-October, we have funding to
get to get the organization
through March 30th. So,
We are in a state of emergency
because we need to make some
changes quick in order to be
able to serve the people in
Espanola and, um,
And provide some options that
can help people get into the
case management that they need
to get away from, um, lifestyles
that are just
Not healthy and so many levels.
Um, and so I can go on and on
about this, but I know we're, I
want to be mindful of time and
give you an opportunity to ask
some questions.
That's great.
So my suggestion is we go to
questions if that works out is
that OK? um.
Representative Herrera.
Borego
And Senator Lopez so far.
For
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, panel for all your good
work.
And caring for the community,
it's deeply appreciated. Uh, I
just, I'm gonna get something
straight. You got 900,000 from
the governor, as I recall, was
that to buy that whole complex
so that you would have rental
income to contribute to your
annual budget? Yes,
so that was the idea. So what we
really need now is money to
build.
Housing, you know, to, to build
housing for so that you can have
more, more people have a house
to
a shelter to live in.
That's really what we need case
management so we can provide
people the route to, um, to get
to those resources.
And how would you just go over
the numbers again. How many
homeless do you have every
night?
In the middle of, let's say in
the middle of winter.
We, we, we would have between 15
to 20. We would fill up every,
every night,
um, in the shelter inside the
shelter, correct, so that means
even if we were open currently,
current stats, even if we were
to open tomorrow, 7 nights, we
would still have
30 or so people outside that we
do not have capacity for and
there is no other facility in is
that they
they are outside because uh they
wouldn't be allowed inside under
the current rules or they would
be allowed inside. You just
don't have the housing capacity.
Yeah, yes, it's because we do
not have the capacity for all of
the people that are currently
living outside, which is upwards
to 60 to 70 people.
And in addition, just to add to
that, um, also within our
shelter, we opened up as a low
barrier shelter, allowing people
to come in as they are no
questions asked, but because of
the, because of the increase in
the fentanyl, because of the way
that's different than the other
drugs, um, the people that come
in are not able to stay.
the night. They have to leave.
So there's a lot of people that
are in our parking lot, right,
parking lot right now that would
not choose to come into the
shelter because of that, because
of some other barriers that are
there, um, and so that's where
our, you know, warming center
would come in handy. There's
also a lot of people in the
community that are not on our
property that would want to come
into our shelter overnight once
we open.
And, and there are many people
in the community that choose to
not come into our shelter
because of the safety, because
of the intense fentanyl use.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Are you,
are you able to convert any of
that, um.
Any of the uh the building that
you currently own, are you able
to convert any of that into a
more spaces for shelter.
Well,
Funny that you should ask that
because, um, just today we found
out that one of our tenants are
leaving and right now we're at
full capacity with our tenants.
Um, but one of our tenants may
be leaving and the thought is
yes to work with that space to
add to the services that we can
provide.
Now, I, Madam Chair, I think I'm
talking about something
different. You, you have,
there's the goodwill there now,
right? OK. Like if you push
goodwill out, could you recreate
that, that storefront into more
temporary shelter for homeless.
That's what I'm asking and how
much would that cost?
Well, we have, they're on a
lease at this point in time. We
have 3 tenants, Goodwill is the
largest. Um, I think there's
about another 2 more years in
their lease. I'd have to double
check that. Um, that would be
wonderful if we can have more
space.
For something like that, um, the
cost.
Off the top of my head, um,
right now, looking to go through
the growth that we're talking
about here just in the shelter
and with those three areas.
We're looking at a 1.3 to 5
million gap right now. So I'm
gonna guess that.
Maybe close to 1 million.
In order to do that, maybe more.
Thank you. That's on, Madam
Chair. Thank you. Thank you,
Representative. Representative
Barrego. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, and thank you guys for the
work that you're doing. I'm
keenly familiar with this
property with both properties.
Um, Madam Chair, I just wanted
to give you guys a little bit of
a, uh, history of how this all
came to be my grandfather used
to own um the property all the
way for the um where the casino
is
The way he used to run cattle
all the way down to the river,
and my mom and my brothers still
own property in this area.
They're both business owners. My
mom has a, a two story, uh,
retail business, um, building
and my brother owns a little uh
car lot. So my uncle used to own
this motel that Pathways is in.
And my cous my other uncle
bought it from him when he died
or or acquired it.
And then sold it to the state,
so that property, the pathways
is a really small piece of
property. It's a really small
with the 14 units.
The other property, um, I think
was owned by, um, the Romero
family, and I think was acquired
from them. Um, and so.
The thing is that when the state
purchased this property to put
pathways in from my family,
which I had no interest in, um,
actually, um, you know, they
develop and, and I give you guys
so much credit with where you
have brought this too because
there was no there was no
fencing, there was, it was just
like a free for all and um
So the thing is, Madam Chair,
um,
It would behoove the state to
consider looking at properties
that we own in other areas,
maybe to build a larger facility
because
Part of the thing with planning
and city planning and anybody
that knows good city planning
knows that we don't put these
types of facilities right in the
central business district
because that is an economic
deterrent for a community and
that has been an economic
deterrent, and I'm just going to
give you a quick example, Madam
Chair, and then I'm gonna stop
talking. But my brother, who's
car lot is right next to this
pathways has found people
breaking into his car.
He's had people steal his cars,
burn them, um, you know, just
like.
It's been a total nightmare and
I, and I thank you guys for
enforcing and adding with the
money that you do have to create
barriers, um, but Madam Chair, I
think it would really behoove
the state for us to look to see
what properties the city or the
state owns and look to partner
with these behavioral health
facilities in order to create
An appropriate place for them to
take them in that little motel
only has 14 units were taking my
understanding, and you said it.
People from all over the state,
not just Espanola, and there's
only 14 units in that little in
that little space.
Um, so I'm just as an urban
planner, which I was for 28
years. Um, I think it's really
important that we don't build
these facilities right a block
away from a bank which is Valley
National Bank, I think it's
still called Cent Century Bank,
um,
because
it
discourages economic
development. So I think that we
need to be very thoughtful about
where and how we're partnering
to create sort of transitional
living.
Create um a transition from the
street to healthy individuals.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
He represented one other thing,
Madam Chair, um, that little
hotel, um, Robert Redford filmed
the Milagro Beanfield War in it.
Thought I'd better throw that
one in very, very good, um,
Madam very,
very briefly, yes.
Yeah.
Representative Brego is 100%
right. Uh, when we first
obtained the property through
Santa Fe County, uh, it was, uh,
we weren't good neighbors. We
had a lot of things happening.
that were impacting local
businesses.
Uh, in, in the time that we've
moved to recovery housing and
set it up as uh what it is right
now. Uh, I'd like to say and be
proud of the fact that a lot of
our clients have purchased their
first car from Mr. Brego right
next door.
So, uh, in, in that time, we
have become good neighbors and
I, I understand from a, from a
business perspective, uh, but
right now there's no place for
recovery housing in the area.
Uh, the governor has, uh, really
wanted to push at renovating old
motels and hotels that already
pre-existing, so they're not
being built from the ground up,
uh, for some of these programs
such as the recovery housing for
Eagle Village. So, um, you know,
we understand, you know, we're
limited in our, in our capacity
in our space.
But again, we are doing some
really positive things in this
community with what we've got.
So, thank you.
Thank you, um, Mr. Viejo. I
appreciate it. um, Senator
Lopez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. And I
just wanted to say thank you for
the work and services and love
that you provide for community.
Um, Madam Chair, I happen to be
an advisory board member for um
Hope Works in Albuquerque. And
of course, we provide day
shelter services for homeless in
downtown, but it's, it's a
journey.
It's truly a journey as to what
we can do and find
with some of our clients and I
hear similar stories. It's,
it's, it's not like they wanna
be there, but if they're caught
in that loop. And when you
really get to know them and sit
and chat, it's just, it's
heartbreaking.
And I'm blessed because I
haven't.
Um, I had that one thing that
caused me the addiction, but
it's out there, Madam Chair, and
it, it's not something where we
have to criminalize these folks.
It's a matter of how we reach
out a hand and there it's, it's
it's a humanitarian issue.
So I just wanted to say thank
you very much for what you do.
Thank you.
Anyone else?
Well, I want to thank you also,
you know, I, I've said this
before, from Los Alamos, so I
definitely know the work that
you're doing and and I also know
that a number of our residents
have volunteer and helped
support the the shelter, so, um,
you know, we're all in this
together and we all want to work
to help um relieve, um, the
homelessness issue here in the
north as well as other parts of
the state. So thank you for
sharing your experience and.
Um, I'm sure we'll be hearing
more and we'll be working with
your representatives and
senators to see if there's more
we can do to help. So thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
eventually
Next on the agenda is um
Wolf Baumgardner, um, Espanola
is affordable housing crisis,
um, preserving subsidized
housing, and rural New Mexico.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair. I
do have a presentation, so let
me see if I can pull it up
really quick.
Oh, is this better? OK. They
gave me this one.
I have.
OK
OK
Sure.
OK.
Thank you very much for your
patience. Um, so I'm going to
give a presentation today on
Espanola's affordable housing
crisis, specifically, I'm going
to talk about the disappearance
of subsidized housing here in
Espanola, um, efforts that my
organization has been doing to
address it and things that the
legislature might be able to do
to address it.
OK, so first off, my name is
Wolf Baumgartner. I'm an
attorney with the New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty. I've
met a lot of you in my advocacy
work before. Um, I really
appreciate your ongoing
commitment to addressing housing
issues here in New Mexico, um,
the New Mexico Center of Law and
Poverty addresses lots of
issues. You've probably spoken
with some of my coworkers or
maybe we've followed you down
the halls at the roundhouse to
bother you about something. Um,
but we do policy work around um
uh debt, health care, public
benefits, education, work.
rights and housing.
So I'm gonna talk a lot about,
and you've heard some a little
bit already about two apartment
complexes here in Espanola that
um lost their subsidized
housing. So first, there is the
Santa Clara Apartments. Um,
that's where over 40 families
lost their housing overnight.
Um, they were being run by an
out of state landlord called
Bosley Management up in Wyoming.
The landlord hadn't taken care
of the property in at least
years, if not longer, um, and
the city stepped in at some
point to condemn it. Uh,
everybody lost their housing and
subsequently the apartments have
lost their subsidy from the US
Department of Agriculture.
The second apartment complex,
I'll be discussing is the La
Vista del Rio apartments also in
Espaniola, also run by the same
out of state landlord, Bosley
Management.
Those apartments also had
similar issues, um, which I'll
get into, um, but the important
thing that I want to highlight
right now is that basically
within a matter of 2 months,
Espanola lost over 100 units of
affordable housing.
Um, which led to a lot of the
crisis that you've heard about
today, um, people had nowhere to
go. Um, they suddenly found
themselves living on the
streets, um, USDA did an
investigation to see if there
was any other affordable housing
nearby. The closest thing that
they could find were the Los
Lomas apartments, um, that Dylan
was telling you about earlier,
which have their own issues and
which were on average about 5
times more expensive than where
my clients were living previous
ly
Um, if people want to continue
living in the USDA housing, the
closest apartments that they
could find were in Taos, um, and
there was a pretty long waiting
list to get into those.
Now this is just a photo of a
couple of our clients, um, the
Santa Fe, New Mexicans done a
lot of reporting on this issue.
You can go to some of their
stories to learn more of the
stories about our clients and
I'll have time to get into
today.
Um, so, so most of what I'm
going to tell you about is
regarding our case, Chavez v.
Vilasac, um, that's a case
where um my organization, the
New Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty and another organization
called the National Housing Law
Projects are representing
tenants of La Vista Del Rio
apartments. We've brought a
lawsuit against the US
Department of Agriculture.
Bosley management and the new
owner who's taken over the
property.
Um, basically, what we're hoping
for out of this, this lawsuit is
to preserve these apartments as
affordable housing to make it so
that espanola will continue
having this place where people
who are really struggling to
make ends meet for one reason or
another because they're elderly,
disabled, I'm having a hard time
finding a job, a place where
they can have decent and
affordable housing um into the
future.
So, uh, at the La Vista del Rio
Apartments, there were 48
affordable units. Uh there was
one other unit that didn't
actually have affordability
requirements. Um, they were
funded back in the 80s. They're
part of the US Department of
Agriculture's Section 515
program. Um, if you're like me,
you'll, uh, be shocked to know
that USDA has a housing program.
Um, I'll go into more details on
it later, but yes, in fact, the
Department of Agriculture runs a
very large housing program, um,
and.
Uh, these two apartments were
both part of that program.
Uh, the out of state landlord
Bosley Management that I
mentioned before, had failed to
maintain the property and USDA
rather than requiring the
landlord to fix the program,
which USDA had funded initially
in the 80s, had subsidized since
the 80s spending millions and
millions of dollars, um, allowed
the landlord to sell the
apartments, forgave his initial
loan, which he still owed the
majority of, and then, excuse
me.
Um, made it so that the
Residents didn't actually have
any subsidies going forward.
So the residents, um, contrary
to federal law, we're not given
any notice of the properties
were being sold. They were not
told that they had a right to
appeal USDA's decision to sell
the property.
Um, the out of state landlord,
contrary to New Mexico law, told
everyone that they had to leave,
that he would not honor their
leases anymore and that they had
a couple days to pack all of
their things and get out.
The one thing that USDA did, uh,
which will hopefully be a
sticking point in this
litigation that can help people
is that they actually filed a
restrictive use covenant on the
property, which, um, at least in
our reading requires the
landlord to continue running the
property, um, as affordable
housing.
So the relief that we're
requesting is that the court,
this, I should say, is filed in
federal court, we're we're
asking the court to require that
the new owner enforced the
restrictive use covenants, um,
run the apartments as affordable
housing that he brings the
apartments to code, as I'll go
into later, there's lots of
habitability issues with these
apartments and that Tim uh there
be damages awarded to tenants
whose rights were violated and
suffered injuries.
Um, just to kind of go into why
this is particularly important,
um, there's not a great number
of people statistically who live
in USDA housing in New Mexico,
but it's often the only
affordable decent housing that's
in any given county in New
Mexico.
Um,
In New Mexico, poor housing
conditions and overcrowding are
highest in our rural
communities, according to an LFC
report.
21% of rural New Mexicans are
living below the poverty line,
which is, as you can see, higher
than in our urban areas and the
median income of rural renters
is about half that of the state
median income, $30,000 a year.
So now to get into section 515
housing generally, the program's
been around since 1963. Um,
there are over 400,000 units,
um, with over almost 1 million
renters all across the United
States, uh, USDA housing exists
in about 80% or a little bit
over 80% of counties throughout
the United States.
Um, just briefly, uh, section
515 alone to understand how it
works. It's effectively 1%
interest rate over 30 year loan
when the program started, they
were actually 50 year loans, um,
they can be applied for by
private organizations, uh, by
counties or states.
And they can be used to create
new housing or rehabilitate
existing housing.
Um, the section 515 housing has
a low income or moderate income
requirements, about 70% of all
units that are in the 515
program have what's called
rental assistance. So that means
that not only is it a low income
person, but their income is
actually so low that the USDA is
going to help them cover the
rest of, rest of their rental
payments.
Um and as I said before, um,
this sort of housing is often
the only affordable decent
housing in a rural community.
Um, I can tell you that uh in
Espanola, um, the clients that I
have that were displaced when
their housing closed have not
found anywhere else that they
can afford, um, and have had to
either um remain living on the
streets in Espanola if they have
pressing reasons why they need
to stay here or have um gone all
across the state trying to find
anything that might be more
affordable.
Um, the average income of a
Section 515 tenant is just over
$12,000 a year. It's actually
lower for people who are
receiving rental assistance
through the Section 515 program.
63% of all section 515
households are headed by an
elderly person or a person with
disability, um, and 73% of
households are headed by women.
And I can tell you that most of
the clients that I have who've
been living in the housing here
in Espanola, um, are people who
have long term disabilities or
are elderly.
So, as I said before, um, the
USDA will give you, uh, will
give a renter assistance if
they're having to pay more than
30% of their income, um,
that number is important. That's
generally in the housing world
where we think of as being rents
burdened. So if you're paying
more than 30% of your income,
your rent burden.
Um,
There's also additional,
additional protections for
people who are living in USC
housing, um, evictions must be
for good cause, um, and
residents have a right to cure
any proposed eviction. Um,
they're generally given very
good time to do this. I, I can
tell you that these are huge
protections for renters, um, if,
as some of you've done, um,
protections for people who are,
or defenses for people who are
being evicted, um, often these
two things will allow somebody
to stay in their household if
they're having a hard time
making ends meet.
Uh, section 515 in New Mexico.
So, as I said, um, there's lots
of of this sort of housing in
New Mexico. We get $28 million
as New Mexico in housing
subsidies from the USDA is over
104 USDA properties. Um, they're
in 36 cities, um, uh, basically
every single county in New
Mexico. Um, the only place where
there are categorically none is
actually Bernallio County just
because it's considered an urban
county, um, but just about
Anywhere else, everywhere that,
um, is represented in this room,
there is going to be a USDA
housing property.
Um, so since the 1990s, the
budget for rural development
housing has been cut by over
90%. Um, effectively what that
means is that there is no uh new
USDA housing, um, the money
that's that's there is basically
being used to continue making
these places to be decent and
places to live.
Um, across the country, that
means by 2050 this, unless
something drastic changes the
Congress, um, this program will
have effectively disappeared.
It's important because when
these mortgages mature.
Then the the protections go away
for tenants.
Um, specifically in New Mexico,
there are 21 USDA properties in
the next decade alone that will
lose funding.
It's a lot of uh right about
1000 affordable units.
Um, and by 2039, basically all
of our USDA housing will be
gone, um, unless, uh, there's
steps taken to preserve this
source of affordable housing.
So, like I said at the apartment
complexes that we represent, um,
there were almost 100 families
that were displaced.
Um, those people have tried to
find somewhere to live, but
often cannot. Um, a lot of them
are receiving services from
Pathway shelter, um, a lot of
them have moved to places like
Albuquerque, um, some have found
places to live, uh, but many
have remained on the street. I
can tell you that two of our
named plaintiffs um were
homeless for a very long time,
living out of their cars. One of
them is over 60 years old.
Um, but they just simply
couldn't find anywhere else that
was affordable to live in the
area and even those that go to
Albuquerque often find a place
that they can afford to live.
Um, now, there's certain
apartment complexes that will be
even more catastrophic when they
close, um, specifically in
Sunland Park and in Gallup,
there are 2 apartment complexes
that have well over 200 people,
um, which means that basically
on one day, all 200 of those
people will be looking for
somewhere that's actually
affordable to go to.
Um, there's other large examples
in Anthony Grant Bloomfield that
have over 100 units that will,
again, on one day close and and
all those people will be looking
for housing in that rural
community.
Um, this isn't just a real
problem. Uh, for example, in the
next two years, communities
around Las Cruces are set to
lose 215 rental assistant units,
um, all those people will likely
not be able to find much
affordable housing in places
like.
Uh, Sunland Park, and so they'll
likely move into Las Cruces
where they might be able to at
least find services for people
who are unhoused.
So there are a variety of ways
that 515 programs can disappear,
um, other than when their
mortgage ends, they can also be
subject to foreclosure or to
prepayments, though prepayment
is um often not permitted under
federal law, um, because
Congress wants to make sure that
this remains a source of
affordable housing and that the
landlords that own these aren't
just taking advantage of really
good federal loans, paying off
the loan, and then kicking
people out.
When people are displaced, they
theoretically have a chance to
get a USD USDA voucher.
As you've heard, vouchers aren't
accepted in a lot of housing,
um, even when they are accepted,
um, the protections afforded by
the voucher aren't as good as in
the actual rental assistance
program.
Um, and also people end up
paying more with the voucher.
Uh, very briefly, I'll just say
that there are um several people
in Congress that are looking to
reform this program to breathe
some life into it and make it uh
something that can last. A lot
of those efforts are in the
strategy and investment in rural
housing Preservation Act, which
would allow people to um
actually stay in these complexes
after their mortgage matures.
There are a lot of things that
uh individual states are doing
to alleviate some of these.
issues. Um, I think one of the
sort of easiest thing that many
states are doing is they're
providing loans through their
equivalent of MFA to what are
called preservation purchasers.
So that can be um a housing
authority, it could be a county,
it could be a city, it could be
a nonprofit.
And more or less how they
usually work is um a low
interest loan is provided to an
entity that would like to
continue running this as an
affordable housing complex. They
purchased the complex and then
they continue providing it as
affordable housing where people
have good renter protections.
Um, another thing that some
states have done is provide
relocation assistance to people
who are losing their housing.
Uh, this can often come in the
form of a voucher, uh, that
allows them to move somewhere
else.
And then some other states have
gone, taken the step to require
earlier notification
requirements above and beyond
what USDA requires. Um, one
example is California requires a
year's notice. Um, there's some
some other states that require 6
months' notice, and that at
least allows a person time to
know that they're going to need
to try to find somewhere else to
move.
Um, and as stated before,
there's lots of other things
that we could be doing in New
Mexico to generally alleviate,
um, the sorts of harms that come
when somebody loses their
housing or is threatened with
losing their housing. One is
enforcement of already existing
tenant protections. As you all
heard from Dylan before, there
really isn't much of an
infrastructure to help people
who are um faced with, with an
eviction or who are living in
substandard living.
Um, as of right now, our
attorney General is not working
on, um, not working on enforcing
the housing code at all in these
sorts of homes or in
manufactured home communities.
Um, I, I definitely would
applaud any sort of effort taken
by the folks here to um to reach
out to the Attorney General and
talk with them about what needs
to happen to make sure that
their office has the ability to
step in and work on these issues
because frankly, um, I get calls
about these issues every single
week, if not every single day,
and um I can only ethically, um,
effectively represent so many
clients at once, and these cases
can be a lot of work. Um, it's
lots of people with
Individual issues, but also lots
of um larger systemic issues,
especially when these sorts of
bigger housing complexes close.
Another thing that could really
help people um is funding for
civil legal services.
Um, uh, offhand, I would say
that there are maybe 3 full-time
housing attorneys right now at
Legal Aid New Mexico, and those
are just about the only
attorneys that you can get who
can represent low people uh who
are facing eviction, um,
throughout the entire state. Um,
it's not nearly enough to cover
all the civil legal services
that are necessary, uh, in
around housing.
And then, of course, in another
way that we could um alleviate
this displacement is to continue
to preserve other sources of
affordable housing, um, in New
Mexico, more than any other
state. Um, we have folks who
live in manufactured home
communities and it's especially
true in rural communities, um,
up in Farmington, for example,
uh, more than half of people
live in, live in a manufactured
home community, um, that's way
above the rate of basically
anywhere.
else in the country, um, and
they're really affordable way
that people can live and in
fact, an affordable way that
people can go on to own their
own home.
Um, unfortunately, most of our
manufactured home communities
here in New Mexico were built
back in the 70s and a lot of
them have really serious
infrastructure issues. Um, for
example, there are.
To manufactured home communities
in I believe Almo Gordo that
I've been speaking with
recently, um, who recently lost
all natural gas. They don't have
any hot water, they don't have
heat. They haven't had it for
months and it'll cost millions
of dollars to fix the
infrastructure, um.
And that's, that's a problem
that we're gonna be seeing all
around the state. So a huge
thing would be just um investing
in some of these, um, some of
these already affordable sources
of housing in rural New Mexico.
And then there's other things
that states are doing to uh to
ensure that these sorts of
displacements don't happen.
Someone would be a write a first
refusal for preservation buyers
that would allow it so that if
counting wants to step in and
run a place as affordable
housing, if there's a nonprofit
that can step in and run the
place's affordable housing.
They'll sort of have the first
bite at the apple to purchase a
place at a market rate.
Um, another way would be to
regulate rent increases, um, so
for my clients that were living
in the apartments that lost
their protections. Um, a lot of
them were looking at over 100%
rent increases, um, just numbers
that they, they can't afford and
basically what that means is
that they're going to be living
on the street.
Another would be to require a
cause for evictions. This is the
thing that in a lot of other
states have done.
Um, that basically says that you
can't just not renew a person's
contract, unless there's a
reason that the the the owner
isn't going to renew it.
Um, and then another would be
allow time for tenants to uh
cure proposed evictions, like
his protected in the USDA
statute. I can just say that all
of these state fixes right here
would also apply to the
apartment complex that Dylan was
talking about earlier. He was
previously a light tech um
property. There's hundreds of
high-tech properties throughout
the United States. Those, those
are low income housing tax
credit properties, um, they
don't have as good of
protections as the USDA housing
does, but
They're extremely prevalent in
New Mexico. It's where the vast
majority of subsidized housing
is in New Mexico and just in the
next 10 years we're set to lose
thousands and thousands of those
affordable housing units. So all
of these fixes would also help
the people who live in apartment
complexes like that.
Um, I provide some links. I, I,
I am really only just scratching
the surface of some of these
issues. Um, there's so much more
that I could say, so much more
that we could all learn about
how these work. Here are some
links I can provide this to
everybody if that's helpful. Um,
but I also just want to say
other than standing for
questions, I am more than happy
to talk with any time with
anybody here about housing
issues generally, about rural
housing issues, um, I've done a
lot of research on what other
states are doing.
Doing and what we could do here
in New Mexico and I can tell you
about the um stories that we
hear every single day from
renters throughout New Mexico
and the issues that they're
dealing with. So, um thank you
for your time.
Um,
thank you, Wolf, um, I'm taking
names for questions.
Comments?
Oh, Senator Cil Lopez.
Thank you, um.
I appreciate all the work that
you do, Mr. Bumgarter. That's,
that's really, really important
work in a state like ours. Um,
did, were you here for the
presentation by Mr. Schweigle?
OK. Um, he also suggested source
of discrimination, um,
prohibition. Would you add that
to your list if you're thinking
about how to,
um, as you might know, um,
Albuquerque, Las Cruces, and
Santa Fe, though their statue or
their ordinance.
doesn't go into effect for a
year, all have sources of income
discrimination. That's huge, um.
Uh, it would mean a lot to all
of my clients who are displaced
who now have a voucher that
often is just about worthless,
um.
Uh, yes, it would be huge if,
if, especially in the rural
communities throughout the
state, if that was a reality for
them too, so they could use a
thing like a USDA voucher and
still have somewhere that they
can live. Great, the other, um.
As you know, we've tried.
Rent control a few different
ways in the in the legislature,
and it hasn't, it hasn't gone
anywhere. Um, and I noticed you
had this, the rent control up
there. Are there other?
Alternatives or any kind of, I
mean, one of the legislators
told me, well, there needs to be
a compromise here, and I don't
know what a compromise would be
on rent control. Um, I know one
legislator, I think it was, uh,
try to compromise of of just
limited to 10% per year, which
seems like a lot, um, and that
didn't go anywhere either.
So I'm, I'm just wondering if
you have any kind of creative
ideas for for I don't know if
compromise is the right word,
but something that um.
Is more palatable. Sure, so
Madam Chair, Senator C. Lopez,
um.
Rent control is obviously a
non-starter for a lot of people,
um, but when we say rent
control, we're really talking
about a huge variety of
different policies, um, rent
control in some cases can look
like a landlord simply needing
to offer an explanation for why
they're raising rent, um, it
could look like something like
uh uh uh an explanation needing
to be provided if the cost of
rent is actually going up faster
than say the cost of living.
Um, it can look like, um, it
being limited at a certain
percentage, um, so I guess
that's one way of answering the
question is saying that rent
control can certainly look like
a lot of things. Um, I think one
of the areas where rent control
could potentially be the least
controversial, um, and maybe the
most helpful is in a place like
a manufactured home community,
right? This is a place where a
person owns their home, right?
They own the actual house that
they live in, but they don't own
the dirt that it's on.
They're renting the dirt.
Um, so I can say that I've had
clients who live in manufactured
home communities where all of a
sudden the price of that dirt
increases 100% overnight because
somebody from out of state comes
and buys it.
Now, you could have something in
the manufactured, uh, the mobile
home Park Act for New Mexico,
right, that says um that an
increase over a certain amounts
in manufactured home community
for the cost of that dirt is
something that a landlord would
have to provide a reason for, or
it could be limited at a certain
amount.
Um, another thing would be to
say that um people can only have
their rents raised so many times
a year per se. So I've got um
clients who live on month to
month leases, and sometimes
they're looking at a rent
increase. It seems like every
few months, right? And so, so
there could also be statutory
provisions that say that rent
could only be increased once a
year or something along those
lines. Um, so really there is a
huge array of tools that
legislators can use to to um
regulate
Market about how much this, you
know, thing that everybody needs
can cost. So when you say
explanation, to whom, to the
tenants to. Yeah, it's a good
question. I mean, so it depends
kind of on the jurisdiction. Um,
it could be to a court, right,
but it also could be to often
places will have more or less
like a board. I think it's more
um more like city focus. So say
if Albuquerque, I mean, right
now there's uh the statewide
prohibition on rent rent
control.
Um, but if that law disappeared
tomorrow and Albuquerque was
allowed to enact some sort of
rent control. What they could do
is they could actually have a
board that they put together,
and if a landlord wants to
increase the rents, you know,
that the contract was, then they
can go to the board and they can
say we had to do, you know, a
$15,000 you know, uh, repair on
the roof or our cost of
insurance went up. Um, and as
long as they have, you know, a
good faith explanation for why
they need to increase the rents,
um, then
And then they'd be allowed to
increase the rent. How about a
cause that rent control prohibit
that law regulating rent
control, as I recall, that was
uh an Alec, um, I remember the
testimony about that. It was
proposed by Alec and I guess it
passed, I don't know, 1520 years
ago. Um, how about removing or
repealing that, would that be
helpful or yeah, I, I, I, uh,
mandam Chair, Senator Lopez, I
believe so. I mean, if you
removed that law,
Which my understanding was
proposed by Alec in 1993 or
something along those lines.
Yeah, that
that would give localities the
ability to to implement rent
controls if they think that it's
the appropriate measure, right?
So you could say exactly.
So if Albuquerque thinks that
it's important there, they could
pass it if they if they think
it's important in Taos, it, it
would be left more up to the
democratic process there
precisely.
OK.
All right, well, I appreciate
the work that the center does,
um, to, to address poverty and
um
I hope that we can come up with
things to really help folks in
this, in this circumstance
because I think it's part of the
perfect storm that is causing um
people who lose their house.
I've been now
for the last few months, I've
been talking to people on the
streets for how they got there
and housing would, would be a a
big solution. One of the, some
of it though is I talked to one
person who was um
She had a place to stay because
she, the church allowed she was
an asylum, somebody seeking
asylum, and the church allowed
her to her and her daughter to
stay at night, but they couldn't
stay there during the day. So
they were on the streets during
the day and the daughter, this
is, the daughter was planning to
go to everything she had
connections, um, so the daughter
was already enrolled in school,
was going to start school, and
she, she was working with a lot
of services.
But she didn't believe that
she'd be eligible for any kind
of permanent housing. She
thought she was going to be on
the streets in the day, during
the day and definitely, and I
believe that she had case
management and and she had
support. Is that correct? Um,
yes, Madam Chay Lopez. I mean, I
can tell you in Albuquerque
alone, we all know that
homelessness is such a huge
problem, uh, APS estimates that
they at any given time have 4000
unhouse students, right?
Those are, those are students in
our our just like our city's
largest public school system.
Um, and often that's the case is
that there's not many places for
people like that to go. Um,
shelters are often limited and
who they can, they can allow in,
often they won't allow families
to stay there for one reason or
another, and that means that
there are lots of families and
kids that are living on the
street, um, in Albuquerque,
there is a source of income
discrimination, often people
have a caseworker, often they
have a voucher, um, and I can
tell you anecdotally, we have
another case that's against the
city of Albuquerque.
Um, for constitutional
violations of unho people's
rights. In that case, I had um
really um like the honor to
speak with, um, uh, maybe
hundreds of unhoused people, um,
to spend time with them, to
learn about their lives, to
learn about the sorts of things
that they would want from a
lawsuit, um.
And I can tell you that the vast
majority of them lost their
housing because it became too
unaffordable. I mean, and
another anecdote I could say is
that when I moved to New Mexico,
I was paying $300 for the house
that I was living in. And if I
still live there now, it's, it's
on the same block as me, so I
get to talk with the students
who live there. Uh, I'd be
paying over $1300 a month,
right? Um, the house housing
costs in Albuquerque have
skyrocketed, and it's true
everywhere.
Um, so, so people are losing
their housing, they're ending up
on the streets. Often they do
find a caseworker. Often they do
find vouchers. Often those
things don't help. Um, there's a
whole variety of reasons why,
and I'd like, I'd be more than
happy to talk about why and um
but but I think the big ones are
that we don't have a source of
income discrimination.
Um, that there is, um, housing
that we're losing, right? It's
not that massive amounts of
people are moving to New Mexico
and that's why
I'm sorry you could talk about
this all day, and I think it's
really important. I just want to
finish by saying I really value
your perspective because you're
communicating with the people
most affected. I've been trying
to do that. I've only spoken to
9 in the last few months, which
some won't talk to me, um, but
it it's
Very, very informative, and
that's where we're going to
develop the best policy to
address the root cause. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Senator. So we have Senator
Lopez and then representative
Herrera.
Uh thank you, Madam Chair, and
Senator Cedilia Lopez, you and I
were on the same train of
thought. So I kind of say ditto
on some of the questions that
the senator asked,
um, Madam Chair, and again, I
know we all know this, we've
heard it, but for those
watching, um, you know.
The threat of being unhoused
affects our children in the
education system.
And it's not just Albuquerque
public schools, but there are, I
would think every school
district, all 89 in the state of
New Mexico will have some family
that is affected by the threat
of being unhoused.
So it does affect um so many
other, it has a, I call a
snowball effect for so many
other.
Um, happenings in our community.
I firmly believe that if we
could and we'll try again this
coming session for removing the
prohibition on rent control. It
just allows local communities to
make up their own decision, make
up their own mind.
Um, but it's still going to be
an uphill battle, and I
understand it, but it's the
right thing to do.
So that journey will continue.
Um, what I also want to say also
too is thank you for the
information you've shared.
And along with with um income,
there's also credit check and
everything else is part of that
list that they go through when
you go to apply.
For rent, right, to rent a um a
simple apartment and it affects
students and college level and
others who don't have credit yet
or if you've happened to have a
bad credit rating, then forget
it.
So it it's where we are at this
point, um, Madam Chair, but it's
not just um housing,
homelessness, unhoused different
names that are given, it's not
just because they've made a
choice. There's a whole bunch of
other issues that come that have
affected and many of us are
privileged to be able to have a
home over our, you know, a roof
and other sources of income and
such that we haven't made a
wrong decision on investments
and such. And an investment I'm
not talking.
Docs. I'm talking other
investments. So it's just
something that
Um, I think we have to keep in
mind that.
There are others in our
community that need an
opportunity. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Senator.
Representative Herrera. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you for
your presentation. I really just
want to talk a little bit. I
don't have a question, but it's
how you create housing in rural
communities, and that's a huge
problem too. I, I'm just gonna
say I worked for 2 years with a
local organization, McCurdy
Ministries, to develop
A 60 to 80 tract housing unit in
the middle of Espanola, close
proximity to Los Alamos. This
was not subsidized housing. This
is just affordable housing that
teachers could buy that, you
know, a young police officers
and their families could buy
houses were 250 to 500. We had
this plan, we had $2000 coming
in to take out, you know,
buildings that were just riddled
with asbestos, etc. they, they
were creating this campus into
a housing complex and uh
hopefully we would get a, what
do you call it, an anchor
property from Los Alamos to do,
uh, you know, kind of a work,
um, a work office there, so
there are a lot of moving parts.
We worked on it for 2 years and
then a group of citizens, um,
and it was election time in
Espanola.
Uh, and they didn't want more
traffic on a certain road, even
though I got the Secretary of
Transportation, Ricky Cerner to
come in here and say if we read
direct the, the routing out of
this place, we could do it and
so because it was election time
and you know, everybody's
selected in Espanola by 100
votes. Everything's personal,
ah, that failed to get through
the planning commission and that
guy was running for city
council. So I'm just saying.
All of that work, you know,
somebody just threw up their
hands and walked away. We'll see
if we can revise it again. Uh,
we got the, uh, the, uh, what do
you call it, out of, uh, Santa
Fe the Housing Trust.
Oh, what's it, I can't remember
their name. I'm apologize
because I brought him in here to
homewise thank you homewise to
come in and they were part of
it. We had a lot of, a lot of
partners, a lot of partners,
money from EPA, money from, and
then it just fell apart. So I'm
just saying as a as a state.
And then there's this other
great thing that we have where
you can out of the mortgage
finance authority where you can
buy vacant and empty houses, and
you can refurbish them. You can
buy them and refurbish them and
sell them to the community. OK?
So we have a lot of, you know, I
looked at all the work it took
to make 100, well, 60 to 80
housing units and then I looked
at this model, well, we have a
lot of vacant buildings here, so
I asked the county, would you
take this on? Well, the problem
is, when we do this as a
I'm learning this. I'm still
learning more than I'm giving
the at this level when we do
this at the state level, we
sometimes make the money
available for housing, but we
don't give the counties a person
to actually do that job and
that's what we need to do, uh,
you know, we're, we're really
good at capital outlay, but not
giving actual money for people
to actually get the job done, so
that's, I'm looking more at
doing that now that I've kind of
gone through this system and
we're going to try
To revise that again and then
I'm going to try to work with
the county and try to get them
money to actually hire a person
to actually do the job because
and that would create jobs, you
know, to get a developer to come
in as, you know, you're talking
millions and millions of dollars
to rehabilitate empty vacant
houses and to revitalize
neighborhoods by doing that is a
much easier process, but we need
people to actually do that work.
So that's all I have to say,
Madam Chair. Thank you.
Um, thank you, Representative.
Uh, just one thing I want to
raise up AI and the use of
algorithms to screen tenants.
Are you seeing any of that, um,
just a brief comment on that.
It's something I'm looking at as
an issue, um, what's your
observation with regard to that?
Yes, Madam Chair, that's the
short answer. We, we, we do see
it all the time, um, it's made
it unbelievably hard for certain
people to find housing and
And it was already mentioned
before by Mr. Schweigle, um, but
a handful of states attorneys
general, um, have already taken
on um one of the largest um
operators of one of those AI
systems, um, and are, are trying
to address it and and it's a
thing that we hear about here in
New Mexico.
I'll just make this point.
evictions when someone's, you
know, um, the object on an
eviction notice, that doesn't
always go through fruition, but
it's still in your record and as
things as AI just keeps
regenerating things about a
person. It has the potential for
really stigmatizing and really
impeding ability of a person to
get housing irrespective of the
fact that they may have not done
anything wrong, and we've heard
some stories today.
About where a lot of potential
malice, you know, without
foundation as being moved, you
know, brought against people and
that has the potential for just,
you know, circulating through
the system forever more, and
it's something I think we need
to be looking at. So thank you,
um, really appreciate it, um,
um, Wolf and uh I think you're
um your presentation was very
helpful, so thank you very much.
Thank you, Madam, sure.
OK. Um, we now are on.
Other
Discussion housing stability
context and policies to address
housing stability, and we have
some um staff folks from um the
New Mexico Center for Housing
Law.
You want to come on up and join
us?
Thank you
Nice people.
Yes
High quality paper. Jesus.
OK
Why are we supposed to do this
not yet.
OK. Um, may I suggest that you
each introduce yourselves or one
of you introduce everyone, but
an introduction would be
helpful.
So I'm OK.
we're just trying to get
absolutely.
Yeah.
No notification, yeah OK.
Maybe, yeah, I hear Elizabeth
has hers, you can try that.
Doesn't have the presentation.
Yeah, yeah.
My hard drive first.
We
OK all right
OK.
Well, we'll go ahead and get
started while we're trying to
get the technology to work.
Thank you all so much for
inviting us here today our
existence, the technology.
Yes
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, thank you for
inviting us. We're from the New
Mexico Center for Housing Law.
Um, my name is Alison Friedman.
Hi, my name is Serge Martinez.
I'm Elizabeth.
Sorry, and I'm Elizabeth Elia.
Hi.
Um.
Mm. So thanks so much for
inviting us up to talk to you
today, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, just by way of
introduction, we are, so my
colleagues and I, we are all on
the faculty at University of New
Mexico School of Law, um, but we
are here today in our capacity
as the founders and today only
members of the New Mexico Center
for Housing Law, which is an
organization we started last
year.
To with the goal of identifying,
promising solutions for
promoting and um preserving
housing stability here in New
Mexico, uh, with the idea of
helping conduct research, gather
promising
ideas and programs from other
places that we think might be
effective here in New Mexico
and.
And promoting those and that is
one of the, that is why we've
been invited here today, I'm
thinking.
Um, so, so we are an
organization focused on housing
stability, right, which um means
lots of different things, uh, in
addition to
Um,
Just preserve people who are
currently housed, we want to
make sure that they stay housed.
We know that one of the best
ways to prevent people from
becoming unhoused is to help
them keep the housing that
they're currently in, uh, when
they are stably housed, but
housing stability also refers to
uh maybe I'll define this better
in terms of housing instability,
housing that is where the rent
is too high and just not
affordable, and so folks are at
risk of losing that. Places that
are overcrowded and the
conditions are not appropriate
for
The people who are living there,
whether that's because there's
family living there or simply
just not enough space or other
conditions. Um.
Uh, housing that costs, you
know, a disproportionate amount
of folks' income every month to
be able to afford. and also
folks who move frequently are
what we consider to be housing
unstable. Uh, there's a lot of
reasons that people move, um,
some voluntary, but, uh, what
we're referring to mostly is
folks who are forced to move to
new places, um, even if they
have a place to live, if they're
moving around, we um include
the, include that in our
definition.
of housing instability.
One of the reasons we're so
focused on housing and stability
is our housing stability rather,
um, is, I mean, I, it's
intuitive, I suppose, why
unstable housing would be
undesirable and something that
we would not.
All right. OK, I think we've got
this now.
Well, I stand correctly.
Yeah.
Beautiful, amazing. Alright, so,
um, there are many reasons, like
I said, that housing instability
is something we are hoping that
we can reduce and address here
in New Mexico, uh, intuitively
you might say yes, that makes
sense. Instable is a bad thing.
The one of the places where we
see this most pronounced is in
the educational stamp context
and educational attainment. Um,
housing and stability during
early childhood can affect.
Negatively readiness for
kindergarten, uh, cognitive
behavior, emotional health,
behavioral health, uh,
depression and anxiety are
increased along with housing
instability. Um, New Mexico
students, uh, PED has pretty
good data about this that tell
us that students who are in
unstable housing are
significantly less likely to
graduate from high school than
their peers and significantly
more likely to be chronically
absent, and you can understand
why if your housing is unstable,
it might be hard for you to
attend school and be
To, um,
To meet all the requirements for
graduation. Um, I'd love for you
to look at this chart because it
is very stark. I think you may
have it in front of you. This is
information from PED. It's a few
years old, but we have no reason
to believe that anything has
changed that shows the uh
differences in proficiency on
the old park test in reading and
math, um, negatively correlated
with the number of times people
move during the moved during
this three year period from 13.
16 that was tracked by a PED.
And as you can see, it's pretty,
there's a 1 to 1 connection in
most cases between how many
times you move and the relative
proficiency and perhaps even
more alarmingly, by the time you
get to 10th grade, that
difference is stark and quite
alarming, um, and this has been
replicated in studies around the
country, the, the, the close
connection between educational
attainment and housing
stability, but mobility here is,
by the way, defined to mean you
move around a lot, it's not a
good
of mobility, right? In addition
to educational um impacts, we
see lots of other different
impacts of housing instability.
And this is an area that has not
attracted a ton of attention
from scholars until fairly
recently. Um, so most of this
data, most of the data out there
is pretty new, but it is very
much a, uh, a field in its
infancy. But as, as I've
mentioned, there are, um,
there's a correlation between
moving frequently and chronic
health conditions
Physical health, um, inability
to form lasting ties in a
neighborhood and we know how
important that can be for social
well-being, for political
political power and for the
ability to participate in the
community that you're part of,
um, and a fairly recent study
that I just came across the
other day, talked about um
housing instability and
overweight, hypertension,
diabetes, and cardiovascular
disease, um, increased
prevalence of that, and worse
control of high blood pressure
And, and diabetes,
understandably, right? If you
don't have a stable house, it's
hard to keep on top of the
requirements for taking care of
yourself.
Um, or the conditions are not
such that it's a healthy place
to live and you're unable to
afford the rent. Um, and when
people are hospitalized or
acutely in need of acute care,
they have longer hospital stays.
They need more intense
interventions. So there are,
there are really clear
connections between housing and
stability and all sorts of
social health, behavioral,
educational, um, issues, uh.
And not in a good way. Finally,
I want to talk about eviction,
which is the most extreme form
of housing instability, or one
of, right, where you're forced
forcibly removed from your your
home, it may seem obvious to the
point of why would you even say
this, Martinez, eviction um
leads, you know, to increased
homelessness. But interestingly,
it's not just eviction judgments
that lead to increased
homelessness. It's eviction
filings, right, as we've, as
you've heard discussed before,
and as my colleagues will
discuss going forward
Right. The simple fact of filing
against somebody may cause them
to self self evict or feel like
they have to have to move. Um,
there's a real clear correlation
there that um doesn't wait for
the court to order you out for
people to be displaced by by
eviction filings, um, and
evicted families are more likely
to suffer from unsurprisingly,
mental material hardship,
depression, poor health, other
outcomes that last for quite
some time once a family has been
forced to move, um, and
And you may have heard me say
this before. No one ever gets
evicted and moves to better
housing. Families that are
forced to move will always
almost uniformly relocate to
poor neighborhoods,
neighborhoods with fewer
services and higher crime rates,
and it's sort of, it's a
downward spiral that we see
when.
Folks are forced from their
home, that again has these long
term consequences uh across the
board. So at New Mexico Center
for Housing Law, we are, you
know, keenly aware of the
negative downstream effects of
displacement of instability, and
um and eviction.
And we have been uh reviewing
what's going on around the
country here in New Mexico. My
colleagues and I have come to
you today with a couple of ideas
that, that we want to share with
you and talk to you about
potential solutions to address
some of these problems,
certainly not going to be
comprehensive, um, but we think
are a good start and a place for
us to focus some attention here
in New Mexico. So I'm going to
turn the time over to.
Yes,
Alison Friedman.
Perfect, thank you for setting
this the stage surge, so, um,
we're gonna talk about 3
specific policies today that
might be helpful for addressing
some of these housing stability
challenges that sort of just
highlighted. You might be
thinking, why are we focused on
these three specific policies,
um, and there's 3 main reasons
for that. First, when we talk
about housing and housing
instability, sometimes there's a
focus on sort of two ends of the
spectrum. Um, the entire
spectrum is of course important,
but we tend to focus on building
more housing.
Which is very important and
something that definitely needs
to happen as well as solutions
for individuals who are unhoused
again, equally important, but
sometimes those folks who are in
the middle who are renters, who
might have a place to live right
now, but if they're low income
renters, um, may, you know, be
forced out of housing at some
point down the road. Those folks
are the folks that we are
focused on with these particular
policies that we're going to
talk about today. Um, the second
reason why we want to focus on
these three, is because, uh, we
think that they will have the
greatest impact on the most
number of people in terms of
housing stability and it's sort
of low hanging fruit in the
sense that these things can
happen, um, right now. The third
reason why we're focused on
these three policies is because
we think that they benefit
actually both landlords and
tenants and so we'll kind of
walk, walk through why that's
the case, um, and so we think
these are things that sort of
everyone could get, get on board
with in this particular session.
So I'm going to start by talking
about eviction ceiling,
sometimes called eviction.
expungement, um, there are sort
of technical differences between
those, but you can think about
them for today's purposes as the
same thing, but I'll be using
the term ceiling broadly to talk
about the ceiling of court
records, um, in eviction
proceedings. So at a very high
level, um, eviction ceiling is
important because it's about
information accuracy, and it's
also about the integrity of our
judicial process. So I'll talk
more about what those two things
mean in this context, um, but I
just wanted to preview that
before jumping into a couple of
different.
Scenarios. So the first scenario
is uh uh sort of cycle of what
happens in an eviction case
where a landlord prevails. So
under our uniform owner resident
Relations Act here in New
Mexico, a landlord is required
to give written notice. A
complaint is then filed, um,
there's a hearing held, and then
if the tenant loses the case,
there's a judgment entered, um,
and as Madam Chair was was
referencing a few minutes ago,
that judgment stays on the
tenant's record for the rest of
their life. There is currently
No way in New Mexico to seal or
expunge um or remove that record
from from public view. Um, so
that's sort of the, the first
piece of it. What happens after
the judgment is then a writ is
issued and then a tenant can be
forcibly removed from them from
their home by the sheriff, um,
if they have not voluntarily
left. This whole process takes a
couple of weeks to a couple of
months, so it's a very quick
process to go from house to
potentially unhoused if a tenant
cannot find another place to
live, um, so that's.
Scenario one that I want to
paint for you. Scenario two.
Um, is if a tenant prevails in
court. So this again starts with
the same process. There's a
written notice provided by the
landlord. A complaint is filed
and then potentially the case is
dismissed. This could happen for
a whole host of different
reasons. So if a tenant prevails
in a cage and a judge makes a
determination that, you know,
the tenant wins in that case,
the case may be dismissed. If
the landlord and the tenant
settle the case. Let's say that
the tenant enters into a payment
plan, pays all the backgrounds,
and the case is dismissed for
that reason, right?
Um, a tenant also is legally
allowed to withhold rent for
certain severe conditions issues
that's called an abatement. And
so that's another reason why a
tenant could potentially, um, be
taken to court if they legally
hold rent but then are taken to
court for nonpayment of rent,
they may prevail in that case.
So that's scenario two.
Both of those scenarios are
treated exactly the same in
terms of what happens with, with
the tenant's record. So any
touch point with an eviction
court at all results in a tenant
having an eviction on their
record for the rest of their
life. Again, whether the tenant
wins, whether the tenant loses,
treated exactly the same.
Currently in New Mexico. So why
is that the case?
Well, enter tenant screening
companies, um, this is a $1
billion dollar industry, mostly,
you know, certainly tenant
screening companies, most of
them are not based in New
Mexico. There are over 2000
tenant screening companies
nationwide, and 90% of landlords
report using this type of
screening data. So, um, this is
sort of a fairly ubiquitous um
process that is happening with
tenant screening companies
around the around the country.
So how do these tenant screening
companies actually process data?
What are they doing? First, they
engage in a process called data
scraping. Um, they comb online,
online port dockets for the
names of tenants. So this is
just a publicly available, uh,
docket online. It just says
landlord versus tenant or tenant
versus landlord. There has been
no judicial determination made
about the case and the tenant
screening company comes in and
picks out the the names of the
tenants from those reports.
then code those names so that
they are marked as having an
eviction.
And this is where we get into
the integrity of the judicial
process because no judge has
made a deter determination about
this case. It's simply that
there's been a case filed as
Serge mentioned, that is the
problematic piece. And then we
get into algorithms or AI, and
this presents another layer of
complications because what has
been coded as an eviction is
then fed into these algorithms
and it spits out a report that
is provided to landlords who are
paying for this service, either
a red light or a green
light or a thumbs up or a thumbs
down. And if you look at the
reports, it really is that like
it's a red light or a green
light. If, if you have um been
quoted as having an eviction, it
automatically flips you into the
red light zone, and so, um, it
also sort of takes away the
ability for landlords to really,
you know, have any nuance in the
process and to determine what
happened in that particular
case. Again, the tenant could
have won the case and it was
dismissed, and they're still
quoted as having an eviction on
their record. The landlord
receives that red.
Light report and then that
really impacts the tenant down
the road in terms of housing. So
just to sort of highlight a
couple of things that I was
mentioning and the consequences
for both landlords and tenants.
So for landlords, they're
actually paying for this data,
so they're being sold inaccurate
and incomplete data.
Um, they're then forced to make
rental decisions based on this
faulty data, and it, you know,
there's an inability for them to
consider individual tenant
circumstances because these
reports that they are receiving
are just sort of, you know, a
cover page with the red and
green light or the thumbs up and
thumbs down. Sometimes it
depends on the report and I've
looked at many of them. There's
a tiny bit more data, but you
just don't get much nuance, um,
within that, uh, and so, you
know, it kind of takes away the
ability for a landlord to
actually be able to
Consider individual tenant
circumstances. Um, for tenants,
of course, as I've mentioned,
they're marked with an eviction
for the rest of their life. Um,
their housing prospects are
quite poor oftentimes because of
that, and many individuals will
then fall into homelessness. And
so this gets back to what Serge
was talking about in terms of
the downstream consequences, the
collateral consequences that
come from, um, you know, the,
the challenges with having an
eviction on your record.
So eviction ceiling legislation
is something that could
potentially really help with
this, um, we have done a
national study of all 12
jurisdictions plus DC, so 13
jurisdictions in total, um, that
have some form of eviction
ceiling legislation on the
books. So we have studied that
legislation in depth and then
we've taken it a step further
and also talked to um
legislators, you know,
lawmakers, attorneys, uh,
nonprofit housing advocates,
landlords in all 13 of these
juris.
to sort of figure out best
practices for this type of, um,
this type of legislation while
also keeping in mind, you know,
the unique landscape of New
Mexico and sort of tailoring it
to our state specifically.
So the overarching goals, as I
mentioned at the beginning and
I'll I'll get a little bit more
granular now for this are um one
information accuracy, right?
Tenant screening companies
should not be funneling
inaccurate and incomplete
information to to landlords.
Landlords are are paying for
this again and that's not
helpful for landlords, it's not
helpful for tenants.
Um, the integrity of the
judicial process is another
really important piece. We trust
judges to make determinations
about whether someone has been,
you know, evicted or not, um,
and we should be relying on
those determinations and not
tenant screening companies
coming in and making a faulty
coding determination that really
sort of takes the power out of
the judiciary because the
judge's determinations then are
becoming um meaningless.
So this gets um fairly granular
and I'm happy to answer
additional questions about this,
but I'll just walk through um a
few of the core components from
our national study that we
believe are really important to
have in any legislation of this
type. Um, the first and probably
most important aspect is, um,
point of, of filing automatic
sealing. So what that means is
that all eviction cases would be
sealed the moment that they're
filed. Um, and that's really
important for, for two main
reasons. One,
I, again, you need to shield the
data from the tenant screening
companies, um, right away.
Otherwise, the cat is out of the
bag. Some states do only allow
for sort of what we call back
end um petition by tenants to
seal their records, but at that
point, the information is
already out there. The tenant
screening companies have already
coded it and they don't go back
and sort of correct the record
necessarily. Um, so the front
end ceiling is really important.
And then also in talking to the
administrative office of the
courts administratively, this is
really important to do it.
Automatically, um, because, uh,
it makes it so that it can be
sort of a technological um way
that they seal the cases and so
it can actually it's, it is
feasible. We have talked to them
about this to make sure that
this, this is something that
can, that can be done. They do
this, for example, in juvenile
cases, um, and so this
technology to seal on the front
end already exists.
Um, the second main component
would be automatic ceiling of
cases that are older than 3
years.
So again, this is really
important for housing stability
purposes, um, and you might
think of this as similar to what
we have in New Mexico with
criminal records expungements.
So, um, you know, we have
decided that um a conviction
should not remain on someone's
record for the rest of their
life, and I think the same is
true, you know, in the civil
space with, with uh someone who
has, who has an eviction or who
doesn't actually even have an
eviction right on the record as
we've talked about. Um, and so
this ceiling sort of allows
tenants to move forward after
Um, 3 years into a new space and
it's really important for them
getting into future housing.
The third component is
discretionary ceiling before 3
years, so this can get a little
confusing, but you have to get
through steps one and steps 2 to
get to step 3. so if, for
example, uh, an eviction case
becomes unsealed, right? And
I'll talk about when that would
happen in a second. If an
eviction case becomes unsealed,
but it has not hit the automatic
3-year ceiling point yet. You
still want to have um a way for
the parties to, for example,
agree that the case can remain
sealed, right? Um.
Most of the time if parties
agree to things, courts say, OK,
great, um, you can go forward
with that, um, and then also if
this, if there's a situation
where in the interests of
justice, it makes sense to seal
the seal the records before 3
years. Um, and talking to people
from other states, this is
important for, let's say some
sort of administrative error
that might happen. You need to
have a way to petition the court
and say, you know, actually this
is something that should be
sealed and this would be in the
interest of justice.
Um, so I want to go back for a
second just to number 1 and talk
about when the petition would be
unsealed. So all cases are
sealed at the point of filing,
right when they're filed. And
then if a landlord is granted or
an owner is granted possession
by the court. At that point, the
record would become unsealed.
Um, and so then, you know,
anyone in the public, uh, would
be able to, to view it, um, but
that's at the point where a
judge has actually made a
determination in a particular
case. And so, um, it's not the
tenant screening agencies who
are telling us who
been evicted, it's actually the
court system itself.
Um, and then last but not least,
the limited dissemination
exceptions. Um, we've heard from
people in other states that
ceiling can actually be too
good. So, um, in DC for example,
um, lawyers, judges and court
staff couldn't even see the
records when their law went into
effect, which was obviously
fairly problematic. So we want
to make sure that there are, you
know, limited dissemination
exceptions that are thought
thoughtfully put into the into
legislation and then anyone who
demonstrates a compelling need,
um, government officials for
For example, right, researchers,
journalists might have reasons
why they need to do some
research and get um access to
records and so if they show a
compelling need, a judge could,
could unseal the records, um,
for that purpose as well. Um, so
I will end there um and let
Elizabeth talk about a couple of
other solutions as well.
Good afternoon, everyone. Thank
you. Good afternoon. Thank you
again. My name is Elizabeth
Elia. Um, I'm gonna, I'm gonna
talk ultimately with you about
source of income discrimination
laws, which you heard a little
bit about, um, it was in the
presenter before us, Wolf
Baumgart from the Center on Law
and Poverty, and I'll also talk
a little bit about protections
for manufactured housing
communities, um,
But before I get there, I'd like
to take you, um, on a journey
through some background, so
please bear with me if you
would. Um, I'm gonna give you
some background on the
affordable housing gap. It's a
term that we you may have heard
in recent years, um, we, we've
had numbers swirling around 10s
of thousands of units of
affordable housing that are
needed in the state of New
Mexico and how do we get there,
um, and a lot of, a lot of
people are interested in
possible solutions. So I wanted
to
Provide some information about
that gap and what it, what it
means in some context for
understanding it, um, to, to
talk, to help frame the
discussion for, for, um,
mechanisms that might help to
close it.
So I'm gonna start with some
information both about New
Mexico, housing in New Mexico,
and also nationwide, um, to try
to help frame that. So the
first, the first little data
piece I have here, um, is about
where New Mexicans live, right?
What, what type of housing stock
are we living in?
Overwhelmingly, New Mexicans
live in single family detached
housing, um, so 65.7% of us live
in single family detached
housing, very significantly.
15, I think it's up to 15.5% now
of New Mexicans live in
manufactured homes or mobile
homes. Um, that is among the
highest percentage of
manufactured and mobile home
occupancy in the nation. It's a
critical source of our housing.
Um, relatively few of us
compared to other states live in
multi-family units only 15.1% of
of New Mexicans live in
multi-family units, um, or
single family attached housing
that's down at 3.7%.
Um,
That's worth knowing. I wanted
to also share with you this,
this, uh, chart, sorry, the
formatting is not great. This is
pulled from HUD's data sources,
and it shows um what that
manufactured housing residency
actually looks like countywide,
so it gives us the the
population in each county, the
total housing units in each
county, the number, the number
of mobile home parks in each
county, which is interesting.
And also the number of mobile
homes.
And then the total number of
manufactured or mobile homes as
a percentage of housing in that
county. This is a fascinating um
chart to spend some time with I
think, because there are some
real surprises here, uh,
including if you see Torrance
and Sierra County have among the
highest rates of mobile home and
manufactured home occupancy in
the state at 44.7% and 39.8%
each of their housing stock,
but.
But they have very few mobile
home parks, so that, so those
are not necessarily in two or
more units, um, in, in any
location, um, compare that if
you would to Bernelio County
that has 78 mobile home parks,
uh, San Juan County has 50
mobile home parks, um, so, so
it's an interesting thing to get
a sense of, of your community
and your jurisdiction if you
didn't know already, where
exactly are people living um in
manufactured homes uh in.
In your, in your jurisdiction.
And we'll come back to why
that's important because of um,
there, there's been a real
uptick since 2020 in um in
venture capital, buying mobile
home parks across the country,
including in New Mexico.
Um, so this, when people talk
about the affordable housing gap
across the nation, what they're
usually ultimately referring to
is this report that's that's
present, uh, that's that's
created annually by the National
Low Income Housing Coalition
called the Gap report, and it's
about how many units of
affordable housing or are, are
missing throughout the country,
um.
What we're going to see. So
this, this chart, if you look at
it, it's a nationwide chart
shows that it divides out, um,
residents and tenants in the
country based on their income
level, so the, the left hand
column is income level, starting
with the lowest income.
Uh, tenants in the country at
the bottom in the orange
category, going up to the
highest income tenants up in the
the dark blue category.
And then in the right hand
column, you have units that are
available, the number, the
millions of units in the country
that are available that pair to
that income. And when we say
that they pair it to that
income, it's a specific kind of
housing policy or housing uh HUD
driven standard, which means
that a household is paying no
more than 30% of their income
for rent. And that's really
important as we're going to see
when we talk about why you can't
really build
your way out of the affordable
housing gap. It just, it, the,
the economics of it aren't going
to work and I'll show you why in
a second. So just the basic
statistics, we see that across
the country there are 11 million
households that are extremely
low income, which means that
they earn 30% or less of the
area median income for their
jurisdiction. 11 million
households fall into that
category, but only 7.1 million
units of rental housing
nationwide fall within what
would be 30% of
Their income, right? So we have
a gap there automatically. What
we're gonna see in a second is
that even that is dramatically
reduced because higher income
people often choose to rent
those units, right? So the
actual number of units available
is going to be about half of
that 7 million for the 11
million people looking.
So this is, this is what I was
talking about, and this helps to
understand why it's, it's not
really feasible to expect the
market on its own to solve the
affordable housing gap problem
just through construction alone.
Um,
If you look, if you compare the
numbers of units of available
and affordable to different
income groups, you see that the
gap essentially disappears once
you get into low income, middle
income, and above median income
renters. At that point, we start
seeing that the number of units
available pretty much matches or
can even exceed the number of of
tenants that are searching for
housing and to go back, here's,
here's that, that.
again
by for low income, that's
households at uh at 50% of AMI
of the area median income for
their location, we've got 27.3.
1 million total renters up
there, and we've got 35 million
units available that are up to
that level of rent, right? And
then the, the gap increases so
that um for middle income
renters, there are 32. million
of those renters, 41.1 million
units available. So this is not
painting the picture for this is
a nationwide picture, we'll take
it to New Mexico in a second.
It's not painting a picture that
That, uh, from a real estate
development perspective suggests
a strong um um a, a strong
demand for units to build more,
right? The, the amount of demand
for new construction here is,
is, uh, softer, right? The the
demand is not there compared to
the, the shortage of units for
extremely low and very low
income households.
And the reason why, here's this
other crazy chart, sorry for all
my crazy arrows. The reason why
is that.
HUD statistics and housing
policy describes what is
affordable to a household based
on 30% of their income, but most
people or many people can't or
don't want to pay 30% of their
income towards rent, and the
higher income you are, the less
likely that you're going to be
paying 30% of your income
towards rent. Um, the, the term
that's used to describe this is
that in the, in the free market,
people are free to rent down and
many, many people do.
So although according to
national housing statistics, you
might be able to afford a very
low income unit.
You might choose instead to run
something even less expensive,
although you're able to afford a
median income unit, you might
choose to rent something less
expensive.
What that ends up doing is it
creates an incredible crunch,
you know, there's an incredible
demand and competition for the
most affordable units for
extremely low income and very
low income units, right?
Here's our New Mexico housing
snapshot.
Um,
in New Mexico, we have, and I
think this data, this is from
2024, good. In New Mexico we
have 812,852 households total
31% of those are renters. The
rest are are homeowners.
We own in some capacity.
Moving on with our our New
Mexico snapshot of those
renters, what are, what are
their income levels look like?
Well, the, the majority of
renters in New Mexico are above
what we would describe as low
income. They earn more than 50%
of the area median income for
their jurisdiction.
Um,
But 67,000 are extremely low
income, meaning they earn 30% or
less, and in New Mexico, that
means that you're earning
$23,650 for a family of 4 and
30,069 households are described
as very low income, which means
that they are earning $39,450
for a family of 4.
Um,
This is also a very important, I
think, statistic to understand.
For those extremely low income
households, we said there are
67,229 extremely low income
households who are earning 30%
or less of the area median
income. How are they paying for
their housing costs.
The vast majority of them are
paying on their own. They're
figuring out how to pay for
their housing. They're not
subsidized in any way. It's
42,000 and change have no type
of of subsidy assisting their
housing.
Um, the, the, the category of
renters who that with uh the
largest category of housing
subsidy is the the Section 8
voucher. So that's HUD's, um,
housing choice voucher program,
formerly known as Section 8. A
lot of people still describe it
as a Section 8 voucher. That's a
voucher given to a tenant.
And they are told to go out and
rent housing in the private
market, right? The tenant
doesn't, I mean, the, the
housing subsidy doesn't attach
to the building itself, it
attached, it goes with the
tenant so that they can compete
in the private market, which as
when you think back to those two
column charts I showed you a
second ago, you're going to see
why that's a problem because of
the amount of competition in the
extremely low income housing
category. So overwhelmingly in
New Mexico, if, if you.
are lucky enough to be to have a
housing subsidy and you're an
extremely low-income person,
that housing subsidy is likely
to be a tenant-based voucher
provided through the the Section
8 program. More likely you're
not receiving any type of
housing subsidy at all, right?
Here's, I think we're getting
close hopefully to these, these
charts. Thank you for your
patience with them. I wanted to
show you this, this graphic too,
which I thought was really great
from uh the LFC's report on
housing in New Mexico from 2023.
This shows us the type of
subsidies that we have, uh, for
housing in the state, and we see
on this bottom kind of bar here
that 83% of our housing subsidy
in the state is federal. 17% is.
financing, and of this federal
housing coming in, the, the
vast, you know, the, the, the
largest category of federal
housing that we receive, are
those housing choice vouchers,
right? That's, that's the main
source of federal funding coming
in. Those housing choice
vouchers are 70, more than $79
million worth of federal housing
subsidy given to New Mexico to
try to deal with our um our
housing affordability
challenges. That's more money
just in that program.
than the state, um.
Uh, uses in any of its its
programs.
OK. And then here's one more
piece of data, um.
This shows our scarcity based of
of available of affordable and
available rental units. It's
chart over here in New Mexico,
uh, based on that income
category. So for extremely low
income renters for every 100
extremely low income renters.
There are 40 units available and
affordable, right? Affordable
and available. So, um,
So, so that is the most
significant gap we see and
remember that for those units
they're in competition with
anybody else who wants to rent
them, including possibly people
who could, who could afford more
according to, to housing policy,
which doesn't necessarily match
individual people's lives,
right? Um.
There are 55 units affordable
and available for every 100
renters, um, that are, that are
very low income. There are 96
units affordable and available
for every 100 units that are um
uh at 80% of area median income,
and there are 101 units
affordable and available if you
are at the area median income,
which is uh which is $78,000 in
change for a family of four.
Again, what this tells us when
we see this, new construction of
rental housing and multi-family
rental housing is aimed at this
part of the market or higher,
right? And you can't see my
arrow. I'm sorry. It's aimed at
the 96 to 101 units or higher.
That is not a strong market for
a developer to decide to to
develop housing in, um, the
demand is at the lower end of
the spectrum and it's and it's.
Uh, the market on its own does
not build housing there
typically. It's very difficult
to do that and it was
fascinating, um, to hear
Representative Herrera, the
story that you described about
Espanola, um.
So, so this helps to explain, I
think, why the idea of closing
the affordable housing gap just
through incentivizing market
rate development is not going to
be successful. You can't, that,
that's not going to do it.
Economics uh don't or don't
support that, that development.
Um,
there are other strategies, I
think that that should that you
should perhaps consider for
trying to reach that, that
crunch of demand in the
extremely low and and very low
um income categories or housing
that's available to folks in
those categories. The first
thing is to pay attention to, to
maximizing the use of those
section 8 vouchers, like, like
we saw on the slide, $79 million
from the federal government is
coming and
And it's, we don't have
discretion to use it in another
way. It has to be used to give
individuals, uh, vouchers so
that they can go out and rent in
the private market.
Um,
And we'll get to that slide in a
second. So, so one possibility
is to say, well, let's, let's
make sure that all of those
vouchers get used, right? Uh,
right now, unfortunately, those
vouchers often do not get used,
um, 1 in 3 people who receives a
voucher is unable to find a
place to use it before it
expires. When a person is given
a voucher, they usually have 60
days. They can try to extend
that for a little bit longer to
actually use their voucher
before the agency that gave it
to them will, will say, OK,
sorry, you failed, we're we're
moving on to the next person.
And um, and 1 in 3 people is
unable to find a place to use
it, um, and that's because the
federal voucher program is a
voluntary program, right?
Landlords are free to
participate or not on the
federal level.
State and local laws.
That creates source of income
discrimination, um protections,
say, say no, we're not going to
do that. We're going to say that
a person with a voucher should
be able to use that voucher
like, like cash.
The other, um, the other idea
that um I think is definitely
worth um considering is thinking
about ways to strengthen the
security of residents and
manufactured and mobile home
parks. Uh, those folks
overwhelmingly are the the
lowest income residents, both
renters and owners in in the
state and they overwhelmingly
have no rental subsidy at all.
So we saw that that more than
60% of New Mexican extremely low
income people don't have.
Rental subsidies, many of those
people are living in
manufactured and mobile homes.
Uh, it's important that they be
able to stay there and continue
to be able to afford those
homes.
So here's a little information
about this idea of the source of
income discrimination
protections. This, this kind of
reverses the trend of renting
down by giving voucher holding
tenants the possibility to rent
up. So here, if you look back at
those two charts about
affordability level, you know,
income levels versus
affordability levels, um, with a
voucher, a very low and an
extremely low income person
because those are the only
people that end up getting
Section 8 vouchers.
The very, the, the, the lowest
income people, they, with the
voucher have the purchasing
power to not just compete for
this 7.1 million units. This is
the nationwide statistic, um.
They're able with the voucher to
reach all the way up into the
middle income and low income
strata of housing costs where
demand is is much less tight,
right? There's much less
competition for these units than
there is in the lower, extremely
low and very low income sectors.
Um, so that's, that's one of the
huge benefits and one of the
goals of the voucher program,
not only can you reach up to
those units, but you also can
deconcentrate poverty, ideally.
Um.
Unfortunately.
Um, it, as I mentioned before,
it can be very difficult for,
for tenants who receive vouchers
to find places to use them in
the private rental market. Um,
and as I mentioned, federal law
doesn't require most landlords
to accept housing vouchers in
the regular market, um, studies
have shown that the more
expensive housing is, the less
likely landlords will want to
accept vouchers, so even though
a person with a voucher may have
purchasing power to rent
something that counts as
affordable or middle income.
rental property, the, the, the
higher the rents are in a
property, the less likely the
landlord will want to rent to
them.
And the reasons for this are are
varied. There have been some
really good studies to try to
examine why this exists and
essentially it seems to come
down to stigma against the
programs themselves. Many
landlords say, I don't want to
be a part of this government
program. Um, and also stigma
against the voucher holders, uh,
thoughts that, that people who
hold vouchers are going to be
bad tenants or going to damage
property, things like that. So
source of income discrimination
laws are one possible approach
to maximizing.
The use of this, this $79
million that the state is
getting from HUD and clearly HUD
is, is all on the voucher train.
20 states and 139 localities
including Al Albuquerque,
Bernelio County, Las Cruces, and
Santa Fe starting next year,
have passed laws that protect a
tenant's right to pay rent with
um a housing voucher. The
benefits of doing this, uh, the,
the two main benefits are that
it means that you can use this,
this large pot of federal
funding as efficiently as
possible to actually serve the
interests of of low income
residents in the jurisdiction.
Um, and also it has the benefit
of potentially easing stress on
that, that, that lowest income
housing that is under the most
market stress where there's the
hardest competition because it
lets extremely low income people
rent up like I talked about.
The challenge is to source of
income discrimination laws, and
there are, there are some
notable challenges, um, our, our
first and foremost enforcement.
It can be a challenge to figure
out how to actually make the law
work once you put it in place,
um, best practices from across
the jurisdictions that have put
this in place suggests that
having a public and a private
right of civil enforcement is
the best way to actually um make
the law work.
And then the second major
challenge is landlord resistance
as I talked about on the last
slide, the more the the more the
housing costs, the less likely
landlords will want to rent, um.
And the, the best practices
there from other jurisdictions
or that the things that make the
biggest difference in turning
around landlord resistance.
There's 3 things. First,
education of both renters who
are voucher holders and also
landlords about how voucher
programs actually work have been
enormously successful. So there
are a lot of misconceptions
about the ways like the the
program requirements of the
Section 8 program that um that
have gone a long way in in
making more landlords receptive
uh receptive to participating in
the program. For example, a lot
of landlords think, oh, I, it's
a form of rent control. I'm not
going to be able to increase
rents. That's not true. They
think, oh, I'm not going to be
able to screen tenants and, and
not accept tenants based on
criteria that I that I find
unacceptable. That's also not
true. So, so education can be
extremely helpful. Um, many
states and also um jurisdictions
in New Mexico, we've got some
great reports that have been
produced in New Mexico about
Landlord incentive programs can
be very effective too. So that's
pairing benefits to landlords
who are renting to people with
vouchers, um, to go along with
the fact that they're renting to
somebody with a voucher. So, for
example, one of the, one of the
common types of incentives that
are used is um to, to, uh, to
assuage the fears of landlords
that that voucher tenants may
be uh may damage units, for
example, many jurisdictions have
created.
Landlord, um.
Uh, damage deposit kind of funds
to say, OK, if, if, if you have
a voucher tenant in your unit
and they do damage your unit,
then you have access to this
fund that's been set aside, um,
in, in addition to the security
deposit that you collected on
that unit.
Um, in the jurisdictions that
have created funds like that,
the data is in and it turns out
that those funds tend not to be
used very much because it turns
out that voucher tenants are no
more likely and sometimes even
less likely to damage units than
other tenants in a unit. Um, so,
so there's some good statistics
out there to look at to show
that that if creating one of
those funds helps make landlords
more comfortable with
participating in a program, it
may, may not be a bad thing to
do, to make them comfort
participating and it may not
cost a lot of money to the state
because, because it's unlikely
to really um be used very much.
Um, finally, um, one of the
other best practices is to, is
to really listen to landlords
and, and, um, listen to the
legitimate business concerns of
landlords and address them. And
so, for example, in some
jurisdictions, landlords can um
problem or their their
resistance to participating in
housing voucher programs.
is because of long turnaround
time on inspections that are
required by HUD in order to get
it. Um, that can be a legitimate
concern, and there are ways of
dealing with that. So some
jurisdictions have created,
again, funds to, to compensate a
landlord if they have uh a a a
longer than is reasonable delay
on renting a unit. Other
jurisdictions have said you
don't have to wait more than 10
number of days if, if, if the
housing authority or whoever is
supposed to come inspect the
unit is taking too long.
Then you're allowed to move on
to the next resident. So there
are different ways of addressing
that, um.
And um.
And trying to make the program
work.
When I talk for a minute about
the unique vulnerabilities of
manufactured housing, uh,
community residents. So as we
saw in New Mexico, that chart
that I gave that was crazy about
all the different counties. Um,
we saw that different counties
have very different numbers of
manufactured housing
communities, meaning two or more
manufactured or mobile homes on
one piece of land. And in those
situations very often the
resident owns the house itself,
but is renting the land beneath.
It like Wolf described.
Those folks are often incredibly
vulnerable for a number of
reasons. Um, as I mentioned, our
statistics in New Mexico and
also nationwide is that very
often those are the lowest
income owners and renters in a
jurisdiction, um, many parks,
including in New Mexico, very
aggressively market to seniors
on fixed incomes as a form of
retirement community. Um, that
is very prevalent in.
Berlio County in Albuquerque,
for example, which had the
highest number of of mobile home
communities or parks.
Um,
When a person buys into a park
like that, they're often
investing tens of thousands of
dollars or even over $100,000 in
buying the home itself, and
that's often their nest egg.
That's where they expect to be
for, for, for the duration, you
know, um, these, these houses,
once you buy them are actually
not mobile. It's really a
misnomer to call them mobile
mobile homes. It can be tens of
thousands of dollars or even
just impossible to actually move
them once they've been put in
place because of of structural.
Difficulties and challenges.
And then.
On top of all of this since
2020, there has been a wave
across the country, including in
New Mexico of private equity
investors buying these parks and
using the type of of management
algorithms that Alison was
talking about to increase rent
to the absolute max for those
ground rents for residents to
squeeze out every extra dollar,
understanding that the people
who who live in mobile home
communities, especially seniors,
are going to.
Probably
Pay that extra $1 as long as
they possibly can. There are
studies that talk that that are
unfortunately all too common and
well documented now of seniors
forgoing food, for growing
healthcare, because they are
worried about being evicted from
the house that they that they
put their life savings into and
thought they would stay in for
the rest of their lives. Um,
So,
So for manu manufactured home
community protection there's a
number of different protections
that I think are really
interesting and, and, um.
Possibilities to consider the
two that um that I'll stress to
you today as perhaps among the
most effective, are requiring
long-term ground leases, a lot
of jurisdictions are starting to
require that landlords, um, when
a manufactured homeowner owns
their unit that they, they must
be entitled to a long-term
ground lease, um, with clear
formulas for how rent might
increase during that lease term.
Um, so that's not
Nesarily locking in rents and
saying rents can't increase,
but, but the rent increases will
be knowable over the term of a
long-term ground lease, um.
That's such a popular and
potentially effective strategy
that members of Congress are
pressing Fannie and Freddie to
require this in their lending,
part of what's driven up this
private investor speculation
into mobile home parks is that
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are
now financing these types of
investments and um and private
equity has definitely taken
notice. The majority of Fannie
and Freddie products that go
into mobile home parks are to
private equity investors, not to
not to mom and pops or
individuals, um, overw
And then the other possibility
that um that I think is, is
definitely worth uh good
attention and consideration is
encouraging residents or
nonprofits to to buy and own the
or the government even to buy
and own the underlying land
where the parks are located, um,
and so the legislative solution
that would do that would be an
opportunity to purchase act for
residents in mobile home
communities, 20 states have some
form of
Resident purchase laws on the
books, so there's a nice
variety. They, they vary
considerably in how they
operate. Um, there's a nice
variety in how they do and
they're based on older laws that
were for tenants buying buying
stick and brick buildings, um,
from before then, so there is a
lot of of case law to look at
and um legislative history to
look at from other
jurisdictions.
And then also we have a a non a
national nonprofit called
Resident Owned Communities or
Rock USA.
Um, which has converted 329
manufactured home communities,
uh, containing more than 22,
almost 23,000 units in 21
different states across the
country. They've developed
models and they're also
financers. They've invested
almost $1 trillion now they're
they're, they're coming up on $1
trillion worth of investment
into acquisition and capital
improvements for um for resident
owned communities across the
United States. They're very,
very actively looking for parks
to try
To do this in in New Mexico. One
of the benefits of this is that
um resident purchase of mobile
home parks does not have to be
adversarial at all with a
current owner of a mobile home
park, so they, they sell when
they want to and enabling the
residents of the park to be able
to buy the park is just one more
possible buyer, um, among
others, so, um.
So sorry, I went on along. I
hope that wasn't too boring and
I would welcome any questions
that you have along with the
rest of us.
Um, no, I didn't find it boring
at all, and I suspect our
colleagues did not either, so
appreciate the overview on, on,
you know, pressing housing
issues across the country and in
New Mexico, so, um, so far I
have on my list uh Senator
Nibert, Representative Chasey,
um, Cy Lopez, um, Barrego.
Anyone else?
OK. Um, oh, Senator Maestas, OK,
so, um, Senator Neiber.
Uh, thank you, Madam chair. One
thing you said very early on was
that.
Student mobility and educational
achievement kind of went hand in
hand and I'm, I'm.
Based on my experience, many,
many decades ago, um, I'm not
sure that that was true.
where I grew up, and, and I say
that because I grew up in a town
that had a significant
population of Air Force.
Uh, personnel.
And they were moving into town
and out of town 2 to 4 years.
My best friend in in junior or
in grade school was not my best
friend in junior high, not
because we fell out of, out of
friendship, he moved likewise,
uh, junior high to high school.
I moved, um, and yet many of my
classmates who were.
From the military base.
And moving
every 2 to 4 years.
We're at the top of the class.
And so I, I'm kind of wondering
if there's other.
Other factors that go into that
is and maybe.
Air Force bases are are a unique
population, but, but it seems to
me that maybe the mobility is
just one factor of some other
things going on in the home that
is just not the 1 to 1
correlation that I think was
represented.
Excuse me, I mean,
Madam Chair, uh, Senator Nibert,
um,
thanks for your comments and
certainly there's, you know,
lots and lots of, you know,
these are statistics that are,
you know, aggregate statistics
and population-wide large
demographics that sort of just
tell us what the trend is,
certainly there are people who
are.
Situations that don't fit this,
this particular model, um, and
I, I mean,
I think in your question, um,
you gave some of my response,
which is, I think we can
probably carve out um, children,
you know, of military parents as
a folks who are gonna have more
access to resources and probably
will move a lot but be more
accustomed to that and have
support networks waiting for
them when they when they land,
um, the data that that you know,
the, these studies rely on do
definitely suggest that it's not
just oh, moving is the only
thing that happens, right? Fami
that families that are forced to
move are families that are going
to be lower income, typically
have perhaps less job stability
and other sorts of things that
are that are going on in the
home, um, but both anecdotally
and statistically, there really
is a close correlation to the
number of moves and academic
performance that, you know, to
hear teachers tell it makes
perfect sense. Students who are
popping in and out of a
classroom will not be able to
have the benefit of that long
term education and the
resources, the support rather.
Of the people who know them and
are able to do them well, but
also, you know, moving from one
classroom to another, there's
always some slippage. It takes
time to for a family to find a
new place perhaps and figure out
where a student should be, you
know, which classroom, which
teachers, um, and so.
the, the education folks who
I've talked to are like, duh,
there's obviously a, a, a
negative correlation to this
because of, because of what
they've seen. They also
interestingly, this isn't
captured in statistics and it
may be purely anecdotal,
suggests that there's actually a
negative impact on the classroom
that is still there, right?
Because the disruption that
comes from new faces, new
people, the teacher having to
ascertain where somebody is and
maybe devote more resources to
bringing that person to where
the classroom is, um, is.
It's something that is, like I
said, not captured in any of the
studies, but when I've spoken
with educational folks, they,
they said, they tell me that
they've they've seen this
anecdotally, um, and so, yes,
it's absolutely the case that,
you know, there are going to be
and everybody's story is
different. I moved a bunch when
I was a kid and managed to, to,
uh, do OK. My family had lots of
resources that that we're able
to to help us with that. Not
every family does that not every
kid is gonna be that fortunate,
um, and as I said.
What we've seen, all the data is
pretty consistent that, you
know, that if you say
this is a, you know, this, this
group represents folks who have
moved a bunch uh through during
their educational, uh, during
their early education and
especially during high school,
they're gonna have statistically
worse outcomes, um, you know,
again, across a broad
demographic, but your point is
we'll take.
OK
Representative Chasey.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair, and
this was a fascinating
presentation. I really
appreciated it. I have really
just two things, and one is
about Section 8 housing and um I
know I represented a number of
clients for whom the Section 8
restrictions were a barrier. Our
is there any chance we're going
to get section 8.
To change its regulations or
how's that going? I, I mean,
there, there was a discussion.
I, I probably at least 10 years
ago when I had clients for whom
it was a barrier and they were
former um, you know, they were
leading a clean life and trying
to have stable housing for their
family, but the, the
restrictions of the federal
Section 8 were a problem.
Do, is there any progress in
that
sorry, yeah, that, that's uh,
that is a great question, so,
um, I'm not aware of many of
many efforts or initiatives to
expand, um, eligibility.
Um, there, there, there may be a
few, um, initiatives at to to
expand eligibility for who can
use, who, who qualifies for
Section 8, if that's what you're
thinking of. There are
definitely calls, um, when it
comes to to source of income
discrimination and making the
Section 8 program better reach
its ideals. So the ideals of the
Section 8 program, um,
Really laudable in my opinion,
that they're really, they're
designed to um.
To deconcentrate poverty and
allow low income people to have
more control over where they
choose to live, um, so, and they
also are they're also designed
to benefit the private market,
right, to to to spread a
significant amount of federal
subsidy to private landlords,
um, the two initiatives that I'm
aware of that are aimed at um at
making those those objectives
more realized in the Section 8
program.
number one is there, there are
calls that are getting louder, I
would say because of the number
of state and localities that are
passing source of income
discrimination laws at the state
and local level, there are
mounting calls for a federal,
uh, a change in the Section 8
law to make it a federal
program requirement, which I
think is, is potentially
difficult, you know, we'll we'll
see if that comes about or not.
um, HUD is, um, is doing, I
think some.
Fascinating work HUD on its own
initiative has has started a
pilot program and has recently
dramatically increased the pilot
program to look at landlord
incentives and look at what
barriers are, why are landlords
not interested in renting, you
know, the, the more, the more
expensive the housing, why are
landlords, um, resistant to
renting to people with vouchers
and they've, uh, the pilot
program created initially a menu
of different possibilities that
housing authorities can use to
try to
to incentivize greater
acceptance by landlords, and
then they opened it up to say,
OK, now you give us your ideas,
housing authorities, that's that
is um that's a relationship
between HUD at the federal level
and housing authorities as sort
of local arms in some ways of
the federal level, um, but I'm,
I'm watching that latter one
pretty closely to see what comes
out of it and and to see how
states and localities can can
piggyback on that effort. Thank
you, and you know, Madam Chair,
we have a, we do have an issue
people coming out of, out of uh
corrections and
And so former felons aren't
allowed supposedly. I mean,
that's what they're not allowed
to be in, in Section 8 housing.
I get it. They don't want drug
dealing going on. These are
people though who are being drug
tested. They're seeing probation
officers and their likely linked
up to some kind of a mental
health program. So it's um, you
know, in a way it's really
self-defeating, but so the other
thing that I wanted to take
Senator Maestas a trip down
memory lane, back
When he and Senator O'Neill and
I were all on consumer and
public affairs in the House and
Senator O'Neill had a lot of
constituents who lived in mobile
home parks. I think the hearing
we had was got at the issue of
resident opportunity to
purchase. Do you remember that,
Senator? Was it, was he was the,
it was filled with the owners of
mobile home parks and not the
residents, but
But um it was a noble effort on
his part to try to help his
constituents have some say in
what happened to them and, and
actually their property because
they only the um mobile home
itself, but I'll tell you when I
came out of that hearing and
Senator Maestas may have had a
different view, but I thought
this is going to be a tough
audience here to make any
changes in the law.
So, um, I really appreciated the
manufactured home community
protections that you've talked
about here and I hope that um
the folks in the legislature
will look at this going forward.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative, um, Senator
Cedil Lopez and then
Representative Barrego.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for, for creating this
organization and for doing all
this research, because one of
the things, um,
I love hearing stories, um, and
I love hearing stories when they
match with what the research
shows. I mean, that's when you
have it all, right? And we've
been hearing stories all morning
and then I've been talking to
people on the streets and what
you're saying is very um
consistent with what I'm seeing.
So thank you for this data, and
I had a few questions about the
data with this renting up and
renting down in New Mexico. How
did you?
How did you get this
information?
Madam Chair and Senator Stee
Lopez, thanks for that question.
Um, I think on most of the
slides that are that are
included in your packet, most of
them contain a link to where the
sources of the data are. So a
lot of the information from New
Mexico came from
uh 3 different sources. I mean,
ultimately, most of it ties back
to the US Census. Most of it is
collected by the American
community survey as a part of
the US Census, um, and then it's
packaged by a few different.
Places or organizations, so a
lot of the New Mexico data it
was uh was packaged for the
legislative Finance Committee in
2023 and that wonderful housing
stability report that they
published, um, I think there's a
link to it,
um, uh, MFA's report from 2024
is another source, and again
they tend to rely, I think a lot
of their data comes from the
census, yeah, and then um the
National Low Income Housing
Coalition produces
Two major reports. One is that
gap report that describes the
housing gap and the other is
called out of reach, and it
talks about um the purchasing
power of of Americans across the
country, but each of each of
those again, relies on census
data and so each one contains a
tool that gives you a state
breakout. So there's a lot of
information about New Mexico
specifically and those two
sources too. I think each one is
probably linked there. If not, I
can get you the link.
So the um, if it all goes back
to the
that's probably underreporting
the experiences of immigrants
and other um
People of color communities in
our state. I would suspect
that's absolutely correct, but
it probably wouldn't change the
basic idea of
And a lot of competition for the
lowest.
Um, price, the lowest cost
housing, and then the whole
thing about trying to rent up, I
think that the whole voucher
idea, um, I, I really love the
idea and I already loved it
before I saw this data of um,
you know, prohibiting
discrimination based on source,
because it's not just this
source. Some people won't rent
to um to people who are relying
on child support checks.
You know, so they're like, oh
no, there's child support, it's
gonna be flighty. I don't want
to rent to you. That's, that's
really unfair too. So I really
um love that idea and would like
to work with you on it. I just
texted the.
Um, Representative Rubio, who
did the um that rental act to
ask her if I don't remember
cause it was her bill, whether
they had um source
discrimination in that bill. But
if not, I think they should
include it or if it needs to be
a standalone bill or or
whatever, and then going to the
issue of um of mobile homes.
And the option to buy.
The option to buy the community,
um, probably, I don't know if
you've heard, there's a legend
in the clinic about mobile home
uh litigation that we had years
and years ago, and what you said
or what um Representative Chasey
said about that industry, it's a
very strong industry in this
state, um, and I really like
that you gave some data for why
this could benefit them when
they're selling, but what's
happening here, I
I think, um, is that out of
state investors are, are
investing in these places and
sort of paying more than.
Paying more because what they're
gonna do is they're going to
suck out a whole lot of money
and then just sell it again. And
what can you do about that?
Um, Madam Chair and Senator
Garcia Lopez, that's a, that's a
really great question. Um, to my
knowledge,
I can't think of.
I can't think of a jurisdiction
that has passed uh an
opportunity to purchase law for
mobile home park residents or
for tenants and stick and brick
housing that has.
Um, that fully addresses that,
um, to my knowledge, all of them
at their strongest gives the
residents the right to match a
third party offer to make, you
know, if there isn't a third
party offer then they have the
right to make a third party
offer that has to be considered
like seriously considered, but
if you have a third party who's
willing to um to value the
property higher than than what
existing rents suggest the value
would be.
I'm not, I'm not aware of any
direct protections and any
existing law that would get to
that. Um, some jurisdictions
have.
Looked at the possibility of of.
Buyers who might have an eye to
changing the use of the
property, um, and have tried to
to look at it that way, to say,
OK, if your goal is to buy this
and then change it so it's no
longer a manufactured housing
community and instead it's going
to be developed as a shopping
mall or something like that, um,
then, then there can be
protections put into place so
that the, the, the least
protection that I'm aware of is
like uh an extended notice
period for the residents like 6
months to give them time to plan
what what to do, um.
Or they could, there could be
buyout options or things like
that.
Um, but I'm not aware of
anything that deals that would
try to control the price from a
third party like what you're
suggesting. Yeah. Thank you.
And, and the other the eviction
ceiling legislation. I think
that's also um.
Important.
I was, we were chatting.
OK, so, um,
all right, well, I'll just, I, I
think that these are all great
ideas and I just want to thank
you and I'll talk to you offline
a little bit about the eviction
eviction ceilings because I've
extended, I've expanded
exceeded my time. Thank you,
thank you. Um, we have um
Representative Barrego and then
Senator Maestas. Thank you,
Madam Chair. I'll talk really
fast. Um, so I find it really
interesting.
Your slide 31 with regard to the
gap and um.
So I, I just thinking out of the
box a little bit. Um, I know
this is done with an aggregate
of the whole state, right?
That's how that those numbers
are determined. And Madam Chair,
I was just thinking out loud,
what if we divided the state
into 4 quadrants and took out
the Bernalio in Albuquerque, how
it would change the gaps and you
know, as I'm sitting here
listening to all this stuff
about espanola and the need for
housing, and I think about
Albuquerque and the need for
housing.
I mean, it's, it would, it would
be still people at the lowest
level needing the housing, but
it would significantly change
how we address the gaps, so I
would love for somebody to do
that, um, if possible, and send
me that information, um, Madam
Chair, the other thing that
comes to mind here is just the
need for, and as I'm looking
through your chart, which I
would love to get a a good copy
of
of 23 because it's really hard
to read and it's just really
small.
Um, so if I could get that, I
would appreciate that, but it
just reinforces the need for a
diverse housing type throughout
the state and, you know, the,
the need for transitional
housing from people off the
street to manufactured housing
to a single family housing and.
The one thing that I just keep
saying, Madam Chair, and I, and
I can't stress this enough is
when we have when we are
building lower income housing
that we also tie that to
transportation because many of
those people do not have a way
to get to work. They don't have
a way to get, you know, to play,
to whatever they do, um, and,
and I know in Albuquerque, we
worked really hard to do that.
Um, the other thing that I
wanted to mention, um, was.
With regard to vouchers, we
worked really hard with mobile,
uh, with the, not mobile, but um
motel vouchers in the city of
Albuquerque and those worked
pretty well until we ran out of
money and we didn't have enough
money to spread it around as
much as we'd like to, and I just
wanted to mention that, Madam
Chair, because that's a really
important thing is, especially
when you're trying to get people
off out of the elements and into
a
and secure environment. And then
lastly, I would love to have
your contact. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
I think, yeah, good job. Thank
you. Um, Senator Maestas and
then Representative Herrera.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. um, thank you presenters
very much, uh.
My officemate Devram sends his
best and he's doing well. His
name was on the list. Uh, so
he's he's gonna be fantastic.
The, um, I'm glad you brought up
the fact, uh, Madam Chair, that
the market can't fill the gap.
The market in number itself
can't solve the problem.
For just two quick points. One
is that it, uh, certainly
couldn't couldn't hurt, you know
what I mean, to increase the
housing stock, to increase the
apartment stock certainly is is
part of the.
He is a variable in the, you
know, uh.
A symbol in the variable or
whatever. It's part of the part
of the solution and also.
You know, when you talk about
the market, the market, the
market implies easy, easy entry,
that there's no barrier to
entry. There's a huge barrier to
entry in my hometown in in
throughout New Mexico, um, I
just want to make the point,
Madam Chair, we're at that point
in our state's history, given
the poverty and given the lack
of economic growth that our own
personal wants and desires, our
own individual, frankly selfish
wants and desires do not trump
generational poverty.
Um, you know, you can't go to a
folks,
you can't go to it's not cool to
go to a city council meeting and
say don't build this apartment
house because it blocks my view
in the morning. I mean, I love
my view in the morning. I,
everybody does, uh, and that
person is legit in saying that,
but that person's argument
shouldn't win the day. Um, and
then, um, also thank you for
that, Madam Chair, the um.
Are we number 1 or 2 in mobile
homes in the country per capita.
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator
Maestas, uh, that's, that is a
debated question. um, when I
first looked at it, I thought we
were number one and then I saw
some other statistics that had
us tied for two with another
jurisdiction, but what we're
certainly up there we have it's
an incredibly part of our house.
Thank you for that. Thank you,
Madam Chair. You know, we think
of maybe Arkansas, Louisiana,
whatever, we're number 12, I
mean because it's, there's so
many isolated places and they're
actually a brand new mobile home
is a nice place to live,
honestly, um.
I used to live in like a double
wide a mile in from Nine Mile
Hill, Madam Chair. So we used to
call it 8 mile, but um, but, but
the statues, and I'm sure the
statues are horribly outdated,
horribly outdated, uh, it's,
there's not even in statute on a
chair to require an email
communication once a month or or
an email committed 6 month uh
heads up if the, if the landlord
is planning on selling just
basic stuff like that, and I
know that uh Representative V
Meado has been working
incredibly hard.
On a landlord tenant statute,
uh.
But let's definitely the
landlord tenant statute has to
pass and the mobile home statute
has to pass uh this next this
next legislative session. It's
imperative that cause those
statutes are so old and so uh
outdated and and and unjust in a
lot of different ways, so it's,
it's rare. I mean, I have
before, but it's rare that I
will take a position. I'm, I'm,
I'm against that bill because it
doesn't go far enough.
Those bills won't go far enough
if, if we get the votes to pass
them, but we have to put them in
statute this next year. So I
look forward to working with you
guys and maybe helping out in
that space and I appreciate you
guys putting your organization
together because there's a
collective action problem
between renters and a mobile
park and the owners.
Between apartment tenants and
the owner, so, so like those
those days in CPAC, now CPAC has
a fancy room, madam chair uh
leader Jason we're in a like a
closet with 200 people.
And they were all packing,
they're all packing. Thank you,
Madam Chairman.
Oh, thank you, Senator. We have
representative Herrera, and then
we'll um representative Romero.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
curious. I'm just curious, uh,
with the subset, with the
subsidized housing, how much
more do you think it would take
for, you know, I don't know
these families to really be able
to afford uh a a rental
property.
Is there a number that you've
looked at?
Um, uh, Madam Chair, and
Representative Herrera, thank
you for that question. Um, so
there are, there are numbers
that are published by different
organizations about the like the
like the gap report that I cited
to gives a number that people
can attach to and uh I think
LFC's report from 2023 for New
Mexico gave a number that it's,
that you can attach to.
In,
in my view, um, I, I think that
that's a less helpful framework
to look at. I, I, I agree, um,
very much with what Senator
Maestas just said, I think the
goal is really to identify that
private market forces.
Um, will always create stress on
the most affordable rental
properties. So the most
affordable rental properties are
always going to have the highest
demand. So strategies that can
alleviate or release that
pressure and stress on the
lowest, the, the, the, the most
affordable rental properties I
think are the, the, the, uh, the
avenues to pursue, including,
um, so there's a few other a few
other ideas that weren't.
Included in our slide show
because we had so much already
in here, um, the idea of
building more affordable
housing, um, if you can insulate
it by making it a, you know,
available only for extremely low
income people, then you have
alleviated stress, right on that
because only extremely extremely
low income people are able to
rent it. I think that's sort of
the question that you're asking
that that happens when you have
uh
public subsidy into in the
development of the property
itself. But that's very
expensive. It means you need to
have federal or state dollars to
do it and then you attach a
covenant into the title of the
property to say it can only be
rented or owned by extremely low
income people, and then you have
to invest in maintaining that
and make sure it actually
happens. Um, other, other
strategies are to identify the
organically affordable housing
that you already have in your
jurisdiction like
manufactured home communities,
um, and make sure that those
stay affordable to the people
that live there, number one, so
I, I would say that's of
paramount importance, um, 2,
trying to, to help people rent
up instead of just renting down
using their vouchers as we
talked about, um.
And then I, what else, the other
things that I that we didn't
have time to put into this slide
show are developing ways for the
folks that are renting down, you
know, if you're a, if you're a
moderate or median income
renter, you're probably in the
ballpark of somebody who might
be interested in buying if there
was something affordable for you
to buy. So the idea of of
encouraging or incentivizing
more more housing types and
tenures is potential.
a good avenue to pursue there
because again it releases the
pressure. Um, we, we do have in
the state of New Mexico as the
first slides show be
overwhelmingly have and we
overwhelmingly develop single
family detached housing, and if
we did more multifamily housing
condos, um, more, more, uh,
shared, you know, co-ops, things
like that, that could or starter
homes that could help alleviate
the pressure.
Well, it occurs to me the flip
side of this, um, proposal is
really how do we lift people out
of poverty in this state. That's
really, really what we should be
looking at, you know, and I
have, we are a group of us,
including the two Senator
Lopez's and some other
legislators are working on
grandparents raising
grandchildren, which is a
cascading effect of our drug
abuse program, um, seeing if we
can get them the same uh
allocation that you would get
for fostering a child, which is
about 600 a month.
So if a a senior citizen on
Social Security had another
$1800 a month, the same amount
that we pay uh for a foster
family, it would make a huge
difference in their life and it
would secure housing and a
place, a roof over everybody's
head for all those people, and
it's, it's how we do that
without having the cliff effect
for other federal programs and
and that's the problem we're
working on and we actually have
the money for that in the early
childhood trust fund we've been
working with, um, uh, sexual.
Terry Grainski on that, and I
guess the second thing is um we
introduced a bill last year that
didn't get through the Senate,
so I will, uh, I will, uh, throw
it into the air again, uh, to,
uh, to have, we help teachers,
we, we, we, we increase wages
for teachers. We increase wages
for educational assistance we
have, we have other school
employees working year round in
this system at $12 an hour if we
would raise their sal.
up to a minimum of $25,000 a
year, that would have a huge
impact. The cost of that is only
24 million really, and, and that
would spread out through all
these rural communities, and I'm
also looking at doing away with
the anti-donation clause, which,
which prevents us from doing a
lot of things that we could do
in this state, and that's all I
have to say, Madam Chair. Thank
you. Thank you, Representative,
um Representative Romero.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you to our speakers today,
um, and I just, I'm so grateful
to see the data in, in so many
ways about informing the um
process of what I think many of
us are endeavoring into for 2025
and um
Just on the subsidies discussion
and I don't know, we didn't
specifically talk about this,
but I recall that.
During COVID, we there was a
special program um for federal
funding that was helping
subsidize rental housing and New
Mexico, if I recall correctly,
was spending about $11 million a
month on rental subsidies that
were coming in federally. And
when that pro um program went
away in March 2023, we saw
everything spike and now we're
in the 50th percentile of like
the worst housing crisis in
Albuquerque and then all of our
the rest of our state, um.
That's to say that we were
already in housing crisis before
the crisis exacerbated. Um, I'm
just curious, when we're looking
at the dollar amounts of that
program.
And when we saw how much federal
funding was coming in, um,
And, and how much is needed for
subsidies while we're still
building and while we're still
trying to even out our um
rental uh vacancies, etc.
Is it money that can help sort
of help with this process for
now, um, I guess like what are
the sort of when we're looking
at structuring funding for how
to deal with the crisis that
we're in and then how to look
forward at the building that we
need to do. What is your
response to outside of the
policy framework, you know, what
is needed to, to help solve the
crisis that we're in right now.
Madam Chair, Representative
Romero, thank you for that
question. So yes, I think the
emergency rental assistance, um,
was something that was
absolutely key to keeping
individuals housed and so in
that sort of housing stability
space, not letting individuals
fall into homelessness or
becoming unhoused, which has
been very hard to come back
from. Um, there's lots of data
to show that emergency rental
assistance that you're
referencing, um, was of
paramount importance in keeping
people housed and so I think
from our perspective
Certainly, um, funding of, you
know, it has dried up from the
federal level, but state funding
that would be allocated to that
would be something that would be
really helpful and impactful for
keeping um people specifically
renters, um, housed
excuse me.
And, um, Madam Chair,
Representative Romero, if I
could just um take off my Center
for Housing Law hat briefly and
talk to you about another
nonprofit that I'm connected
with called Apado. Um, that is
dedicated to providing
immediate, you know, quick one
time uh rental assistance to
families with children and
school-age children in Bernal
Leo County, um, we, we formed
with the particularuspicious
timing in March of 202.
not realizing what we'd be
facing. Um, but over the last 4
years, we have discovered that,
you know, the, the requests that
we get, and these are families
that are experiencing some sort
of hiccup in their income, maybe
reduction in hours and medical
expense, a car repair that they
need to pay so they can get to
work, um, that we're able to
actually keep these families
housed for um the amount is
going up regrettably in Berlin
County, but for less than $1500
usually per.
uh to be able to keep, you know,
families with children, stably
housed, uh, we consider that to
be an incredible bargain based
on, you know, the money that is
saved on the back end in terms
of social costs, educational
loss, and, you know, physical
behavior or mental health. Uh,
so, um, I haven't actually run
the numbers in terms of how many
families, you know, would need
that and what those numbers have
to be, but I think the price tag
is.
Surprisingly affordable when it
comes to the alternative of
letting families lose their
housing and the money that we
then spend um trying to help
folks retabilize or deal with
the fallout of that and um our
treasurer has all of the data.
I'd be happy to share it with
anybody who wants again, it's a
relatively small number because
we are a very small nonprofit,
but, um, if you extrapolate from
that to the larger population, I
think you'd be surprised at how
low that number actually is.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you for that response. Um,
and just, just as a call for
anyone here who's interested in
working on some of this
legislation, a group of us are
meeting regularly to talk about
this, um, both from the Mobile
Home Parks Act, um, as well as
the landlord tenant work um in a
number of the other funding
mechanisms, I think that we
might be able to um rehash and
then I'll just keep um asking
my, my best friend over here to
the right to hear our
legislation come um session
time.
With that said, Madam Chair, um,
I really appreciate that, yeah,
everyone's best friend. That's
right for life,
but thank you again for, for all
of this work and and for your
continued advocacy.
Um, thank you. I just have a
question on the mobile home
park, the purchasing the ground
under, is it a collective
purchase, meaning the tenants
pitch in and they buy it
collectively, or do they get the
plot that's on, how is that
structured?
Madam Chair, the way that it
usually happens, uh, for is
that, um, the, the residents
form an entity, a business
association like a corporation
or or a limited liability
company and then take title in
the name of that entity and then
they would become members, owner
members of that great because I
was thinking about it and if it
were the plot,
the affordability then go, I
mean, then the prices start to
rise because people then own the
land, they own the house, you
know, and it
we're back into that cycle of
escalating prices, but I, I
could see if a corporation or
some kind of entity owned it all
collectively for the benefit of
the people who, you know,
resided that I can see that
working much better. OK, that
was great. That's the typical
model. There are instances where
people have done it as
condominiums or subdivisions
homeowners associations where
you have a a title to the land
on your specific, but then, you
know, a common area as well, but
they're different models, but
the most common one is to have a
corporate.
It, you know, and take title of
whole of like owns it now. I
mean, that's right, you know,
sort of, it's similar concept.
OK, well, this was, I think,
really interesting. I think the
members found it um very much
so. So, um, appreciate the
overview and the suggestions and
the data, people are always
interested in seeing data, so
thank you very much and coming
up here, we really appreciate
your time. Thank you.
OK.
I
So
One last
Um, presentation on a similar
topic.
Some people start Please,
well, yes, absolutely.
P
Mm.
You know, I would note.
Some of these topics have
probably been addressed, so.
Calibrate accordingly, you know,
just my um guidance for you.
You ready? Go.
Please introduce yourself and
the person that you have online.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, uh,
members of the committee. My
name is Maria Grego. I'm an
attorney with the New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty. Um,
you've heard, uh, about us
earlier today when my colleague
spoke, so I won't, um,
Belabor that. Um, I'm joined
today by Joanne DeMel. She's a
resident of a mobile home park
in Silver City, um, and a real
community leader, um, in these
mobile, mobile home park
advocacy issues.
Um, I do have a slit, uh, uh,
presentation, uh, slideshow
presentation that will come up
after Joanne speaks because I
don't wanna.
Kick her off the screen. Um,
but, uh, as you all know, I'm
here to talk to you today about
preserving affordable housing
in, uh, manufactured home
communities.
Um,
We, Joanne and I are here on
behalf of the New Mexico Housing
Alliance, which is a group of
various advocates including
civil legal service providers
like New Mexico Legal Aid, um,
senior citizens law office, um,
New Mexico legal resources for
the elderly program, advocacy
organizations like New Mexico
Voices for Children, um, the
Center for Housing Law who just
spoke.
Um,
Albuquerque Healthcare for the
Homeless, New Mexico coalition
to End Homelessness, and then
others as well, including
representatives from, um, AOC,
the Administrative Office of the
courts, representatives from the
Human Services Department, um,
and New Mexico eviction and
Prevention, uh, program.
So, you know, as, as Madam Chair
alluded to, you've heard a lot
of these, uh, topics covered
today. Some of them really bear
repeating. These are important
issues that are really facing,
um, some of our most vulnerable
New Mexicans.
Um, I wanted to start off by
telling you a quick story about,
um, some tenants that I, I got a
call from in Santa Fe last year.
Um, they, it was a small mobile
home park, uh, called Dale
Mobile Village
and the residents had, most of
them had lived there for
decades. The park had been owned
since its inception, I believe
in the late 70s or early 80s,
um, by one man, uh, Mr. Dale,
the park was named after him.
And the park residents loved
him. They, he had a great
relationship with the residents.
Um, he worked with them whenever
anything came up, he kept the
parking.
Good working order and basically
considered all of the residents'
family.
Um, Mr. Dale became too, um, he
was getting older and decided to
sell the park, um, early last
year.
And uh sold it to a new, a new
owner, um, the new owner came in
and, um, immediately demanded
that residents sign a new month
to month lease. Um, the lease
was so poorly written, it
contained references to Utah
law, um, many just outright
illegal provisions that if you
read the Mobile Home Park Act,
you would know our blatantly
illegal.
Um,
He raised rents and for one
family in particular it was
devastating. There was a
An elderly couple who are 76 and
78 who had been in the park
since it opened in the same home
they'd been in the park for 45
years.
And the new owner raised their
rent by 97%.
Um, and they simply could not
afford to live in the park
anymore and
before I talked to them, they
believed that their only option
was to move into a, an RV and
abandon their home and
essentially sign it over to the
new owner.
Um, luckily we were able to work
with the residents negotiate a
new lease, um, and
The rent increases was
eventually phased in, but still.
Far too expensive, um, for the
residents.
So that's just one example of
some really horrible stories we
hear about from mobile home
parks all over the state. Um,
and Joanne is Joanne DeM is here
today to tell you about her
story, um, and her story really
illustrates again, what many
residents are facing, um, in New
Mexico. So I'm gonna hand it
over to Joanne and then I'll get
back to my.
Thank you.
Um, thank you, Maria, and thank
you, uh, Madam Chair and members
of the MI. Thank you for this
hearing, uh, and for the
opportunity to speak. My name is
Joanna DeM and I live in a
manufactured home community in
Silver City. I'm 76 years old
and a single woman without
family to lean on.
A little bit a community where
we support each other and
celebrate life together. There's
no loneliness epidemic where I
live. What there is is fear for
our future.
We own our homes and live in
unstable housing.
My story begins 3 years ago when
I found the perfect home for me
to age in place in a community.
It was affordable, quiet,
surrounded by nature with
pleasant people, mostly aging
single women without family
nearby.
Single women over 60 make up the
largest segment of the mobile
manufactured home community
population.
For example, when I met my
neighbor Nancy, she was 84 years
old and she told me that during
the past year, she had a
debilitating stroke and a few
months later her husband died
suddenly and then a month after
that, her only child also died
suddenly.
She went on to say how happy she
is to live in a community
surrounded by people who care.
So after looking at this
affordable and supportive
community for several months. We
all got letters from the very
pleasant woman who owned the
land under our homes, saying she
had sold it was leaving town the
next day.
I felt like a work had been
pulled out from under me.
None of us had written leases.
We had an oral agreement. She
told us we could live here as
long as we followed the rules.
The rules were in writing,
unlike those.
But we believed her.
And
But at that point in time, I
felt like my home, my community
and my largest asset in my
future, we're all at risk.
So a few months later, the out
of town investors showed up for
the month to month lease and
assured us that there would be
no changes.
We were relieved for a minute,
but a couple months after that,
our rents were raised 20 to 50%.
I started to research the law
thinking that things couldn't be
as bad as they seemed, and I
discovered the opposite. Things
were worse.
I learned that the New Mexico
mobile home park app was
outdated and not enforced. I
learned that there was a
national trend that has been
going on for almost 2 decades of
predatory practices that were
making investors rich and
destroying communities.
My understanding has always been
that the government's primary
role is to protect its citizens,
but what I've learned was that
not only we're vulnerable
populations not being protected
from an unscrupulous practices,
but the corporate investors and
private equity were being
assisted with loans from Fannie
Mae and Freddie Mac.
And that the real estate owners
and lobbies.
would get in the way of
meaningful solutions.
So then I started talking to
people in other communities. I
made contact through friends and
friends of friends. My friend
Carol set up a meeting with me
and a woman in another community
here in Graham County.
But the day we were supposed to
meet, she emailed and I'll read
this, she said sorry, I said I
would do an interview. C,
please.
Even if we accidentally got out,
the owner could have looked me.
He evicted a woman in a
wheelchair who was in her late
60s, truly, I don't have the
energy to move.
Sorry, said yes without thinking
it through. Thank you for
understanding.
I have found that many, if not
most of the people living in
these communities are afraid to
speak up for fear of losing
their homes and communities.
A friend of mine in another
community here in Grant County,
got an eviction notice with no
cause listed or expressed. She
lives in a home that was
manufactured 63 years ago that
she obviously could not take her
with her if she had any place to
go.
After begging to stay, she was
told she could stay on a month
to month basis if she behaved.
Which was a strange response
since no improper behavior was
ever described. So my lively
friend who came of age in the
60s.
Who has strong and outspoken
strong and outspoken, her whole
life responded by saying she
would behave so that she could
stay in the home that she owns.
So after more conversations, I
discovered the community
infrastructure is allowed to
deteriorate because the
landowners have no incentive or
requirements to make repairs,
even as rents increase, people
are being told to keep buckets
of water handy or by space
heaters when water lines or gas
lines need attention.
People are cutting back on
medicine and having to sell
their homes at a loss with no
place to go because they cannot
pay the large rent increases.
My neighbor Ruth, who's in her
80s, started cleaning houses to
make ends meet after her large
re rent increase. Another woman
in Albuquerque reports that she
had to put her dog down because
she couldn't afford to keep her.
So despite the horror sports
stories, I've also learned of
many states that have an active
protective and opportunity
legislation to stabilize this
type of housing in these
important communities. New
Hampshire alone has 150 resident
owned communities that have
stabilized their futures of over
9000 homeowners.
Florida provides for mediation
between landowners and
homeowners to mediate land
land-based rent increases.
God has provided $225 million in
grants for infrastructure
improvements for resident owned
communities to replace the
dilapidated.
Uh, dilapidated homes and
infrastructure.
So I just want to thank you for
giving this matter serious
consideration and supporting
solutions that can stabilize
these homes in the central
communities and possibly even
making them affordable in
perpetuity.
Including possible shared equity
options that can impact current
stability as well as
generational poverty. Thank you.
Thank you so much, Joanne. No,
of course. Thank you, Joanne.
Um, go back to you, Maria.
Great, and I just need help
getting my slides up.
Oh
OK.
OK, if you can go, go ahead.
All right, so this is just um a
picture of Dale Mobile Village,
the park I, I mentioned at the
beginning of our presentation,
as you can see, it's a fairly
small park in Santa Fe. Um, and
again, now, you know, now that
we were able to work with the
residents, um, things have
gotten significantly better for
them, but they are still, um,
constantly in fear of the ever
increasing rents, um.
Go ahead and switch to the next
slide.
All right, so just to give you
an overview of of affordable
housing you've heard from, from
a lot of folks today, but, um,
New Mexico lacks around 32,000
units of affordable housing. Um,
and in New Mexico, our median,
um,
Median household income is just
over 58,000 a year while the
national, uh, median household
income is over 75,000, so it's a
pretty large disparity. Um, the
state's median household income,
um, increased in increased 22%
between 2018 to 2022. Um, while
the median home price increased,
uh, 53%. So as you can see, uh,
wages, um, sorry, home prices
are outpacing wage.
Increases.
And then I just wanted to
highlight some key demographic,
um, information.
Um, specifically about seniors
in New Mexico because I think
it's axiomatic that, um,
seniors, uh, tend to rely on,
um, manufactured housing
communities, um, more than some
of the other demographics. Um,
so in New Mexico, the rate of
households with seniors, um, is
just under 34%, which is much
higher than the national rate
of, um, seniors, uh, I'm sorry,
11% of, um, seniors and
households.
Um, and then, um, many New
Mexico senior households are,
you know, living with, uh, with
very low income, um, earning
less than 4 or $40,000 annually.
Um, so again, very difficult to
afford, um, housing prices. If I
could just, I'm sorry, I'm
having a little bit of trouble
seeing my own slide 4 there.
Site 3.
OK, if we could go to slide.
For
All right.
Um,
So, you know, as again mentioned
before, manufactured housing
communities offer a very
accessible and affordable path
to, OK,
uh, they offer in a very, uh,
accessible and affordable path
to, to home ownership. Um,
according to the manufactured
Housing Institute um
factory-built homes cost an
average of $72 per square foot.
Um, compared to $143 for um site
built homes. So it's, it's quite
different.
Um, additionally, um, you know,
manufactured, um, homes make up
a large source of the affordable
housing stock in New Mexico. You
heard um Elizabeth Elia earlier
talking about the large numbers
of manufactured housing
communities in New Mexico, um,
in New Mexico 15% of our
affordable housing stock is
comprised of mobile homes, uh,
versus 5% nationally.
Um, and 30% of the housing stock
in 11, uh, New Mexico counties
is comprised of, of manufactured
homes and um Representative
Hall's jurisdiction, San Juan
County has the highest, um,
percentage of folks who live in
mobile homes of any other county
in the US, so it's quite high.
We can go to slide 5.
All right, so just wanted to
highlight um why retirees and
seniors choose, uh, manufactured
home communities, um,
Again, they are an affordable um
source of, of home ownership.
Um, more affordable than the
traditional.
Um, homes, which is ideal for,
for seniors on fixed incomes.
Um, it also allows folks to
downsize in their later years
while still maintaining
ownership, so they can still
enjoy the benefits of home
ownership can make alterations
to the inside of their home
change paint, change carpet,
etc. um, but it's more
manageable for them.
And then probably most
importantly, and you heard
Joanne speak to this, is the
strong sense of community that
comes with living in a
manufactured home community. Um,
that's especially important for
folks who are, you know, they
age, they're losing spouses, um,
they're, you know, getting more
medically fragile. Um, we often
hear about, you know, how, how
folks look out for each other in
mobile home park. So there's
folks that are helping others,
you know, go to medical
appointments or reminding them.
To take their medication,
picking up a prescription. Um,
so that's a really important
piece of the puzzle is the
strong sense of community.
Um, you can go to the next
slide.
All right, so just to go over
some of the challenges and risks
for residents in, um, Mobile
Home Park communities. I'm
sorry, manufactured home
communities. You can go to the
next slide.
All right, so again, um,
mentioned earlier by, um,
Elizabeth Elia that this myth of
mobility. Um, so you heard me
correct myself a second ago
calling the manufactured home
communities versus mobile home
communities. Um, and that's
really sort of the trend
nationally to call the
manufactured home communities
because they really, these homes
really aren't as mobile as we
might think of them.
Um,
Contrary to, you know, the
notion that they can be moved
easily. What we know is that
actually once homes are placed,
they are very often or very
rarely, I'm sorry, moved, um, I
mentioned the, the family
earlier in Dale Mobile Village,
uh, their house had been in the
same spot for over 45 years. And
as these homes age, they lose
structural integrity, um, making
it difficult, if not impossible
to move, um, without causing
substantial, uh, structural
damage.
And then the second issue is
just finding somewhere to move
the home.
Um, a lot of manufactured home
communities actually have, um,
in their rules, you know, age
requirements, so they won't
allow, uh, manufactured home and
that's older than, you know, for
example, 20 years. Um, so once
you're, you know, if you're
evicted and you have to move
your home out of a park, it's
really difficult to find a new
place. Um, and often folks just
sadly end up abandoning their
homes.
And then high relocation costs.
Um, I was shocked the first time
I, I heard a client tell me
about the cost uh for moving a
home. She was facing eviction
and started, um, you know, just
as a precautionary method, not
knowing if she's going to be
able to stay looking into
relocation costs. And it was
close to 15,000 to move her home
from Albuquerque to Berlin.
Not very far.
Um, and the, the data shows
nationally that costs range
between 5000 and 15,000, um,
which represents approximately 5
to 10 years' worth of the home's
equity.
Um, so it's just cost
prohibitive. Folks just can't do
it. And again, what happens is
many folks just end up
abandoning the home and uh what
we've seen unfortunately is that
the, the park owners will come
in and say, look, we know you're
not going to be able to move the
home. We'll buy it from you, but
they buy it for pennies on the
dollar and folks lose their
largest asset.
And end up having to move to an
apartment or in with a family
member.
All right, if you could move to
the next.
All right, some more risks for
homeowners. Um, what is the
vulnerability to sail, um, as
mentioned earlier, uh, you know,
landowners, um, who own the
parks may just decide to sell
the park, they get a good good
enough offer, um, and the park
might be redeveloped for other
purposes like a shopping mall,
displacing usually hundreds of
residents.
Um,
Short notice eviction. So, um,
Currently under the Mobile Home
Park Act, you are only if you
are evicted, you're only given
30 days to move a single wide uh
unit. You get 60 days if it's a,
if it's a double wide.
Um, but that's very little time.
Again, very little time to find
a place that will accept your
home in very little time to come
up with the exorbitant costs,
uh, to move it.
And then there's the impact on
home values. So, um, it's very
difficult if you decide, I just
want to move out of this park
and I also want to sell my home.
It's very difficult to attract a
buyer to buy your home, um, when
you know they come in and look
at your house, they can't be
certain that they're going to be
moving into a secure community,
um, knowing that rents can, can
skyrocket very quickly. Um, and
they just might not want to
invest in a home that might have
the land sold out from
underneath it very soon.
OK, you can move to the next
slide.
All right, um, so again, you've
heard this earlier, this this
shift in ownership trends, um,
and I talked about, um, Dale
Mobile Village is a good
example. Typically, um, mobile
home parks, manufactured home
communities were, um, owned and
operated by mom and mom and pop
um operations. They had great um
relationships with the
residents, you know, would work
with residents if they knew, you
know, maybe they weren't going
to get, uh, paid, you know, for
another week, they would, you
know, hold off on, on giving
them.
A 3 day notice, um, treated them
like family.
And we've seen a real shift over
the last few years, especially
since 2020. Uh, the emergence of
private equity firms who are
coming in and buying out, um,
parks. There's a huge increase
in the acquisition, um,
of manufactured home communities
we've seen a huge increase in
the Albuquerque area and you
know, these investors have a
profit-driven approach, so they
are not necessarily looking out
for the best interests of the
residents, but looking at how to
maximize returns. So often
driving up rent quite high and
in turn, and, and despite
promises that that rent will be
used to make improvements to the
park. Um, what residents are
reporting is.
reduced maintenance, um.
Less focus on resident welfare,
um, an example, a park in, um,
Alamogordo, uh, a private equity
firm bought out a park in
Alamogordo and um increased
rents and we hear from them
repeatedly, their, you know,
their roads are in shambles.
They're being told that they're
not going to have hot water, um.
And this is despite now paying
more than they were paying when
they had, um, a local landlord.
All right, you can.
All right. Um, so getting into
the financial impact, um, one of
the biggest, you know, impacts
is the erosion of equity. So
studies have shown that for
every $100 increase in rent, um,
a manufactured home can lose
$10,000 in value. Um, and that's
according to a, a 2017 study, so
it's it's actually probably
getting worse.
Um,
And then again, challenges in
the market, um, rising rents
make it difficult for homeowners
to sell their homes because
again, someone's not going to
want to come in and pay a huge
rent increase and then no, or
pay it a large rent, knowing
that it could increase at any
time and also knowing how
difficult it is to move the home
out of the park.
Um, so the reality is that
These homeowners are faced with
3 difficult options pay the
higher rent and forego other
necessities. Um, you heard
Joanne talk about a
heartbreaking examples somebody
in the Albuquerque Meadows Park,
um, in Albuquerque, a senior
community. She could no longer
afford to pay for her dog's
medicine because of the increase
in, in rents and it had to make
the heartbreaking decision to
put her dog down.
Um, a, a dog that had been her
companion companion for many
years. Um,
Spent thousands of dollars to
relocate is the other option,
assuming you can even afford it,
but again, oftentimes it's just
cost prohibitive.
Or abandon the home and as I
mentioned, we are seeing more
and more, uh, almost, you know,
uh,
The.
Landowners pushing folks out.
So, you know, finding reasons to
evict so that they can push
folks out and then swoop in and
buy those those homes for
pennies on the dollar.
All right. Um, so one of
another, uh, big issue, um, that
we see is, um, lack of
enforcement. And you've heard
this several times today and I
was so glad to hear, um, this
talk about, um, the AG and a
possible letter from this
committee. Um, you know, the,
the mobile Home Park Act was
created by the legislature in
1983 recognizing the unique
vulnerable vulnerabilities of,
um, residents who own their
homes but rent the land.
But unfortunately because of
this lack of enforcement, uh,
those protections are often
rendered meaningless.
Um, and I can give a little bit
of insight into this issue with
the Attorney General's office.
Um,
When, uh, AG taught us, uh, took
over, um, the office. He came
and talked to us and said, I'm
really actually, I'm really
interested in in mobile home
park issues and, you know, what
are you seeing and I shared with
him everything I'm sharing with
you today.
And he said that he was going to
make it a priority of his
administration.
And then once he took office,
what we were running into is,
The, um,
Assistant AGs in the office were
were some of them were taking a
position that we don't have the
authority under the mobile Home
Park Act to to act. And we said,
you do, actually you have this
general authority, this the
welfare authority that comes to
you, just as, as the AG's
office.
And you also have authority
under the, um, unfair Practices
Act, and the unfair Practices
Act, um, it doesn't cover real
estate, and I think that's why
folks get hung up. Um, there's
an exclusion for real estate,
but it does cover leases.
And so, um, we have encouraged
the AG's office to either use
their enforcement authority just
generally for the general
welfare or the, uh, authority
granted to them under the unfair
Practices Act. And luckily we
have seen a little bit of
movement. I do want to say that
with this park in Alamogoro that
I mentioned just a minute ago,
the AG's office has started
investigating and putting some
pressure on the landlord to fix,
you know, these, the utilities
get the water working, get the
roads repaired.
Um, so that is some promising
movement, but we really need a
dedicated, um, approach, uh, by
the AG's Office of commitment
and an approach to enforcing,
um, these laws.
OK, you can switch to the next
slide. Um,
So some opportunities for
legislative action, um, the
first is resident owned
communities, which uh has been
talked about a lot today. So I
won't go over it a lot, just go
over some high points. Um,
again, explicit authority for
the Attorney general to enforce
the Mobile Home Park Act, which
I think is important because
even if we get one
administration to understand and
agree that they're going to
enforce the act that could
change with subsequent
administration unless the act
itself is amended to say,
The AG hasn't the authority to,
um, enforce this act.
And then last is increased
funding for civil legal
services. Um, folks just need
access to legal help when
they're facing an eviction.
Oftentimes there are some very
good defenses that folks could
raise. They just don't know that
they're out there.
Um,
We unfortunately are seeing
fewer and fewer civil legal
service providers who can take
on housing cases, New Mexico
legal aid used to have a much
more robust housing program, um,
and they simply don't anymore
and
It's pretty much come down to
when we get a call because we
don't do individual
representation at the Center on
Lawn Poverty. We have to do a
screening and ask, do you have a
veteran in the household? If you
have a veteran, then maybe we
can refer you to the veterans
program at New Mexico Legal Aid.
Do you have someone who's
disabled because then maybe we
can, um, send you to disability
rights New Mexico. Do you have a
senior citizen because then
maybe the senior citizens law
office can take you. But if you
don't have anyone in your
household who meets that
criteria. Oftentimes you just
don't have access to legal help.
Um, so it's really important
that we um continue um robust
funding for civil legal services
so that folks can get access to.
All right, resident owned
communities, you've heard a lot
about them already today, but
they're just really a mechanism
for, for tenants to come
together, um, and form an
entity, um, so that if they
choose to, uh, if the owner of a
manufactured home community
decides to sell or they get an
offer, um, that the community
can come together.
As, as one entity and, and make
an offer and be considered. I
want to be very clear that this
is not right of first refusal.
So you, there's no requirement
that the that the seller, um,
give the the residents priority.
It's an opportunity and to
purchase and it.
In some ways just sort of levels
out the playing field so that,
um, you know, that the owner is
required to negotiate, um, in
good faith, um, they're required
to, you know, disclose exactly
what has been offered to them.
So if it's something beyond just
a cash offer if it's, you know,
$200 plus an acre of land that
they are upfront and, uh,
disclose that so that the, the
tenants, the residents can come
back with a competitive offer.
Next slide.
All right, so just some of the
things that uh um
Uh, so Rock USA is the, the
entity that has been very
successful across the US with
helping tenants form cooperative
units or cooperative entities
and purchase, uh, their parks.
And so I just wanted to
highlight their model and and
show you that they take a
four-pronged approach really
they help with the setup, the
governance set up. So if they
need if the residents need a co
op or some other, um,
Agreement to make the purchase,
they helped them set that up.
Uh, they provide financial and
technical support. So help find
funding and you know, in New
Mexico right now, we have some
funding available for this, the
MFA has some funding available
and they're actually working
with Roc USA right now, um, to
help residents acquire.
Uh, their communities, um, Rock
USA also provides support, so
helping them with with
negotiations, um, helping them
with drawing up contracts that
might be necessary, property
transfers, documentation
recording.
And then post purchase support,
so helping folks to understand
what it means to manage a park.
How do you hire a a community
manager? What are the
governance, um,
What's the governance structure
you might need? What are the
laws that you must abide by, um,
in running a park.
Now
Um, and then, you know, lastly,
again, you've heard much of
this, there, there's just so
many benefits to a resident
owned community. Residents
really get control over their
decisions. It helps protect them
from displacement because rent
is no longer being seen as a, as
a profit, um, driving mechanism.
It's really rents are set in a
way that cover the expenses of
the park, keep it up and
running, um, but it's still
affordable.
And then I just wanted to sort
of end with some case studies
showing successful modernization
in other states that have moved
to, um, legislation that
includes uh resident opportunity
to purchase. Uh, the first is
New Hampshire.
Uh, so New Hampshire was really
um a leader in the Rock USA
model, um,
The New Hampshire legislature
passed laws to include
provisions for opportunity to
purchase, um, in their
equivalent of their, the Mobile
Home Park Act.
Um, and since adopting the rock
model in New Hampshire, um, just
under 9100 homes um in, in New
Hampshire were preserved as
stable, affordable housing, so
it's really effective. And 150
communities were moved from uh
the real estate market, making
them an enduring uh source of
affordable. And then uh go
ahead. And then lastly, um, is
just a quick um case study of
Colorado, um, our, our
neighbors, um, they have again.
Um,
Also done really well with uh
opportunity to purchase. They
passed a bill in 2020, um,
codifying, um, opportunity to
purchase into their mobile home
park app.
Um, and since then, uh, 454
homes have been preserved as
stable, affordable housing in 9
communities have been removed
from the, the real estate
market, and that's just since
2020.
Um, so,
Yeah, I just wanted, uh, those
are some quick highlights of how
successful, um, opportunity to
purchase can be.
Um, and I am available for any
questions, I have some proposed
legislative fixes. I've gone
over all of them. Um, then
there's some more detail here
about what, um, opportunity to
purchase could entail, um, as
well as, um, aging enforcement.
Uh, thank you, Maria. Um,
questions, comments, um, Senator
Neiber, anyone else? OK. And
Senator Maestas.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, you
said it didn't involve a right
of first refusal, but how do you
force a owner of property to
sell to.
A specific group of individuals
without it being a right of
first refusal.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, um,
Senator Nibert, so there's,
there's no forcing of, of the
sale. So with a right of first
refusal, if you had, um, just a
kind of contrast if you had a
third party offer and then the
residents offering if they were
essentially the same the uh
default would go to the
residents. The residents would
get that right to purchase.
Um, with an opportunity to
purchase, there's no requirement
that the seller sell to the
residents. It's simply and there
are different models, right? But
one of the more common models is
that you give residents advance
notice or of your intent to sell
or if you get an offer, you give
residents advance notice so that
if they need if they're
interested in a purchase, they
can form the the legal entity
needed to make the purchase or
they could start looking for
financing, um.
And then there are other um
requirements like
You know, again, good, good
faith negotiations, full
disclosure of the terms of, of
other offers. So I use an
example earlier if you have a
third party offerer who is
saying, I'll give you 2 million
and this acre of property, um,
the owner, the seller must
disclose that they have this
offer that's.
2 million plus an acre of
property can't just be, you
know, I'm getting 2 million so
that.
The residents can then have the
opportunity to say, OK, well let
me figure out what this acre of
property is worth, maybe we can
increase our cash offer to or
increase our offer um to take
that into account so that we're,
we're competitive. But there's
no requirement that they get
preference over a third party.
So Madam Chair, are the models
of the I guess the uh bills that
you've had drafted, are they all
not really requiring a cell.
They're just more noticed.
And opportunity for another
party to come to the table and.
Yeah, maybe pursue a purchase,
but there's no.
Forces.
Madam Chair and senator, that's
correct. One of the, the biggest
key provisions in an opportunity
to purchase is that advanced
notice. And if you, you know,
you heard Joanne speaking
earlier. They had no advance
notice of their sale. They
simply were, you know, working
with a, a great, uh, mom and pop
uh landlord situation and then
with no advance notice this, the
park was sold out from
underneath them to a new owner
and the new owner came in. They
had no chance to.
Form an entity should they wish
to to purchase or make an offer,
look into financing, it was
simply just sold without any
advance notice. So that is one
of the key provisions of an
opportunity to purchase act.
It's that advanced notice and
and residents may not, you know,
choose to exercise that right,
but if they do, then it just
gives them the the the time that
they need.
And then, Madam Chair, the, the,
uh,
You put down that one of the
benefits is maybe.
The person gets treated fairly
or whatever. I, I know a number
of situations in retirement
villages where.
A resident does not get treated
fairly by the homeowners
association or by the common
ownership group and.
Uh,
To think that this model then uh
resolves all issues. I can
assure you it does not, it may,
uh, may, may change the nature
of the issues and conflicts that
arise, but they certainly don't
go away. I get too many calls on
these things, uh, from time to
time.
And they can be ugly even in a
common ownership model, but
anyway, thank you for your
presentation.
Thank you, Senator Maestas.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Ms. Grego for your work and
and uh.
Do you know, um, what percentage
of mobile homes are on kind of
the private property single.
acre lots or whatnot and how
many are part of Mobile Parks.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Senator
Maestas, I am going to turn and
ask Elizabeth if she knows. Um,
she promised to help me out
today.
Yes, uh, you want.
Madam Chair, Elizabeth is really
the expert here.
OK.
After, after waiting for me to
make the journey up here, I have
a disappointing response for
you, um, Madam Chair and Senator
Mayes, I don't know the number
off the top of my head, but we
can, we can calculate it by
looking at that, um, that chart
that I included in my PowerPoint
presentation that showed mobile
homes by county or manufactured
homes by county and also the
number of parks by county, so we
could,
we could find,
Madam Chair, Generals, did you
know if um
What's your opinion? Do you
think Albuquerque is essentially
zoned out mobile home parks with
their ordinances.
I'm gonna watch you.
Cause I know, Madam Chair, when
they redraw the school
districts, it's always a.
Very peculiar lines go around
those mobile home parks.
Um,
Madam Chair and Senator Mays,
I'm not sure about that. I
don't, I don't know. That's,
that's something I'll definitely
look into. Um, there, there
certainly can be tensions around
um zoning issues for
manufactured home communities,
so I wouldn't be surprised if it
if it's an area that needs more
attention. We do know that uh
Albuquerque and Bernlio County
have more mobile home parks than
any other part of New Mexico.
And then, Madam Chair, do you
know uh.
The mobile home itself.
How many years?
How old is a mobile home park
get where where you can no
longer move it? Obviously the
movement is based on its
relationship to the ground and
you know, the, the, the fixtures
around it, but essentially can
the mobile home park be moved?
When can you say, well, it's 12
years old, we can't move it
or they can be moved till when?
Structurally.
Yeah
Madam Chair, um, Senator
Maestas, I think you're going to
find it varies greatly, you
know, some factors to consider
are general upkeep on the home
itself, um, you know, depending
on who, who owned the home it
might be, you know, had better
maintenance, um.
There will be uh movers will
have different um policies too,
so depending on which mover you
call, they may, um, their
insurance may say, you know,
we're only going to move homes
that are, you know, 10 years or
younger. Um, so I think, I think
it's going to vary quite a bit.
Understood. No great
explanation. And then also,
Madam Chair, the um
The bill, were you working on
the bill that Senator O'Neill
was working on the last couple
of years or.
Or which build were you guys
pushing last year, if, if any?
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator, um,
not directly, not directly
working with Senator O'Neill,
um, we, we reviewed the bill,
you know, the members of, of the
New Mexico Housing Alliance
reviewed the bill and we were
generally supportive of it, um,
but, uh, we weren't doing a lot
of uh direct work with, with
Senator O'Neill. We had been in
the past few years, um, working
at, um, updating the uniform
owner resident relations Act,
and that's sort of where our
focus had been. And I, I know I
met with you.
um, a couple years back now, um,
to talk about those changes. But
yeah, our, our focus had been
really on the uniform owner
resident Relations Act, and then
what prompted this sort of shift
and we're, I want to say we're
still very much interested and
concerned with what's happening
with landlord-tenant
relationships generally, but
what prompted this shift in
focus for us is just call after
call after call from folks
living in mobile or manufactured
home communities who are
reporting these same issues and
it didn't matter.
part of the state that they were
the same story just from every,
every corner of the state. Got
you, thank you, Madam Chair. And
so I just, just want to
reiterate the point that we, we
definitely need to pass
something this year for sure.
The, uh, I mean, it's a bummer
to move to get kicked out of
your apartment is one thing, but
to get kicked out of the park
and you don't have to just.
Get your couches and your
luggage. You have to take your
home, so it's a very difficult
endeavor, very expensive
endeavor, uh, you're forced to
sell and unlike.
Real, you know, a house,
depreciates, it doesn't
appreciate so you buy a mobile
for like $80,000 and you'll be
lucky to get like 15,000 for it,
so, so we definitely have to uh.
Update that statute. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Uh, Representative Romero and
briefly and then briefly
Senator, it's been a long day.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Just a
couple of things I've noticed
that I had learned recently and
would love to try to understand
and have it wraps around first
is um that the manufactured
housing um updates even through
HUD and some of the funding
that's coming through the
federal funding I've learned is
some of these manufactured homes
are like the tiny homes. They're
these like new modern incredibly
efficient, great builds, um,
that aren't the traditional sort
of manufactured home we've been
thinking about if the past, um,
so with those updates too, I
think come this opportunity to
look at how manufactured homes
could be part of our solution in
the housing crisis that we're in
as well, um, and how we can
maybe match some of those funds,
so just a comment there. And
then secondly, does the, have
you been talking to tribal
communities too about these
parks and I don't even know if
they exist or how you've been
looking at the data, um, with
With what that model would look
like for our indigenous
communities.
Thank you, Madam Chair and uh
Representative Romero, uh, to be
honest, I haven't had any direct
conversations with members of
the tribe, um, but I have, uh, I
just recently did a training in
Gallup, um, and uh it was a know
your rights training for
manufactured home community
residents. And I would say if
not 100% 95%, um, we, we, um,
either um Dena or members of um,
you know, another.
Um, tribe or or pueblo.
Um,
And we're going back out there,
I think next week actually to do
another, another training. So,
um, this is, um, you know, an
issue again, it it affects very
rural parts of of the state. Um,
there are a lot of parks out um
in the, in the Four Corners
area. Um, and so it is an issue
that affects native communities.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Those
are, that's it, right.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, have
you ever been out to Meadow
Lake?
Madam Chair, Senator, I am not
sure where's Meadow Lake? Meadow
Lake is in Valencia County and
it's east of El Cerro. The
reason I ask is the last time I
was there I saw a really
disturbing sight and it was all
these abandoned, um, it's gonna
say trailers, mobile homes, you
know, whatever. And I asked
people there, and I guess my
question is, is what happens
when people abandon these homes
in a mobile home park or
or wherever, what happens next?
Does it to this state
eventually, or what happens?
Madam Chair, Senator Cido Lopez,
typically what we see when it's
when it's a park is uh the
family has gotten evicted and
they can't afford to move the
home and so, uh, and, and often
they will maybe perhaps owe some
back rent and so they end up
cutting the deal with the the
owner of the park that they will
sign over the home and it'll
cover some of the back rent owed
and they might get a little bit
of cash.
and leave, but, but what we see
is that the the park owners are
buying those homes for pennies
on the dollar, um, and then
either selling them to a new
resident or renting them out.
So, um, yeah, it.
Folks just aren't, aren't able
to take the homes with them and
so it's, it's sort of a perfect
model for predatory practices
where you can swoop in and just
buy those homes, um, and, and
folks are in a pinch, right?
They, they have very little
negotiating power. I mean, what
are they going to do? It's gonna
be very difficult to sell to
another, another buyer, they
often have no choice but to sign
over the the home to the park
owner. That, that's outrageous.
I, I, I'm also curious about the
abandoned homes that that I.
So somebody told me that some of
them were from people who had
been deported. And so there
they, these homes on land they
bought.
On, you know, the mobile home
that they bought, and I'm
curious what happens to all of
that when they get deported, so
it's yet another story um about
these.
About these mobile homes. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Appreciate you
adding me on.
Thank you, Senator. All right.
um, thank you, Maria, and um
thanks again to our UNM friends.
I'm sure we'll be talking more
with you all about policy
initiatives and so on. So
appreciate your time. It's very
um interesting and informative
um presentations. Thank you.
Thank you so much but whatever
to them,
um, a few things we need to
approve our minutes from our
last meeting.
I have a motion from
Representative Romero, um, do I,
do I need a 2nd, 2nd from
Senator.
Nybert any opposition to the
minutes.
Thank you. All right.
They, um, we have approved
minutes, no opposition.
Next on the agenda is committee
discussion.
So this is a time for us to just
have a conversation about what
we've been hearing about or
anything else that's sort of
appropriate for our committee,
Senator Nibert.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Early on we were talking about
the uh
Lack of
detention facilities in Espanola
and Rio Riba County.
And I know some counties uh.
Don't have the other counties
don't have the resources either
and I, I know that a lot of or
number of counties have put
substantial investments in those
types of facilities,
particularly the last few years,
and I don't know how we deal
with that without.
Me somewhat unfair to some part
of the state or another, but,
but uh that's something I think
uh you all are gonna have to
wrestle with and how much does
the state start taking over and
maybe uh controlling some of the
County responsibilities and
whether the counties really want
some of that state intervention,
so to speak, because with every
uh
Program that we tend to get
involved with uh it soon.
May lead to places that they
never intended, so just point
out that observation.
Uh, a good point and we'll be
hearing from uh New Mexico
counties. I'm wondering if
that's gonna be on there. They
bring this idea of regional
detention and so on up
periodically. I don't know if
it's gonna be on their list
tomorrow, but it may be, and I
suppose we can ask them about
it. Thank you, son.
Representative Chasey.
Moor, uh, is this our discussion
part? So can I, I first want to
ask a really quick question and
Senator Maestas. I did not hear
what you said, and it seemed
like it was an important point
about the school districts and
mobile homes. What was that?
Thank you, Madam Chair. Leader
Jay, I was kind of teasing, but
it's the truth of mobile home
parks.
A classic example is La Ceva
there was a mobile home park
very close to like high school
and the lacuva uh boundary
excluded that Mbone Park and
sent them down the road, I
think, to Norte or Sania and
then uh starting to.
My colleague Senator C Lopez was
talking about.
The zoning in Albuquerque that
essentially it would be that it
would be very, very difficult to
buy a piece of land and create a
mobile park in the city.
You know that's what I was
referring to.
So, um, I have a question about
mobile homes because it sounds
like Senator O'Neill is still
after it over there in the
Senate, and I, you know, just
lost track of things, but um.
Could you create an implied
covenant that runs with a mobile
home. This is not my expertise
in the legal field.
Wouldn't that provide a form of,
oh, they're all gone.
They don't want to hear our
discussion.
Um
No, that's Monica. She's not,
she's finds and peace expert. Oh
well. So I'm just wondering, you
know, if there we had a law if
that might not help protect the
owners.
Hm.
Oh, Maria, um.
I asked a question about whether
creating an implied covenant
that runs with the manufactured
home would protect the owner.
In a home park, not the, well,
I'm thinking
of they're, they're really the
individual owner isn't
necessarily gonna be able to
save.
But they don't own the land I
mean things that run with things
are real estate, not personal,
and I've never heard of it
running with personal property.
Or
I mean, I, we can ask, yeah, go
ahead. I'm sorry, Maria, maybe
I, I don't know something, the
question of creating an implied
covenant that runs with the
home, um, would be a protection
and we were kind of saying,
well, pass a law, but I'm not.
I didn't do well in property. I
mean, I passed it, but it wasn't
my favorite thing at all.
It was just really not my
favorite class,
and I don't I never practiced
there.
Thank you.
thank you, uh, Madam Chair, and,
um,
Representative Chasey, to be
honest, I'm, I'm not sure. It's
not something I've thought
about, um, as I'm sort of as my
wheels are spinning right now
hearing the question, um, I
think that might be fairly
difficult for a couple of
reasons and 11 reason that's
kind of just popping into my
head and I don't know, uh, maybe
with a lot of lawyers on the
committee can think this
through, but I, I know that
typically, um, manufactured
homes when they're sold, they're
not sold like a tradition.
home, right? So it's not through
a deed with documents that you
record, um, with the county
assessor or whoever it's through
a bill of sale. And so I think
it would probably be much more
difficult with a bill of sale to
include if at all possible to
include those types of
covenants, but I'm interested in
it and I'm certainly willing to
look into that further.
Thank you Maria. Thank you, Ma.
Job centers soon.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I just
have a.
She took the light off, yes.
Um, I just have a couple of
things to share. Uh, first of
all, a long time ago, I was a
brand new legislator. Uh, one of
my first bills I have, I have 5
mobile home parks in my
district. One of my first bills
was, uh, what we then called
right of first refusal. Uh,
we've got a different name for
it now, but so I for the house
propriation Committee, and he
just laughed at me. And then
they did.
What they usually don't do, he
did a do not pass, not a
tabling. They did a do not pass.
So it was pretty shocking,
um, I wound up in the ladies'
room crying. I had another
legislator come in and tell me
to stop it and get back in
there, uh, so it was, it was, it
was really something. It took me
at least 2 more terms before I
Well, if you work with the
lobbyist for the mobile home
parks, the manufactured housing
parks. You might have a little
bit better of a chance, uh, so I
did that, came back with another
bill. It passed, uh, we walked
into the appropriations
Committee holding hands,
skipping down the aisle, so they
would not think, oh, we know you
too, uh, so, but it just set up,
um, reporting times and uh a
for, you know, when you have.
To have your meetings, making
sure everybody got to know, etc.
so I've I've left mobile home
parts to uh Bill O'Neill and
others since then, um, I have a
really bad feeling about him,
but I feel about them the same
way I feel about HOAs. Now
that's another group that has no
one to go to when they're boards
and not all of them, the
significant number of them just
run roughshod over the
laws that we have carefully
crafted and passed for their
benefit, so um.
Uh, so anyway, I'll leave that
aside and tell you one other
thing, you know, Senator Nibert
brought up the mobility issue
earlier.
As part of our at risk factor?
In determining sending money
based on kids at risk, mobility
is one of those four factors.
Uh, mobility is very, uh,
correlate to low academic
performance. I have some schools
in my district where at their
elementary they start with 20
kids at the end of the year,
maybe they have 3 or 4 kids that
are still there and all the
other 1617 are new.
Because they've swapped out.
It's a total mobile
area. So, um, mobility is very
important.
So, thank you. Thank you,
Senator, um, Senator Cervantes.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
colleagues, I, I want to share
some data and some information
with you. I'd like to do that at
these meetings as we have to
really try and give us a good
perspective and I think a
different look at why we have
crime and what causes it. Um,
yesterday, many of you all
probably know I was a victim of
crime. It was a, a mercifully
it's not something that I was
injured in and, and mercifully
really nobody was injured and
except the criminal alleged
criminal. I was attending the 9
o'clock mass at the cathedral in
the middle of Santa Fe, uh.
It was the Fiesta mass, so the
about 1/4 of the church was full
of conquistador dressed and
senorita dressed and uh and a
celebration of, of uh Hispanic
culture and the archbishop to
his great credit in trying to
bring people together, he
invited in a Native American
ceremony and prayer and dance as
well too, and we were in the
middle of that after communion
when the when people began to
rush from the plaza into the
cathedral trying to escape
gunshots um that you all have
heard about.
And um people are diving on the
ground and under the pews,
parents are grabbing and
covering them, their children,
it's, it's what you'd expect.
There's a lot of screaming,
there's a lot of crying, there's
a lot of hysteria. Um, people
are rushing for various exits.
It's just, you know, you, you
sit there and go, God, is this
what we're, we're coming to, um,
when you go to mass for that the
um, Peter Worth and I were
talking a little bit, he may
have some of the details and can
fill them in. This was an hour
long process where an individual
evidently stole a car.
The accused in the case. I want
to tell you a little bit about
the accused because there's an
education in here, um, the
accused evidently stole a car
about 2 a.m. Looks like Sunday
morning, is that right, Peter, I
think, and um the owner of the
car had one of these trackers on
their vehicles so they were able
to tell the police where the
vehicle is at at various times,
the police responded or didn't
respond or whatever it may be,
they had some opportunities to
maybe uh uh pick up the
individual or stop the
individual they they for
whatever reasons that didn't
happen. I'm sure we'll hear more
about that.
Began to follow him maybe
throughout the morning, at some
point in time that led to a
series of chases in the the
chases led into Peter's
neighborhood near my, near a
second home that we have in the
area too. Streets are blocked
off, crime tape. The whole plaza
was blocked off when, when I
finally left the, the church, I
was in the back with the
archbishop talking to him in
the, in the participants, when
we finally left, of course, the
fiesta was canceled, the vendors
all very terribly disappointed,
um, they're missing their
opportunity to earn a living,
food, um, uh.
All of those kind of things, the
the plaza shut down, crime scene
tape all around the plaza around
that corner and so forth. So
that was my Sunday morning
yesterday.
Um, now, the individual who's
accused of this, um, was
eventually stopped. I don't
think there's going to be any
question of misidentification.
They find financially stopped
him. Uh, he may have shepherd
suffered a gunshot wound. I'm
not entirely sure about that
either, but he's, he's been
charged today with the following
crimes. Then I want to tell you
a little bit more about this
individual. He's 21 years old.
Um, he was charged now with
aggravated battery on a police
officer who's a long car chase
through various parts of Santa
Fe, including down near the
Plaza.
Uh, aggravated battery on a
police officer with a deadly
weapon, multiple charges of
aggravated assault on a police
officer with a deadly weapon,
aggravated fleeing a law
enforcement officer with
injuries, possession of a stolen
vehicle, reckless driving, and,
and multiple other charges.
Uh, this is what he's been
charged with from yesterday.
Now, this is what's always
interesting for me. This 21 year
individual began his record of
crime at 19 years old in July of
22, and I'm gonna list for you a
number of crimes and the
disposition of those crimes over
the period of time. It'll take
me a couple of minutes, Madam
Chair, but I think it's helpful,
and I'll let all of you know,
all of this happened in um Santa
Fe, right? So this individual
was first charged as a 19 year
old, uh, with felony, uh, get
this charge and receiving and
transferring a stolen vehicle,
right? This is the same
who yesterday stole a vehicle.
He was charged at 19 with uh
receiving transferring of a
stolen vehicle, uh, with
resisting and evading an
officer.
Um, all, all of this in July of
22.
Uh, he was charged with
felonies, uh, for those crimes.
The district attorney in Santa
Fe dismissed the charges.
A month later, this individual
in August of 22, uh, was again
charged resisting innovating an
officer.
Um, sound familiar? 3 counts of
that, concealing his identity,
drug paraphernalia.
August of 22.
Charges dismissed by the
prosecutor.
In February of 23, he was
charged with criminal trespass,
concealing his identity, um, in,
um, the following month, really
just days later, February 26th,
uh, charged with felony of
aggravated assault, um, intent
to commit a felony, larceny,
possession of controlled
substance, possession of drug
paraphilia that would have been
in February of 23. Uh, the case
was dismissed.
When the police officer veiled a
show for that for those charges
in March of this year.
Uh, he was charged with felony
possession of a controlled
substance. I don't have the
disposition of this, but
Brandon's gonna be helping me do
more of this when we, we did a
lot of this in our last couple
of years in this committee in
our, in our, our standing
committee during the session.
Um, in, um, July of this year,
just a couple of months ago.
Uh, 2 months before yesterday.
Um, the individuals charged with
the attempt to commit a felony
burglary of a vehicle, larceny,
conspiracy to commit burglary of
a vehicle conspiracy to commit
larceny. Um, the district
attorney dropped the felony
charges.
A couple of months ago, um, the,
uh, court suspended all of the
penalties for the misdemeanor
crimes remaining.
So all felony charges in July,
this is last July, uh, for those
charges, felony offenses
dropped.
Uh, by the district attorney,
and the court suspended all all
the penalties for the
misdemeanor crimes.
My colleagues, I keep trying to
make the point that I think is
resonating out there and I
really do believe it's it's
getting to the people that it
matters to. We, we, these are
not an absence of our laws. Uh,
our problem is not our absence
of laws and it's abundantly
clear, should be abundantly
clear to us where the breakdown
is at.
And, and how we solve it. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Um, Senator
Ceda Lopez, all in.
Of this turn. Well, that, that's
hard to follow, um, but I just
wanted to comment a little bit
about the housing situation in
New Mexico. It's kind of a
perfect storm of events that has
caused all of this, the drug,
the drug situation, the end of
COVID relief, the, the facts
that there are companies who are
buying properties in New Mexico
to come in, suck them dry, and
then resell them, and there's
there's just a whole lot going
on and
I think that it's really
important that this committee
take a lot of the suggestions
that were made today to address
it very seriously, um, and
because I think it's a crisis
and it's going to get worse if
we don't do something. I was
particularly affected by this
idea that we can't build our way
out of this. That sort of
changed my perspective because I
thought it was really important
to build additional housing and
yes, of course it still is, but
that's not going to solve the
problem. It's really the
competition.
For the lower
The lower priced housing that we
need to ease that competition.
So I just really want to
encourage us to to do that. I
think that source of income law
would be very, very important
because it's not just people who
have vouchers. I've heard of uh
people who come in with child
support orders and some of their
income, and, and uh the 10, the
landlord not wanting to accept
that because they don't feel
that child sport is as reliable,
um, and so I think that that's
really
Um, important, and I, I think
the manufactured housing, you
know, I, I don't know who's
gonna be the next Bill O'Neill,
but something needs to be done.
That's just really um really
horrendous. So I, I just really
encourage us, um, to, to do
that, and I was intrigued um by
the, by the whole idea of
stealing records and expunging
cause.
Yeah, I was wondering, uh, my
situation happened in the
ancient times of paper and not
computers. Thank goodness. Um,
cause I, it didn't affect me, it
didn't follow me, but I think, I
think it shouldn't. Well, I
agree, Senator, and frankly, the
reason we had a day of housing,
it was intentional, just a
second, um, representative is,
I'm conscious of the fact that
people are working on bills
related to these items. So the
point was to.
Try to lay some foundation and
background when so nobody's
surprised when they start
appearing in the docket. There
was, um, uh, no discrimination
against uh source income source
filed in the past. I believe one
was filed last um session, uh,
but obviously it was a short
session he needed a message and
the likelihood of that you might
imagine is not great, but there
are gonna be bills on these
topics. I'm quite sure there are
people working on them and
people discussing them amongst
ourselves.
You're on some of our members.
So definitely the these, I
thought that's really partly why
I wanted to have these
discussions so people would
start getting prepared for the
ideas moving forward, so thank
you for doing that, Madam Chair,
because it's, it's really
important. It's the crisis
situation for sure
um, representative of Elcon.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
You know, back to the house, I
mean, if you look at the
The statutes are in the
magistrate books and in the
Metro court books, there's not
much that the judge can do.
I mean, the judge has the way
the statutes are set up,
the judge has 3 steps that he
can take or she could take, and
that's all there is to it. I
mean, it's almost like uh
driving on a revoke license or
DWI and you gotta follow those,
those slots, I think.
The thing is that the landlords.
have been spoiled for the last
90 years.
You no longer and uh when uh I
think as representative uh
Romero, who, uh,
Tried to put the bill together.
I've been the screaming out in
the hallway was just like, like
we were going to burn down the
roundhouse is almost worse than
uh bringing the guns or doing
the gun bill and uh so we do
have to do something. Somehow we
got to work on it to where it's
uh
We compromise somewhere and we,
we take uh
We compromise somewhere and we,
we take a
see baby steps, you gotta take
some steps.
But it's gotta be done, but we
can't, uh, we can't just
completely come around and just
slam it with a whole brand new.
Set of rules one day to the
next.
How you're going to do it,
that's up to you, OK, but I
think it's in your heart. That's
how I have madam chair. She's
responsible for everything.
So did you want the center
worth? Thank you,
Madam Chair. I thought I'd share
with the committee that I, I
really appreciated the law
enforcement panel, and I think
when we're down in Las Cruces,
uh, we should do the same thing
here from local folks there and
then back in Santa Fe. I'd like
to have our Santa Fe folks come
in. It just gives us another
lens on what's going on. And
then the second thing, I thought
the, the social services
director Michelle Frayer, I
think it is.
It was really impressive and it,
it, this is all connected and
just to hear her talk about
what's happening here in
Espanola and what they're doing
proactive, obviously, to the
extent she can do her job and
accomplish what she's trying to
do.
It means that law enforcement
isn't having to arrest each one
of these addicted folks and
thinking that locking them up
for some period of time is gonna
solve the addiction. And so it's
connected and I just think as we
try, I mean, I'm glad we're
going to be down in Las Cruces
because again, I'd like to hear
from the folks down there and
also when we're back in Santa
Fe, bring in the Santa Fe folks.
I just think that that
interconnection is super good.
you know how some of these
things are gonna work out when
you schedule, but it really, I
did agree, I agree that worked
out very well and
We heard a lot of sort of on the
ground insights that are helpful
to us, frankly, when we're
talking about crime because we
hear a lot of theoretical stuff
or actually hurt real stuff, you
know, from folks who are
actually trying to enforce the
laws and where they impediments
are. I thought that was
extremely helpful to us, so, um,
anyone else?
OK, we have a public comment. We
have one, we have Nat, uh, Dean,
electronically, is there a way
for, I believe.
For us to retrieve her.
No.
Thank you. Oh bye now.
Uh, thank you.
Senator.
As an advocate Ma chair, Mr.
Vice Chair, members of the
committee, and all the presents.
Thank you.
Right. Thank you. We don't have
anyone else electronically to
OK. Anyone in the audience
wishing to make public comment.
I don't they're kind of.
I don't see any real public out
there. OK.
Thank you.
In recess, and we will start
tomorrow at 9:30, correct? All
right, 9:30, same place, um, you
can leave your stuff I've been
told.
