OK, so let's start in. Um um,
let's go around the room, and if
so name and thank you, Madam
Chair. My name is Alan Martinez.
I represent District 23 in
Sandoval County. Madam Chair. My
name is Andrea Reed.
Madam Chair Greg Nibert Senate
District 27. Madam Chair. I
guess. Tara Luhan representative
for
Joseph Cervantes, Dona County
district 31.
Good morning, Madam Chair, Peter
W.
Good morning, Madam. Chair,
Senator.
Good morning, madam Chair.
Representative Cynthia Bargo
district 17 closest to
Cottonwood Morning, Madam Chair.
Good morning. My name is
Antoinette Cillo. Lopez and I
represent District 16 in
Albuquerque, representative
Christine Chan, Um, House
district 43.
Los Alamos, Sandoval and Santa
Fe counties. And we now have a
quorum. You chair I am.
Representative in the CO. I
mean, I really know who I am.
I district six with respect to
Cibola County
Unit to be on, uh, you're
welcome. You see, Um Senator
Maestas has walked in. If you
Introduce you can then start the
meeting. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Everyone. Apologies
for being late. Antonio Maestas,
A senator from uh, Senate
District, 26, West Mesa of
Albuquerque.
Thank you.
First on our agenda is the work
plan, review and adoption, So I
believe you have it in your
materials. Just some prefatory
comments. Um it's no surprise to
the governor has indicated that
and there has been a request
approved by you'll also note on
that as well. So we're we're
trying to allocate time I have
spoken to the governor's office
and they will be pleased that
we've identified you as
possibilities are made.
Or June.
Five and 6, 2026 and 27 and my
goal in putting together the
agendas for those meetings is to
touch on criminal competency,
Civil commitment and you others,
For example, we know that Pan
handle it as well. So that's
that's kind of the plan. Um, the
work that happy to entertain
comments, Madam Chair
Um with regard to the issue of
panhandling, I would just
suggest that some research be
done regarding the, uh, lawsuit
from the Albuquerque City
Council.
The Albuquerque City Council did
attempt to restrict P, uh,
certain type of panhandling. I'm
not sure if it's the same thing
that the governor is looking
for, but I think if there were
if some staff could look at the
background, the lawsuit was
filed by the AC LU, and we have
some some back course we'll have
the specific one and
representative Lujan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I
appreciate the, um, getting into
those details. It's hearings
from advocates, in all part,
Yes, Representative. I, uh,
balance programs to the extent
we have the governor's
Many of the proposals I, as as,
um, I hope broad representation,
Madam chair. I think that that
is that answers My question
again, but I, I I'm really glad
we discussion and interaction
having that transparency Vocal.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Be here on
June 15 let us know.
An exaggeration to say it's a
subject areas and we, uh I know
they're working right now on a,
um proceed. I will
Diagnosis.
Uh, we will have
I think it's important to
Recognize that in the
conversations we've had with the
governor and the governor's
staff and then with the majority
leader of the Senate that I've
had in the president and others,
Uh, I think the members are
counting on this committee.
To do a lot of work between now
and the special session and I
just wanted to take a moment of
the the meetings. The dates are
attendance.
And our dedication of time and
effort to research staff and
legal is going to be very
important because we're really
expected to do I think a lot of
the work
On behalf of our colleagues so
that when they do show up in the
special
That the work's been done in
advance Those of us that have
been here for a long time. And
you any of you all have already
heard this if it's not done.
Before you show up for a special
You're asking for just chaos,
especially, uh, in the middle of
the summer, people trying to
find hotel rooms, not knowing
how long they're gonna be here
in the middle of campaigns and
everything else so that this has
AAA lot of risk if we haven't
really done all of the work and
I, I just wanna emphasize it in
our conversations with the
representative Chandler, Senator
Wirth, Senator Stewart and the
governor directly and her staff.
They're they're really counting
on this committee to do
The work and have it done by the
time we show up, So I I our
roles can be very, uh, to the
extent that, uh,
These dates are set in stone
that was
Well, I really appreciate. Um,
your interest in comments we are
gonna have a busy front end
interim, but I think it will be
worthwhile. Um, my goal is
Let's plan on doing it that way.
Um, I'm happy Do we need
00 Yes.
Travel dates. I am anticipating
that we may be traveling on
August September.
We don't have to do so I will
plan on feel free. I like the
idea of having
Locations that are pertinent to
where we're you know the topics
Any objection.
Next on our agenda. We're early.
Isn't that nice?
Um, introduction to
So members
We are gonna start with item
two.
What item three criminal
competency and court process
because one of the presenters
didn't anticipate our speedy
Example, Um, start with Item
three. Boone and the Honorable
James. It is up on the screen.
It would be helpful probably to
yourself and explained, You know
why you're on
Is that better in the back?
No.
Try that. How about now?
OK and members also, I would
recommend you bring the mics up
close.
So thank you. Thank you, madam
Chair.
It's a little bit more.
I was so again. My name is Steve
Schwartz here in New Mexico. I'm
the senior you here today to
speak with you all about
competency and court process.
Um, so I'll let him also share a
little bit about himself. The
committee today, um, explaining
a little bit more about
competency as it currently such
Hudson to tell you a little bit
about himself, and then we'll
dive in. Thank you again for the
