So before we get started on the
presentation, I just would like
to acknowledge that today is
9/11. Um, a really horrific day
in our history, and I'd like to,
OK, thank you very much. Hello,
Rachel.
Would you introduce yourself and
um you're free to begin your
presentation. There are slides,
um, on your places members and
Right
Um, good morning. I chair,
members of the committee, uh, my
name is uh Doctor Rachel Garcia.
I am an LFC analyst for CYFD,
um, with me today is Deputy
Director John Courtney, who, uh,
is also, um, very expert in this
topic, um, and I will be talking
from this PowerPoint that says
New Mexico's child welfare
system. Yes, I passed it out in
front of yours is just tinier
than ours is tinier. I've got
some notes, smart move to make.
make it bigger.
For us.
Um, and so, uh, if you'll turn
to page slide 2, this is where
I'm going to focus my
presentation. My hope is that
I'm addressing kind of the key
requests you all have, which is
to just provide an overview of
the system in New Mexico and
share some data about how it's
performing. Um, so I'll spend
some time there. I'll give you
just a brief overview of how the
system is organized and how it's
funded. For some of you that may
be um.
An area that you are deeply
familiar and for others, um,
this may be more of an overview.
And then I'm going to talk about
some specific levers for
improving outcomes in the
system. Um, and areas where LFC
evaluations and research over
time have made some
recommendations. Um, my hope is
that this is sort of an overview
and kind of context session for
you all as I know the subsequent
speakers will dive more deeply
into some specific areas of the
system. Um, Madam Chair, I will
look to you in terms of how you
would like to address.
ask questions, you can pause me
at any time, but I can also hold
time certainly at the end for
deeper questions. I think we
should wait till the end.
Um, if I do say anything that's
confusing, unclear or an
acronym, please though interrupt
me.
Um, all right, so, um, I'm gonna
start on slide 4, which just
gives some context for New
Mexico's child welfare system
when it comes to data.
So if you look at slide for, uh,
here's some data about child
maltreatment in our state. Um,
much of this data comes from
federal reporting. It allows us
to compare to other states, but
as a result, it is, it tends to
lag a little bit, um, but things
that we know, um, let me go
forward.
And we will hope that my laptop
doesn't die. Um, OK, so what do
we know about maltreatment in
New Mexico? We know that the
rate of maltreatment, that's the
number of children for every
1000 is how the feds measure it.
In New Mexico is considerably
higher than the nation. Our rate
of maltreatment in 2022, which
is the most recent year
available is about 7.7. I'm
sorry, it's 12.7 compared to the
national rate of 7.7.
If you break down what is that
maltreatment, these are the
federal categories, uh, that are
collected by the administration
of children and families. And
the majority of that tends to be
neglect. That is the pie chart
that you see on slide 4.
Um,
and that rate of maltreatment
has persistently been higher,
um, over time than other states.
Uh, if you look at that third
kind of line graph. You will
also see that the rate of repeat
maltreatment in New Mexico has
trended considerably higher than
the nation, and that has been
true, um, for over a decade.
Um,
If you look at that last chart,
that is the rate of repeat
maltreatment over the last year.
In New Mexico, that rate
currently is about 15%. That has
gone up slightly over the last
year, and that is the number of
the rate at which children
experience another instance of
abuse or neglect after coming
into contact with the system a
year prior.
We know that there are
conditions in New Mexico that
kind of inform or contribute to
those statistics. We know that,
um, New Mex in New Mexico,
adults, um, have a rate of
adverse childhood experiences
that is higher than the nation.
We know that about 25% have 4 or
more adverse childhood
experiences and those are risk
factors that likely contribute
and underlie the data that you
see in front of you when it
comes to child maltreatment.
Uh, the last comment I will make
is that states do have slightly
different definitions of abuse
and neglect. You all heard some
about that in your last meeting
when it comes to changes to the
Children's code. Um, but the
definition of abuse and neglect
or maltreatment, um, is defined
in the federal Child Abuse
Prevention and Treatment Act,
and that is, um,
Any recent act or failure to act
on the part of a parent or
caretaker, which results in
death. Serious physical or
emotional harm, sexual abuse or
exploitation, or an act or
failure to act which presents an
imminent risk of serious harm.
That's kind of the shared
federal definition of
maltreatment, which is comprised
of abuse and neglect.
Uh, if you look at slide 5, you
can see trends over time when it
comes to the number of children
who are in foster care.
That number of children had been
trending downward. It was about
1700 right before the pandemic.
And over the last few years, it
has increased to slight uh just
over 2000, I believe in the last
month, it was around 2072
children who are in foster care.
Um, why does that matter? Um, we
know that a single foster care
placement is costly to the
state. It costs about 21,000
we'd estimated for one case of
foster care for one year. Um,
and over time we have
recommended moving investments
to the front end of the system
because intervening early or,
for example, the the comparison
I have here in-home services are
considerably less expensive. And
so as we've seen the number of
children
In foster care increase, LFC has
recommended over time, making
investments in the front end of
the system, in part because it's
less costly to the state. Uh,
but we also know that the
experience of foster care has a
human impact as well. Um,
children in foster care often
experience consequences, um,
Due to family disruption and
multiple placements that that
results in lasting trauma. And
so, um, that recommendation to
try to move investments to the
front end of the system is both
one that has a financial impact
as well as a human life impact
and human experience.
And if you turn to slide 6.
Um, I share a little bit of data
here about the protective
services workforce,
um, that workforce is really
critical to the operation of the
child welfare system.
Uh, and what you'll see is that
persistently protective services
has a high rate of turnover. Um,
it has improved somewhat over
the last year or so, but it
remains over 30%, um, uh, CYFD
will end at FY 24 with about a
34% turnover rate among
protective services. And that,
um, indicator is important
because it's connected to sort
of the stability of the system
and the ability to deliver and
serve children and families.
Um, I will note that nationally
that turnover rate is also quite
high. Um, nationally, estimates
range between 200 and 30% when
it comes to a child welfare
workforce, though the Annie E.
Casey Foundation recommends a
rate closer to 12% is considered
optimal for a system.
Um, if you look at that second
graph, um, you'll also see that
the legislature has made some
pretty significant investments
over time in the protective
services workforce. Um, you'll
see pretty significant increases
to CYFD's personnel budget
within protective services. Um,
but you'll see that the agency
has had challenges, um, staffing
up, um, FTE dropped considerably
and hasn't returned to FY 2019
levels. And in part that's
because of the high turnover
rate.
While the agency has made some
efforts to fill roles,
particularly over the last year,
that high turnover rate, um,
really inhibits kind of net
progress.
OK. So I'm gonna turn now, if
you look at slide 7, I'm going
to talk a little bit just high
level how is the system
organized, um, for a shared
context because the child
welfare system or CYFD does not
operate by itself as an entity
when it comes to overseeing, um,
the child welfare system. So if
you look at slide 8, this is
just a brief overview about what
happens, um, when a suspected
case of maltreatment is referred
to CYFD. And what you'll see is
sort of a flow chart at a very
high level.
about what, um, CYFD is charged
with doing, um, and does when a
case of abuse or neglect is
reported.
If you look at sort of the the
circular or graphic, um, next to
it, you'll see who is involved.
So there are a variety of
agencies that become involved,
um, when an instance of a
suspected abuse or neglect is
reported to CYFD. Uh, well,
ultimately, CYFD holds
responsibility. Um, the
Department of Public Safety is
ultimately authorized in statute
to do removals of children into
protective services. Um, the
Children's court system and a
judge ultimately
decides if abuse or neglect has
occurred and makes
determinations about whether a
child can, uh, safely return
home.
The Office of Family
Representation and advocacy, uh,
is newly created. It existed and
fully operated for the first
time in FY 24 as a standalone
agency. Previously, it was part
of the administrative office of
the courts. And that is the
State agency that provides legal
representation both for
respondents in Children's court
cases as well as the children
involved in the system.
And then finally, uh, the
healthcare authority, formerly
the Human Services Department is
also deeply involved in the
child welfare system because
much of the financing for, uh,
treatment and services for
children in, in care are
provided through the Medicaid
program. Um, and so, um, much of
the funding and support for
children is ultimately
administered by Medicaid. I
share that with you all just to
acknowledge sort of the, the
complexity of the system and the
relationship between the state's
child welfare agency.
So ID and other state agencies.
All right, if you turn to slide
9. I'm gonna talk a little bit
about funding and how the
state's child welfare system is
funded. I am going to focus here
on CYFD specifically. You've
heard from us over the interim
about some of the funding for
other agencies involved. I'm
going to focus here on CYFD.
Uh, so if you turn to slide 10,
what you'll see is an overview
of the Child, Youth and Families
Department budget. In FY 25,
that number is about $387
million.
Overall, about 3 roughly of
CYFD's operating budget is
federal funding, um, while the
remainder is general fund. They
also do have some transfers,
particularly in TANF.
That's the overview for the
agency. There is more federal
funding concentrated in
protective services. Um, and so
that share looks a little bit
different.
If you look at the next chart,
that is CYFD's general fund
history over time. And what
you'll see is between FY 21 and
FY 24. There were some pretty
significant investments that the
legislature made into CYFD. Um,
and then in FY 25, the
legislature authorized a
relatively flat operating budget
for CYFD that was in part
because during that period of
time of significant increases,
the agency tended to revert
quite a bit of money and had
unused resources.
However, in FY 24, while the
legislature authorized a
relatively flat budget overall
for CYFD. The legislature made
some, some targeted investment
investments in non-recurring
special appropriations, um,
which I'll talk about a little
bit further. Um, but those
included about 18.6 million in
the grow, which is the kind of 3
year pilot funding.
So that's kind of the agency
overall.
If you turn the page, I'm gonna
talk a little bit about
protective services, uh, and
their budget. So on slide 11,
you'll see that in FY 25, the
protective services operating
budget is about 228 million. Um,
if you look at the chart on the
right, you'll see that that
operating budget has grown
significantly over time. Between
FY 14 and FY 24, that operating
budget grew by about $100
million. And you can see the
breakdown of both general
Um, funds as well as other
funding sources in that chart on
the right.
The second chart you'll see is
the tracking of prevention
spending over time within
protective services. Currently,
um, within COFD's, uh, budgeting
structure, that is where, um,
uh, prevention services lives.
And what we have seen over time
is a relatively small amount of
money is invested in prevention
and early intervention programs.
And over time, the LFD is
recommending kind of shifting
that dynamic and moving money to
the front end of the system,
specifically for evidence-based
programs.
But you'll see, um, that 2
currently, yeah, at least in FY
24, um, that share remains
pretty small.
So that's kind of an overview of
how the systems organized, what
the money looks like. If you
turn to slide 12 and they start
talking a little bit about
recommendations or how to
improve the system.
If you look at slide 13, um,
Over the last decade, LFC
program evaluations and reports
have really dug into the child
welfare system, and they've
tended to make recommendations
in for kind of key areas.
Those include, um, implementing
evidence-based prevention and
early intervention programs for
families, essentially shifting
resources to the front end of
the system, implementing, um,
programs that we know work to
divert families from formal
system engagement. Um, the
second area of recommendations
have tended to, to be around
recruiting, training, supporting
and developing a professional
social work workforce within the
child welfare system.
The third category has been
around expanding access,
particularly to behavioral
health services as well as
community-based, um, services
for children and adults. And
then the 4th has been around
strengthening oversight and
accountability mechanisms.
Those are kind of the big 4
areas that LFC has recommended
over time. What I'm going to do
in the rest of the presentation
is focused in on recommendations
1 and 4 because I know those
were areas of interest for you
all. Um,
That's where I'm gonna go next.
I'm gonna talk specifically
about, um, implementing
evidence-based prevention and
early intervention programs, and
then I'll kind of close out with
an overview about oversight and
accountability.
Um,
Before I do that on slide 14,
um, we go into a little bit more
detail about the special
appropriations that's DYFD
received particularly through
the grow. During the last
budgeting cycle because they
were targeted to all of those
kind of key areas that I
mentioned. You'll see that while
CYFD's operating budget was
flat, as I mentioned, they
received about $18.6 million
through the grow, and they were
targeted to those kind of key
lovers, incentivizing master's
level social work.
insurer for their workforce,
expanding differential or
multi-level response, which I'll
talk a little bit more about,
um, implementing evidence-based
prevention and intervention
services, as well as, um, an
investment to pilot and evaluate
ways to recruit and retain
resourced families or foster,
uh, parents. Um, House Bill 2
last year reauthorized some of
several appropriations that had
gone unused in prior years, one
of which is $20 million for
behavioral health, um, services
capacity building.
I know you as a committee have
heard about that money
previously. There was also a $3
million appropriation for
workforce development and
support that had gone unused.
Both of those were reauthorized.
OK, so now I'm gonna shift a
little bit and go a little bit
deeper on that first kind of
category for system improvement
and I'm way behind. I'm sorry on
my slide moving. My apologize
you all. Um, OK.
I'm gonna talk a little bit
about evidence-based prevention
and early intervention, and I'm
going to focus in on 3 topics.
One is implementing
evidence-based prevention
programs, um, and Title 4E. Um,
the second is about differential
response and multi-level
response and implementation. And
the third is around Cra
implementation in our state. So
those are the three things I'm
going to focus on in this
evidence-based prevention
section.
If you turn to slide 16, this
just provides sort of an
overview of a framework about
how we might think about
preventing, um, child abuse or
neglect or child maltreatment.
There are a variety of agencies
involved in our system who do
that. At that very high level,
um, primary intervention is
really things focused on
supporting children and families
so that they never come into
contact with the state's child
welfare system. Those are things
like income support, childcare
assistance, um, and, and
potentially things like
universal home visiting. The
state has made some pretty
significant investments over
time to expand those things. Um,
As you move down the pyramid and
we talk about secondary or
tertiary interventions, those
are really programs and services
designed to intervene when
families may have multiple risk
factors or maltreatment has
already occurred, but it is a
relatively low level of risk. It
is at those secondary and
tertiary levels where the state
has some real gaps in the
existence of programs that do
those things. And so that's kind
of where I'm going to focus
today on what the state could be
doing at those levels.
Um,
as you move down that pyramid,
you also sort of see that while
other state agencies, um, are
involved in kind of those
broader prevention programs,
COIFD is really positioned at
that tertiary level, uh, to
intervene, uh, in high-risk
cases.
OK. If you turn to slide 17, I'm
going to talk a little bit about
different evidence-based
programs that can prevent
maltreatment and repeat, um, uh,
maltreatment. So over time, LFC
has done a variety of
evaluations, um, and also used,
uh, formerly known as the
results first, um, model to
identify programs that have a
rigorous evidence basis and also
a positive return on investment.
Um, when it comes specifically
to preventing abuse in
Neglect or maltreatment. And so
what you'll see in kind of that
bar chart are several are a
variety of evidence-based
programs and the return on
investment, um, that they
produced. Um, one note I will
make when we talk about ROI, we
are the finance committee, we
often break things down in terms
of cost. But what I encourage
you to think about when it comes
to what are those benefits and
costs, they are things that
translate to families and the
prevention of system
involvement. And so, for
example, um, taxpayer.
Benefits that you see in that
orange chart are things like the
avoidance of future future
interactions with the system.
What you'll see here are a
variety of specific programs,
um, that research has
consistently shown prevent child
abuse and neglect. Um,
So alternative response, I'll
talk a little bit more about,
um, safe care nurse family
partnership, Triple P. Those are
all, um, home visiting programs.
Um, and if you look at the chart
on the right, um, we've broken
down what research predicts, um,
the state might experience in
terms, in terms of benefits
specifically to reducing
maltreatment from these
programs. One I will make about
home visiting programs is
they're really designed, um, to
serve different needs, different
audiences.
Different populations. And so,
um, you know, you may see some
programs on here like, um,
parents as teachers. That is an
evidence-based, um, home
visiting program, but it tends
to have more academic outcomes.
There are home visiting programs
that are really focused on sort
of intervening, um.
And have, uh, results related to
the reduction in abuse and
neglect. But those are the
programs that tend not to be
operating in New Mexico. So if
you look at this chart, for
example, we do have nurse family
partnership, that's helpful. We
don't, for example, have safe
care augmented, which, which,
um, research suggests, um,
reduces abuse and neglect. We
don't have operating one of the
programs on this chart as well,
homebuilders. And so when I
showed you that pyramid and I
called out sort of, where do we
have gaps in our system? It
tends to be in the
implementation of the specific
evidence-based programs that are
shown to reduce abuse and
neglect.
Um, so what could we do about
that?
If you turn with me to slide 18,
I'm going to talk a little bit
about federal legislation that
was passed in 2018, known as the
Families First Prevention
Services Act, um, which, uh, is
an amendment to Title 4 of the
Social Security Act.
Historically, the federal
government has been really
focused on foster care, the
provision of foster care and the
oversight and funding of the
foster care system. In 2018, the
federal government passed this
legislation which was really
designed to incentivize states
to make investments to prevent
interaction with child welfare
systems. And so what the
Families First Prevention
Services Act does. It is
essentially, it says that states
can receive Federal Title IV.
Funding, um, if they implement
evidence-based programs and
those are programs that the
federal government defines and
lists in a clearing house for
specific populations. Those
populations include a child who
is a candidate of foster care
involvement, um, a child who is
in foster care and is also
parenting, um, or pregnant.
Essentially, the government, the
federal government says you can
use this funding for, uh,
children and families who are
imminent, uh, risk of becoming
involved.
in the system. If you implement
evidence-based programs in
certain types of categories.
Those eligible categories are
listed on this slide. Um, mental
health and treatment services,
substance abuse prevention and
treatment services, and then
in-home skill-based programs or
home visiting.
Um, to be eligible to receive
that funding, the state has to,
um, develop and submit a plan to
the federal government that is
approved. And the plan has to
include the implementation of
programs that are in the Federal
Title II clearing house and have
a certain rating.
Currently New Mexico is one of
5, states, um, or tribal
governments that have submitted
a plan that has not been
approved by the federal
government. Our state first
submitted a plan, uh, back in
fall of 2022. Um,
Uh, our state submitted a plan.
Uh, it was not approved by the
federal government. We received
some feedback. COFD has now
undergone several iterations
with the federal government
regarding that state plan, but
to date it has not been
approved. And so what that means
is we are potentially missing
out on federal revenue that
could be matched with state
revenue to implement some of
these prevention programs.
Um, so what I'm gonna do is give
you a little bit of an overview
of what is in our state's
proposal. Um,
Uh, LFC staff was, uh, we
received access to the plan and
um LFC asked us to do a little
bit of analysis about what is in
the plan. So if you turn with me
to slide 19. This is just an
overview of what is in the
current draft,
um, that COFD is revising, uh,
when it comes to what would be
implemented.
The key thing that you'll see uh
in the plan that is currently
proposed is CYFD would implement
3 programs, those are listed in
gray. They include uh keeping
families together, which is a
program that COFD currently
offers that provides, um, uh,
housing support, uh, family
resource centers, and family
connections, which are home
visiting is a home visiting
model. None of those programs
are currently listed in the
clearinghouse and therefore
likely are not eligible for.
For a reimbursement.
Um, the plan also proposes the
expansion of several
evidence-based programs, but
implemented by the Early
Childhood Care and Education
Department. So you can see what
those, those programs are
healthy families in America,
Safe Care, which is a home
visiting model specifically
targeted for high-risk families.
Um, and that is essentially the
list. So that is what is
currently in, in the states, um,
proposed family first prevention
services plan. COFD is working
to address federal feedback but
has not shared a timeline.
For resubmission.
If you turn to slide 20
Um, we summarize here just sort
of what we saw in the plan as
well as some of the federal
feedback that CYFD received. Um,
the first is what I mentioned
that,
Title 4 in the Family First
Prevention Services Act requires
states to implement
evidence-based programs that are
listed in a clearinghouse. Um,
the programs that COYFD is
proposing, the agency implement
are not those evidence-based
programs. They're implement,
they are primarily recommending
ECECD implement evidence-based
programs and they would pass
money through to that entity.
Um, the federal government did,
uh, raise some feedback about
that proposal, specifically
because Title 4, prevention is
designed to target families who
are imminent risk of involvement
with the child welfare system
and it requires kind of the
safety monitoring of families
who then receive services. And
so there is a potential risk of
referring families back and
forth between different systems
and kind of monitoring safety,
um, that the federal government
raised.
The second thing we note on this
slide is there are other
evidence-based programs that
CYFD could implement and that
the state actually used to
implement that have a, a, a
positive ROI and are shown
through research, um, to prevent
and address, um, abuse and
neglect. Those include programs
like HomeBuilders, which is an
intensive family preservation
program. It allows a child
welfare agency to provide
services in the home instead of
a foster care removal, and
there's pretty rigorous research
about the outcomes of that
program.
Uh, another is Safe Care, which
is a home visiting model that is
actually already approved in our
state's Medicaid waiver. CYFD
received a $1000 appropriation
from the opioid settlement about
a year ago, um, to get that
program up and running but those
funds went unspent and CYFD has
shared, um, some implementation
challenges, and a third is
Triple P, um, which is also an
evidence-based, um, prevention
program. So those are, that's
sort of a summary of what we see
in the plan, the current status,
and some
Additional opportunities the
state has to implement
evidence-based programs that
work when it comes to preventing
abuse and neglect.
So that's sort of that category.
I'm gonna move on to now talking
a little bit about differential
or multi-level response. So I'm
now on the slide that's got this
colorful graphic.
I'm gonna talk a little bit
about what differential response
is and then I'm going to talk
about statute that already
exists that has not been
implemented.
And so differential or
multi-level response is
essentially a response to an
allegation of abuse or neglect.
That is an alternative to an
investigation. In a traditional
system, when when a call comes
in to the central intake system,
it is accepted as a potential
case that abuse and neglect. The
system orients to investigating
and confirming, uh, you all
would probably use different
language, a legal language that
abuse or neglect occurs. An
alternative or differential
response model.
Has some different ways of
approaching that. So, I, I, I
reported case of abuse or
neglect comes in. It is
accepted, but instead of
orienting to investigating in
cases of low to moderate risk.
Um, the system is less focused
on substantiation and instead
focused on conducting an
assessment of family needs and
then working to address those
family needs. Typically that
occurs in evidence-based models
with consistent follow-up and
engagement with the.
Worker who is working alongside
the family. So that's sort of a
general overview about what
differential response is. Um, in
2019, New Mexico enacted statute
that allows for the
implementation of a differential
response or multi-level response
system. This legislation was
carried, um, by Le Chasey. And
what you can see on slide 22 is
sort of a flow chart of how that
system should work. Um,
If you're a call from my my ROI
chart, differential response
tends to have, um, if
implemented with Fidelity, a
high ROI for every $1 invested,
a state could expect to see
about 16 in returns and again
that return is really a human
experience and things like
avoidance of future interaction
with a system.
Um, in 2019, New Mexico
implemented a differential
response statute. But we have
not implemented it. Uh, so if
you look at the chart on slide
22, what you'll see is what, uh,
CYFD has implemented to date,
which is not really a
differential response system.
Essentially, it is a referral to
community-based services. Um,
when cases are screened out, um,
from the central intake system.
In a traditional differential
response model.
You're focused on low to
moderate risk cases that have
been screened in.
Um, CYFD has sought some
technical assistance beginning
this year from Casey family
programs and is interested in
implementing differential
response, um, more in line, uh,
with kind of evidence-based
practice, but, um, we don't have
a timeline about that. There is
also statute, um, within section
32A4-4 that requires, um, annual
reporting by COFD related to the
implementation of differential
response that has not occurred
for the last couple of years.
So what I hope you take from
this kind of focus of the
conversation is there is an
element of statute that already
exists that just has not been
implemented. Um, and you'll see
if you look back on some of
those grow appropriations some
targeted money in the last year
specifically intended to
implement, um, pilot and
evaluate this, this section of
statute.
Um, so that's sort of the
summary of differential and
multi-level response.
Um, I'm gonna move on to the
third elements of kind of
prevention and early
intervention that I mentioned I
would talk about, and that is
Cara or the comprehensive
Addiction and Recovery Act.
So back in 2019 in order to
comply with federal law, uh, New
Mexico, uh, adopted a uh a car
lot, I believe our bill, uh, was
titled Plans of Safe Care. But
essentially in an old system,
uh, a substance exposed infant
would automatically be referred,
um, to COIFD for investigation
was considered abuse or neglect.
Under the Carroll law, um,
states have shifted to taking a
more
Public health approach or
response, um,
to, to an exposure of, of
substances among an infant. In
2023, the LFC looked at the
implementation of this program
and sort of concluded at a very
high level we had really swung
when it came to a pendulum that
used to be very punitive,
referred to all children, um,
substance exposed for abuse or
neglect to sort of, uh, a lack
of oversight and a real lack of
implementation of what this law
was intended.
To do. And so I'm gonna talk a
little bit more about what that
evaluation found, recommended,
and then what has happened to
date.
Um, OK, so the first thing I
will show you is this figure for
how both statute and rule sets
out the CRA system. And if you
feel overwhelmed looking at that
chart, and that is the
appropriate takeaway because
there are a lot of players and
actors when it comes to what
happens, um, when a plan of safe
care is designed for a substance
exposed, um, newborn. And that
was really one of the findings
of the evaluation from 2023.
That the system as outlined in
in statute and rule was
complicated and that there were
many gaps when it came to
implementing what you see in
this flow chart.
Um, overall, these were the kind
of core findings of that 2023,
um, Kara program evaluation, uh,
specifically that the Kell law
did not outline monitoring of
families and following through
of plans of safe care. So I
realized I should have said
this. Essentially what the the
the um statute allows is when a
baby is born substance exposed.
The hospital is required to
develop a plan of safe care, um,
for that, um.
Newborn and then a variety of
actors sort of are supposed to
help that plan of state care be
implemented. Um, key thing that
the evaluation found was sort of
real gaps in that implementation
and a lack of monitoring of what
happens once a document was
created. Um, another finding
from that evaluation was that
hospitals were likely under
identifying substance exposed
newborns by up to 40% because
they tended to have different
screening practices. Um, and
also that the statute didn't
allow.
allow for the establishment of a
plan of care until the birth of
a child, which was a real missed
opportunity when we think about
the impact that substance
exposure can have on a newborn
and a child. Um, we also found
in that evaluation that
hospitals were submitting plans
of safe care, sort of creating
documents with missing
information that then led to
insufficient case management.
Um, many CA families were
unaware that a plaintiffs say
care was even created for them.
There were real gaps in kind of
the follow up or what happened
Um, and then overall, the
evaluation found that the vast
majority of Cara families were
not receiving support services,
um, in, in particular, substance
use treatment, um, resulting
from those plans of care. So
almost half of families with a
plan of care were not referred
to substance use treatment and
then only about 15% of those
accepted referral. So overall,
The evaluation sort of found
while a statute was put in
place, real gaps in
implementation in the system.
Um, if you look at this chart,
these were some of the core
recommendations that came out of
that evaluation, which really
tried to kind of with nuance
identify how can the state
implement while also kind of
aligning implementation to sort
of the intent of the statute
which was a public health
response. So here are a variety
of recommendations, the
evaluation made. Um, the, the
first was to amend statute to
include references to
implementing prenatal plans of
care. Uh, the second was
Adopting statute that would make
the health care authority, the
lead agency for CARA. While the
LFC was doing an evaluation on
this topic. There was actually
um agencies involved, DOH, uh,
CYFD, as well as HSD at that
time did their own internal uh
evaluation and made a similar
conclusion, though they
ultimately chose not to move
forward with it. Um,
But the LFC recommendation
encouraged moving up the lead
agency to the healthcare
authority, um, in part because,
um, that agency is really
positioned to potentially help
families navigate the variety of
systems and services to which
they might be referred in plans
of care, things like access to
substance use treatment.
Um, the evaluation also
recommended promulgating rules
that require hospitals and
birthing centers require a
referral to early intervention
or evidence-based home visiting
programs, some of those that I
mentioned earlier, um,
recommended implementing
differential response statewide
in, in alignment with best
practices, uh,
Directing HCA to require
hospitals to universally screen
um using Espert, which is a
verbal screening process. Um,
and also, uh, directing MCO care
coordinators to monitor the
completion of specific action
steps. Uh, one of the things if
you really hone in on that very
complicated chart is that MCOs
and care coordinators, so
managed care organizations who
oversee Medicaid and then care
coordinators are really charged
in the existing statute to do a
variety of activities.
That was some of the places
where we saw some implementation
gaps. Um, and then also
improving a portal that houses
case management. What you'll see
on the right is essentially what
has happened to date. Overall,
there is real opportunity in
terms of implementing these
recommendations that has not yet
been accomplished.
Um, during the FY25 legislative
session, the appropriation
associated with Cra was moved to
the healthcare authority in
alignment with the
recommendation. But statute was
not changed in terms of
identifying who is the lead
agency.
Um, to date, CYFD has taken some
steps to try to improve
implementation. Um, they have
posted about 18 CRA-related
positions as of August 1, they
had hired about 4, and then the
healthcare authority also issued
letters of direction to managed
care organizations, um,
Uh, requiring a variety of
activities for care
coordinators. They tend to be
sort of timeline based. You must
follow up with a family under X
timeline. They tend not to be
outcome-based, ensuring the
family actually access the
services. And I think there is
an additional risk where now two
agencies are pursuing
activities, but still, when you
think about that intersection
that I showed you in the complex
system, there is a real risk in
implementation that continues.
So that is sort of the overview
of Kara.
Um, what we have done here is
just give you a brief summary
of recommendations the LFC has
made, uh, related to prevention
and early intervention over the
last decade that haven't been
implemented, um, to date. So,
um, when it comes to CYFD, um,
recommendations around focusing
on the implementation of
evidence-based prevention and
early intervention programs,
specifically programs that will
be eligible for Medicaid or
those title.
For a prevention dollars I
mentioned so that they have a
sustain more sustainable funding
source, um,
Uh, while CYFD is the lead
agency, uh, recommendations
around promulgating rules
related to CARA, um, both, uh,
to require certain types of
referrals as well as require set
conditions under which an
assessment, um, uh,
Uh, under which families who do
not engage in services might
then undergo kind of an
assessment, um, and then
implementing differential or
multi-level response in
alignment with statute. Um, and
then when it comes to the
legislature, a couple of
outstanding recommendations. Um,
Specifically related to kind of
targeted investments and a
performance measures. Um,
Related to the implementation of
evidence-based programs, and
then also some statutory changes
when it comes to, to Cara.
That's sort of the overview of
prevention and intervention, um,
and that was that first kind of
lever for system improvement.
I'm gonna briefly talk about
that the last lever on the list,
which was oversight and
accountability.
Um, if you'll turn with me to
slide 29, um, here we sort of
lay out what is currently
required and in place when it
comes to oversight and
accountability, um, within state
child welfare systems. There are
several mechanisms that are
currently in place either
required by federal law or in
existence in our state. Uh, so
the first two, the, uh, the
federal government requires two
oversight functions among
states. The first is citizen
review panels, um, which are
intended to
To review cases of children who
are in foster care. Um, that is
a federal requirement. Um, in
our state, that function is
delivered by the substitute care
advisory Council. Um, that
entity exists within the
regulation and licensing
department and over time, LLC,
um, both evaluations and reports
have noted that that function
could be more robust. Um, so for
example, there were several
years where the
He didn't produce an annual
report, um, and, uh, when last
reported reviewed 240 cases over
a multi-year period. And so over
time that LFC has recommended
that function could likely be
strengthened as well as
potentially moved because it's
currently in, in regulation and
licensing.
Uh, the second federally
required oversight function, uh,
Is a child fatality review
panels in New Mexico, that
function is housed within the
Department of Health. Um, and
over time, LFC is also kind of
pointed out that function could
also be more robust, um,
historically, reporting has been
somewhat inconsistent, um, and
statute requires kind of
non-identified, aggregated, and
descriptive reporting, um, from,
from that, um, entity.
There are several other
federally required oversight
functions that are implemented
by the administration of
Children and Families. Um, that
tends to be focused on data
collection and reporting that is
required by the federal
government. Um, you saw some of
that data earlier in the
presentation. It tends to lag by
about 2 years and tends to be
pretty narrowly focused on sort
of what the federal government
cares about.
Um, there's several other
functions that exist currently
within state government,
um, that LFC has sort of also
pointed out over time could be
strengthened,
um, there are several internal
case review functions that exist
in different places in
government. Some exist within
the courts. Some exist within
CYFD CYFD, for example, does
have both a process for doing
case reviews as well as an
internal inspector general. Um,
but they tend to be internally
focused and don't.
Public, uh, don't provide public
feasting reports. Um, CYFD also
has an Office of Children's
Rights that is designed to kind
of respond to, um, individual
concerns, um, but that function
hasn't been staffed in several
years, um, and so, uh, it's our
understanding that COFD is sort
of covering it through kind of,
um, existing staff, but not
dedicated staff, um.
In addition, um, LFC has
identified it over time. So
there are opportunities to
strengthen performance and
oversight, data and reporting
over time. COFD has reduced the
public facing reports that they
publish, um, online for the
public. Um, and so that could be
improved and strengthened. And
then there's also the
opportunity um through the
accountability and Government
Act to establish specific
performance measures, uh,
related to the agency. But
overall,
What you might take from this is
there are likely opportunities
to strengthen oversight
mechanisms that exist within our
state.
And that is sort of uh what
you'll see on this slide. These
are sort of the three
recommendations LFC has made
over time related to that
function, um, specifically
moving SCAC to be attached to
the courts instead of the
regulation and licensing
department and potentially
strengthening their statutory
function to do things like a
minimum number of reviews or, or
reviews in certain instances.
Um, LFC is also recommended that
if considering additional
oversight mechanisms to
potentially streamline.
what already exists just to
avoid duplication, redundancy
and improve efficiency. Um, and
then also opportunities to
strengthen, um, AGA performance
measures. So for example, within
the multi-level response statute
that I mentioned. statute
already requires, uh, um, AGA
performance measures, but there
aren't any right now, um, in the
agency's report card. So that is
an opportunity, um, as well. So
that's sort of the summary of,
uh, kind of oversight and
accountability.
I will mention one last area
that LFC has made
recommendations over time when
it comes to strengthening the
system and it's not specific to
child welfare, but it touches on
child welfare. Uh, so back in
2023, LFC didn't evaluate a
program evaluation of the risk
management department and
processes in our state, and
highlighted that while agencies
are required to establish and
implement procedures for
investigating or analyzing
incidents or losses.
Agencies aren't required to
document anything in sort of a
post hoc review. That is really
a best practice implemented in
other states. And what you'll
see in other states, for
example, Washington, is that
through statute, um, state
agencies must have a loss
prevention review team that sort
of analyze certain events, um,
things like instances related to
death, serious injury, or
substantial loss. And so that is
a recommendation, not specific
to CYFD would
would potentially apply to
other, um, state agencies, but
also could be an opportunity for
strengthening this system.
Why does that matter? We know
that CYFD has had some increased
legal sentiment settlement, um,
and risk costs in recent years.
Um, since 2021, the state has
paid out, um, 21.2 million for
illegal settlements on behalf of
CYFT, um, that is across all,
uh, kind of, uh, cases, not
necessarily just cases
involving, um,
As we call it here, kind of
death, serious injury or
substantial loss, but it's a
significant payment. And so this
type of statute would then
direct an agency to appoint a
last review team, do some
analysis and document in a post
hoc way. um, ways to respond in
the future. Um, in addition,
kind of risk management, uh, and
risk-related costs are
increasing for CYFD. The
agency's liability insurance
will increase by about 1.5
million next fiscal year. So
there is a, a potential cost to
avoid.
In doing this, this type of
required analysis when it comes
to risk and mitigating risk.
Um, so that is what I, I have
for you all. I know I shared a
whole lot. I also know that the
subsequent speakers will likely
go much more in depth. My hope
is I gave you sort of a very
broad overview and stand for
questions. Thank you. I really
appreciate it. So we
Wondering, you might want to
turn your mic off just, there's
a reverberation that happens
when we have too many mics on at
the same time. So appreciate the
presentation and we do have, um,
people on the list. I have
Representative Reeb,
Representative Block, um,
Representative Hall,
representative Nibert,
um, representative Ceda Lopez
representative Barrego. Anyone
else? Um, so it's 11.
I'm going to allocate about a
half an hour. We started a
little bit late, so that's
12345. So that's again about 5
minutes each and I'm gonna time
it because we're on kind of a
tight schedule today. So
representative Ree then block,
then Hall, OK, OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um, and
thank you, Ms. Mercer Garcia,
um, for the information. I want
to kind of touch on the
voluntary programs or the, I
guess you call them
evidence-based programs that you
discussed in your presentation.
Are, are these voluntary
programs, I guess is my first
question, Madam Chair.
Oh, your mic.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
generally speaking, yes, the
programs are voluntary. So for
example, if you look at a
differential response model,
while in a family assessment is
required, um, and a referral to
service required the engagement
of that service, um, is
voluntary in, in a traditional,
um, differential response model,
while at the same time in a
traditional, uh,
Differential response model.
There's also a pathway to refer
back to investigation in the
event of, uh, a safety risk. So
there was sort of a, while the
service and engagement is
voluntary, um, mechanisms that
should be in place to intervene
in instances of safety concerns.
OK, and I think more of my
concern, um, Madam Chair and
expert is you can have a
substantiated case, um, and they
can decline in-home services or
these programs. Is that correct?
Um, Madam Chair, Representative,
that is correct, though, in
statute, there are certain types
of substantiated cases that
would not be eligible for a
differential response model.
Those are things like sexual or
physical abuse.
But the majority, you've already
stayed or neglect cases. But if
they aren't mandatory, there
aren't, they aren't mandatory,
Madam Chair, an expert, unless
they're court ordered, right?
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
that would be correct. So a
petition would have to be filed
and then they're actually
ordered and then they're
mandatory. And so I guess my
concern is, uh, the articles and
things that I'm reading, uh,
Madam Chair expert, is that we
have like a less than 7%
completion rate in these
programs. And so we're spending
all this money on these
voluntary programs, um, and the
kids aren't getting the
services. If I'm understanding
it correctly, am I?
it correctly, Madam Chair. Madam
Chair Representative, what I
would nuance is what is
currently outlined, for example,
in differential response, the
state is not implementing. So in
our current system, we are not
implementing currently.
Um, kind of the evidence-based
approach. OK, you can have a
substantiated case, which means
neglect, abuse, whatever has
been found, you can offer them
these voluntary programs, but
they don't actually have to do
them, um, and the majority of
the people don't do them. It
says everybody pretty much drops
out. So it seems like the only
way to mandate these great
programs for submitting all this
money on is to actually file
petitions in court ordered them
to complete them. And am I just,
I want to make sure I'm
understanding that because we're
spending so much money and
getting so little out of it.
That I, I'm concerned. I was
just this, this round and round
thing with CYFD and I'm not
blaming you, obviously you're
just analyzing the information,
um, Madam Chair, but this seems
like it is completely not
working and so it is that path
of how things work, in my
understanding that correctly, I
guess is my question.
Um,
Then I'm true representative, I
would say, as you described,
that is kind of the current
system, though it is not kind of
what, uh, evidence-based
research would say we should be
doing. We are not doing what we
need to be doing. OK, thank you.
Uh, that was my question.
Appreciate you.
Thank you so much, Madam
Chairman. Thank you so much for
being here and a very good
presentation and such good
information. I think seeing the
data, follow the dollars and see
where they're going is very
important for the people to
watch.
What's working, what's not
working, and it seems to me,
Madam Chairman, nothing's really
working right now. So, uh, real
quick about Kara, Madam
Chairman, I'm wondering, uh, it
says on the 4th bullet point on
page.
25, it just says that these
families aren't aware of a plan
of care that was even created
for them. So, Madam Chairman and
Madam expert, I'm wondering what
can we do to ensure that these
people know and also how do we
know that they don't know from
whatever data that you've
gleamed through, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, representative,
this data is from an evaluation
back in 2023, that LFC did. So I
will acknowledge it is now
somewhat dated. Um,
How did we know, we, we used a
variety of sources to analyze
and track cases that had
existing plans of care. Um, and
in that, uh, found that many
times families did not know a
plan of care had been created.
This points to sort of what I
showed in that example where the
evaluation really found gaps in
implementation. Summarized by
things like just a lack of sort
of um boots on the ground.
kind of focused case management
follow up, as well as a variety
of handoffs to different
entities or agencies that
weren't.
Being sort of supporting a
family to follow through.
Thank you so much, Madam
Chairman. Thank you for that,
Ms. uh, Mercer Garcia. I really
appreciate that. So my, my next
question is kind of related to
that, and it's uh on the next
page and it's talking about HCA
should require hospitals to
universally screen pregnant
women. And so, Madam Chair, uh,
Ms. Mercer Garcia, I'm
wondering, could you give us a
little more information about
that because in previous years
we put forward legislation that
would do just that. We've heard
arguments that said, well, it
would discriminate against
certain women. It would be, it
would be bad for certain groups.
However, everyone's being.
Asked to do this, so every
single person who would apply to
this would indeed be screened
just to make sure that there is
not a problem. So I'm wondering
what data do you have that is
helping in your analysis to give
this recommendation, Madam
Chair. Madam Chair,
representative, the specific
recommendation was for E, which
is screening, um, brief
intervention and referral to
treatment. Um, so that is a
specific evidence-based approach
that is a verbal screening, um,
in in other states, um,
And that was essentially what
the recommendation was. Some of
the evaluation found was that
some hospitals do that, but it
is not the process and approach
is not universal, at least it
was not a, a year or so ago when
we did the evaluation. Got it.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
And then another quick question,
hopefully I'm not getting toward
my 5 minutes, but I got 2
minutes. Good, good. All right,
let's talk. All right. So Madam
Chair, uh, last thing is on page
29, you're talking about
reporting has been inconsistent.
So, Madam Chair and
Ms. Mercer Garcia, I'm
wondering, is that because of
the ever revolving door of
cabinet secretaries, or is it
the staff that keeps leaving and
then we're getting new stuff and
it's just hard to staff. What is
the big cog in the machine, I
guess you could say, to having
good data and reporting that is
consistent so that we can see
what's working, what's not
working, Madam Chair. Um, so,
uh, Madam Chair, representative,
when it comes to, uh, the
substitute care advisory Council
and the lack of consistent
reporting. Some of that I
believe is
to the appointments to the
council that weren't made and so
they couldn't.
Operate with a quorum. Um, I
can't speak to why the, uh,
child fatality review wards have
not always published a report,
though they have in the last
year. And then that last one
around performance and oversight
data and reporting, um,
published by CAFD that
specifically references things
like their quarterly desktop
reports and 360 reports, which
have included less data over
time. I can't really speak to
why that has occurred.
Great. Thank you so much, Madam
Chair, and I think that's super
salient point to have. So I
really appreciate it and thanks
again to LFC and you for all
your hard work. I know how, how
hard it is to put all this
together, so we really
appreciate it and it's a high
level overview, but it's very
good for people who are watching
to see how the department's
working and what we can do as
legislators to actually make a
difference and not just put
band-aids on problems. So thank
you so much, Madam Chair. I
appreciate it. Thank you,
Representative. We have
Representative Hall and then
Senator Nibert.
Madam Chair, ma'am,
on page 29, I, I noticed that
inconsistency under the New
Mexico Chi fatality review.
And do we use any type of
multidisciplinary teams in
reviewing when children
Basically infanticide, whether
it's from drug abuse or abuse
abuse since New Mexico is one of
the unfortunately has one of the
highest child abuse rates in the
nation.
Um, so, Mr. Chair,
representative, um, child
fatality review panels are
federally required. We also have
statute, uh, state statute that
creates that child fatality
review. It ties with the DOH and
it does have a multidisciplinary
component, a variety of
individuals are appointed to
serve in that review function
and kind of their, their
backgrounds are outlined in
statute. They are required to
review all instances of, of
child death that occur in the
state with the intention to
prevent future cases.
And representative Block's
point, I was just curious why.
He says for the last 2 years are
published online, um, and it's
been inconsistent, but when
we're talking about the death of
a child.
Is there a mechanism that we
could assist with to make it not
more consistent but just
consistent.
Um, Mr. Chair, Representative, I
think those are some of the
opportunities to strengthen what
is statutorily required when it
comes to some of those reviewer
oversight functions.
And thank you for your presence,
Madam Chair.
Thank thank and if Senator
Nibert, and then we'll have, um,
Senator Cia Lopez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I want
to look at the slide number 8
real quick, and I know that
these are probably
You know, very compact and
simplistic charts, but I would
suggest to you that when you
look at these referrals and
maybe the outcomes of the
substantiated case is that
there's another category.
And that would be children
living in CYFD offices.
And personally, I find that a
very sad outcome, uh.
Not only
Have they been abused in the
home or whatever, now they
really aren't in a home and
Oftentimes it's because these
particular children.
Don't integrate well into a
foster family. There's something
going on that
that uh
There's no foster parent that
would step up and maybe take
those children and so I talked
to the secretary months ago
about uh we have to deal with it
because putting children in an
office is not.
It is not a reasonable solution
and we need to have a place
where children can have a more
of a home environment and have
professionals there that know
how to deal with these often
very troubled youth.
And uh
I hope that as we wrestle with
these issues.
That we don't forget those
children that fit in that
category. I just checked today.
There's one child in the Roswell
CYFD office last night.
It usually runs between 2 and 8.
This past weekend it was up to
54 have since been placed in the
last couple of days, so it's
down to one, thankfully.
But it's a continuing issue and
the offices are not an
appropriate place and so I would
encourage my colleagues to keep
looking at that issue and trying
to find some, uh, better
alternative to house those
children who can't get fostered
out or are not getting fostered
out promptly. So I, I don't know
if you have any response to that
or you know whether that's a cog
of what you.
studied, but that's certainly a
concern that's in my community
and I suspect my community is
not the only one that has that
problem.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Um, Senator
Cedilia Lopez and then
Uh, representative Barrego.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, I was looking at the
oversight of child welfare
systems, and I was and I, you
know, this is on me. I was
surprised that there is a New
Mexico child fatality review
team because I'm very familiar
with the intimate partner death
review team. I've served on it
Every time they mail a report to
us. I look through it, try to
figure out if there's anything
that they recommend that I could
work on.
And so I turned to the, the
child fatality review report and
apparently it's not sent to
legislators, so that step is
missing and looking at the the
it's a fascinating report
because it tracks suicides,
sudden infant death, death from
abuse and neglect, and it also
identifies risk factors, which
is really important information
for us to to know. So I would
hope that this child fatality
review report is sent to the leg
It's not just posted on the
website or at the very least,
send us an email saying that it
has come out and uh the
legislature should review it.
So that's a recommendation that
I make, but looking at the
recommendations is there follow
up to the recommendations they
make because they um.
One recommendation I think is
just great. Legislation should
be passed in New Mexico that
allows for greater access to
mental health professionals from
other states via telehealth by
joining a multi-state compact
such as CPAC, an interstate
agreement which allows
psychologists in participating
jurisdictions to practice across
state lines, which includes
provisions for teleppractice.
This is really important for his
child suicide.
And you know, connecting it,
connecting it.
I think, so what's the follow up
to these recommendations? Is
there any?
Um,
Madam Chair, Senator, um, I
think what you're touching on is
an opportunity to strengthen
what exists. I know you do have
a follow-up presentation after
me from NCSL that will talk a
little bit about other states
structure, um, these oversight
mechanisms as well as how they
integrate with other systems
like the loop back to
improvement of the, of the
system. OK, because they're like
I said, I look at these
recommendations and even, I
mean, I was looking at the data
and there's nothing in the
recommendations about domestic
violence even
Though that's correlated with a
high um
There there's child death is
higher in houses with domestic
violence, and I was like,
Didn't they look at that? Um,
but I think that if these
reports and the data was more
available to policy makers that
would be really helpful and the
recommendations, um, if there
were follow up, I, I would like
to see.
Follow up from the relevant
agent agencies are getting a lot
of these recommendations passed
and put in place because, I
mean, some of them are obvious.
Some of them are, are a little
bit harder, you know, the
correlation between Aces and
child deaths. That's a, that's a
a bigger problem, but um there
are some, some specific things,
and I'm really happy to see this
report. I understand it's been
inconsistent. That's what you
say, um, and online I only see
the.
For the last 2 years, it would
be great to see what if if
reports have been made in the
future, um.
is it required the intimate
partner death review team is
funded by the state and required
by statute. Is that true for the
New Mexico child fatality
review. Um, Madam Chair, Senator
Lopez, yes, we do have statute
that requires the child fatality
review. It's also serving a
federally required function. It
operates out of DOH, um, but I
think to your point, there are
potentially opportunities to
strengthen that function as well
as streamline if
Other functions are created that
are similar. OK. Well, thank
you. I'm, uh, I'm glad to hear
that and I really just want to
uh push that, and I will be
looking at these reports much
more carefully and um.
And glad to know they exist.
It's kind of disturbing. I've
been on the legislature for 5
years. It's the first time I
hear about it. Thank you.
Thank you, um, Senator Lee.
We have Represented Brego and
then Senator Stewart.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
thank you, Doctor Garcia. This
is
Um, a very detailed report, some
of which I understood and some
acronyms that I totally did not
understand. Um, so sometime it'd
be nice to have a, a glossary of
acronyms in the back that we
could refer to, um, so when I
was at a city councilor, I
helped establish um and expand
crimes against children unit and
um at APD and one of
things that really struck me in
this report, um, was on page 29
where you talk about these
oversight committees, um,
That are placed in, for example,
the Department of Regulation and
licensing. And it just seems
really odd to me when I'm and
I'm new to this, and I'm new to
this whole kind of um
department, but
I always thought of the
Department of Regulation and
Licensing as housing and
construction industries and so
on and so forth. Um, and so,
It really, I mean, I don't think
and you can correct me if I'm
wrong, but does the federal
Act
Say that that's where this
should be housed in the
Department of Regulation and
Licensing, or am I missing
something here? Madam Chair,
representative, I imagine NCSL
will give some examples of where
other states place this
function,
um, they did sell NCSL helped us
with some analysis a couple of
years ago, and I believe we are
the only state that places the
function within a regulatory
agency. Most states place it
either within the courts, a
Health and Human Services.
or as a standalone entity. So,
Madam Chair, as I'm thinking
through this, and you know, I
was in government for 28 years.
Um, we had oversight, we had the
oversight commission for APD. We
had the DOJ oversight
commission. These were not, um,
I mean, these things were not
completely regulated by city
council, and remember, I'm new
to this area of government, but
Wouldn't it be an administrative
change to move that or does that
actually require legislative,
um, authority.
I mean, Madam Chair
Representative, I believe it
would require a statutory change
because it is currently set up
with that configuration in
statute. OK, so that does
require a legislative change. So
the second one is the child and,
and, um,
Senator Lopez brought up the
child fatality review panels, is
that also legislative?
Madam Chair, Representative,
there is a section of statute
that outlines what those federal
uh I'm sorry, what the child
fatality review board function
is the composition, the
expectations and that kind of
thing. And and these two are the
ones that are called out on this
page 29. So how long have they
been housed in these areas and
not functioning.
that we've known, Madam Chair
Representative, I actually don't
know the timeline for how long
they have been in those
different places. I will note
that there is an element of sort
of leadership and relationship
that is connected to
functioning. So we as staff have
tried to do some analysis
nationally about how other
states set up this function.
There there isn't a lot of
research about what is the best
configuration and what leads to
the optimal function.
When it comes to structure. Um,
what we do sort of hear
anecdotally is there is an
element of the relationship
between the entities that
enables functioning. So for
example, um, Doctor Courtney
behind me will point to his days
at CYFD when he worked very
closely with the substitute, um,
care advisory Council in the
existing configuration. So there
is also an element of what the
relationship looks like that is
important to functioning.
OK, thank you. And Madam Chair,
just a closing thought, um, it
seems to me though if we have
identified these in your report
as maybe not functioning
properly in the areas that
they're existing in, there must
be best practices across the
nation that recommend maybe that
they be placed in a a similar
place that is functioning better
in other states. And so those
are just my closing remarks.
Thank you.
Senator Stewart.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you for this report. I,
I've started to feel like the
LFC reports like this are are
just really very valuable to us.
Yeah, I think most of us have
said that today.
Uh, so I wanna ask you a few
specific questions. Uh, what I,
what I really appreciate about
this research in your report is
to focus on evidence-based best
practices, which we've also
talked about.
But I'm, my question to you is
that have you looked at the line
item vetoes in HP 2,
I certainly have, and I noticed
so many strikeouts of that
phrase, evidence-based, and my
question to you is that if
you've looked at that were those
line items about primarily about
CYFD or or were they not? Can
you answer that question?
Um, Madam Chair, uh, Senator
Stewart, um, CYFD was one of the
agencies that specifically had
the words evidence-based,
vetoed. When it comes to CYFD,
it occurred in a couple of
places. One was in the operating
budget when it came to general
fund matching available for
evidence-based programs that
would be eligible for Title 4.
And then the second primary
place that occurred, uh, related
to CYFDs in the special
appropriations.
And the piloting of
evidence-based prevention
programs that would be eligible
for either Medicaid or Title
VII.
All right, thank you for that.
Uh, so I'm looking at pages 24,
25, and 26. Uh, this is the
where you lay out the care
system.
I, I'm very bothered by the by
these pages that we have looked
at this issue so long, and what
we've done is complicated the
issue. I mean, look at that
chart on page 24. I mean,
We're already burdened by lack
of staff, uh, certainly in the
past, lack of resources, and yet
we set up systems like this that
I mean, I don't even know where
to start picking this apart, uh,
you say potential duplication.
You know, you certainly on page
26, you lay out the
recommendations that you're
suggesting.
Um, no, Senator Gay Kernan for
many years looked at this
substance exposed newborns and
the fact that we've got 40% that
aren't even being screened, um,
is very problematic, so.
Uh, I see what you're suggesting
on page 26, but I don't see any
simplification of the CRA
program. I, I'm wondering about
how we might do that, and you
talked about potential
duplication.
Um, Madam Chair, uh, Senator, I
would encourage two potential
recommendations that might
simplify the system.
Uh, the first is the movement to
the healthcare authority as the
lead agency. And the why of that
is because already care
coordination, care coordinators
within managed care
organizations. Our positioned,
um, to,
Help families navigate services,
make referrals to services and
things like that. Um.
A handoff to another entity
could be challenging, and so
that was sort of the why behind
that recommendation. Um,
the, the caveat I will share
about that is that the
recommendation is not the care
coordination as it has existed
in the last few years. I think
that the evaluation did point to
the need for real life human
being interaction and follow up
with families that was not
really what is happening in the
current care coordination
system. Um,
And a focus on the actual
outcome of that care
coordination, not just meeting
deadlines and timelines for
making phone calls, but really
making sure our family is able
to access services. So that's
one, I think, potential
opportunity to streamline. The
second is connected to
differential response. And so
that section of statute really
is designed to implement a
system that is an alternative to
investigation. So if in kind of
the plans of care, there are
concerns about
A family not being able, um, not
following through, for example,
in referrals to substance use
treatment. A differential
response system would also sort
of come alongside, um, and, and
so the agency would do an
assessment for what the family
needs and then do a consistent
follow up without the need to
create something else and more
navigators. So those are, I
think, two potentials that the
evaluation recommend,
recommended to streamline the
system and try to, um, not
Create more opportunities for
gaps.
All right, thank you so much for
that. Thank you, Madam Chair.
A briefly representative were
running up against our.
Very briefly, I'd just like to
make a comment and years ago, I,
and I don't know how this
happened, but we decided to go
with Medicaid fund and home
visiting programs and by doing
that, uh, I, I get it was done
under David Abbey and I work
very closely to try and not do
this, but that's when, when we
get into federal requirements
for home visiting program, you
know, that's, that's where this
mess has taken place.
I think, and I think we really
could go back and look at if we,
I did a budget years ago and I'm
sure it's more now, but about
10,000, you have about 10,000
newborns in this state a year,
OK? Um, of those, uh, 60% are
firstborns. Uh, if you worked
with that family, that entire
budget would be between years
ago it was 25 to 30 million a
year. So I'm just gonna let it
go on that. I think we've made a
mistake by going to Medicaid
funding for home visiting. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Just a couple of comments. I'm
concerned, um, by this, um,
issue that Senator Stewart
brought up, which is
We legislate parameters when
some of our budgetary items.
And they
Those budgetary items have an,
an amount of money, but
directions included in them. And
that's the will of the
legislature. And that's what the
legislature supported through
our
processes and what I'm now
beginning to learn after 5+
years in the legislature is
those items are being line item
vetoed in ways that have the
ability to change the intent of
what the legislature as a
collective body intended.
And I think we all need to be
looking at that more closely
because we heard a little bit
about it in this presentation.
We heard about it in last
month's presentation on the law
enforcement, things like
evidence-based programs are now
being struck out and they're
just programs, you know, things
that clearly we intended and
voted for, but the, the, um,
the, uh, governor has the
ability to unilaterally change
but keep the money.
And I, I, I don't think that's
the way that just weakens our
authority and we need to be
talking about that. So I just
want to raise that, that came up
in this meeting. It's come up in
the prior meetings and maybe at
some point in our discussions
as, uh, uh, as a committee, we
can talk a little bit more about
what our options are with regard
to that and uh because I'm very
concerned about that now that
I'm after 5 years in the
legislature understanding better
how that all plays in, and you
don't have to comment on that,
doctor, because that's.
More of a collective thing, but
I bet you some of you are
sympathetic in LF the office of
LFC.
So, um, anyone else before I
shut down, yes, Senator if I can
just weigh in on that. I do hope
we'll maybe put that on the
agenda for Las Cruces, um, this
is not new to this governor. The
last governor did it as well
too. It's unconstitutional they
get away with it because we
don't stand up, but they changed
the, you you said they have the
ability to do this. They have
the ability to do it only
because we don't challenge it,
but, but they can't legally do
so. And and there's quite a bit
of case law, uh, where this has
been challenged by some of our
predecessors, some of our
predecess.
We're pretty gutsy
Uh, Lucky and Kiki and uh some
of George Buffett, John Arthur
Smith. We've had people in the
past who would not let the
executive branch get away with
striking language selectively to
change the appropriation, but
it, it takes us to do it and we
haven't done it in years of
late, so it'd be good for this
committee to maybe take that
lead because the finance
committee, in my opinion should
be the ones really doing it, but
they're not doing it. And so
maybe those of us here we're
gonna look at the, and, and I
think the simple matter is that
we in Las Cruces and we just
look at the
Vetoes
It's really, it's really evident
when you read the vetoes and see
what was struck you can see
they're changing the, the
appropriation in a meaningful
way, and it'd probably be good
to look at a couple of cases
where the courts have weighed in
on this before and said,
Governor can't do it, but it
takes somebody to challenge.
Yeah, I agree. I mean, it, it
has a potential for changing our
intent completely and I yeah, I
think it would be good to maybe
have a memo drafted in terms of,
you know, outlying the our, the
constitutional issues and as you
say, some cases that where we're
better informed, so we know what
our options.
because we're not utilizing our
options. We're, we have, there
are so many of us we need to
now, I think, try to focus in on
ensuring that the legislature's
authority is protected, you
know, and we're adequately
representing our our
constituents because that's what
this is about us representing
our constituents.
And Madam, you'll see even in
our crime package in our
spending on crime, the vetoes
changed our intent. So for
example, in, in our
appropriations we had one
appropriation for law
enforcement retention and
recruitment, and we were
spreading it over 3 years and so
we, we are, our budget language
said a certain amount divided by
3 and putting one part in the
first year and the second part
in the 3rd year, and the, the
governor struck out the language
that would have required to
spread that out over 3 years, so
essentially they can spend it
all at one time. That's a pretty
meaningful change to what we
had.
intended to do so we're seeing
this in the area of what this
committee is doing on crime. And
so I, I, I do hope that we'll do
that maybe in Las Cruces. It'll
be very interesting I think that
would be a very good
conversation for us, Jeff. So
thank you for the suggestion.
Thank you very much, doctor. I
think people very much
appreciated your presentation
and
It's going to set us up for the
60 day as we hear some bills I
imagine that are going to be
intended to address some of
these issues. So thank you.
All right. Next we have the
Kevin S settlement.
And uh we have Betty Fleis
Fleishman. hello, and Sarah
Krika
Crea. OK, um, welcome and thank
you for joining us, um, another
topic I don't know enough about
and I, and I imagine there are
other members who would like to
know more about, um, this Kevin
S settlement. So thank you for
joining us today. We have about
an hour allocated to this, so I
suggest you take maybe about a
half an hour in your formal
because.
As you can see, we have a very
inquisitive committee. So thank
you. So.
Just, oh, well, we'll we'll do
this at the end of the day.
Uh, yeah, there's a.
yeah
Did that work? OK. Um.
We Betty.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, uh, my name's
Betty Fleischman. I am the
executive director of Pegasus
Legal Services for Children. Um,
I've also served as the guardian
at Lim and youth attorney for
over 10 years and Pegasus was
the next friend, attorneys for
about half of the plaintiffs in
the Kevin S lawsuit, and with me
is Sarah Crecker, who's been a
JL youth attorney for over 20
years. She was also attorney on
the Kevin S lawsuit.
And many other things which I'll
let her expand on. So thank you
so much for your interest in in
Kevin S and the safety and the
well-being of children in, um,
CYFD custody. We've had the
privilege of preventing in a
couple of different committees
and then we always listen to
these hearings if we're not here
and we are just very grateful
and for your passion and concern
about the safety of children in
New Mexico in the foster care
system. So today we'll give you
a brief overview of the
settlement.
Um, how it started, then we
moved to a correction action
plan, which Sarah's going to
talk about and then we are going
into arbitration in November. We
are going into arbitration
because the majority of these
goals have not been met and
these children are really not
safe and it is getting worse,
so, um, we are using everything
we can do from our end to
improve the system that way.
So the lawsuit was actually
filed in September of 2018,
which was with the former
administration, um.
And it kind of lingered for a
couple of years and the lawsuit
is against CYFD and health, um,
human services, now the health
authority, um, primarily CYFD
because they are responsible for
these children, but also a human
services because they have
Medicaid and they fund it and
they're responsible for it.
Also, and that's why we picked
those two agencies, um, and it
was on behalf of 13 foster
children representing all the
foster children in New Mexico,
and these children
which
Already expressed and know this,
you know, like all the children
in the system, they've been
re-traumatized, they've been
uprooted. They've been cycled in
and out of emergency placements,
including shelters, offices,
which is still going on, send it
out of state to residential
treatment facilities. So the
intent of the lawsuit, and this
was after literally years of a
group of us, attorneys meeting,
trying our best to advocate
individually for our clients. At
that time, I personally had 40
cases and just not
any headway, um, so we felt like
there was no other alternative
but to actually file a class
action lawsuit knowing it would
be difficult to implement
knowing that it takes time, um,
but we just were not
individually getting where these
kids really needed to be. So
it's that for a while and then
in uh.
2020, we, uh, which was also a
new administration.
And at that time, Brian Baylock
was the secretary, going back a
while here, um, and we spent
literally days and days of
mediation to see if we could
come to an agreement about what
needed to be done, and we did
reach an agreement and that's
what we have now. The lawsuit is
not
a, um, it is a settlement
agreement. It is not a consent
decree. We never ever step foot
in court. We worked it out. We
met for days, and the thing that
we were excited.
About at the time was everyone
from CYFD who was involved in
human services agreed that the
system was absolutely broken
that it is absolutely not safe,
and we all jointly came up with
recommendations that, that
everyone wanted to do so, and
then there was also part of that
put together a formal
implementation team, which Sarah
and I and others are both part
of, um,
So we did sign the agreement
with the absolute intent of
moving forward with cooperation
in the spirit of the team.
Of course, what happened about a
week later was COVID hit and
everyone went into lockdown, so,
you know, we would have probably
never had this agreement and
being able to meet that much,
um, however we still felt even
more urgently that these these
recommendations, not
recommendations, but agreements
needed to be implemented because
with COVID is we all know, we
were on lockdown, everyone was
trying to figure it out. There
were even less eyes on the
children than there were before.
They weren't going to school,
um,
CYD workers weren't going to the
homes as much as the GAL. I
always struggle. Do I go in the
home? Do I sit on the porch with
the screen? I mean, how do you
visit your kids, um, so, excuse
me.
So we did make some
accommodations in terms of the
deadlines and pulled them back
at the request of the
department's given, um, COVID.
And I want to say that, um, you
know, some of the feedback we've
gotten is it's impossible, it's
too hard to implement these.
Everything in here is basically
already in law. We're talking
about just putting in place what
is absolutely necessary and it
is an ambition agreement with
intent because we have an
absolutely broken system which
I know you all know we're all
tired of being, you know, 50th
in the state. Um, but the thing
that about this agreement was,
it was really looked at a lot of
what has been successful in
other states. There was a lot of
thought put into it. It wasn't
just random gee, this sounds
good. Um, and it was very
intentionally phased in. So you
do this by this date, then you
have that foundation, you do
this by this state and then.
All works, so it isn't this
overwhelming thing and it was
expected to take, take many,
many years, um.
And it really just to bring our
state into compliance with
federal and state laws. Some of
the laws that were actually
mentioned in the lawsuit, which
we're not being, um, followed
and still not being filed is
both you know section 504 of the
Rehabilitation Act and the
American Disability Act, which
protects, you know, people with
disabilities, every child in the
foster care has some liability.
They have complex trauma just
from the system. Those rights
were not.
Not being honored, you know, in
terms of including them in
getting the responses they need
on the 14th Amendment to the
Constitution to due process that
the children, you know, when
they're taken away from their
family into state custody, the
state has an obligation both
legally and morally.
To make it better than where
they came from. The house they
were removed from and the state
was failing to provide them with
basic needs including adequate
and appropriate medical care
services, condition of
confinement that were actually
related to why they were removed
from the home. Um, as that the
medical act early periodic and
screening diagnosis was
absolutely not being done and
still not being done. That is
the state and federal law that
these children will get a full
comprehensive.
Screening in a timely manner.
Um, the other part, and this was
unique to our lawsuit in other
states of lawsuits was, uh, you
know, being compliant with ICWA,
the Indian Child Welfare Act,
that children taken into state
custody. He Indian children have
more protection and more rights,
including that active efforts
are done, that they're put in
preferred placements so they
don't lose their culture and
this act was put in
You know, in 1978 federally in
response to the boarding schools
and children being posed away,
and I would put it as a side
note, one of the good things
that came out of this is the
state did adopt its own law, the
Indian Family Preservation Act.
So congratulations, that was
huge and really important,
particularly at the time because
we thought it was possible that
ICA might get discounted by the
Supreme Court, which it wasn't,
but that law is in place for
this state. And then there are
things in the children code
specifically, um,
You know, about mental health
and the rights these children
have to services. So those are
the basic legal foundations to
move forward with this. There's
another law, this is sort of a a
side comment I wanted to share
with you. Um, there was not in
the Kevin S lawsuit, but it's
really important for what's
going on right now, which is um
CAFTA, which is a child abuse
prevention and Treatment Act,
which is one of the first acts,
you know, to put this whole
system in place. One of the
really critical pieces of that
is there is a timeline and
specifically
It says, if children are in
foster care.
From 15 to 22 months, they must
move towards a permanency plan
so they're not lingering in the
foster care system, and that can
be independent living that can
be a kinship guardianship, it
can be adoption, but it the plan
must move forward. What is
happening today, and again this
is outside the lawsuit, but
since I have you all, I want to
share this with you. Um, we have
cases, many cases where the
adjudication.
Cannot get finished in 22
months.
You go to court.
PPWs aren't there. They just
quit that morning, so it gets
vacated and continued and
continued. We have cases
lingering 5 or 6 years besides
being illegal and being
absolutely immoral.
It's tons of money, she said
earlier what it cost to keep a
child in foster care, so you've
got all these cases where
they're, they should be going
home or getting a new home, and
they're still not adjudicated
yet. And what has happened, and
this is just in the last week in
Berna Leo, there's been a rash
of attorneys leaving. So now not
only are the PPW showing up, um,
but every case is getting
vacated because there are 14
position legal.
Attorney positions, excuse me,
in protective services in
Bernalio. You wanna know how
many attorneys there are.
2
Two of the really good attorneys
left last week. I, some of my
cases and I got this email.
Hello, it's been great working
with you. Uh, I'm leaving
effectively.
And I had a staffing with the
court yesterday got vacated
because there's no attorney to
show up, so that's not in our
lawsuit, but it's all, it's part
of the bigger problem, and it is
just devastating for these kids,
particularly with the hearing,
like we, we work really hard to,
as a guardian lied to my
requirement is to meet with your
client before. Tell them what's
going to happen, get them
prepared for court when
possible, go to come to court.
They have an absolute right.
You know, they're all ready to
like.
You know, get a new service,
either go home, get a
guardianship, whatever is
appropriate just to get there
and say, um,
Sorry we can't continue because
there's nobody here from CYT at
court. So I just, that's a new
thing with the attorneys just
all leaving and it's pretty
scary because, um,
Like, as a garden with your
clients, do you start doing
their job, you know, to file a
motions at CYD should just to
keep things going, but then it's
enabling a really broken system.
So,
That's an outside the came on
us, but I want to share that
with you because it's just from
accelerated really in the last
couple of weeks, um.
So that's said. So, you know,
the agreement was.
Um, like I said, it was an
agreement. Everyone agreed that
the things in this, and it's
long, it's like 100 pages is
what needed to happen.
So it ended up being broken into
4 kind of major categories with
lots of details and phasing in
things attached to them. The
first thing to develop a trauma
informed system of care,
acknowledging these children.
have suffered trauma. They need
appropriate services and make
the whole system Tomma
responsive trauma informed. And
that really includes, I mean,
this is a children's lawsuit,
but that also includes the
parents and whatever happened.
They've been traumatized. Most
of them are desperate to get
their kids back. They will do
anything, um.
Have a system that supports
that. The second one is, um, the
least restricted and appropriate
placements.
This includes never having
office visits. Thank you for
your comments, Senator, um, in
the agreement actually by
December of 2001, they're
supposed to never be a child in
the office. It is just so
unacceptable and we 2021. I'm
sorry 2001 my brain, thank you
so much, um, and also, and this
is one thing.
That actually did get improved
is the practice of sending these
children out of state to out of
state treatment programs. That's
one thing that's, and the reason
I think you're, you all can
imagine why first of all, like
my whole time doing this, I've
always had at least one kid out
of state.
They end up in a facility that
will take them, not one that
matches their needs or is it a
proper assessment. It's really
hard to visit and see how it's
going, you know, cause you can't
just pop in cause it's, you
know, across the country. It's
almost impossible for parents to
visit their kids when they're
desperately trying to get the
kids back, but the facilities,
you know, in Indiana, and
they're supposed to actually get
themselves there and visit the
kids, so.
That I will say, and I will
give you know Secretary Viejo
credit because she really
focused on that when we filed
this lawsuit, there were 180
children in out of state
facilities. Most of them really
bad facilities. Now I don't have
the exact number, but it's under
15, so that's.
That, that's fantastic. Um, I
will just tell you one of the
facilities or one of my clients
actually Kevin himself was in a
facility and I went and visited
it and I had a really bad
feeling that this isn't good.
Um, so I was able to get him
moved out of the facility and
then about 2 weeks later.
This is not an exaggeration. The
facility got closed down. It was
in Colorado.
I closed down. They published a
report on their findings, and
one of the things they found was
a young girl sitting in the
closet eating her own skin. That
is not an exaggeration, so
that's where these kids were
going, um, so that's better, but
it's not perfect and it reflects
the state not having developed
its own services and counting
on, and it's usually with one or
two private, um, organizations
that that that took these kids
and it, I told you the names, so
it's um.
And then the other parts of the
agreement were to implement and
really honor the Indian Child
Welfare Act. And that's made
some progress to one of the good
things out of this, there's
within CYFD there's an Office of
Tribal Affairs, which was not
there before, and that's doing
really well. Um, one of the few
things doing well and then the
last thing which I know you all
are very more aware than I am
even was, you know, the
requirement for uh developed
behavioral health services, and
I know you all put a lot of
money into it and
My understanding, a lot of that
money got reverted because
The agencies just did not meet
their commitment to get the kids
in the right place. Um, and
that's critical. So,
Very briefly, you know, the, uh,
major improvements that we
expected and that we all agreed
to is the development of a
system of care that coordinates
efforts between human services
and CYFD to ensure delivery of
trauma responsive foster care,
mental health service continuum
of care to meet the needs of the
children and families in care,
including expanding services to
meet the needs of the children
throughout the whole state.
Of, um, home and community-based
mental health behavioral
services and families, keep the
kids, you know, the families as
much intact as possible and as
close to home as possible.
Sufficient staffing and trauma
sports training of CYFD
employees, foster parents,
behavioral health providers.
This includes CYFD development
of a workforce plan, which has
been developed. It is just not
been implemented with specific
strategies to attract and retain
diverse
High quality staff with
appropriate qualifications and
skills.
Consistent screening assessment,
referral procedures to improve
early assessment, medically
necessary service. Every child
when they come in to see what
custody within 30 days should
have a full medical screening,
absolutely.
Minimize the placement of foster
carers in con, you know, RTCs,
shelters, maximize the least
restrictive family-like and kin
setting with minimal movement
for kids among placement and IA
compliance. Those are like super
headlines, like I said, all of
these pages and pages of details
which you don't want to hear.
Um, and again, thank you all for
just your interest in trying to
help us improve the system. And
with that, I'm gonna turn it
over to Sarah who will talk
about our
Correction action plan and the
need to go to arbitration.
Thank you. Good morning, Chair
Chandler, Vice Chair Cervantes,
and each member of this
committee, thank you for having
us. My name is Sarah Kreka. I
have been, uh, guardian that
item and youth attorney in on
behalf of children in care since
2001 and was part of the 8
attorneys, plaintiffs' attorneys
who did file. Betty mentioned we
did not go to court. We did file
a complaint, Betty, you forgot.
In federal court as a class
action because we wanted to
enforce these children's due
process rights and because
specifically because the
Children's Court.
Um, judges themselves were
unable to provide what we were
asking for. So we went to
federal court to reform this
system very quickly, this
administration inherited this
lawsuit and asked us to mediate.
Um, it occurred to me as Betty
was describing the history of
this case because it's almost
been 4, it's been 4 years since
even the settlement and then
prior to that, the litigation
began at each turn, this
administration said, no, no, no,
no, we, we agree, we want
To help these kids. Let's not go
to court. Let's stay out of
court. Let's keep our resources
on the children. Um, so we did,
we spent an enormous amount of
time mediating to get an
agreement that then the state
immediately turned its back on.
Um, so whether it was
COVID-related or not, at each
yearly report, the co-neutrals
have said,
The state has almost achieved
almost none of the goals. Um, I
encourage everybody right now
actually to pull up Kevin S
settlement.com. There is, there
are two S's in the middle. We
don't have handouts. They are
all on that website. This is a
website you can go to during any
um hearing when CYFD or HSD
comes before you and the Kevin S
issue comes up, um, in lieu of
handouts, we have published
every single piece of paper we
filed in the lawsuit.
We have the cap I'm about to
talk about is on there, the
arbitration pleadings, um, are
public and have been uploaded so
you can keep an eye on exactly
where we are and what's going
on. So, I'm going to spend about
10 minutes and then we'll get to
Q&A. The cap is a corrective
action plan, and it was, um,
again, we were ready to
arbitrate, invoke arbitration
under the agreement after we saw
by March of 2023 such a dismal
performance on the actual um
agreement itself, and members of
our team were monitor.
that entire time and encouraging
collaboration with both HST and
CYFD, there was very minimal
collaboration. Um, so we said,
OK, we're thinking about uh,
asking for arbitration. No, no,
no, we wanna, we wanna work, we
want our resources focused on
the kids. Let's mediate this. We
spent six full days in mediation
to produce an agreement that
boiled down these obligations so
that these children could have
immediate relief.
That agreement, um, was
Supposed to last for 6 months,
we would agree not to invoke
arbitration. You have 6 months
to pull it together, OK?
They did not. So, um, I'm gonna
briefly go over what the cap is
because the arbitration is,
we've invoked arbitration on the
enforcement of the cap, so
that's kind of where we are, um.
We developed it with the benefit
of the two published in
Thoroughone neutral reports,
which I really encourage this
legislative body to look at
again on Kevin S settlement.com.
The cone neutrals are the
experts that the state is paying
to advise, collaborate, monitor
on Kevin S. They have done
reform in many other states.
These experts are fantastic.
Sometimes we hear, what should
we do? Who should we ask? We
have them on board, um, and
Reports are telling us and
telling the legislature and
telling CYFD and HSD. This is
what you need to do. So I really
encourage everybody to look at
those reports. Another one will
be coming out in November of
this year, um,
And so what they do is they
review and report to the public,
the actual policy changes that
have been implemented when we
have agency heads here telling
you they've got a plan to make a
plan or, or this is what we're
doing. That's co-neutrals
validate what's actually being
done. So it's it's they're
looking at behaviors and actions
and not just promises. So again,
those are really critical for
everyone to review, um, the cap
itself.
Had 4 areas. Let's see.
The cap as part of the CAP
agreement, CYFD and HSD promised
to strengthen and stabilize the
workforce. And what that really
specifically is, guys, we got to
reduce caseload standards or
we've got to get to a caseload
standard and reduce the number
workers have on their caseloads.
That's just number one
foundation, recruit new family
placements, recruit and retain
an array of foster family
placements to meet these
children's needs to get kids out
of the office, um, take active
steps to bring kids back from
Of state facilities, monitor the
critical incidents, which is
really important and engage
local community partners to
implement this settlement
through our pilot teams. We had
two pilot projects in San Juan
and Dona An counties.
Um, again, those pilot projects
recommendations are not being
implemented by the agencies. So
the goal of the CAP was to get
these agencies really focused on
the building blocks to reform
our system and the concrete ways
to do that in a 6 month time
period from June 2023 to
January.
2024.
Um, when we saw that that wasn't
occurring, we invoked.
Arbitration.
In January 2024, the co-neutrals
did a planned site visit. Again,
they come to our state, they
talk to the workers, they talk
to management, they meet monthly
with the secretaries. Um, and
they were compelled, they were
so compelled by what they saw in
January of this year. They
issued a letter warning the
state that children were clearly
at risk of harm, that
investigators were so overloaded
they were not laying eyes on the
children that were charged to
investigate, they were charged
to investigate and protect. I
think we all remember when that
came out in the news. That's
why.
Because the cone neutrals
exposed it in their letter. This
is when that backlog was
revealed. The co-neutrals also
learned most supervisors were
unaware that there was a
caseload standard.
Um, and managers and staff
repeatedly reported to the cone
neutrals that the agency's
month-long hiring freeze in
2023, 1 of the first things
Secretary Casados did was, was
initiate a hiring freeze. And
that dramatically worsens
staffing levels, cause more
staff turnover, and the number
of vacancies to continue to be
very high. Placement of children
in offices statewide were on the
rise in 2023 and early into
early this year, Memorial Day
weekend, we had over 50.
Children in state offices. That
practice is not just continuing,
it is getting worse. Um, there
are simply, they did not do
fulfill their promise to commit
dedicated staff to foster parent
recruitment in each of these
suffering counties. So our team
did invoke arbitration to hold
the state accountable for this
latest round of failures, um, we
invoked it in July of this year
to enforce the cap again on
Kevin SSettlement.com.
Read those pleadings. The
agreement provides for this
specific alternative dispute
resolution process, and it is a
binding process. We have a
litigation team that has alleged
that the state, the state's
breaches under the caps for
areas, um, should result in an
arbitration award in favor of
plaintiffs. That means we will
be able to enforce it by court
order. So we will be going back
to court if we prevail, um,
under the cap. So each, I just,
it really kind of occurred to me
thinking about
The iteration and the long
process and the journey we've
been on to avoid being in court
and we're going to be back in
court and spending state
resources on that because of the
lack of leadership by this
administration to keep its
promises that they sat at a
table across from us and
co-created.
So it's very hard for me when we
get the energy of this is hard
and, and I don't, you know,
it's, it's like you, the state
agencies agree to this. This was
a co-created agreement. So, and
these failures are not
hypothetical. They're impacting
our clients every single day and
behalf, on behalf of my clients.
Each of whom is truly suffering
in this system right now. I want
to thank you, Chair Chandler,
and thank you, Vice Chair
Cervantes, and each member of
this committee for really
bringing your time and attention
to this and taking the lead on
understanding how this
legislative body can hold the
states to its promises of major
reform. Whenever this question
comes up at this session, and I
know it will, what do we do to
help kids? The answer is Kevin
S. Kevin S, the agreements in
this.
Settlement agreement and in the
cap is the way to turn our
systems around. So I really,
because of that, encourage you
when you're wondering what to
do, read the cap, um, read the
arbitration pleadings online,
pull them up on Kevin
SSettlement.com every chance you
get. Um, when CYFD and HST is
presenting to you and drill down
each and every time these
agencies representatives come
before you and drill down on how
they're allocating funds to
implement implement this
agreement. Ask them where they
are following
Conneutrals and our team's
recommendations to fill these
promises to our kids. Fulfill
these promises. Um,
So we're just so honored to have
questions from this committee
during this proceeding, but any
time offline, um, we can provide
our contact information. We've
done that each time, and we're
more than happy to receive those
questions now. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Um,
actually, if, if Nancy has the
contact information she can get
it out to us, so that's very
helpful. Thank you for that. So
far I have representative Ream.
Senator Cedil Lopez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
would like to first ask, what
are, well, let me back up. It's
my understanding there are 14
kids right now at the Bernelio
County offices sleeping there.
Would you describe to me what
their bedroom looks like.
That would be Sarah, who has
spent more time with kids there
for us. Thank you so much for
your question. Yes.
Thank you for asking that, and
actually there's a description
in the beginning introduction of
the arbitration plaintiff's
opening brief of my client, um,
who we called Kermans, who was,
uh, a year ago spent from
Late August, the entire month of
September and into October in
this room. And it is in the Pine
Tree office. There's a hallway
that was designed specifically
for parents visiting their kids.
So when you do, um, children are
in custody and parents have
visitation time. They would come
to the office and have a one-way
mirror room so someone's
monitoring, um, watching them
play with their kids. They've
taken, and that, and there's a
whole U-shaped hallway that has
these types of offices. There's
also a, um,
Microphone in there so that the
person observing the visitation
can hear what's being said
between the parent and child. So
imagine that scenario where
there's a window, um, there's a
door, it's a very small office
and they put my client had a
mattress on the floor. The
window got covered, so she had
some privacy, no place to put
her things, no dresser, no, you
know, doesn't look it looks like
an office and they never turned
the microphone off. So anything
she said to me, her
Attorney on the phone in her
room, the only space she's
allowed to be, they could hear.
And I even requested that they
not do that, and they did
nothing would change. The food
that she had access to, the
snacks, you'll hear, oh, they
have snacks and they get to go
on outings. No, the snacks were
locked in a in a closet that
also had cleaning supplies, and
she had to find just find a
staff to unlock it. The food
that was brought to her was
reheated food from the
delinquency center from the
prison where kids are, the jail,
um, brought in Styrofoam.
Who knows when the last time it
was warm, stale, tiny portions,
unhealthy. So what I did in my
motion is I invoked the
children's mental health. Her
rights, if she had been in a
children's mental health
facility, she's entitled to
fresh vegetables, a varied diet,
um, exercise opportunities
outdoors, um, letter, none of
that is happening, OK? And when
you hear what it just pains me
to hear, oh, they're going to
the movies, they're going to the
zoo. No, they are not.
They're also not going to
school.
So sitting and and the what the
impact on my client's mental
health was so dramatic that she
would have meltdowns and call me
screaming repeatedly throughout
the day. And then the PPW would
would punish her for a very
predictable physical response.
What, who among us would not
start to mentally break down
and, and express that. And
during one of those I'll, I'll
wrap this up, during one of
those exhibits of frustration.
the on a Saturday, the um
security person on staff told
her what she needed was a good
old fashioned ass whooping.
That's a quote.
So this is a girl who had been
abused by her family, sexually
assaulted by her family in the
system for over 10 years and,
and insult to injury housed like
an animal, truly.
And I observed all of that
firsthand. I brought her fresh
food and groceries myself. And
one time was barred from taking
them to her because they didn't
want me.
They don't want light shined on
this. They didn't want me to see
what was going on.
I hope I answered your question.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair, and
you actually answered the second
half, you know, which is, we
wonder, you know, the mental
health of kids and how do they
end up in drug abuse? How do
they end up in crime, and I mean
this is exactly we're setting
them up for that. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Cedilia Lopez.
Thank you. We've been
continually hearing
disappointing reports since you
started reporting to us, um, I'm
just, I know we have oversight
responsibility of the somewhat
oversight responsibility of the
department, but is there
anything else we can do? Is
there legislation you need? Is
there, I know money is always a
thing, and I think we've we've
put a lot of money, as you said
that, that, um, gets sent back.
So I feel very frustrated, um,
in, in this.
All
Do you have any suggestions?
Well, I actually am glad that
you asked that because we're so
far away from where we should
be. It's hard to even think how
we, you know, what in a perfect
world, what would these kids be
receiving? And I really, in
preparation for today, came back
across some materials, I think
we presented to the Children's
Law Institute, and I'm happy to
provide to anyone interested and
Doctor Davis, who's a, um,
An expert in how to treat kids
with trauma is on our team, and
he developed this together with
the Disability Rights New Mexico
advocates and it's what HSD
should be doing and it's
community-based behavioral
health services, Centennial Care
is responsible for these kids.
So you could really push HSD to,
um, develop, I mean, this is a
bullet point list of
Two pages of different types of
community-based services that we
don't have, that we should have
in other states have to help
support the families and maybe
keep the kids out of custody to
begin with. So really holding
HSD to its promise through
Centennial care to provide
community-based services and get
specific on that, um, would be
one way to do that. And I don't
know if Betty has other ideas on
the CYD front. So it's um Madam,
Senator, thank you for that
question. It's um challenging
Because everything here is
already against the law.
I know it's like that's why I'm
so frustrated. It's like why
pass more laws that aren't going
to be, yeah, so that's kind of I
guess the question for the
legislature is how much can, can
you guys do do you set up a
subcommittee? Do you, I don't
know your, you know, you're a
very powerful and very important
arm of government. So that's
sort of but, but in terms of
questioning like what Sarah has
here, this
is like, when we talk about
caseloads and staff, there's
agreed numbers of what it would
be and the more specific you
guys all have and can ask that
question, um, because, you know,
the caseworkers are just
ridiculous in terms of not
there, but they agreed, you
know, that they'll only have,
you know, additionally 17 active
cases one year that was last
year, and then it'll go down to
12 and this is all based on
research, national standards of
what is
Reasonable, so I don't know if
there's more legislation. There
may be, um.
But kind of just keep asking
those questions and the only
other thing I thought about is
you, you all have put so much
money in and is there a way, and
this is more a question cause
this is your world to make it
really accountable, contingent
on certain very specific
miserable objectives.
That helps a little bit. Thank
you, Madam Chair. That, that is,
um, that is helpful and I just
want to reiterate I really
appreciate the reports because
it, it helps us in this function
of understanding what's going on
and, and exploring what's
possible for us to do to protect
these children. Yeah, and I
think just one question to
always ask because it's such a.
Kind of crisis now and it isn't
specifically part of the
lawsuit, but how many cases are
being deferred and vacated and
continued, I'm talking about
years because they don't have
the staff and that not only is
really harmful, it's really hard
for us to do our jobs, and I
will tell you some good
gardening items are quitting
because they just can't work in
that dysfunctional, the whole
system is losing some good
attorneys, um, but it's so bad
for these kids just to linger
and they get all excited to go
to.
if it's in person, they get all
dressed up and only to be
vacated. So that's a question
because in the last two weeks in
Albuquerque, it has just gotten
significantly worse, not to
mention whatever the financial
cost is to keep these kids in
foster care, keep attorneys on,
we should be dismissed after a
year or two, and we're still
there 5 years later, um.
So that's kind of a screaming
issue and to the extent that
people can ask those and they
all, it's very measurable, like
how many cases just got vacated,
um, and when did this case
start? Uh, like one of my cases,
and it's an Iqua case in Equor,
um, we're going on 5 years.
And the attorney just walked
down. This is, you know,
yesterday we're supposed to have
the staffing to move it forward
and it got continued because
there's no attorney to help move
it forward. So that's a, you
know, a question as appropriate
to really ask and just make the.
The Department give you guys
that information because it's
devastating. And we could
communicate I guess to the law
school to stop shrinking their
classes and start focusing on
people who want to go to law
school to do, you know, say on
the report on their application
that they want to do child
welfare in the law school with
the new, you know, the seat,
children's welfare by my car is,
um, it's a great work. It's so
important to really give these
kids voices and I've been
concerned about the law school
shrinking the.
Represently I don't want to get
into managing the law right now.
OK, just popped into my head. Uh
thank you very much. I
appreciate it, maam. Thank you,
Senator, we have Representative
block and then Senator
Cervantes.
OK, thank you so much, Madam
Chairman. I just had one quick
question. I, I'm not an
attorney, so I apologize to all
the attorneys in the room. If
this sounds stupid.
But Madam chair, so it sounds to
me like you have done everything
possible to get compliance with
the settlement.
And since you haven't seen
results pretty much nil.
What is the next step and how, I
mean, I guess you could go back
to court, right, Madam Chair,
and you could, you could
litigate it on the state level.
I'm just wondering, is there
anything else that you could
potentially threaten, I hate to
use the word threaten, but
Float out there to say it would
be a shame if we had to go to, I
don't know, federal court or it
would be a shame if the federal
government would have to take
over this agency because you're
not complying with the law and
you are funded by the feds. I
mean, how far can we go until we
finally see results, Madam
Chairman.
Thank you for your question,
Representative Block. Madam
Chair, Mr. Vice Chair, I, um,
think about this a lot because
what winds up happening, part
of, of what I do for a living is
I am a plaintiff's attorney and
I have
pursued holding the state
accountable in wrongful death
actions where children are not
taken into custody. And actually
there's a really big link
between what goes on in those
cases and Kevin S. Invest, I
have learned through those
depositions, through my
investigations in these cases,
and there's more multiple of
them is that these investigators
know if I take this child into
custody today. I don't have a
place to put them. The office is
full. So even though Kevin S
doesn't address investigations,
it actually, I mean, in part it
doesn't, but it does.
Because if we had a robust
system of resource families of
different ethnicities,
religions, sizes, who could take
teens, children who were trained
to handle the harder kids who,
by the way, those are my
favorite clients. The teens who
are condemned by this system are
my absolute favorite clients.
They are fantastic young people
with brilliant ideas, often
artists, and if they had if they
had support, they would thrive.
They are
writers. They have hustled their
whole lives. If anybody believed
in them and I had stability,
they would go really far. So,
again, it's just a foundation if
we had resource families and
foster families, we, I think, I
know we would see fewer of these
investigators turning their
backs on kids who are in
patently unsafe homes. And so I
think that is one thing this
committee and this legislative
body could do is focus on what
CYFD, what are you doing on
their promises and commitments
to expand
So families. That's just as a
basic matter to support them to
make them feel supported and
mentored to reimburse them when
they are absorbing personal
costs on behalf of these kids.
Um, what are we doing to support
foster families? That's really
truly one of the best places to
plug the leak on this giant
Titanic.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
that's it, giant Titanic, right?
It's like the Hindenburg. We're
just watching it burn and it's
just horrifying.
I appreciate that answer, but
You know, I, I've heard we can't
do it legislatively much. I
guess we can do it through the
appropriations process to get
more resources to recruit foster
families, but I mean, what do we
have to do, make it a million
dollar job. Everyone wants it.
Is that what we have to do to
ensure that we actually have
enough people to help,
actually there's so many people
with huge hearts that want to do
it, but they're they're
really hanging on on a very thin
thread with their license
because of the the treatment
that they receive, the um,
Nor they are, home visits aren't
happening, reimbursements don't
happen. Children don't have
these community-based services
where they can, um, address the
behaviors and the young kids are
melting down and it's too much.
So yeah, supporting foster
families is, is absolutely the
foundation, which is why it's
the beginning and the foundation
of our Kevin S agreement, but
driving everybody back to the
agreement, the other thing that
is another plug and I mentioned
what, what else I do for a
living is, um, we saw that
presentation on the.
amount of payments in sexual
assault cases, wrongful deaths.
I mean, the, the New Mexico
Civil Rights Act is a huge part
of what's we're going to be
seeing coming up in, um, claims
that have occurred post July 1,
2021 when that went into effect
against this agency. Um, and
that, that liability number will
go up. And I'm, I personally,
not because I want to, but that,
that needs to happen.
Because that is the only, that
is the other stop gap for what
we're seeing and
Will this agency learn its
lesson when the numbers get
bigger?
I don't know.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and I think it's just,
it's a huge issue, and I, I feel
like sometimes in these
committees, we're just banging
our head against the wall
because we want to talk about
the issue. We hear what it is we
have results and solutions that
are in the settlement. It's just
not happening. So I just wish
both of you luck. I'm praying
for all of you and all of your
clients, and I, I apologize at
least on behalf of the state for
what's happened to them. So
thank you, Madam Chairman.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, just
to follow up.
A little bit of the answer that
you gave Representative Block's
question. Did I hear you
correctly that it is more an
issue of supporting and
bolstering the foster families
that we have that have already
shown interest to recruiting new
families.
Um,
Adam Chair Representative, I
would say absolutely both, um,
I'm getting a well you've got
foster parents sitting in the
audience there, so I try not to
misspeak, but um, it's really
both and I'll, I don't, I'll
just tell you some examples I
know of with foster parents
because we go into their homes,
we get to know them, issues of,
um, not getting payment on time
and asking, and they don't get a
lot of payment. I money is not
the issue.
But if you've opened your home
to these children.
Little financial help goes a
long way clothing, food,
absolutely huge issue of not
getting paid. Another huge issue
which is this is part of Kevin S
is to have proper training.
Let's start with the reality
that these kids,
have suffered trauma. So a
little bit of training, a little
bit of support. Yes, I'm opening
my home, but when my kids start
screaming, they're supposed to
be set up a call, you know,
almost like not a 911, but to
call and say hey I'm having this
problem. Can I get a little
advice or bring a few little
services into the home, but it's
so often where that is a gap,
another gap missing, so
sometimes foster parents need to
ask kids to be removed, not
because they want to, but they
just don't have the capacity.
Because they don't have the
training or the support with it,
huge issue, um, another one is
as it's been short is.
Most, you know, some of these
foster parents, and everyone
I've met blow my mind, how
generous and just amazing they
are. Some have their own kids,
some don't, a lot do, so they
know what their capacity is to
take children, and they will get
calls every day. Can you take
one more kid? You've got to take
this kid. You got to do and it's
like, leave me a it's too much
just to say no. So I'm not, you
know, I know there's more
issues, but they like have a few
of the examples of simple things
that can and should be done to
them and then on the flip side,
yes, there, there's room for
more, um.
And that just takes like there
was I think a lot of money has
been spent on a
program that didn't work, um,
Foster parents talk to other
foster parents, and therefore
everyone's exhausted, they're
not gonna, you know, say to the
best friend, hey, cool, this is
a lot of fun, you know, so, yes,
there has to be more. And then
the other thing, and I don't
know where this is, but, um,
allow foster parents to kind of
specialize, if you will, like
for a while, and again, I'm not
exactly sure where this is, but
you foster parents and you had
to be able.
You had to open your home to
everyone. Like, what if you just
love babies and you're totally
cool with, you know, a bunch of
babies, prenatal, all the health
issues. Why can't you just do
that? There we believe very
strongly, and this would also
address the office issue. There
are some foster parents
who a little bit like us with,
you know, really love but more
interesting teenagers specialize
in that, give them instead of
popping them in the office
because they've gotten thrown
out of everywhere else, um, set
up a specialized group, give
them a little.
extra training maybe a little
extra money, maybe not. Money's
not, everyone I've ever talked
to money is not the issue, um,
and acknowledge a need and then
like design something around it.
So those are a few things and
um.
She's gonna add on to that.
Madam Chair, in 10 seconds that
because this is a very important
CYFD had a contract with New Day
Youth and Family Services to, it
was a version of what we
promoted in our agreement to
mentor.
People that would take the heart
to place teens and have a 24/7
hotline. CYFD cut that contract.
Um, and the other thing I want
to mention is foster parents
aren't paid.
They don't get paid. The money
is for these children. It is
daily rate and it's low. And
then for and that's supposed to
cover all manner of costs. They
don't get paid.
Yeah
Yes, thank you very much for
those. I have 1 million
follow-ups, but we're short on
time, so I'll get with you,
yeah, and we'll get contact
information out to everybody
happy to meet with Senator
Cervantes and Senator, no, we
got our next, we're behind. So
Senator Cervantes.
Um, first of all, you make me
proud to be a trial lawyer. Uh,
we got criticized from time to
time. My guess is you inspection
of public records laws, a great
deal in connection with your
practice. Yes, yesterday we
heard about the gross way that
lawyers use the inspection by
the, yeah, and, and you use it
as a tool to, to investigate our
government and, and I'm I'm
proud that you're a colleague.
Um, I'm proud to be your
colleague.
You women have been shined on.
Um, that is the best way I can
describe what I'm hearing today,
and we've all been shined on for
years on this subject matter.
We, we in the legislature have
to hear over and over about our,
uh, state standing in poverty,
education, jobs, economic
development, crime. We hear all
of these things and, and really
to me, none of our failings as a
state 50th and 51st, none are
more egregious, um, than this.
Um, none.
Hm
None is more shameful.
To me
And, and what's hard is that
you're telling us it's getting
worse.
I, I've worked with uh secretary
after secretary, administration
after administration, telling us
over and over we need more time.
Uh, give us more time.
And, uh, and we've given it, and
we, and we've confirmed people
and we've given them more and
more time and you're telling us
it's getting worse.
Um, and now we have the lawyers
even leaving.
disheartened, I'm sure
dispirited.
How you you talked about years
um before you even got to a
settlement agreement. Now you've
been 4 years under a settlement
agreement, 6 days of mediation,
I've never
I mean anything like a 6 days of
mediation, and you got shined
on.
You got shined on during the
mediation, you got shined on in
the years leading to that.
You've got a settlement
agreement 4 years in place, and
you've been shined on there too,
and now you've got to go to
neutrals who are telling you
they're not complying, and now
you've got to go to um an
arbitration, which is another
proceeding for somebody to tell
you that they're not complying
with the settlement agreement
only so that you can then maybe
get to a judge who's going to do
something about this. This is
just really egregious.
Um, and I appreciate the fact
that you're trying to change
that, but.
Um, you got to try harder.
Uh, and, and
That's not
It's easy for me to say.
Um, from here, but you got to
try harder and, and, and, you
know, we heard yesterday we
heard somebody all the time say,
well, our hands are tied and
this and, um, yeah, I never
accept that. Um.
You've got to get in front of a
judge and you've got to get
orders and you've got to get a
judge who's going to take this
seriously because he clearly the
administration and the
secretaries are not. And again,
I've tried to work over many
years, many years bills came to
our committee to take away the
authority of children and
families. I remember even this
last session, Senator Ortizipino
wanted to take away all of this
authority and put it into an
outside agency. I resisted that,
um, in years past, there was a,
a legislation to create an
oversight, um, of, um, of
another branch of government to
Tell us why this branch of
government wasn't working. That
doesn't seem like the way that
you get anything solved in, in
government. And so this part of
government's not working. Let's
create another part of
government to tell us why that
government's not working. I've
resisted all those. I've usually
fought those bills and some
mostly successfully to keep
those bills from passing because
it just didn't seem like piling
more on, on the problem was
going to get us anywhere. But,
but like, you know,
Representative Block and others,
we're sitting and go.
And what do we do?
Mm
These kids don't have lobbyists.
Other than you and and and
others, right? And this
committee and, and what we do,
they don't have packs and they
don't have campaign funds and
they don't have um.
Lobbyists and others that this
is it. This is all they got.
So there's really nobody
there's there's there's nobody
who's
Really more vulnerable and in
need of of.
Help, and so, um, early in the
year, I said if we're gonna have
a special session, let's have a
special session on this, um.
For all the things we're trying
to do and and I will see in the
past all of you in my office,
uh, with your bills, begging to
be heard and telling us how
important what you're doing is,
and you come to our committees,
in all of our committees and
telling us how important what
you're doing is. I hope when you
do that, um, that you give some
thought to what you, what means
so much to all of us, I'm the
same. My, my bills are so
important to me. Everything I'm
doing in Santa Fe is so
important to me.
Pretty hard to compare.
Anything I've done really too.
To what's not getting done to
children.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Um, well,
thank you very much for the
presentation, obviously, um,
you've gotten a lot of our
attentions and we'll be talking
more about this, I'm sure, and I
imagine there will be bills
introduced. There were a couple,
I think last year and the year
before last year, and we'll have
a this will give us a better
foundation just as the previous
presentation gave us a better
foundation to have an
understanding of what the the
the depth and breadth of the
problem.
and hopefully we'll have some
solutions.
Forthcoming this legislative
session, so anything we can do
to help, let us know for sure,
and we will. Thank you for the
invitation.
Thank you all for your interest
and questions. Thank you so much
for your time. Sure. Thank you.
Um, last topic on our agenda is
governance oversight and
accountability legislative
opportunities in child welfare
and we have, I think some
Remote folks coming in um.
One person from the children and
families program, NCLS.
Jenna Bannon and another also
from NCLS, so we'll get them
online in a second here.
All yeah,
unfortunately, yeah.
Oh, Ms. Bannon and Ms.
Ditzenberger, and I hope I
didn't mangle anyone's name. Um,
the floor is yours, uh, we have
about an hour allocated to this.
So if you kept it to about 30,
35 minutes on your part, you
know, we'll have some time for
questions. So thank you.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair. Can you hear me all
right?
Yes.
And what are a few of its key
Or components. So as you know,
governance is the process of
overseeing the control and
direction of something. And with
regards to child welfare, we
listed out here are what are a
few foundational components to
governance.
First and foremost, keeping New
Mexico children safe is at the
forefront of the work of
governing.
Accountability that your system
is working with the legal and
ethical requirements of federal
and state law are also
essential.
And ensuring that the system can
sustain itself through
comprehensive financing and a
strong workforce are also key.
We also know that systems must
be able to adapt to the changing
needs of families, children, and
communities.
No one expected a pandemic.
A mental health epidemic or an
opioid crisis. Yet these issues
are reshaping families and
having serious impacts on all of
our systems, especially the
child welfare system.
The teaching needs of families
and communities also calls for
your governance system to not
work in a silo.
Families experience multiple
systems in a day from dropping
their children off to childcare
at school.
And pick them up to go to the
pediatrician, the dentist, the
family therapist, and so much
more.
Trouble for governance means
being nimble and working your
cost systems collaboration with
their early childhood education,
health, behavioral health
agencies and other programs and
stakeholders that impact
children's lives. And last but
not least, governing involves
ensuring that families
experience
High quality programs,
practices, and services. So you
can achieve the outcomes of
strengthening families and
promoting the well-being of
children.
Your governance system is also
accountable to special oversight
by the administration for
Children and Families.
In order for federal funding for
child welfare services.
Engage in and comply with child
and family service reviews.
This slide provides a very, very
basic overview in regards to
compliance and oversight of
state child welfare systems.
Children's standing service
reviews are overseen by the
Children's Bureau.
And are a federal state
collaborative effort designed to
ensure that quality services are
provided to children and
families through state child
welfare systems.
The reviews identify strengths
um identify strengths and
challenges and practice for
children and families in the
areas of safety, permanency, and
well-being.
And while the federal government
mandates oversight into the
progress states are making to
meet these outcomes. States are
both working within these
parameters and identifying and
creating their own standards of
practice and governance.
So as we look across the
country, child maltreatment
prevention services are often
housed across government
entities, including those that
focus on health, human services,
economic development, education,
and civil and criminal justice.
Most states, how is that child
welfare and protection work
within a larger payment services
department.
A few states, such as Indiana,
Washington, and Tennessee have
departments that focus on
children that exist outside of
other human services
departments. Indiana's
Department of Children's
Services and the Tennessee
Department of Children's
Services work on both child
welfare and juvenile justice
issues.
Washington State's Department
for Children, Youth and Families
aims to support families through
services related to childcare,
early intervention, child
welfare, and youth and young
adult housing. Today, most of
the examples of oversight that
we will provide you with, focus
more narrowly on the oversight
of child welfare and child
protection systems.
However,
And finally, states have both
internal and external processes.
Site.
Internal forms of oversight may
include boards or department
leads that are responsible for
ensuring that statutory
requirements are followed.
For example,
Oklahoma's Office of Client
Advocacy operates within the
Oklahoma Department of Human
Services.
External oversight defined in
statute may include include
independent boards, the
ombudsman offices, the report to
the governor, the legislature,
and or departments outside of
the office of Children and
Family Services.
Many states rely on oversight
mechanisms that involve
community and stakeholder
engagement.
Two common forms of this are
foster care review wards and
citizen review panels.
For example,
Florida's foster carer Leeward
operates independently from its
child welfare departments.
These internal and external
oversight mechanisms are not
necessarily mutually exclusive.
Colorado, for example, has
statutes related to both forms
of oversight, internal and
external.
So throughout the remainder of
this presentation, we will
illustrate for you some ways
that states provide
accountability and oversight of
child welfare systems and child
safety. With that, I'm going to
be passing it to my colleague
Hannah.
Flow all mo chair and members of
the committee. Thank you so much
for having me. Can you all hear
me OK?
Yes. Excellent. Thank you. My
name is Hannah Ditzenberger, and
I am a policy citizen and MCSL
working on child welfare and
early childhood issues.
Today I'll be providing some
estate examples of oversight and
4 main categories.
Citizen review boards, child
welfare commissions.
Children's Ombudsman officers
and data sharing and analysis.
I'll start right now with
Citizen Review boards.
States are required to establish
this and review panels.
Under the child abuse prevention
and Treatment Act.
These citizen review panels are
sometimes called foster care
review panels or boards.
And in 1998, the administration
for Children and Families issued
program instruction to provide
instruction on the citizen
review panel requirements under
the Child Abuse Mw State grant
or basic state grant.
The win here in this slide, uh,
takes you to the program
instructions if you would like
to learn more about those.
have to require is that most
states establish a minimum of 3
citizen review panels.
And the exemption to the to this
requirement is for states that
receive the minimum allotment of
$175,000 under Title II and CTA.
And new states are only required
to establish one or more citizen
review panels.
The review boards are
responsible for evaluating the
extent to which the state is
fulfilling its child protection
responsibilities in accordance
with CATA.
They must examine the policies,
procedures and practices of
state and local child protection
agencies.
And when appropriate, they must
review specific cases.
Have to also requires that
members of the review panels be
broadly representative of the
community in which the panel is
established and include members
with expertise in the prevention
and treatment of child abuse and
neglect.
A piano might also examine other
criteria that it considers
important to ensure the
protection of children.
Including the extent to which
the state and local child
protection services are
coordinated with the state's
Title 4E foster care and
adoption assistance programs.
Hamels may also review the child
fatalities and near fatalities
in the state.
State governments have the
review boards from various
entities, including entities
outside of the formal child
welfare system.
Review boards may take different
forms, including statewide
review boards, local advisory
boards and child brutality.
I now providing with a few
examples of these three
different main categories of
citizen review boards that we
see.
So for state advisory review
boards, you see that Iowa as a
child advocacy State board that
consists of 9 members, all of
whom are appointed by the
government.
The board reviews activities.
At the local boards and of the
course, a point of special
advocate program.
The board also establishes data
collection system and reporting
requirements.
South Carolina's division for
review of the foster care of
children consists of 7 members
who are also appointed by the
government. The members must be
part be past or present local
review board members.
The many states also have local
advisory boards as mentioned in
the larger state advisory board
bodies.
Arizona's foster care would be
forest system is established by
the Supreme Court of Arizona,
and members of local advisory
boards are appointed by juvenile
court judges.
In Idaho, local public health
districts must establish citizen
review panels to evaluate and
provide recommendations of the
child protection system within
each of those health districts.
And finally, many states also
have reviewed reports that focus
on child fatalities or near
fatalities.
Alabama has its state child
death review team in the
Department of Public Health.
In Hawaii requires the
Department of Human Services to
establish a child protective
review panel to review each case
of child abuse or neglect, that
leads to fatality or near
fatality.
Commissions or advisory councils
are another type of oversight
that we see.
These are typically long-term
bodies that work to address a
broad issue.
And they may represent state
agencies from multiple
jurisdictions.
They generally require
membership by appointment, as
stipulated in enabling
legislation.
And they typically recommend
legislation and other policy
situation solutions.
Several states have established
commissions and councils related
to child wellbeing broadly.
Or to specific aspects of child
welfare for again to the
intersection of child welfare
with other systems.
Commissions and councils may or
may not be created via
legislation.
In some instances, other
government branches also create
commissions related to child
welfare, juvenile justice, and
similar issues.
For example, in 2004, the
Supreme Court of Washington
established the Commission of
Children in Foster Care.
However and now I'll go over
some examples of commissions and
councils that were established
via legislation.
So Texas's Policy Council for
Children and Families, studies
and makes recommendations to
improve the long-term supports
and services, including
community-based supports for
children with special health
care needs.
As well as children with
disabilities and their families,
but specifically receive
protective services from the
state.
Nebraska created a committee
within the state's larger
children's commission in 2019.
As a high-level leadership body
to monitor and evaluate the
child welfare and juvenile
justice. The commission must
provide a permanent forum for
collaboration among state,
local, community, and public and
private stakeholders in child
welfare and juvenile justice
programs and services.
The committee must examine the
Office of Juvenile Services and
the juvenile Services Division
of the Office of Probation.
Such committees shall review the
role, and the effectiveness of
out home placements, including
the youth rehabilitation and
treatment centers.
And make recommendations on
juvenile justice continuum of
care.
Including what population should
be served in out home
placements, and what treatment
services should be provided at
the centers in order to
appropriately serve you who are
receiving at-home care.
The commission was also required
to analyze case management
workforce issues and make
recommendations to the Health
and Human Services Committee of
the Legislature regarding
workforce issues in child
welfare services. Finally, the
commission was also required to
determine 3 to 5 strategic child
welfare priorities. For research
or policy development every.
In 2021, Nevada requires a
juvenile justice oversight
commission to establish a
five-year strategic plan to
establish policies and
procedures for the division of
child and family services of the
Department of Health and Human
Services.
The plan must outline the use of
evidence-based services to
children subject to the
jurisdiction of the juvenile
court.
And then finally, Oregon
established the governor's child
foster care advisory Commission
in 2016 to advise the governor
and the director of human
services regarding foster care
foster care system in the state.
The members of this commission
were appointed by the governor.
Now, the most common form of
statutory oversight for child
and family services and
divisions are in both.
Children's Ombudsman offices,
also known in some jurisdictions
as an Office of the child
advocate, have been established
at the state level to assist
with the oversight of children
services.
As of May of this year, 33
states have established a
children's ombudsman or child
advocate office with duties and
purposes specifically related in
some way to child welfare.
Ombudsman offices can be very
broad strokes, focusing on
services related to multiple
government agencies.
However, some offices are
specific to a population
impacted by child welfare or by
populations that intersect with
child welfare.
Again, the purpose,
responsibilities, and duties of
the children's ombudsman office,
vary by state.
However, in general, these
offices exist too.
Handle and investigate
complaints from citizens and
families related to government
services for children and their
families.
This might include child
protective services, foster
care, adoption, and juvenile
justice services.
They also provide an
accountability mechanism for
child welfare systems.
By recommending system-wide
improvements to benefit children
and families.
These recommendations are often
informed.
An annual reports to the state
legislature or governor, and
many states also require that
these reports be made public.
Finally, they also made moer
programs, placements, and
departments responsible for for
providing children's services.
This might include inspecting
state facilities and its.
On this side, I'll outline some
recent enacted state legislation
that established ombudsman of.
Earlier this year, Idaho
established a child protection
bus.
The office will operate
independently from the courts.
And the state's Department of
Health and Welfare.
And it will be responsible for
receiving and resolving
complaints on behalf of children
receiving child welfare
services.
The ombudsman and Idaho is
important by the governor and is
subject to confirmation by the
Senate.
In 2019, Michigan established
their children's ombudsman
office.
investigates complaints related
to children who are alleged
victims of child abuse and
neglect.
The office also makes
recommendations to the governor
and the legislature concerning
child welfare, adoption, and
foster care, legislation,
policy, and practice.
Michigan's child advocate is
appointed by the governor with
the advice and the consent of
the Michigan legislature.
Finally, in 2020, Virginia
established the office of the
Children's Ombudsman as a means
of effecting changes in policy
and procedure, and legislation,
according to their legislation.
The Ombudsman must educate the
public.
The artist must also investigate
and review actions of the State
Department of Social Services.
Local departments of social
services, child posting agencies
and in general other child
caring institutions.
They also must ensure that
compliance with relevant
statutes, statutes rules and
procedures are met.
The ombudsman is appointed by
the governor and is subject to
confirmation by Virginia's
General Assembly.
I'm going to provide you with
more examples of investment
offices, all of which are
established in statute but are
not necessarily as recent as
examples from the previous
slide. And the purpose of these
additional examples is to
illustrate that these offices
can operate in different ways
and with different purposes,
depending on the state.
Illinois's Office of the
Inspector General is located
within the Department of
Children and Families.
It functions independently to
conduct investigations into any
employee, foster parent, service
provider or contractor of the
department.
The Inspector General makes
recommendations to the director
of the department has access to
confidential information. It
also acts as a liaison between
the department and the police.
It has the power to subpoena and
it publishes an annual and
public report.
Montana's Office of Child and
Family on Budley is part of the
Department of Justice in London.
It works in consultation with
the child welfare department and
appropriate county attorneys to
strengthen children and family
services.
The Ombudsman inspects and
subpoena records, investigates
reports of child abuse and
neglect.
Revis department procedures.
Promotes best practices,
prepares educational materials
and also provides annual
workups.
Mon Montana stipulates got
records of budsman
investigations, including case
notes, correspondence, and
interviews must be disclosed to
members of the legislature, if
certain measures related to need
and confidentiality are met.
The Ombudsman is appointed by
the Attorney General.
rights office is under the
Department of Job and Family
Services.
The office consists of a youth
ombudsman.
Family ombudsman and at least 2
regional ombudsmen.
The office in general
investigates the complex made by
children and families involved
with the state's public service
agencies for children.
The scene on busting is
appointed by the governor and it
investigates complaints made by
adults. The youth on bus, on the
other hand, is also funded by
the government, but that
governor appointment is
completed with advice from the
overcoming hurdles in Ohio news
advisory more.
He was and investigates
complaints in 85 news.
And it's also an advocate for
the best interests of children
concerns investigated by the
office.nesota's Office of a
budsperson for Families is the
independent state agency.
The office monitors compliance
with all laws regarding child
protection and placement as to
the impact specifically on
children of color and tribal
children.
They also provide cultural
diversity training to state and
local courts.
And receive investigating funds.
The ombudsperson has access to
confidential information as
subpoena power, makes
recommendations, and provides
reports.
Um bus persons in Minnesota are
selected for specific
communities. And they selected
by applicable community-specific
force.
Each on buzz person must be
selected without regard to
political affiliation, they must
be highly competent and
qualified to analyze questions
of law, administration, and
public policy regarding the
protection and placement of
children from families of color
and tribal children.
In addition, the ombudsperson
must be experienced in dealing
with communities of color and
knowledgeable about the needs of
those communities.
No individual may serve as a bus
person in Minnesota while
holding another pd box.
Finally, we
One more final point relating to
oversight of child welfare
systems.
Many jurisdictions consider data
sharing analysis to be one
essential component of effective
oversight.
Data recording and sharing is
one way to ensure that at least
some accountability exists. This
accountability can even though
with relevant agencies and
departments to the legislature,
or even by sharing the data with
the public.
We see some states paying
attention to who has access to
specific data related to child
and family services.
Including child protection
services.
You know that data can be used
to make decisions regarding
children's safety and
well-being.
Both internal and external
oversight bodies are often
authorized by statute to access
certain child protection
investigation and service
records.
In addition, many states require
child welfare departments to
provide other governmental
agencies and the public with
access to certain information
about child welfare systems.
Data recording include
information our placement type
permanency outcomes, child and
parent demographics of use of
funding sources and other
information.
So, so now I'll share 3 examples
of how we see some states
grappling with this idea of data
sharing.
In 2023, Arizona passed
legislation requiring its
Department of Economic Security
to give certain course, access
to case management systems to
assist foster care review
boards.
In 2022, the District of
Columbia amended its data
sharing information termination
Amendment Act to allow the
disclosure of health and human
services information to aid in
the development of a report on
the root causes of youth crime,
and the prevalence of adverse
childhood experiences among
justice justice involved you.
Finally, Maryland includes child
welfare data and the data
collected and analyzed by the
state Data Systems Center.
In 2021, the state required the
center to conduct research on
the educational and economic
impact of the out of home
placement child welfare
programs.
With that, I will pass it back
to Jenna. Madam Chair and
members of the committee, thank
you again for having me.
Because you Hannah.
Our presentation today, we want
to leave you with a few policy
considerations.
First.
A governing structure needs to
have clear priorities and
determine what the what and the
why.
Before it figures out the the
how.
Second, we have seen time and
again that, for example, a child
fatality can result in reactive
policymaking.
Which then can result in
unintended consequences and
strategic governance can help
create a more proactive culture.
I can take the longer view from
complex child lover issues.
Third, role clarity on the core
functions in your child welfare
system is important.
We're hearing from so many
slaves that chop protective
services is being asked to do
work that goes beyond their
original intentions.
And they're being asked to do
work in prevention, mental
health, caregiving, and beyond.
Um, and it goes beyond what it
has the capacity to do. So
again, roles and
responsibilities need to be
clearly defined.
And 4th, communication between
your executive leadership.
The legislature, your judges,
within your judiciary is needed
for systemic success.
In communication to external
stakeholders and families in the
relationships instigmatized
child welfare.
In closing, we're also seeing
the data can play a really vital
role in guiding your governance
system.
Leveraging data and evaluation
to inform and guide your system.
It's important to understanding
who is being served by our
system and how they are being
served.
Also understanding how families
are served is best gained by
hearing from families
themselves.
They are the users of your
system.
And they can assist you in
designing the system that they
actually want to engage in.
Also cost benefit. This is a big
question as states grapple with
where they want to move their
child welfare systems and
governance, where should it be
housed? Should be independent,
should be a division within a
larger agency.
Who should oversee it, defining
the problem you're trying to
solve and ensuring that the move
is addressing that, that problem
is an important question to ask.
And there can be a significant
cost to move child welfare in
and out of other departments and
asking if the move is going to
result in a return on investment
is another important question to
ask.
And in conclusion, I want to
share the consideration of
collaboration.
We are seeing across the
country.
The state legislatures are
extending their child welfare
system to be a prenatal through
25.
System.
We know that at least 50% of
children who are being removed
are newborns, infants, and
toddlers.
Which is why extending your
system to include prenatal to 3
is one thing that legislatures
are really thinking about and
then extending it to youth and
young adults. So as we know,
brain development is happening
all the way through age 25, and
thinking about the policy
opportunities on both sides of
that experience of childhood to
young adults really opens up
doors and opportunities not only
as policymakers.
As opportunities to collaborate
across systems. Again, families
are navigating multiple systems
a day and really intentionally
creating collaborative
structures between early
childhood and education and
health, and many other systems
can really have high impact on
both for your governing
structure and for communities um
across New Mexico.
With that
We just wanted to have a final
page on the resources that are
available to you. We have a uh
an active child welfare
legislation database. Hanna
spends time every day seeing
what legislatures are up to. You
can find that in our database.
You're doing really deep work
around the policy levers to
prevent child abuse and neglect,
uh, we're really thinking about,
uh evidence to inform
policymaking, results-based
governance, and we and NCSL are
really working comprehensively.
both with her early childhood
partners or health partners or
education partners in our civil
and criminal justice partners in
this space. We're more than
happy to come back and provide
you with more in-depth
information if you would like
that. So we wanna thank you,
Hannah and I again uh for the
invitation to present to you
again our apologies for not
being there in person I would
love to go get some green and
red chili with all of you, um,
and have deeper conversation on
this. And with that, we're happy
to open it up.
To any questions you may have.
Thank you. All the questions,
uh,
Senator Lopez.
But
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
first of all, thank you to our
colleagues at NCSL for sharing
this information. Um, just for
committee's information in the
public, um, Madam Chair, the
information that has been shared
with us today and what we have
heard also at another hearing
with legislative Health and
Human Services in Portales. Um,
there is also a task force set
at Memorial 5 Task Force that is
also reviewing um some of the
same information that's being
presented to us here.
And in fact, we have one of our
task force members sitting here
in the audience with us. Um
what I, I think that we um have
done some good investigations.
There's so much to read. Um,
it's not just sitting, I mean,
there's just so much information
that's there.
Um,
But what I am saddened about is
that our last task force meeting
where we're actually we'll have
some recommendations to the
legislature and of course the
executive won't take place until
November 15.
And this committee will already
have finished business. Um, but
when that information does come
out, we will make sure that
members of this committee and
others do receive the
information also. There may be
some duplication on what um your
committee, Madam Chair, decides
to move forward with, um, as
well as what Health and Human
Services may, but I'm hoping
that we will be able to
coordinate.
So that we don't have
duplication and spending our
precious energy during session,
um, as we move forward on these
issues. And I know that from
what um, again, our colleagues
from NCSL have presented, uh,
is, is good information and
there are some states across our
country who have done bits and
pieces of, of, um.
Proposing and implementing some,
I think some oversight that
different departments, uh,
depending what they're called
around the state need, but from
what was heard just this
morning, I think we go to a
different level of
implementation oversight and
just what the hell is happening
within our department even now,
and we have 14 attorneys who
have just up and gone. So I
think, Madam Chair, this is
even, even more so critical as
to how we look, what we do and
How we use money to maybe have
some input uh within management
of this department. So, I mean,
there's much more, but I just
wanted just to remind the
committee that there is another
entity that's also reviewing
similar information from what we
were just hearing. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator
Representative Reed.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Hi,
Jenna. Hi, Hannah. I've, I've
been to many of their
conferences, probably about 4 of
them now, um, over the last
couple years and I have
expressed to them and and kind
of one of my goals when I worked
with them was that we need a
child welfare committee, and I
think that we've, we've again
kind of talked about that today
and it's been kind of one of my
things that I've been trying to
push that we have a committee
that's just dealing with these
child welfare issues and still
not happening
Jenna, but I'm, I'm still trying
to work on it, so I just wanted
to bring that up to this
committee. We could spend so
much time really more focusing
on our CYFD issues and our
juvenile issues instead of um in
so many other committees, um, so
I just wanted to throw that out
there, especially with people
with Senator Fonte being present
and, and some other people that
might be able to help with that,
that thing.
Happening, um, I, I don't know.
I know everyone says no more
committees,
but you look like you want to
say something, so I was just
gonna say that. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
OK, uh, thank you very much. I
don't see anyone else with
questions, appreciate your
support and um thank you for
joining us today. We, we had a
good morning of discussion and
appreciate your information and
I'm sure members will find it
useful, so, um, thank you. I
think we're going to move now to
committee discussion.
Thank you. Thank you.
Um,
Senator Cervantes, uh, you go
first. Thank you, Madam Chair. I
asked to go first because I
wanted to get the committees and
the audience's attention before
the president of the Senate
leaves, she's rolling her eyes.
She told me a secret and she
told me not to tell anybody. I
says,
you can't you can't tell me a
secret, not expect me to tell
the folks this. She said, I'm
feeling something today that I
don't know what it is, and it
seems like a mystery. I'm
feeling happy.
She's, she's, I've never felt
this before.
And she's blushing a little bit
if she's gonna do, but, but I
just want to let all of you know
that, that Senator Stewart today
is uniquely happy today and I, I
didn't ask her why or what
that's about, but I have a
pretty good idea that it had to
do with last night's events, um,
and, and so I wanted to capture
the moment and today and and
recognize that we that some of
us were pleased with the evening
and uh Senator Stewart now knows
what it is to experience
happiness. So thank you, Madam
Chair.
I think it has to do with
spending 3 days with us. That's
why she's so happy, so, um, so I
have a Senator Nibert and then
Representative of Oconn and then
Representative Brego.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. The,
question was asked about maybe
some legislation.
And
regarding some of these issues
and it does appear to me that we
need to uh
Continue to maybe investigate
whether CYFD's mission is too
broad for one person to handle
and uh I've suggested in the
past that maybe it it needs to
be cut up a little bit so they
can focus on some of the very
issues we heard at that table
today,
uh, whether it remains CYFD or
another name, but it does seem
to me that doing juvenile
justice.
Doing fostering and doing abuse
and neglect is a pretty broad
task for anyone.
Uh, secondly, apparently on part
of the issue of
Children going to a regional or
a state group home used to be
called orphanages, uh, I think
Simon or somebody should look at
whether or not we can do
something along those lines
because apparently a federal
statute prohibits that or uh
was changed in the 70s so that
you cannot have those types of
facilities and so uh we might
have somebody at legislative
council look at that issue, but
we can't have.
Children being raised in
offices.
They're with a security guard.
A security guard. They're not
with anybody, you know, that,
that uh is qualified to see
these children uh through the
night and so they're tearing up
the offices they're they're
causing us to spend a lot of
money repairing and they're in a
facility that's not designed for
for uh kids and, and they
certainly don't have the
professionals on staff at the
times of day when when they,
they probably need those
professionals.
Um,
We need to look at that and see
if we can do something about
that, um, and then thirdly, I
think uh the ladies just said
it, we, we've proposed ombudsman
and things, and I think we
really need to look at bringing
some people in to advocate, and
one thing I learned uh a year or
so ago, if you go to the foster
families and ask them for their
ideas. They are very willing to
share their concerns.
Their ideas how to improve the
system. One thing that that I
learned in a meeting in Roswell
was that.
It's not, you know, as I said,
it's not the money, although
they would like to be
compensated more quickly than
they were being compensated,
but.
The red tape.
Just the, the burdensome, uh,
you know, these people aren't
good about filling out a bunch
of forms, but yet they're being
required to do a lot of red tape
and I don't know much, maybe
Marilyn knows a lot more about
what she has to do each, each
month, but, but it's uh, it was
a complaint that resonated with,
with all the foster families in
in Roswell, uh, that they were
being asked to do too much and
take their time away from the
kids, uh, so we, we.
May want to look at some of
that. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator. I have
Representative Al Cohn and then
Brego.
Thank you Madam Chair, I would
like to propose that we set up
uh about an hour's meeting.
But a no conference here in uh.
The corrections department, uh,
basically here in the employee
side of the corrections
department in the state of New
Mexico. I mean, we hear a good
side and hear everything nice,
it's happening at uh we don't
really hear what's happening on.
Underside on the people who are
turning the key.
And uh I think uh if we could
set up at least half an hour
meeting or a call part of us,
And uh I think uh if we could
set up at least half an hour
meeting or a call part of uh
our, our next meeting before we
go to session.
I think it would uh open some
eyes as to where we're at or
where we're not.
That's the hope. Thank you,
Madam Chair. So you're talking
about the corrections
department. OK, got it. OK,
thank you. Um, Representative
Barrego.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, and
I would just like to say that
every time I come to Espanola, I
feel happy too because my mom is
here, um, so I'm hoping that
that's resonating a little bit,
um, to everyone, um, and
hopefully, hopefully we'll come
back here. Um, you know, as I
was sitting here listening to
all of this, and I know a lot of
you have had a lot more
experience with this than I
have, but.
Um
I too like uh Senator Cervantes,
it was deeply impacting me and I
don't have any children, but I
have a lot of nephews and nieces
and just I've seen a lot in my
time, and I wrote some comments
down. I thought, you know, the
legislature has certainly put a
lot of money toward this, but,
you know, I, I, I truly believe
that and I saw it on the
Green, it said turn up the
volume, and I think that that,
and it wasn't part of the
presentation, it was part of the
computer, and I thought to
myself, well, how do we turn up
the volume on this, and I wrote
some notes to myself about stop
the hurt and start the healing,
and that's really, you know,
what we need to do is start the
healing because there's too many
children that are being impacted
by this, and too many families,
um, but one of the
Things that struck me when I
thought back about sort of
organizational theory and
organizational behavior, um, is
a lot of these,
when we look at the data and
different uh country or not
countries, but states across the
nation and what they're doing.
Um, one of the things that
really struck me is that the
administration of these
departments has been
administrated by a certain group
or a certain.
branch of government, but it's
also being monitored by the same
branch of government, and that
struck me like in my heart, sort
of like, wait a minute, the
group that's setting up the, the
agency is also the group that's
monitoring, you know, and dare I
say this, but
I think it should be.
A different branch of government
that's monitoring it. I mean,
because one is, uh, how could
the same group that's setting it
up, be the one that's monitoring
whether or not it's successful.
It just to me it doesn't make
any sense. And so I, you know,
I, I really had to think about
whether I should say this or not
because I am up for reelection,
but you know, regardless, um, I
think it's important that we
think about that, especially as
we move.
in our legislation is that the
groups, we should be monitoring
each other. And that's how
government is supposed to be set
up. So I mean, I go back to my
training and at UNM, um, is, you
know, that is respectfully, the
way government should operate.
So I just wanted to raise that
issue and I hope that we all
turn up the volume on this.
Thank you. I just wondered,
wondered if we could at least
get a preview or something of
the task force that Senator
Lopez is um has been working on
because I think it's too bad
that they're the report's going
to come, come out after we meet,
and I think, you know, they've
been working on it for a while,
and it's one of the reasons
we've been told to wait to do
anything because of this
comprehensive report, so I don't
know, I just throw that out
there as
Something important that I'd
like to see before the session
and to to have the opportunity
to discuss with this committee.
Thank you.
The floor is yours, senator.
Thank you, thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair and Senator Serio
Lopez. Um, actually the person
who has been educating us and
bringing information because the
LFC has been the focal, you
know, the organizer, of course,
is Doctor Garcia, Rachel, um,
and a lot of the information
that she has been sharing with
different committees is part of
the information also that we
have been receiving. But again,
our focus is not multi as the
committees are set up.
So there may be an opportunity,
we'll have to chat and see if
she can give a short overview
maybe at another time as to um
maybe not go so in depth, but at
least giving an overview of what
we have already reviewed. We
have not come up and the task
force is not slated to have a
discussion until November when
we'll spend some
Nice time. Um, it won't be a
short period we're hoping, um,
for us just to have an honest
discussion, so it'll be a lot of
the information that we've
already received, um.
And have our, our frank
discussion as to what our
recommendations will be. But
maybe we can do that, Madam
Chair, um.
Rachel is so willing to do that.
She's the person at the helm of
in sharing information with us.
So, um, can I just ask some
questions. So we got a lot of
good information today from
Rachel, um, that kind of
identified.
Issues and problems and where
things weren't being implemented
and you know that. I'm assuming
that you're working group is
intended to offer.
Suggestions as to how to go
forward, you know, so, um, I get
that. So is that gonna be ready
like by October? Would it be
ready by our November meeting at
13 or the 12th and 13th. So
Madam Chair, our last meeting,
actually the meeting day where I
anticipate our task force having
a heart to heart discussion on
the recommendations that were
given here won't happen. We're
not scheduled until November 15.
Yeah, that's what I was worried
about.
Um, and will you all be having a
public meeting where, OK, so you
know this is an opportunity. I
mean, if we all can be, if we
may have conflicts, I imagine
the meeting will be tape
recorded as all of our meetings
are. So, I mean, that's one way
at least to have some knowledge
about what's going on, um,
because basically we we shut
down around November 14th for
this commit this, this
committee, um, and it's not like
we haven't had a lot of
meetings.
All summer, um, so that's one
opportunity I'm sure we can find
out when that your meeting is
when you, you're gonna go over
all the recommendations and so
on and any member, I'm sure is
welcome to attend, um, I would
imagine, uh, Senator Lopez, is
that true?
And Madam Chair, what, what
could happen um is just maybe,
you know, and it doesn't have to
be extended, but maybe just a
brief overview as to what we've
already covered. And we do have
some information on the LFC
website that's public, that
persons can go and access um
some information, but if you
would go ahead and you can come
up and um participate here.
So, Madam Chair, what I might do
is direct where some things are
happening logistically and then
I'm going to narrate a few
things, Senator Lopez as a key
leader on that task force to
say, let me know if you think
these things could work. So the
first is, um, we can send the
Senate Memorial 5 Task Force,
um, uh, the LFC was positioned
as kind of the coordinator and
organizer. There is a section on
the LFC website I can send you
the direct link. I admit it's
not the easiest to navigate to.
That does um
Post all of the content the task
force has considered the
schedule, um, as well as, uh,
agenda items. So I can send
those some of the content will
feel familiar. The second thing
I might offer, um, in terms of,
and there are a couple of task
force members here is each
meeting, the group has started
narrating potential
recommendations we have been
taking notes along the way. What
I imagine we could probably do
is start, start preparing, uh.
Preliminary reports are things
that are not the final um task
force recommendations because we
haven't, the group hasn't gotten
to all of the topics, but some
of the initial ones that the
group has at least surfaced. I,
I wonder, Senator Lopez, as a
member of the task force that
that might be a kind of a way to
address kind of what you're
you're surfacing as a timeline,
and I think, Madam Chair, again
it's all information for what
we've been discussing, but the
task force hasn't had an
opportunity to really sit and
talk and discuss.
And do the, you know, final vote
that needs to to move forward
with, so that's still to come,
but any information we have is
for us to look at.
So I think that would be
wonderful. I think what I just
heard is you'll provide us links
to where.
A lot of this information, is
that what you're saying,
doctor? Madam Chair, that is
correct, and it will probably
look familiar in terms of some
of the topics you heard today,
you know, I know, uh, the Senate
Judiciary and I think House
Judiciary has done in the past
where we are at the bottom of
the rung when bills come our
way, and that means we have time
in the early part of the session
to often have conversations
about, you know, educational
things. I know you have done
that. Um, that's another
opportunity where.
We could have either our
individual committees could have
a briefing or we could have a
collective briefing with both
the Senate and the House
Judiciary Committees. That's
another, because, you know, we
don't really start getting
revved up for a few weeks into
the session, couple weeks at
least, so that's a possibility
as well. So, thank you, um, very
much, Senator, um, and thanks
for your work on the issue. It's
important, of course.
Anyone else?
Alright just can't, I'm sure I,
I, I've talked to the committee
about this before, and I, I hope
you and I will continue to work
on this subject, which is that,
um, I remember, I remember years
ago in, and that's probably why
I got a little upset earlier
today. Sometimes you just feel
powerless in these jobs, you
know, and you get frustrated
and, and, and remember again,
I've been here 24 years, so when
I see a failing, like we see,
and I just really take some of
that as a great personal
responsibility for that.
Um, years ago I talked to a good
colleague and I said, sometimes
I just feel so powerless in this
position. And, and the
colleague, um, and mentor to me
said, you know, Joe, there's one
power that you have that's an
enormous power that you may not
realize, which is you have the
power to convene. Um, and I, I
want to share that with all of
you. We have the power to
convene. We he said, Joe, you
can, you can pick up the phone
and call somebody and they're
gonna call you back, uh, or you
can ask for a meeting with
people and they're gonna show
up. Uh, you have a power to
convene. So I, I share that with
you.
Because when we have this
incredible power to do that and,
and, um, I hope that we as a
committee will do that. So for
example, today, it would have
been really beneficial, I think,
for us to have the secretary
here. Um, and, and deputies here
to hear that and, and hear them
tell us how they're complying
with the settlement agreement
because they may give us a
broader perspective of what's
going on and we may hear the
other side and we may be more
pleased than, than I am today.
Right now I'm very unpleased.
Uh, I think we all are. So I, I
hope
Do that, you know, it struck me
throughout the three days here,
we were on housing issues for
quite some time. Um, we hear a
lot of folks that are very
critical of I heard predatory
practices and so forth. It it's,
it's good to have the landlords,
um, for those kind of
conversations because I'm a
landlord and I'm sitting there
thinking, oh, you know, folks
are not paying their rent for a
lot of months.
As a landlord, I wanna, I don't
want to have to continue to
house people doing that. So
again, hearing all sides, I
think is something we should
continue to do that we heard the
IPRA belabor that one a little
bit too, but, uh, it's good,
it's good to hear how IPRA is
being used constructively by
some and, and I tried to make
that point too. And so I hope
we'll continue to do that is to
maybe put both sides in the room
together to hear each other. Um,
it's good to hear, for us to
hear from both sides, but it's
also good in my expense to hear
each other, um, and, and you'd
be surprised how many times they
go talk in the hallway
afterwards and, and
Say, hey, uh, they, they
continue the dialogue after us
too, so I hope, hope we'll
always continue to look for
those opportunities.
Anyone else?
OK, well, thank you. I thought
it was a productive meeting and
really appreciate all your, um,
