All right.
Um, good afternoon, everyone.
Leslie Billingsley, um,
infrastructure division,
director of the Department of
Finance and Administration, um,
here on behalf of behalf of
Secretary Popes who could not be
here today, um, we both jointly
presented last year as this
committee members, um, the first
time.
That we have presented um in
front of this committee for DFA.
And so this is, we're returning
in our 2nd year to try to
request some additional funding,
um.
From this committee.
So, um, DFA administers more
than 1000 legislative
appropriations each year.
Um, as appropriations revert or
closed on June 30th of each
year, another batch of
appropriations are made and so
each year we continue to see the
increase in the number of.
Um, total appropriations amount,
um, range from 200 million in
2021 to about 800 million in
2024 for DFA alone.
Um, DFA received.
586 appropriations totaling $290
million in 2024.
Um, the DFA also administers
application-based grants from
funding in House Bill 2 and
other typical um legislative
appropriations other than
capital and junior bills.
Um, these application-based
grants can create 100 more grant
agreements per application cycle
or more.
Um, the second slide, um,
You'll see is kind of the range
from 21 through 24 and how, how
it's increased, um.
A little bit each year, um, each
year that we've had
appropriations.
So I just want to kind of talk
about some accomplishments real
quick before we get into the
request, um, uh.
As I stated, I'm the new
division director for the
infrastructure division, and so
that um that was passed in House
Bill 232 last session. And so we
have a new infrastructure
planning and development
division that were, that were
standing up um beginning July
1st, so we've, we've come a long
way, we've, you know, there's
only, um, it's only been 3
months in and we've, we've, um,
I think we have 8 employees now,
um, within the division, um,
which is a lot in a little bit
of time and so we're still
standing that up, we're still
going through the, the process
of
developing processes and
procedures, um, and making sure
that, uh, you know, we have
everything in place to be
successful division um into the
future. Um, this division, you
know, consists of a planning and
policy bureau. Um, I also have
my planning policy bureau chief
here today, Scott Wright, um,
the capital funding and
Navigation Bureau. Um, the
bureau chief is Hayley, um, and
we have our Federal grants
Bureau, um, who, um, also we
have two employees in the
Federal grants Bureau who are
not here today, but um.
That we have those too, and then
we also have other employees,
which are the two ombudsmen
underneath Haley and the
navigation bureau, which is
Michael Gilmore and Jason
Quintana, and then, um, we have
Ethan Branch as well as a
navigation coordinator, and then
under Scott right now we have
Mary Anne. Um, so we'll continue
to set this up and get things
going. Um, that's one of the
things that we have going on
this year within our within our
agency setting up this new
division.
Um, we, this new division is
also administering the New
Mexico match fund program. Um,
last year we received $75
million for this match fund
program, um, we're excited to
state that as of today, um, we
have allocated about 57.8
million of the 62.5 million that
was set aside for the match fund
itself. Um, there are other
components of this match fund,
um, one of them is federal
compliance offset grants, and
the project implementation
grant, um, the federal
compliance offset grant is also.
Uh, fully expended at $3 million
so, um, really, um, you know,
only about 5 million left in the
match fund and then another 7.5
million in the project
implementation grant, which
hopefully that funding will
start to flow soon, um, that,
that funding doesn't flow or
cannot flow until the federal
awards are made and until they
receive the match fund. Um, so
that's why there's a little bit
delay there, but um we're.
We're gonna start pushing those
uh moving forward, and those
help provide the technical
assistance for those federal
grants, so I'm sure we'll get
lots of applications.
Um, the next one is the local
government emergency fund
statewide. Um, as you'll see,
this is going to be part of our
request again this year. Uh,
last year we received $10,000
and so these funds were
available as of July 1st, and
we've already awarded a total of
$4.2 million. Um, we've
developed a policy for this, um,
we wanted to ensure that not
anyone was coming to our office
for emergency funds. We wanted
to make sure that these were two
emergencies, so we developed a
policy and within that policy,
there's different guidelines and
stipulations. The primary one.
Being that a state of a state of
emergency has to be declared
either by the governor or by the
city or county itself. And so in
order for them to receive those
funds, they have to have that
emergency declaration.
Um, and so, you know, almost 4.3
million out of that 10 has been
has been awarded and so we we're
gonna come back, um, and I'll
get to the actual ask here in a
minute, but we'll have more
funding requests for that.
Um,
We've also received some funding
for capital planning and project
management system. Um, we
received $2 million last, last
fiscal year, 1 million from, I
think it was the C2 funds and
the other one was from Capital.
Um, we've already started the
process of developing some of
the, the framework for the
system. Um, we've started
developing the ICIP piece of the
system. Um, this is probably
the, the very first component of
the system as, as we all know
from this process that the ICIP
is the very first piece that
makes all the funding flow so
um.
was hoping to have that stood up
and, and that system ready to
go. Um, I think the timeline is
around December, so we'll, we'll
hopefully we can shoot and keep
that timeline, um, but we really
needed to be developed before
the ICIP system opens up again
next year, probably in the March
time frame, so sometime between
December and March is what we're
looking at.
Um, we've also started, um, a
grant tracking notice of
obligation and pay request
system for the local government
division. Um, that one also has
a timeline of about December of
this year to have that tracking
system in place. So, um, as the
local government division tries
that out and and hopefully
perfects it, um, we're gonna
hopefully extend that to other
agencies and other um other,
yeah, other state agencies who
can potentially use that
tracking system as well, um,
especially those who use grant
agreements, um, and who have
like, you know, grant agreements
with entities.
Another local governing bodies.
Um, this is another one where we
are coming back, um, this year
for some additional funding to
continue to develop that system.
Um, I did, I did, um, also email
the committee a presentation on
that which I can go over after
after this slide presentation if
we need to.
Um, another one is the City
Parks Improvements Fund, um, we
received $7.5 million this last
year. Um, that was funded by the
governor's pot of money or city
park improvements and so um
we're administering that. That
was one of our application based
um programs that we're looking
at and um the, the application
cycle closed at the end of
August and we are really close
to making those awards, um,
trying to award, I think as many
as many counties as possible
with as little funding as
possible. Um, we received, I
think over 50 $50 million in
requests.
And only had 7.5 million.
So it's those are, those are the
the the times that are tough
whenever we're trying to, you
know, um.
And to get funding to everyone
and we don't have enough
funding. And then I think the
last one is the school kitchen
infrastructure improvements
program. We received $20 million
in 2023. Um, all of that funding
has been um awarded and
allocated, um, awards were made
to 87 applicants. Um, so at
school districts and charter
schools um combined, um, and
those funds will be distributed
on a reimbursement basis and
that we've already started
seeing some expenditures, um,
the slide in your presentation
is a little bit outdated. I
think it was a couple months
old, but I'm, I'm.
We've obligated at least 1.75
million and expanded 620,000,
um, but I think that's gone up
since then.
And we were able to fund, again,
this is one of those where we
received lots of applications
and I think there's only 5
counties that we were not able
to get funds to, so.
Um, again, we were trying to do
something similar to the parks,
but it's, it's hard without the,
the, the funding that we need.
So, um,
I'll go into our actual ICIP
requests now. Um, so our number
one priority um is the Mora
County Courthouse completion.
And so, um, we're requesting
$500. Um, they, they need, um,
at least $11 million dollars to
complete this project. Um, it's
the plan, design, construct,
renovate, improve equipment
furnish the courthouse facility.
Um, so this is including
renovations within the facility
and landscaping, paving, curve
curbing drainage outside of the
facility as well. Um, the
secretary and I were able to
visit that complex, um, earlier
in the summer and um, you know,
as, as everyone probably knows
who has been following this
project.
There's, there's lots of empty
space in the facility. Um,
there's lots of space that has
been filled and utilized, which
is great. Um, I think the
sheriff's office um has some of
the space. Magistrate court is
in there as well, um, but the,
the remaining, the remainder of
the space needs to be filled in
with the district court
facility, um, as well as some
county office space that's
needed. And so that's the number
one priority for this for this
um agency this year is to try to
finish that project, um, like I
said, our request is 50, um, as
I do have some.
some folks here from Water
County who who can come up and
speak to this a little bit
better too. Um, that request
might go up a little bit. Um,
we're trying to find the exact
amount that we need. There's
different things that need to be
done within that facility, um.
That facility, like I said,
houses the sheriff's department,
um, but it also, I think they're
trying to find some room for
some Homeland Security or
emergency management personnel.
They have some of their county
offices, um, as some of you
might be aware, they were in
portable buildings prior to
this, and so those portables
caught fire multiple times, and
so now they've moved out of
those into other locations
throughout the county and so
they need to get that staffing
into this facility as well. So
this is really a situation where
we need to really finish this
project um and get this, get
this one.
And so, um, I think what I'll do
is I'll go through the 5 and
then I'll have them come back up
and speak more to this project.
Um, the number 2 request is the
Bataan Building Historic
Restoration. Um, we received
$500.
And FY 26.
Oh sorry, this request is for
$500 for this year. We received
$10 million last year, uh, $5
million from the CBRF funds and
5 million from the general fund.
Um, we are starting to move
forward with this project. We're
trying to um get some, we're
trying to get the historic
pieces of it done, um, as
everyone knows this is a
historic building, so trying to
finalize all of that and see um
what needs to be done and what
can be done to this, to this
facility, um, I think the, the
piece that we're focusing on is
the was known as the red room,
the old Senate chambers, and so.
Um, there have been leaks in
there, um, falling tiles from,
from the, from the ceiling, and
so the first piece of it is
obviously getting the roof
fixed. So GSD is working on that
right now and so, um, once the,
the roof is completed, and I
believe and Anna can correct me
if I'm wrong, parts of it are
gonna be done by the end of this
calendar year, and I think
they're going to start up again
right after the winter and and
finish some of it in the spring
to summertime. And so we're
looking at um, you know, trying
to move forward with the, with
the design and development of
this project for the Red room,
hopefully within the next
6 months and then start
construction sometime maybe in
the summertime next year. Um,
and again, that's only a piece
of this, of this project.
There's um there's windows that
need to be, um, as anyone who's
in that building um knows you,
you can't open your window at
all, um, and maybe that's for
security purposes, but I know um
a lot of them were painted shut,
so these windows are older and,
and they need to be upgraded to
energy efficient windows and so
we'll see if that can be done
with some of this funding again,
um, preserving the historic
nature of
The facility as well. Um, and
there's also lots of other, um,
interior renovations such as
flooring, um, trying to
potentially restore the old
flooring of the of the facility,
um, pulling up flooring, seeing
what it looks like underneath
there and and trying to make it
look as close to possible as
possible as what it looked like
before, um, when it was the the
old capital, so, um, again, so
our request is just $5000 this
year, um, knowing that, you
know, we're we're still in the
process of trying to spend that
$1000.
The 3 priority on ours is the
Albuquerque office building and
so we did hear some requests
earlier to, um, actually I think
it was yesterday on some
agencies that are also looking
for space in the Albuquerque
area. And so as I, as I made the
statement during their
presentation, um, I think, you
know, having a, a, a building in
the Albuquerque area, I think
helps um with employment, um,
trying to find employees that
that we probably aren't getting
from the Albuquerque area
because they don't want to drive
all the way up to Santa Fe. Um,
That's one piece of it and for
those employees who are already
driving up to Santa Fe, um,
trying to find a place where,
where they could either either
work full time from Albuquerque
or even potentially work um our
time from Albuquerque and the
rest in Santa Fe. So, um, open
up, you know, opening to any of
those possibilities, but I
think, um, as, as, as we're
finding out, there's more and
more agencies who are wanting
space in the Albuquerque area
and so I think, um, I know Anna
is gonna talk more to this, um,
in her presentation, but there
is a master plan for the album.
area that she is developing and
so we'll see what comes from
that master plan and hopefully
um this will be either a start
to getting a building or if
there's buildings um that are
available for this, for this
amount, um, you know, using
this, this $20 million or in
combination with some of the
others like environment I think
requested some funding and some
other agencies. So, um, that is
our number 3 request.
Our number 4 priority um is the
emergency capital statewide. Um,
we're requesting another $20
million this year, as I stated,
we've already started expanding
the $10,000 from last year and
we're, we're coming to find and
I think we've always known that,
uh, you know, sometimes there's
emergency situations that arise
each year and so, um, if it's
not fires, it's some, it's water
systems, right, so, um, trying
to make sure to manage those
crises that come up every year
has been difficult, um, the
state board of Finance.
Has some funding available
through an application program,
um, and so I think we're just
trying to help um ease some of
those concerns of these local
governments, um, you know, while
they're waiting for the next
session to start. Um, they just
can't wait till the next session
sometimes and they need um some
emergency funding to to get some
some stuff done um to make sure
that it's not a crisis. So, um.
So we're requesting the $20
million as our number.
And the last one, the number 5,
is the capital planning and
project management system.
Um,
I know, um, I know we, we asked
the, the other agencies these
questions, so I'm gonna go ahead
and just and answer this one
upfront. Um, why is this the
number 5 and why isn't this a
higher priority, um, you know,
we did receive some funding
already and I think the funding
that we did receive is a good
start to getting the system
going and so, um, I think some
of the other needs that we have
in front of this one, are more
urgent and so I think we, you
know, we want to to get as much
funding as we can to continue
the project, but at the same
time, realizing that
Um, there are other emergency
and urgent needs in front of it.
So, um,
And we want to keep this on
here. We want the $1000. I think
we're going to need the $1000
when it's all said and done. Um,
this project, um, although we've
started moving pretty quickly on
it, um, can take a couple of
years to do and so we're not
gonna probably know the full
extent and range of the funding
that we're gonna need, um,
until, you know, some of these
modules in the system are
developed, um, like I said, I
can go into the, the actual
presentation that I forwarded to
the committee, um, but you'll
see the different modules that
we have and that we've started
already. There's other modules
that
We have planned for the future,
um, and these modules will help,
um, not just DFA but local
governments, um other state
agencies, constituents,
legislators, um, anyone who's
wanting to find information on a
capital project, we'll be able
to in real time, um, use this
system and go in there and see
and track the project. And so,
um, again, it's, it's a high
priority, um, but the reason why
it's our number 5 and not our
number 1 is because I think we
did receive some funding and and
have enough funding to begin.
Um, but we will need more
funding.
In the future.
Um, and that concludes my
presentation that I um.
That you all have in front of
you. Again, um, I, I don't think
I want to go over the full um
presentation from, um, that I
have for the tracking system,
but it's, it's there if you guys
have any questions on that or on
some further information, um, I
can to answer questions.
So before I go to questions, I'd
like to invite anyone from Mora
County um up here to kind of
talk a little bit more about um
that project and kind of what
we're looking at and what
they're looking at doing with
that project, um, before you ask
questions because you're
probably gonna ask those
questions anyway.
So I don't know if um
Good afternoon, honorable
members of the committee. My
name is Ernestina Cruz. I'm the
county attorney for Mora County.
I'm joined today by the full
commission comprised of
Chairmanman George Trujillo had
asked you raise your hand.
Vice chair John Trujillo and
Commissioner Veronica Cerna.
In addition, we have the interim
county manager, Joseph Weaths in
attendance.
Earlier, Chief Justice Dave
Thompson was in the room and
wanted to express his
Strong support.
In addition to that, I
understand that some of the
judges in the 4th Judicial
District court are participating
in the webcast.
They could not attend in person
because of uh.
Some issues with their docket,
but they of course likewise are
very supportive of the work that
needs to be done at the Mora
County Courthouse complex. With
that being said, I want to
provide you with a broad
overview regarding um how all of
this came to fruition, of
course, as you well know, this
building has been um a building
that has uh needed some.
Work in order to bring it to
completion.
And uh last year around this
time Mora County learned about
the match fund program through
the administrative office of
this courts. It submitted an
application and thankfully was
designated as the top applicant.
The courthouse at that point in
time was going to have a square
footage of approximately 110,000
square feet.
After some additional reflection
on the um.
Square footage of the courthouse
has been reduced to
approximately 504 plans have
been finalized and in addition
to that they've been
administrative office of the
courts. With that being said,
um, what you have before you now
is a summary of to bring the
complex to completion.
On the very top of the um
documents that you have titled
County Court's Complex Work in
need of funding, you see the
district courthouse and again
this is going to be a 5800
square foot courthouse. It's a
modern courthouse that's going
to have a hearing room in
addition to that, it'll have
space in order to facilitate
mediations because now very
there's many uh matters that end
up getting resolved by way of
alternative dispute resolution,
so it's a modern.
The total amount of the project
is.
For the fifty-fifty match
through AOC. We would like to be
able to hear some issues with
regard to the match funds and
the reason for that, if you look
at the second page that's in
front of you.
That's titled funded projects.
Number one is phase one mora
administrative offices first
floor.
The county currently has
approximately 4 points for
score. Some of those funds
ostensibly could be reallocated
for the match fund for the
district court, but that would
result in as well. So I think
there are things that can
certainly be done in order to
ensure $400 match for the
courthouse, but it ends up
resulting in, so I wanted to
make a note of that for your
reference.
In addition to the district
court that's going to be built
on the 2nd floor of the southern
portion of the complex. There
are administrative offices that
need to be completed and some um
additional unfinished spaces in
the complex, the total amount
that needs to be allocated for
that work is approximately um.
Mora County certain strong
support of this thank you for
visiting with the county as well
as the secretary and at this
point I'll turn things over to
Wayne Lloyd and Associates so
they can.
Thank you. Thank you very much
for hearing us, um, I'm uh Shev
Mirando from Lloyd and
Associates and uh the principal
of Loy and Associate.
and my, my things as well. We've
been uh working with Maura on
this property.
Um, for about 2 years now, we
were, um, hired.
First and foremost.
Most as a mandate to get the
folks out of these uh temporary
offices that this was before the
fires has happened, but they
knew that this was.
Not a good situation and so that
was really.
Our first
Priority, um, but as soon as,
you know, we were involved in
the site, we saw that.
You know, we knew about the
project generally, but we didn't
realize how many um financial
needs were, were there, uh, so,
you know, in the span of the
last two years, there's 4
projects on that site that have
been effectively funded and are
going out for bid.
So that's the uh EMS that's
located on this site for the
courthouse as well, um.
Uh, creating a town plaza in
front of uh the.
The court complex.
And um.
And also, um, the uh veterans
memorial.
Um, the, the veterans memorial
is also in the front of the town
plaza.
Um, the 4th project is that
phase one, which is the the.
People in the uh portables and
and, um, unfortunately because
of.
It has become extremely
difficult to match anything else
while relocating.
Uh
It, it definitely, um, the.
You know, the, the money needed
from the match.
Uh, is certainly important in
terms of creating the district
court space, um, the rest of the
money that you.
See in that spreadsheet that
amounts to about 8.5 million.
is finishing the rest of the
empty space that's in there.
Um, are
The issue that we see in funding
this is is is particularly the
location in Mora. It's been very
hard to get.
Competitive bidding.
And we find that the only way to
do that.
In a method that does not have
the county spending significant
funds.
Per diem essentially putting up
contractors.
Stay through construction is to
be able to have enough money
secured that we either do this
in 2.
Projects or a a set of projects
that we're able to advertise
consecutively.
And that way we can actually
show the competitive market.
Look, you're, you're not just
applying for a chance at this
project.
And um so it's, it's.
That is certainly the main
financial reason why, um.
Uh
Basing this just to the courts
and then completing the rest of
the building later, we don't
feel as uh
Um, the other is just simply
that they, um, they do need the
space.
Um, right now they are
essentially operating.
Um,
The other portions of money is
there. Some of it does relate to
the original construction having
issues, um, the, the building
was
Never actually uh waterproofed
and an effective manner of their
they're actually things like
that.
So
What
What we
Endeavored um to do with um the
the county commission, um.
was to um.
To make sure we found everything
that signal building.
And really
So, um, that, that concludes the
presentation, so with that we
stand for question.
OK, thank you all for your
presentation. Let's go to
questions from the committee.
Let's start on, right? Uh, thank
you so much for the
presentation.
So, um, I wanna start uh by
commending Wesley and um uh the
entire team has.
You were building it, so you're
walking over and building it,
and I just wanna commend you and
your staff, um, just a couple
questions I'll start with the
Maura since um since you.
at the podium.
So what is your role in
supporting Maura?
Yes, that's correct. OK.
So and you.
roughly.
And have you completed?
Where are you at in design?
So the um there's 4 projects
that are.
Ready to bid and um.
Going through, I believe there
and and then the court um has a.
Essentially, um.
You know, more invested to have
that layout, the cost
effectively and if we receive
the money, then we, it is an
effort, but. So you're designed
for.
Because you have 100 others are.
Other than the wreck the wreck
grant in this project.
Um, so just looking at the
district court and then the
phase two of Maura, would you
consider these to be new
construction or remodel?
Yeah, of an interesting
distinction.
Um,
Most of
So the court and the the
offices, wouldn't call them
remodels, they're they're.
You might call them tenant,
we're not doing a lot of
demolition. We have a a shell
there that doesn't present a lot
to.
Us out. So it's not a renovation
and fitted out shell that we're
um, I would say the only
portion, uh, not so much what
you're reviewing what's our.
That's a new building that's um
on the site.
And then the the recreational
site.
Um
But everything in the court, I
would consider a.
And, and just a fitting out of
the shelve that.
cost per square foot when you
look at the district courthouse
versus the more admin offices.
Um, the district courthouse is
double the admin.
Sure.
Absolutely, yeah.
Yeah, um,
I, there's really a layering of
reasons, um.
I, I
A lot of it is some of those
admin offices.
have already been or I should
say a complete in some cases.
They just ran out of money to
supply from really the last.
20%
And in other cases, it's more
like.
But that um that piece of the
lift is much less.
And the space um where the
courts are going.
Totally bare.
From a programmatic standpoint
really needs to be on the 2nd
floor.
Yeah, um.
What Wayne's reminding me, we,
we, so we did bid, um.
One set of work already and uh
um before our, well, right when
our involvement started.
The recreation memorial was bid.
And that's when we were first a
bit shocked at per square foot.
And um we spoke to a lot of
contractors that bid and didn't
bid.
And we got a handle on what it.
It was per diem cost. We're
looking at a 20 and most of
these projects that.
To essentially or not all of
their personnel, but a portion
of them.
It's a significant increase.
So we
Have we don't have not built in
that 20% funded in this way,
they would not, we still have
for DMA.
I'll, I'll, um, less
conservative number, it's more
like.
Uh, that being said, uh, the
other reason for the difference,
uh, courts based their
employees, they didn't have.
You know, we're talking about
very simple office spaces.
Sports is a little bit harder.
There's a lot more standards we
have to meet.
And that alone.
So, you know, we're we're
talking about a space in terms
of finished communication.
Um, and security that would be
similar to what we're in.
Uh, for some of those spaces and
those more offices are um.
You know, we're certainly not
proposing something that we
don't feel would look good, we
tried to make it economical.
So I know you about your are is
part of your contract to the
project to help support or
ensuring that costs are
controlled.
Yes, absolutely, we, we have
complete services contract to do
a construction. Maura has in the
past and to do.
Uh, their own, uh, inspections
through can, so they've they've
certainly taken precautions.
And I think some of that is
honestly learned effort. Um,
thank you, and then, um, last
question, when you say going out
to bed, are you using um like or
are you doing, uh, or a good
question is both uh one is uh
competitive to others I believe
are gonna be.
Um, but, um, it hasn't been
through. I don't.
Those projects haven't been
built, how they really get bid,
but.
The two that are, one would be
competitive and one. if you do
use a statewide price agreement.
I didn't see the 20.
So
I, I hear you, yeah, um.
Yeah, well, and it's true,
unfortunately.
Where we saw the 20%, I, I.
Um, they had
Uh
We were using uh CES, you know,
and it has a a.
Uh, defined per diem.
And
They were forthcoming with me
that at least one contractor
that they had uh.
Certainly, the price per square
foot that we got from all three
was
And.
So, um, thank you for the
clarification, so um just uh uh
CES contracts, um, so there are
other tools out there.
Um, there's other statewide
price agreements you might want
to look at all your options
might not be spelled out in CES
contracts, but under the state.
Thank you.
Right, I followed the wrong way.
Um, kind of following up on
Anna's questions.
You know, I think both for phase
one and for the district court.
You're looking at 500 and then
$800 per square foot for tenant
improvement.
I do understand the cost of
doing construction of the state,
but that's.
Quite high.
Um,
So what is driving that and then
in the latter case.
It looks like maybe it doesn't
include the HVAC.
Um,
So yeah, can you tell us a
little bit more about why those
costs are.
Yeah.
Certainly, uh, we, we, you know,
we do projects at times as well,
so we, we.
You feel like we have some kind
of handle.
Um we were to do a tenant
improvement. Um.
Um,
Is it just the per diems, um, I
don't believe it is a BMs on top
of whatever percentages.
That's embedding.
Um, it's entirely possible that
dominoes could look, but this is
reflective.
How many projects
Sometimes
Got
Never had a period in life.
escalation the hardest questions
we have to answer.
Based on recent bids.
This is where we see
So
We've just never seen a period.
Me at that price.
Right.
Um, OK, I think, you know, one
thing.
We've seen cost increases, of
course, on all sorts of public
projects and then dramatic. We
have also seen that, um, some
entities are able to control
them better than others, and in
some cases it's a matter of, you
know, being a tough customer and
trying, and I don't say that to
suggest you're not trying, um,
just to encourage.
Um, everyone to keep trying and
possibly, you know, if, if this
is to be funded through the
statewide framework that um.
DFA kind of have a substantial
role in being involved in this
as it goes through and you know,
being able to draw on the
expertise we have within state
government on.
Um,
Doing this well, um.
You know, it's increasingly
problematic as we keep saying
yes to us.
And some of it we can't control,
obviously, um.
But
Really to be able to continue to
accomplish what we need for the
state. We need to try to control
it more so.
Thank you.
Um,
My other question is, is this
going to also be submitted as a
request for legislative capital
outlet or for consideration by
the governor for sure.
Yes, Miss Carslow my it's
lobbyist for.
funding assistance um circling
back to your earlier question
regarding the project itself, I
really quickly wanted to speak
to something.
Mr. Moranz Mora County has had
an own past, that contract last
year, it wasn't renewed for the
sole reason that the county was
not.
Actively, but there has been
dialogue with the present back
involved in this process now
that we know that these projects
are going to be put out to those
safeguards are at places very
seriously as great, um, and I'm
glad to hear you're submitting
it to the governor as well, and
I would just, um, encourage you
to, well, I could think to
submit it to the governor'll
have to submit it for the
legislature.
For the discretionary funds too
and.
Um, would encourage you to do
that, so there's multiple
options, um.
Let's see, um.
This is just a request, um.
That if you guys could send us
kind of the final plans for.
The various phases we've seen a
couple different nice to see
where it's at now and.
Um, functionally.
Um, and then my last question
is, um.
Does, has the county kind of
looked at, um, operations and
maintenance once.
All of this is complete and um.
You kind of have a plan for that
and um feel like you have
resources or sufficient to do
it.
Sure, so I attend all of the
county commission to commit to X
today, can we sustain it?
Down the road.
So there certainly is a topic
for conversation as an example,
um, a recent hire um that took
place in the past year relates
to a facilities manager to
ensure that the county is
actively.
of the building
So that you don't have to go and
do significant repairs at a
later date, so there is a lot of
change that's happening at the
count, and I think in that
regard, the county will steadily
develop a plan as certainly.
Um, to your earlier question
related to the plans.
We can certainly get the plans
for the courthouse to you to be
really excited to see what that
courthouse is gonna look like.
There has been different
iterations of plans as the
county's been receiving money
initially it was thought maybe
the recreation grant funding
could be used in the building
itself and then actually need
that space for um offices, so
the rec facility is going
current portables are.
Set up those plans can certainly
circulated as well. um Sheb and
Wayne are ready to get out to
the county to start.
Great, thank you. um, and just
one more comment on this, I
think.
Um, it could be a little
problematic for the state to
provide the matching, um, so
maybe that's just something we
need to have additional
conversation about um.
You know, there's
I understand this is like a
unique project, but there's also
like bigger implication, um, so
anyway, Wesley and I speak to
that because I did have an
opportunity to visit with Wesley
about that before you commenced
your eating today.
Um, currently there are some.
F
that are dedicated to the first
that could be allocated, creates
a gap, however, with regard to
there are conversations that can
be had so as to ensure that the
county is meeting its obligation
to provide the match on the AC
project involving the district
court. It just requires a little
bit more conversation internally
here as their spokesperson
today, but those are decisions
that I think you made.
Couple of weeks and we report
back to us.
Billingsley regarding the
progress that the county. I do
agree that the county committed
to come up with 50% for that
match fund and in terms of its
commitment and certainly because
of the optic as it relates to
the entire state, the count the
county. OK, thank you for that
response. Um, Mr. Chair, I have
a couple of questions for
Wesley, but I don't know if you
wanna finish up with more of
anyone else's question. OK,
anybody else have questions
specifically about?
OK, go ahead.
Thanks, thank you, thank you.
Um,
Wesley on the system, um.
Did you guys submit this as a C2
request too. I know we funded
it.
Not that way last year, but
should we start funding it
there? Um.
Mr. Chair Kelly, um.
We did not submit this as a C2
request, um, as we did not
submit it as a CT request last
year. Um, however, some of it
was funded out of C2 last year.
Um.
The C2, C2 process just the PCC
creates um, I think a delay in
some of what we're trying to do
with this system and so I, I
think, you know, from a DFA
perspective, I think we prefer
not to have to worry about that.
However, um, since we did
receive C2 funding, um, we are
looking at going to um the PCC
probably within the next few
months. Um, hopefully if
everything aligns right before
the session. Um, again, I guess
if we do that then.
Um, if you chose to fund another
1 million out of the C2, we
would already have hopefully
received approval um from them
so we wouldn't have to
necessarily go back.
Um
But I think, you know, from, and
I and I understand the
importance of of the PCC and and
them monitoring, um, you know,
these systems and computer IT
systems, um, I just think the
the reporting aspect of it, um,
just it could be um.
I say difficult just um it it's.
I think we would prefer to not
have to go through that process,
but.
OK, um, and, you know, as you
heard from our chair last year,
he wanted to know if you could.
You know, how much is it really
gonna cost if we just give you
the money now, you get it
quicker, so, you know, as you
understanding of the costs and.
The answers to that question
evolve just keep us.
Um, Mr. Chali, um, that's one of
my same questions to to the to
the vendor that we're that we're
currently using, which is um RTS
real-time solutions. Um, I
think, you know, this is.
There's lots of different pieces
and moving pieces to the system,
um, as we continue to meet with
the vendor to go over different
options on like the current
module, for instance, I'll just
kind of give you an idea about
the ICIP module. um, when we
started talking about that
module, um, some, some items
came up about, you know, um,
getting.
Getting those those projects,
those ICIP projects into a
capital outlay request form.
Uh, which would be another
module, which would cost more
money, um, and then, you know,
after the projects um are in the
ICIP system, um, having other
sources of funding navigation,
uh, which would be another
module, um, and another piece of
the ICIP and so, you know,
outside of that, there's still,
um, you know, possibly uh an EO
compliance module that we could
create, um, and so I think as we
continue talking through the
system, more and more things
come up, so, um, I agree with
you, I'd love to get a total
cost.
On that, um, but it, it, it is,
it is difficult, I think, you
know, we'll continue to work
with with the vendor to try to
figure that out, um, and if we
do get something, we'll let you
know, just knowing that
enhancements could still come in
the future, um, as we continue
to use the system, um, because I
think even as the members use
the system, I'm sure that they
will also have other things that
they would like to see out of
the system, which could also
continue to increase that cost.
Yeah, and I appreciate you, you
know, asking, I know you're good
at that, so, um, just, you know,
know this is a priority for us
too, and I think it's
foundational to the.
Success division.
Um, on the emergency capital,
um, I guess, can you circulate
to us, um, a list of the awards
you've made from this so far?
Yes, I can definitely get you. I
think we were tracking them
through a spreadsheet, um,
obviously there's been 3 so far,
which is um 2 for Ruidoso, um,
and actually one of them is
Rudoso Downs, um, they are, if
you, if you've gone to the area
of Ridoso Downs, the the whole
track has been kind of torn
apart because of the flooding
and so I'm more the the Lincoln
County and Rudos are trying to
help with their wastewater
pieces of that system, and so,
um, part of it was for that part
of it. They also have other
wastewater needs within um.
The village limits itself and so
I was 1.5 and I think 2.2
million, and then the other
600,000 was for a water system.
I see. Um, but we'll get you as
we continue um to expand out of
that, um, and then, uh, my last
thing, this is, I guess more of
a comment, um, and maybe we can
talk about it more with Hanna's
request, but.
Um, you know, I think baton.
The Albuquerque stuff and the
EOB feel to me like things that
all.
Relate to each other.
And that we sort of like need to
decide what's going on with all
of them before before we provide
too much additional funding to
any one of them.
Um,
So, you know, I, I guess on
Albuquerque in particular, it's
kind of like um.
The same thing where it feels
like it'd be good if we did the
plan before we funded the
facilities.
Um, and so maybe this is a next
year thing.
Um,
And then
You know, it, it's sort of.
Baton and the EOB both I feel
like.
We kind of need to know what's
gonna happen with the EOB.
Before we know what to do with
the time and that it also feels
like.
We need
You know, sort of the next, the
next decision is like, well,
what, what is the purpose ofan?
What does it become?
Um, and it feels like that.
Will influence.
Um, the renovations, at least to
some extent, I'm sure there are
things we can.
Do now regardless, um, so that's
all.
Um
And Mr. Chair, Kelly just to
speak to that a little bit, I
think, um, at least from the DFA
perspective, and I think as we
continue to work with GSD and
and even cultural affairs on
this, um, you'll see that a lot
of our request isn't really to
repurpose space for our um for
our divisions, it's more of
making sure that, um, the
flooring looks, you know, like
it used to look, um, the
staircases are, you know, maybe
modernized there or look or
looking better than they are
now. It's really doesn't have
any.
to do with the, the, the
divisions themselves and, and
that spacing it's more of just
the the interior look of of the
facility, um, just to kind of, I
guess, in other words, bring it
back to its glory days.
OK, uh, thanks, uh, Callie kind
of echoed my uh curiosity about
how the
um in that, you know, there
might be somewhat
self-interested since I worked
at the time, uh, and then also,
um, with regards to like the
Albuquerque office building, I
know uh in planning, but like is
there any ideas for like sites
or anything or is it just still
kind of like
Uh, Mr. Chair, um.
I think
I've spoken with Anna about
this, um, I think there are
some, some spaces already
available um to be able to be
utilized um in the Albuquerque
area, so that's kind of where we
came up with the 20 million
rough estimate, obviously, um.
But yes, I think, you know, as
the as the master plan continues
to be developed, um, who knows
if the, if the $20 million will
be enough for a bigger facility
if we're wanting all agencies
there, um, so I think, um, you
know, Callie kind of said the
best master plan does need to
come first, um, I think we
wanted to start the conversation
from at least.
EFA's, you know, perspective,
um, and to kind of give, you
know, GSD and other agencies
that same support of area office
space that's needed in
Albuquerque, um, you know, not
only to get rid of these space,
but to to try to get that, um,
that other pool of applicants
to, to get some some better
applicants, um, you know, that,
that are, that are not willing
to to travel up to Santa Fe, um,
I think.
I know, I know you probably have
noticed too from trying to um
fill positions that it's the,
the applicant pool has gone down
a lot and we used to receive 20
plus applicants per position and
now you're lucky to receive 5
and maybe 1 or 2 of them will
actually qualify and get
certified. So we're trying to
close that gap and I think, you
know, um making Albuquerque
available, um, would probably
help.
Great. Thank you, Wesley. Thank
you, everyone. I think we are
good.
Thank you.
Go on to the general services
department. I'll turn the chair
back over to Mr. Billingley.
So I was gonna ask Anna to be
the chair, but then I thought
that would be really weird, so
um.
For your.
I was gonna say I feel like you,
Wesley.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, good
afternoon, uh, committee, thank
you for the opportunity to
present to you on the General
Services Department's Lotley
requests.
Um, first I wanna start by
saying thank you to each and
every one of you.
Um, we, I think, have a, a great
partnership between all of our
agencies and I think it has
proven in different um.
Projects that we have, the
different initiatives to include
DFAs, capital outlay,
infrastructure committee, some
of the initiatives that, uh, we
have in GST. All of your
support.
So just want to say thank you
very much.
So, um, I wanna start on page 2
and when I go through this
slide, this basically keep this
in mind as we go through each of
our, uh, different, um.
Requests
So our number one focus for GST
is always maximizing efficiency,
and we talk about that, it
bleeds into all areas of
everything that we do.
Co-locating agencies, um,
wherever it makes sense we're
either renegotiating leases or
moving agencies from lease space
to a state space.
We are looking at remodeling and
renovating existing facilities.
We continue to evaluate always
our facilities and our assets
and always maximizing our
efficiencies in all of our
state-owned buildings.
As such, um, it has been been
mentioned throughout these last
few days.
Um, some of the initiatives that
we currently have to include our
master plan in Santa Santa Fe
and in Albuquerque.
Um, one of the requests that we
have, which is the, uh,
executive office building came
about as a result of funding
from this, um, uh, committee for
a master plan money for Santa
Fe.
As a result of that, that's
where the executive Office
building idea was born.
And through um the process of uh
standing that initiative up
going through the process of um
uh all the requirements for, uh,
completing that project.
Um, it's going to include a
renovating existing facilities
and um co-locating, removing,
um, moving around agencies and
temporarily doing fixes to
agencies until we can renovate
the current buildings.
So, um,
To let you, um, just to kind of
inform you of some few things
that we have done, um, this
year, I just wanna uh highlight
a few things.
Um, and most of it is the team,
uh, at facilities management
division.
As you guys know, you are a part
of our monthly meetings that we
have in our agency DFLFC
collaboration meetings, but
we've also stood up what we are
calling agency collaboration
meetings that we meet with um
each of the different agencies
that we support every month.
Um, from that, uh, we look at
their capital projects, their
recommendations, their
appropriations.
And this year, what we've done
is we have stood up a bureau
called the Procurement Bureau.
And the need for that was based
on.
Um,
Construction, procurement is
difficult. It's hard, um, and
everything is born from our
opinion out of a construction
contract.
We have found that uh capital
projects are as weak or as
strong as your construction
contract.
So we have really focused this
year in standing up our
procurement bureau. So we have a
procurement bureau that oversees
everything from ITBs, RFPs, sole
sources, quotes, and uh
construction contracts all the
way through contract
administration.
From that, um.
standing that bureau up just
this month alone, we have saved
$1000 in just reviewing quotes
and really closely looking at
the construction projects and
procurements um that we received
from uh contractors, so I know
that we talked a little bit
about some of the costs, um, of
construction costs.
So for instance, um.
Per diem. That that was a huge,
huge problem and it is a huge
problem for us, but in looking
very closely at the per diem
costs we have found with just
one contractor and one quote,
I'll just um give you an example
where a contract was trying to
save us, uh, trying to, uh.
Um,
Trying to uh put in costs for a
$100,000 project, like $60,000
in per diem.
So, but we push back on those,
we hold them accountable, hold
them to the statewide price
agreement if we're using that or
to the per diem rates of the
state.
And that is really being driven
through our procurement bureau,
which we, um, I give a lot of
credit to.
Um, the other bureau that we
have is that we have stood up
and separated from the
procurement Bureau is our.
Projects administrative, um.
They're called, uh, they are the
administrative contract
administrative and Budget
bureau.
So what they do with their
responsibility is working with
the agency and the project
manager in setting up initial
project budgets.
We also ensure that we're
watching.
Through the project budget
process and the contracts, um,
change orders, costs, cost
overruns. We're talking to
contractors and to our project
managers when we start seeing
that we're butting up against,
um, maybe POs and a contract uh
terms, we start having these
conversations with our
contractors and our project
managers so we can start looking
at the budget as a um pay
applications are coming in, so
we can make sure that the pay
application that's being uh
submitted is in line.
With where the project is as far
as percentage wise, so we have.
Really put a very strong focus
this year in each of those
bureaus and been able to
separate both of those.
Um, the other is in the Capital
Projects Bureau itself, um,
which is our project managers,
which we have 13 project
managers, but also our team
lead, uh, Kevin Borrella, who,
um, just happened to was not
able to stay for this afternoon
and our capital project planning
manager, which is a new position
right behind me and um these two
positions were hand in hand with
the agencies when they receive
their appropriations from the
capital outlay and from the um
legislative process, once they
receive appropriate.
and their capital project
requests come in. They work hand
in hand with both the agency and
the project manager that we can
start planning the projects and
that is all done in our
collaboration meetings which
have been really successful and
I give a lot of um.
Credit to the team and to the
agencies that we've been working
with.
That's just kind of like a high
level on what we've done, um,
this year.
So moving into our request, uh,
on page 3, we have our statewide
construction and renovations,
that's $30 million. We have a
statewide emergencies and
unforeseen. That's $10,000. Our
executive office building that's
$100 million are statewide
facility condition assessments
that's $400 and um of course our
energy efficient vehicles,
that's $500.
So we'll start with our uh
statewide construction and
renovations, $30 million.
$30 million is a lot of money.
We have seen that over the last
few days there's been a lot of
requests from a lot of different
agencies. The difference between
us and all the other agencies
that come in is we support every
single agency. We would support
do it, we support DBS. We
support CYFD.
And um sometimes when uh their
projects either are not funded
or they receive, um, uh,
requests from either an
initiative from the governor's
office or from their cabinet
secretary or in a reactive state
based on whatever their
programmatic needs are.
Sometimes they don't have enough
for to fund their projects. So
what happens is a project would
either have to stop.
Or they can come to GSD and then
we can help support them on um
different projects they have.
One such project is um DPS, for
example.
Um, DPS, uh, needed a kitchen
hood replaced.
And uh the cost was 1,000,000.
It was unforeseen and it was a a
a a huge issue for DPS because
they did, it's a commercial hood
and.
Who would have thought that
something like that would cost
so much money. Well, they didn't
have the money in their
statewide, so we were able to
support them and helping them
with that, but we also don't
have money in the CBRF so we
weren't able to use CBRF funds
because I know that was gonna be
a question from you guys and why
didn't we use CBRF for that?
Um, so in that case, we had to
use our statewide.
We also have transformers that
are going out around the state.
One of those such transformers
was another one here, um, in
Santa Fe and I'll let you guys
know, um, this was specifically
for DFA. We had to uh send out
notifications that we had to,
um, shut down all of DFA, shut
down all of the East Campus and
the central campus to uh replace
a transformer. It was over $1000
and in that instance.
The reason we had to replace it
and the way we found out.
was um there was a situation
that happened here at the
Capitol.
And we are tied to the capital
as far as our uh infrastructure.
And when they had to bring down
the capital.
We were terrified that we were
not going to be able to bring
DFA back up.
The infrastructure was so old,
it's like as old as the
building.
And when they were doing it,
they were worried that the
actual hardware itself was gonna
break when they were trying to
um bring it back online, so
immediately knew.
OK, we better do something
because if this ever happened
again, um, it'd be catastrophic
for the entire state.
So things like that are um how
we use our capital
appropriations that we received
from this committee, things you
might ever not know, um, but we
just do in supporting all of our
agencies.
Um,
The other requests, if you look
to page 5 as part of our uh
capital outlay and our $30
million request.
we have seen a lot of movement
within the agencies, so there
are new uh agencies being stood
up, HC, the Healthcare
Authority, um, ECECDs was stood
up, um, we have agencies moving
in different buildings, so we're
going to have ECECD move into
the public
records building, which is the
public health uh public nurse
facility.
We have DFA who might be moving
into another facility.
So as such, um, over the years,
the signage in our facilities
has not been done in probably as
old as the buildings. So we have
a hodgepodge of signs all over
Santa Fe and all over the state.
So what we've done is if he
turns to page 6, is we have um
hired an architect. This has
been a project that has been 2
years in the making, and we are
doing a uh standardization of
our signage, so, um, in
standardizing our signage and
some of the other things that
we're able to standardize as far
as um uh paint colors of
bathroom, uh, specifications
we're able to realize cost
savings because we put out RFPs
for new construction or
renovation.
we can give signage packages we
can give statewide standards and
then the architect then doesn't
have to reinvent the wheel and
we can save some save on um A&E
designs because we've already
have the package already been
done, so, uh, any new
construction we can handle the
sinus package and they don't
have to design that piece of it,
so it's a cost savings for any
new construction, not only on
our uh science packages, but
also again on a bath.
standards on colors on stucco
colors and things of that
nature, so we will be doing an a
complete signage renovation for
all that we're gonna start in
Santa Fe and then we'll
eventually roll it out um to the
rest of us, um, and again, part
of the um additional requests on
page 7 are always our life
safety, our ADA, um, compliance
are deferred maintenance and um
any other unforeseen um.
Requests that we get.
So looking on page 8, we are
asking for $10,000 for
emergencies and unforeseen.
Usually in the past you have
seen us, um, combine both our
statewide requests and our
emergency requests just in one.
This year, uh, what we've done
is we have separated the request
and this is mostly coming out of
um things that we've seen from
the annex building into TRC.
And um the DBS uh cemeteries,
uh, where we have some, uh,
major mitigation issues that we
have going on there.
Um, if we had separated the two
requests, uh, last year, and
we've had the money this year to
help DBS. We've been able to
move forward with the mitigation
that is currently uh DBS.
So that is our emergency
request. So let's go on to page
number 9 and our uh executive
office building.
So, as I mentioned earlier, this
was as a result of a master plan
study that was done here in
Santa Fe.
Uh, currently where we are at is
we are uh working with the
design company on the design of
the facility.
The uh agencies cause I know
this is gonna be a question, uh,
are still, uh, being, um,
solidified.
But um.
I can tell you that uh the
initiative is still to move
agencies from lease space to
state space.
And um we are still looking at
not moving agencies from Santa
Fe to Albuquerque.
So it is um an initiative from
this, um, um.
Governor's uh initiative and uh
this administration that's the
present state in Santa Fe, so
you will not be seeing a mass
exodus of people from Santa Fe
going to Albuquerque, even with
the request from DFA and the
Environment departments for
another building in Albuquerque.
Now, um.
The size of the building has
come up um when we've had the
different, um, meetings with
City of Santa Fe.
And, um, looking at the
footprint of the building and
what's gonna happen with the
casitas.
So we have uh determined, can we
look at the possible size of the
building. Can we decrease the
size of the building. It is a
possibility, but even with that,
um, we would still need to uh
demo the Casitas.
Um, however, we are looking at
maximizing the footprint of the
area that's just um uh east of
the um east of this uh facility
just right across the street.
And um in the footprint next to
the garage and where the casitas
are. However, we are still
needing to demo the Caitas and
um next step is us for us to
complete the design.
Um, which should be done, um,
hopefully by the end of the leg
this next 60 day session.
And then once design is
complete, then we go back to the
um uh H board with the city.
And then we request uh the
demolition of the casitas
because then we will have the
design complete.
Part of that process is
including the uh city of Santa
Fe in some of the design.
Um, not the internal design, but
they want to see uh what the
facade is gonna look like and
how is it going to be, um.
Basically representative of the
campus and what we are calling
the uh Capitol campus.
Um, so they, we will, uh,
include not only the H board but
also the public in uh in the
process of the design, so there
will be meetings coming forth,
which you guys will all be a
part of as well as if that's the
case.
Um, looking at page 10.
One of our requests are the
facility condition assessments
and this is $400.
The request now is of a critical
nature because our facility
condition assessments, um, data
has expired on June 30th of this
year.
It is required statutorily that
we present this information to
the state board of Finance twice
a year in June and December, um,
on the condition of our
facilities and our inventory uh
to the state board of Finance.
We are asking for $1000 so that
we can do the facility condition
assessments, not only to better
inform us, better inform you,
the legislature, the state board
of Finance, and the Capitol
Building Planning Commission who
we um are responsible and
sharing all this information
with.
Uh, facility condition
assessments are really important
because that's how we determine
what buildings need to be
demoed, What are deferred
maintenances? What's in cue, um,
how we do our planning when we
work with the different
agencies.
Um, there have been requests for
demolition and um we have a a
demo list and we have uh
received $500 from this
committee and from that we have
been able to demo I believe is
um 14 buildings and we have an
addition 11 buildings that are
in queue.
And uh we still have $200 which
we plan on using the rest of
that money and being able to uh
use all of that money for the
demolition of the remainder of
the uh buildings that need to be
demoed.
Oh, that demolition list came
specifically from the facility
condition assessments and
specifically from um the request
from the different agencies
because they have been either
determined to be a life safety
issue, um, homeless are sleeping
in these facilities and uh they
either have a.
Asbestos or in very uh.
Very poor state.
So that's the facility condition
assessment. Um, turning to page
12, this is the last request and
this is the $5000 through the
presentation in the last few
days, you might have heard me
mention of the executive order
from the governor. This is
specifically for uh that request
and this is for energy efficient
vehicles for GST and all of the
agencies that we support,
whether it's DOH, whether it's
CYFD, ECECD, DVS, all the
different agencies, $5000
dollars.
Although it's a GSD request,
it's to support, um, all of the
different agencies.
And that's all I have.
Thank you for the presentation,
um, questions from the
committee.
You, Anna.
Um,
So on the EOB.
When do we think we'll know kind
of what the slaves going there.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank
you, Kelly. So we will know um
the agencies by the end of
November.
Um, who will be housed.
Um, and on the issue of like
whether employees who are
currently assigned to Santa Fe
might get reassigned to
Albuquerque if we have more.
Offices there.
Um,
How will like.
We in the legislature.
Sort of know what.
The final call is on that and I
guess also like.
Might there be some?
Variability agencies on how that
all plays out.
Um,
Mr. Terri Kelly, so we have been
charged with basically holding
agencies.
Um,
To the requirement that the
footprint is here in Santa Fe,
and they are not.
I'm allowed to move their staff
from Santa Fe to Albuquerque. So
the Albuquerque office is uh for
new employees that they're
trying to recruit in
Albuquerque.
Removing agencies from lease
space to state space.
Or co-locating agencies for like
services. That's the initiative
of the master plan.
However, it is a directive from
uh this administration that the
agencies are not.
Supposed to move um staff from
Santa Fe to Albuquerque and the
way we are holding agencies
accountable is we're working
with SO.
And um when we receive an agency
request and whether it's lease
space or state owned space, one
is the location of the FTE so
they have to send us their uh
roster.
Um, of all the agencies.
Um, we have to know if the
agency, if it's a new RFP.
If, um, it's an already existing
lease in Albuquerque and they're
asking for an expanded
footprint, then they have to
send us their roster from Spo,
um, so that we can determine,
OK, are these new positions and
I is there, um.
A location on record Albuquerque
and if there's any that are
identified in Santa Fe, then we
then have to have a conversation
with um the leadership of that
now.
Are there justifications for
some agencies to move from Santa
Fe to Albuquerque. Yes, there
are. What impact is that gonna
be, um, here in Santa Fe?
So, for instance, um, DFA they
have a bureau.
Um, HCA, they're standing up,
um, they're different and
environment, uh, just to name a
few.
Right now we don't have the
space here in Santa Fe. So, um,
or in the DFA building
specifically in Bataan.
So what I'm doing right now is
we are finding a short term
solution for DFA and we're.
Moving uh and consolidating some
people from environment back
into a lease.
So that way we can accommodate
DFA in the Matoya building. So
it's kind of like we're in a
shuffle game right now until we
can ease some of the overload
when the the goal when the
executive office building is
built is to consolidate agencies
in individual buildings as part
of the master plan.
And um part of the master plan
in Albuquerque is to not only
work with the different
agencies, but where are we
growing the different, um, other
stakeholders to include the
city, the county, higher ed.
Um, to see how we're gonna
co-locate in out um there has
been some justification from
some agencies that they're able
to recruit in Albuquerque, but
that's to expand their
footprint, not to move their
footprint from.
OK, thanks for that. Um, it
might just be something Joey and
I want to look at.
With you when once you have the
roster, look at some of those
numbers. Um, I feel like I
should know this by now, but.
Why can't that weird road
between Baton and.
Gotten rid of and become
pedestrian infrastructure and.
You know, maybe.
Expand or change the shape of
the site, um.
Allie, that is C. So, um, but
it's not something that's not
me, um, and do we?
Um,
What is kind of the timeline on
the.
So, um, the agencies are going
to be finalized end of November.
Um, then we need to start the
kickoff and the um.
Uh, programming, the programming
for the executive Office
building because it's just gonna
be administrative offices.
It's not gonna be anything
that's gonna be um.
Uh
Really complicated like the
forensics building or the
scientific lab or things like
that, so they're just offices
once we identify the um offices
and based on our space standard,
uh, we'll be able to just.
The schematic design and
complete design is not gonna be.
So in talking to the architect,
um.
We have an accelerated schedule,
we'll put it that way, and
depending on the feedback from
the city.
Uh, we are hoping to have design
done, um.
Or a a
A design available to uh present
to the board by the end of the
session, so we're looking
probably about end of March
April time frame.
Um, at that point, once it goes
before the board, depending on
what the outcome is, um, from
the board there's a lot of
changes that they're requesting,
um, then it could look, uh.
I'm hoping that we can align the
design completion with the next
um capital outlay request, which
is 100 million, so we can go out
for bid for construction, which
would be next year around
September October time frame.
OK, thanks. And then, um.
The question kind of on both the
FCA request and the statewide
stuff.
Um, you know, I think from my
perspective at least, I sort of
have the.
Sense that um the larger
statewide pots have been good
and effective recently, um,
partly just because we see like
less cost overrun requests
coming than we do through other
venues, um.
But, uh, we don't actually.
At least when I say we, it's
like, you know, at LFC, we
don't, I don't think we.
At this point, have kind of like
a quantitative way of measuring
like, well, how much benefit has
this had for the state in terms
of.
Um, changing our FCIs and
reducing deferred maintenance
and stuff like that, um.
Would funding this help us do
that and then I also kind of
wonder like if we should be.
Um,
Funding these updates on a
little more regular like
rotating basis, you know, even
where you're not doing it for
everything every 10 years, but
you have kind of consistent
funding to do.
You know, in cycles like update
every buildings assessment every
5 years or something like that.
What do you?
What do you think about that?
Agree, um,
Because facility condition
assessment should be done every
5 years, um, and, um.
If we don't keep up with the
maintenance, deferred the money
that we're receiving and so you
can actually see what it.
Um, what the results are on the
FCA if we're not seeing the
numbers go down.
Um, then, uh, that's a problem
and so I there's a direct
correlation, so. What would a
good like annual amount be to be
able to kind of rotate through
all your buildings, yeah, every
5 years. So, um.
If there was a, so the $50 that
we're requesting right now.
It's just for about 10% of the
buildings.
So, um, if we were to look at
like maybe a $5000 request
eventually get to, we have 800,
right.
But um, yeah, I think $5000
dollars every year.
Uh, every 5 years. OK, thanks,
um, and on the EVs, um, you, you
guys have a supplemental request
that is similar or duplicative
of this or.
Um,
Uh, the the procurement bureau
you mentioned, is that part of
FMD and funded through your?
3% admin fee or is that.
Part of state purchasing.
Um, thank you for the question.
So now it is specifically an
FMD.
And, um, it is not funded
through the 3%. It's funded out
of our operating budget.
And um.
And it's.
Soul concentration is just
because it's so specialized, uh,
and.
So I love state purchasing too,
but um, we actually have a
different uh.
Any other questions from the
committee.
Thanks, and a quick question for
the executive Office Building
and I don't know.
So yeah, but are there?
Plans to have sort of a public
facing agencies or services
there like, for example, Allen.
Um, Mr. Chair, thank you for the
question, Doctor Miner. So, um,
I can tell you a little bit
right now that uh in the Baton
building, the goal is to move
all of DFA and consolidate all
of DFA into the executive Office
Building. So if there's any
public facing um pieces in DFA,
they would be consolidated in
the executive office building.
We're going to backfill, um, the
baton building with everybody
from DA DVS, so right now
they're in a part of the Lay
building, so we're gonna move
them and consolidate all of DBS
into the Bataan building, so
it'll be a DBS and possibly DCA,
um, it could be another agency
that has similar uh services to
DBS that we might backfill uh
DFA uh in the Bataan building,
but, um.
Could there be some public
facing uh pieces and the
executive office building, there
could be depending on the
agencies that are moving to the
executive office building
because we're the focus is to
consolidate agencies in
buildings so that way agencies
are spread across multiple.
Any other question?
Anna, thank you for your
presentation.
Always you're part of the
committee is just really
appreciated.
Um,
I just like to thank you again
for your presentation, that
picture on the bottom of of uh
sorry, page 5 looks vaguely
familiar, um.
Just for my own uh personal
curiosity demo the casitas was
that ever decided?
I was just wondering out of
curiosity. Thank you.
Um, Mr. Chair, um, remember Dela
Rosa, so, uh, we are going once
the design is in uh at a phase
that we can present back to the
historic review board, we will
be going back with the
requested. You're welcome.
I have a few.
Um,
And I think um it's probably
gonna touch part of what Kelly
was saying, but I wanted to make
sure that your #1 and 2
priorities and so right now if
you have emergencies that arise,
they currently probably come out
of CBRF or out of your
statewide. So is this going to
help us kind of understand how
much you are getting in
emergencies each year, um, and
this potentially could be a
request that we see each year,
um, in case those emergencies.
Um, Mr. Cha, yes, and, um, I had
also thought that during our uh
LFC DFA meetings.
Uh, in order to better inform me
because I know the question
comes up, well, what is it? How
are we using the funds, who are
we supporting and by separating
the statewide from the
emergencies. I think that if we
can um help with transparency in
those meetings. These are the
issues and this is what we're
addressing with the statewide
funds, um, or the or the
emergencies, I think would help,
uh.
Both utilizing the funds.
Right, and then, um.
Executive Office building.
I think you already know this,
you have EFA's school support
secretary posts been pretty
vocal that he wants to see that
built, so um.
Hopefully we can find the
funding to be able to get that
moving.
Um,
These the facility conditions
assessment looking at the FCI,
is that the Bataan building at
the top of the list. I just
wanna make sure that I'm seeing
that very small print and.
Just one
Obviously that building has no
you get your magnifying glass,
it says baton.
Um,
And so I, I mean, I know that,
you know, obviously we received
the $1000 already. We're we're
we're requesting $5 million for
the baton, um, I think
regardless of, of, you know.
Doing it for historic
preservation or doing it for
other repairs that are needed,
um, I think obviously the need
is there to um to get that
facility up to where it needs to
be for state government. So I
just wanted to.
Point that out and then lastly,
the EVs, um, have you received
any funding prior to this for
electric vehicles?
Um, we're, we're, we're gonna
need those put in place in FY
24.
Um, Mr. Chair, that's a great
question. So we received
$2,000,000.
Um, we have just spent, uh, our
last, well, $1.5 million and the
uh vehicles are being delivered
like this week as we speak.
So, um, and then, uh, after we,
uh, purchase these vehicles,
then we'll be um.
Um,
Spending the rest of the
500,0006 uh.
EV and hybrid vehicles.
It will probably be seeing those
on our FY 25 direct pay.
Um, prefiling and filing.
Any other questions? And, and
before we adjourn, I just want
to.
I think the the committee, um, I
know obviously leaving your um.
Your actual jobs for 3 days, um,
isn't easy, um.
I know it's, it's difficult, um,
to keep up with the work that
you're doing um outside of this
committee, so I appreciate
everyone's time and and effort
um on this committee. This is an
important committee, I think, as
we've heard all the projects
over the past few days, um,
it's, it's easier to make these
decisions when we have all of
this information rather than
just.
You know, finally going into
these funding requests. So
again, I appreciate everyone's
time, um.
And
I think uh just kind of to
comment on the next piece of
