Um, towards
By the governor's staff
identical to the bill. That's
OK, so you'll see those two
bills. In addition discussed. I
don't believe the gov staff will
be prepared to get in. Um the
big one is a OT and we're not.
Let's see.
A OT. Um, some of us not sure.
where better tomorrow so that
that's happening and one last
thing.
Justice system. I have
Um to us.
Um, the resources that they
believe are of these, um, need
for things. So that is on the
agenda. I'm saying this because
I don't want you all to think
I've forgotten about it or that
I, You know, that's kind of an
the elephant in the room and
many of and I've also asked C
but willing to and have ideas.
Always happy to talk with you
Um, I represent House District
59 in Chavez from the
International district and east
Gateway area of Albuquerque
District seven.
Good morning, Madam Chair, Madam
Chair and Good morning,
Uh, first on our outline of
assisted outpatient treatment,
summer of the law, and we have
two of our committee staffers
them to just present the law,
You know, just walk us. Our two
presenters are Megan Dorsey.
Thank you, madam Chair members
of the committee.
A as through the current statute
regarding, uh for members of the
public there is on the website
It's been printed for the
committee members to reference,
uh, in case the statutory
language on the slides are a
little bit. Um, so first today.
Committee. We're going to be
talking about what a OT is, Uh,
the criteria that needs to be
established in a courtroom in
order to have somebody ordered
to participate in assisted
outpatient treatment.
Ah, some of the burdens of proof
involved in this process have to
abide by and then the potential
outcomes that the judges can
order once this process has
begun, And the outline for this
presentation does track
chronologically the statute as
it is currently enacted. Um so
just
I must say that the way that the
a structure in the current
statute and for legal brains, so
just try to
Muscle through and follow along
with me, and I'm happy to answer
questions as we go or at the end
as they come up.
So first what is a OT?
Uh, a O. As we know is assisted
outpatient treatment. It is
statutorily defined. Um and you
can see at the bottom of these
slides. I list the exact
citation for where this language
is coming from. In case you want
to double check or reference it
later as we research and dig
into these bills, Uh, but a OT
is
Uh, categories of outpatient
services ordered by a district
court, including case
management, comprehensive
community support intensive
outpatient.
Care, co ordination or a pseudo
services.
Uh, that are prescribed to treat
a patient's mental disorder and
to assist a patient in living
and functioning in the community
or
To attempt to prevent a relapse
or deteriorated to result in
harm to the hospitalization.
Ah, now I know that that is a
lot of legal mumbo jumbo.
Basically, what that means is
that a court can order that a
person who is experiencing a
mental health disorder that they
participate in out and they can
only do that. If there it is
established that the person
needs that type of treatment
that it's going to help them.
And the statute is interesting
because of the types of
treatments that may be ordered
pursuant to an A OT order of the
court to the judicial
discretion. These are not
required, and the judge could
order things beyond this
enumerate. Um, but the standard
type, uh, blood tests in new
ways that can test to determine
whether or not the
Individual or group therapy
programming activities,
education or vocational
activities, alcohol and
substance. They can also use
drug tests to to see whether or
not a person is utilizing
narcotics or non prescription
medication. Outside the scope of
what is prescribed pursuant to
the A OT order.
Um, the A OT order can also en
goer to what happens when you're
on probation, and your probation
officer can go to your house.
And look at the the way that
you're living to determine
what's appropriate.
And this is the catch all any
other services prescribed to
treat the patient immunity.
Or to attempt and that language.
Um even in this first definition
of a OT is something that is a
theme throughout the course of
the statute.
That Theoretically, this statute
is supposed to be helping people
who have been diagnosed by a
qualified professional, helping
them to function and live in the
community and also
Now, uh, in order to have an a
OT order issued by a court in
the petition or the person
asking that the
Um, has to file a petition they
have to meet certain criteria
for the judge. And in this
particular case, there are five
separate elements that the
petitioner has to establish by
clear and convincing evidence.
And this piece, this burden of
proof is really important In the
law. The burden of proof is the
amount of evidence that the
petitioner has to present to the
court in order to win in order
to the job in order to have the
judge order the person to
participate in a O.
And clear and convincing. It is
an important stand familiar with
The one that most people are
familiar with this proof beyond
a reasonable doubt that is the
highest burden of proof in our,
uh in our court of law. That's
what's used in criminal cases.
That means that when you're
taking away somebody's liberty,
the burden of proof must be much
higher.
Now in a O, although there are
definitely liberty restrictions
implicit in the statute is lower
than that. In a criminal case.
It's clear and convincing
evidence.
And the Supreme Court in New
Mexico has a defined that as
follows.
The standard of clear and
convincing evidence strikes a
fair balance between the
defendant's interests in
avoiding an erroneous protecting
the defendant from himself.
From themselves.
And protecting society in
general, further any risk of an
erroneous decision from applying
the standard is insufficient to
warn this book that is the
reasoning behind why the court
believes that this is the and
again it is distinct other a OT
laws or in preponderance of the
evidence that is a lower
standard of proof in our court,
which is similar to more
So, uh, the specific elements
that are required in order
To establish an a O order.
There's five of them as I
mentioned before.
First, uh, that the patient the
person in question, who legally
is called the respondent in this
proceeding.
The patient is 18 years of age
or older and is a resident of a
participating municipality or
county.
Uh, both that age determination
and the resident of the learn as
we get further down in the day,
most of the counties in New
Mexico are not in in
municipalities are not
participating. Uh And so there
is, uh
The second element is that the
patient has a primary diagnosis
of a The third element is that
the patient has demonstrated a
history of lack of compliance
with treatment for mental health
disorder, and that lack of
compliance is is, uh explained
further in the statute, and
here's a lot of mumbo jumbo here
for you to read through, which
is why the printout might be
easier to look at. But
essentially what this is saying,
is that
You can prove lack of compliance
with treatment in one of three
ways.
So they don't the petitioner
doesn't have to establish all
three of these prongs that just
one of these three prongs the
first way that they can prove
lack of compliance with
treatment is that twice within
the last 48 months
At least twice within the last
48 months. It's been a
significant factor in
necessitating hospitalization or
receipt of services in a
forensic or other mental health
unit Jail presided at the 48
Month period shall be extended
by the length of any
hospitalization, incarceration,
basically twice in the last 48
months, something very serious
had to happen where you required
Or
Um, it was the mental health
disorder and lack of compliance
resulted in one or more acts of
serious violent behavior towards
the patient themselves or to
towards somebody else.
And that includes threats of
attempts.
Um, threats or attempts. It's
not just a physical act that
results in again within the last
48 months, which can be extended
based upon hospitals. Finally,
the third way to prove a lack of
compliance with treatment is
that the person was
hospitalized, incarcerated or
detained for six months or more.
And the person is to be
discharged or released within
the next 30 days or was
discharged or released within
the past 60 days.
Um, so the statute in this
provision is trying to capture a
variety of ways in which you can
objectively demonstrate a lack
of a lack of compliance with
mental health treatment. Um,
that's what the statute is
attempting to do.
Um so going back to the five
elements that we need to
establish to get an a OT order.
The next one is D that the
patient is unwilling or unlikely
as a result of a mental disorder
to participate voluntarily in
outpatient treatment.
Here are some critical language
that you're gonna see throughout
the state. The statute
That would enable the person to
live safely in the community
without court supervision.
Now importantly, that type of
language living safely in the
community is not
Defined in the statute.
So that is a completely
subjective prong.
Um subsection E.
The patient is in need of
assisted outpatient treatment as
the least restrictive
appropriate alternative to
prevent a relapse or
deterioration likely to result
in serious harm to self or
likely to result in serious harm
to others again. This is that
thematic language that is going
to be repeated throughout the
statute, and it is incredibly
important to try to understand
what this is getting at, because
again we talked about in a
criminal case when we're taking
away somebody's liberty. We have
a higher burd.
Proof beyond a reasonable doubt.
In the A OT context. There are
still liberty and so the statute
is saying we want to make sure
That for those people where this
is an appropriate course of
action, we are not overly
restricting their liberties. We
are making appropriate
alternative to prevent harm.
Finally, the last element needed
to establish for an A O order is
that the patient will likely
benefit from served by
Receiving
Uh, now a couple of legal
Prongs. Also needing to be
established in order for a
petition to be granted as
jurisdiction and standing
So, basically what that means is
where can you file the petition?
What court has the authority to
hear the petition and who can
file the petition Who has enough
information about the patient to
have the right to ask the judge
to order that patient's liberty
restricted
So first jurisdiction. A
petition for a OT must be filed
in the district court.
In the county where the
respondent is present or reason
if that district court has
entered an MOU with a
participating municipality or
county.
So what That is saying is, you
can file your petition anywhere
where you know, or you
reasonably believe they will.
But only if the district court
where the person is is actually
involved in a O has, uh, has
signed an agreement in terms of
standing who has the right to
ask for a person to be put in
outpatient services.
Uh, the statute has an
enumerated list. The first
option is an 18 year old
individual who lives with the
respondent with the patient.
A parent or spouse of the
patient.
In 18, year old sibling or child
of the respondent, the patient.
A director of a hospital where
the patient is hospitalized.
A director of a public
charitable organization, agency
or home or the respondent
resides, and that provides
A qualified professional who
either supervises or treats the
respondent for a mental disorder
or has done so in the last 48
months.
Or a surrogate decision maker.
And so again, this section of
the statute is attempting to
enumerate the list of people who
reasonably have enough have the
right to ask the court. And so
the question for the Legislature
is whether this list is, uh
appropriate to give that type of
authority.
Now you can't just have a
qualified
A person was standing asked the
court to order a OT.
The petitioner must also include
an affidavit as a part of the
petition.
Uh, a qualified professional,
uh, has to be somebody who has
examined the patient within 10
Days of I have to have actually
spoken with the respondent
within 10 days, which is a
pretty short window.
Uh, they have to also recommend
that treatment for the
respondent.
And they have to be willing and
able to testify at a hearing on
the petition.
Alternatively in situations
where they are not able to,
actually, uh, interview and, uh,
evaluate affidavit from a
qualified professional can state
that, uh, no more than 10 days
prior to filing the qualified
professional, uh, had
unsuccessfully attempted to
persuade the respondent to
submit to an examination.
That the qualified professional
has reason to believe that the
respondent meets the criteria
for a OT.
And the qualified professional
is able and willing to testify
at a hearing.
Uh, now this alternative
affidavit is important to
consider what this is saying. Is
that, um U, unlike in the
situation where the professional
actually interviewed the
respondent here, the
professional can designate
another person to speak on their
behalf, which is unique.
Um, and also allows that when
you're not able to contact the
respondent without defining what
an unsuccessful attempt is
But if you have sufficient
additional information showing
that this person person would
qualify for a OT, uh, you can
say so.
Now at the after the petition is
filed.
The court, assuming the petition
meets those standards that the
petitioner established
jurisdiction established
standing the qualified
professionals affidavit meets
the statutory requirements. The
court accepts the petition. The
next thing that happens is a
hearing.
Uh, a hearing shall be held
within 3 to 7 days of serving
the petition.
So for people who are not as
familiar with the court process
once the petitioner files the
petition, it gets file stamped
by the court and has to actually
be served upon the so within 3
to 7 days of serving the
petition.
Um, the court must hold a
hearing that time window can be
extended for up to 30 days on
upon a showing of good cause but
cannot be extended beyond 30
Days. Statute also provides that
if the patient is hospitalized
at the time, the petition is
filed or at the time of the
hearing is scheduled to be held.
Hearing timeline can be modified
to allow for continuous care.
The idea being that once
somebody is hospitalized is no
need to unnecessary.
Um, The statute also requires
that the patient or the
respondent be represented by an
attorney throughout this entire
proceeding.
And also allows that if for any
reason, the respondent does not
appear for the hearing.
The court may proceed. Um as
long as the patients to means
that these these hearings can
happen with present to observe
what is
Uh, it's not required. That may
means that the judge can choose
to continue the hearing if they
see fit as long as it's within
that statutory time window that
I
If the petition is accepted, the
judge can order the respondent
or the respondent or the patient
to comply with an evaluation if
they haven't done so already.
Which means they can look at the
affidavit from a qualified
professional who said, Hey, I
tried to contact this person and
was not able to
The judge can order
The the patient to meet with a
qualified professional, and if
the respondent refuses to do so,
the court can order that that,
but only for 24 hours for the,
uh, at the hearing the qualified
professional who conducted the
evaluation is required to
testify.
And that person must speak to
their rationale.
And whatever facts they have
that establish that a OT is an
alternative, meaning there is no
other lesser that might achieve
the same goal.
The qualified professional must
testify to the access and
availability of a OT services in
that immediate community and
elsewhere in the state.
And if, uh, the A O treatment
plan that is recommended
requires medication, the
provider has to talk about what
type of medication is
appropriate, how it might help
or harm the patient and whether
or not the or be administered by
a profession.
The qualified professionals
plan. Uh, that day the day of
the year now, when the judge is
making the determination of a
after hearing testimony from the
qualified professional
The judge has to decide whether
the criteria those five elements
we talked about at the beginning
have been met, and there's a
couple of definitions in the
statute that I think are
important to bring to your
attention. There are many other
definitions in the statute that
would be helpful to read at some
point in time, But these are the
ones that are the most.
Uh, first of all the definition
alternative.
Uh, statutorily. That means
treatment and conditions that
are
No more harsh, hazardous or
intrusive than necessary to
achieve acceptable treatment
objectives.
And do not restrict the physical
movement or require residential
care except as reasonably
necessary.
Now, this is a really
interesting definition. Um,
because again, what it is trying
to say is
This person that we're looking
at in the a O individual that
has a mental health disorder
that is detrimental to
themselves and or to the
community and we want to help
them.
This is not a criminal
proceeding where we're trying to
put somebody in jail and prevent
them from moving freely in the
community.
And so this definition is
attempting to to instruct the
court to make sure that whatever
it is ordered is the least
restrictive as possible on the
probability to travel and work.
However, as you can see in
subsection two, it also says
We are not restricting physical
movement unless it's reasonably
necessary. Um, so within the
statute that the statutory
definition itself, it's giving,
giving the judge the opportunity
to circumvent. What is
It's the purpose of the statue,
which is important to
Uh, a second definition that I
think the committee should look
at closely is likely to result
that is used in several sections
in the statute and is relevant
to determining whether a O is
required.
What it means is that it is more
likely than not that in the near
future, a person will inflict
serious, unjustified bodily harm
on another person or commit a
criminal sexual offense, as
evidenced by behavior, causing
attempting or threatening such
harm.
When behavior gives rise to a
reasonable fear of harm of such
harm from the person.
Again. This is a attempting to
identify when we believe that a
patient a person who's suffering
from actually likely to result
in harm to others. When is it
actually learn that the
government needs to step in and
prevent bad acts?
Again a similar definition
likely to result in serious harm
to the self means. It is more
likely than not that in the near
future, the person will attempt
to commit suicide or will cause
serious bodily harm to the
person self.
By violent or UN grave, passive
neglect Determine when can the
court
So, uh, we filed the petition.
The court has accepted it. We've
had a hearing The qualified
professional has testified.
Hopefully the respondents
attorney that they have
available on behalf of the
respondents or the patient.
And after that hearing, the
court has to decide whether the
criteria has been met. And
again, the standard is by clear
and convincing evidence.
So I I'm sure you guys are
mostly aware of this, but for
the public at large, the
petitioner has to establish
Each element. Each of those five
elements we talked about at the
beginning by clear, not able to
establish just one of those five
elements. Then the petition must
fail and the judge is not
permitted to order a OT.
However, if the judge is
satisfied that the petitioner
has established each of the five
elements by clear and convincing
evidence, then they issue a
disposition requiring a OT.
A dispositional order and a OT
order is for not more than a
year.
And it has to include specific
providers, so the court has to
Smith.
For the next year. I am
sentencing you to. I can't just
be a generalized Oh, we think,
um if the A O order requires
medication
Uh, it has to identify what
medications should be provided,
uh, authorized and whether the
medication should be
administered by the patient
themselves or by a health care
provider.
Over and this is very important
Supreme Court case law it may
not require or authorize
restraints or physical somebody
to take medication.
Ah, the A O order must be based
upon recommendations from a
qualified professional, which
may not order services to that
was not recommended by the
expert.
And the court cannot require
private or Medicaid providers to
cover a O also shall not
Um
Order, and he's already been
issued, or I didn't mention that
before I should have at the
hearing, the court can hear
testimony from a surrogate
decision maker that is defined
in the statute. But essentially,
it's somebody who's been
identified to speak on behalf.
Sufficient testimony. The court
is not supposed to order I leave
it at that.
Um
All within the statute. The
parties enjoy a right to an
expeditious appeal on a final
order, which means that if the
judge issues an a OT order or
denies an a OT order that the
either party is not satisfied
with they can appeal.
Uh and importantly as we may be
discussing for the criminal
competency proceeding at a later
date, this does not impact
criminal competency and a OT
order is not the same thing at
the defining that a defendant is
not competent. They are separate
burdens of proof separate
elements completely separate
problem now, once in a OT order
has been issued, as we said
before, statutorily. It's only
supposed to last for one year,
however.
There is a process that allows
the
Ask for it to be extended.
Um
The application for extended
treatment is supposed to be
filed before the original order
expires. And it can ask that,
uh, treatment be extended for an
additional year beyond the, uh,
original year that was or when
there is an application filed.
the court is required to decide
whether to extend treatment or
not with 10, then, uh, the
earlier provision, which
required a hearing within 3 to 7
days of service, So it's just an
in, um and then that the
Again. This the burden of proof
is the same that the court must
find by clear and convincing
evidence that the respondent,
uh meets the elements of
continued requirement for
treatment, which are enumerated
here first is that they continue
to have a primary diagnosis of a
mental disorder.
That the patient is unwilling or
unlikely as a result of that
disorder to participate in
treatment voluntarily in a way
that would enable them to live
safely in the community without
again as the least restrictive,
appropriate alternative to
prevent and that the patient
will benefit from and their best
interests will be served by
receiving continued aid.
There are other ways that you
can ask to modify. Stay vacate.
Terminate the A O order at those
five.
Um, and here. I think this is an
important piece for the
committee to take a look at the
statute does outline the ways in
which the court may act if the
patient fails to comply with an
AOL. Thank you.
Uh, if a qualified professional
determines that the PA the
patient, the respondent has
materially failed to comply with
a OT.
Such that the professional
believes that the patient's
condition is likely to result in
serious harm to self or likely
to, and that immediate detention
is necessary to prevent such
harm. The professionals shall
certify the need for detention
for emergency mental health
evaluation and care.
So, basically this, uh
Somewhat complex statutorily,
but the petitioner has to
establish based upon an opinion
of a qualified professional that
the patient has materially
failed to comply with a O.
Now materially is not defined in
this specific statute. It is a
common word that is used
generally in the law,
essentially significant
violation of the A O order that
is a subject based upon the
facts of a specific case.
One would hope that a material
um violation. Oh, they didn't
answer their phone or their
house was dirty. Hopefully it
would be a a significant
violation or repeated violation
of the A O order. But again,
that's not, um, this
Consideration also requires the
court to find, uh, sort of in a
minority report way that this
violation is likely to result in
serious harm to self or others.
As and this is the important
piece, though, and that
immediate detention is necessary
to prevent such harm. Again. The
qualified professional should be
testifying that this is a very
serious situation that
necessitates restriction of this
person.
Respondents failure to comply
with an A OT order. Importantly,
is not grounds for involuntary
or for a finding of contempt or
for the use of physical force or
respondent. So again, the
statute is saying, even if the
court finds that the person
materially violated the a O
order, that does not mean that
they are automatically
involuntarily committed.
Uh, it certainly might be
evidence and it similarly you
cannot find somebody in contempt
of court for that alone. Um
You shouldn't find somebody in
contempt of court for that
alone. But again, judges do what
judges do.
Um, and again as Supreme Court
law requires, you cannot be the
statute in two different
sections does provide that the
pleadings and the record in a
protective order and and
confidentiality And that is
basically the, uh, summary of
the statute as it stands right
now.
Uh, one other thing.
Interestingly enough, there is
almost no New Mexico Case Law
about a OT the only case that I
found in New Mexico, um
That addressed a O was really
more about preemption of law in
resolving ordinance that was
proposed in the city of
Albuquerque. The court
determined that that code was
preempted by state law, so it
didn't really provisions of the
statute, then or now, But that
is that means that the leg
direction from the courts in
terms of how this statute is act
on
Thank you, Madam Chair. We're
happy to be here. Join the
committee, and I kind of watched
Thank you, madam Chair. I Katie.
Duh. I'm Senator for, uh,
District 10, which is
We have two people on the
Thank you, madam Chair.
This. This was a great
presentation, but I do have
Um
You said at the very, um
In order for
Thank you for the question.
I am hopeful that as the day
progresses, we might
With that is my understanding
that the don
Madam Chair representative.
That's true. The second judicial
district has a wide range.
Spreading this
I'm just really happy that we're
having all these conversations
and trying to understand the
behavioral health system within
our
It's critical.
So I'm gonna go back to, uh, the
failure to comply with a O. The
what I'm looking at is, um
The if
The case is made.
Then, um
To prevent such harm The
qualified professional shells
certify the need for detention
and transport of the respondent
for emergency mental health
evaluation and care.
So then they will.
Force will be used to, um
Detain.
The individual is that correct,
madam Chair
Ma'am chair. Um, just
When was this? When were these
this law provision? When was it
put into law? Adam? That's a
great question. Let me look for
you. I have you, madam Chair
Representative 26. Thank you,
Madam Chair, I. I do appreciate
this. And I think that this is,
um
Brought to our attention to the
lawmakers, and, uh uh, this was
a this was an issue and I'm glad
you're highlighting it because
it we did move forward and put
this into law. Do we know how
many cases um, have where the
courts have you? Uh, Madam Chair
representative. We don't know
how so we're what we're really
trying to get to and why we're
having these additional hearings
in C CJ are to make a, um
Well, first of all, to have an
understanding, but also to, uh
determine and and look
Bill that we're gonna be looking
at deals with criminal law.
And as we've learned from the
first hearings we've had and
There.
A OT is not the same statement
as well. So
I think a question has to be at
what what part of a OT then
could be or possibly
As we're
And understanding, I guess, uh,
bear with me, Madam Chair. Um
Is this a better system? Or is
this a place in law that we
really want to be putting our
attention to, rather than what
we are looking at question.
I think that
Thank you, Madam Chair and I
appreciate that is that is a a
very balanced answer and
Again as we're looking at
competency in criminal law, we
we really have to look at
Probably some of these, um like,
um
Language and law. Um I do have
another question. And then I. I
just wanna
Talk about the implementation of
crisis stabilization and
implementation through, um,
diversion programs.
Would this be considered? This
is not a diversion program T.
Um, although thank you, Madam
chair and as we're looking at
populations that have severe
behavioral health needs, um
That meet a lot of the criteria.
Um, law here, um
How our diversion programs
helping with this the whole
picture that we're looking at
Madam chair.
Sure. Um, I am very much looking
forward. I. I think statutory
perspective is that you are not
the type of people that we are
looking for a community and so
And I hope madam chair that as
we are services that we have in
place. We're looking how we're,
um programs and it'd be nice to
see a side by side and really
How, but
Cute. I have, um Senator du
Thank you, madam Chair.
Thank you for this presentation.
Um, I have a couple questions.
The language. The
The the the qualified provider
would testify to the
availability of the treatment in
the community or elsewhere.
So does that mean that if we
only have it in Donna Anna,
someone from in Santa Fe can be
ordered to go to Las Cruces to
get statute is written.
Um I would hope that does not
require
That the
And Madam chair and
Uh, these hearings do do like
the normal rules of like,
evidence and stuff apply at
these hearings.
Um, that's a great question, I.
I know that there is a provision
in the statute that requires
But I'd have to get back to you
unless
Madam Chair senator. The statute
does not. And then I was just
looking up to see if mental
disorder is defined.
And it looks like it's not
defined in the a OT statute.
Uh, it is defined in the the one
dealing with criminal. Um
In in the criminal context.
Do we know if
Kind of a different standard for
mental disorder is being used.
Having never participate, Uh,
but to answer your question you
that would leave it up.
Great. Thank you cause I and I
see that in the in the criminal
context it it specifically
excludes.
Uh, developmental and
intellectual disabilities from
being considered as like an
important
Exclusion that we would want in
any Civ or civil context as
well.
I also and and again. This might
be a question for the the Johnny
Anna folks, but
But saying that it has to be
there has to be a primary to
have. What does that mean?
Uh, Madam Chair Senator, yet
Another
Relevant question.
I would presume as similar to
the ones that I have seen in the
criminal context.
The statute does provide
language that, um, as
great Thank you.
OK, thank you Be chair. All of
this.
It just makes a decision and
decides to send
Uh, Madam chair represented them
too.
The statute requires that the
dispositional order out what I
am Sorry Representative, Um what
I as
works, It's a few years ago.
Former your honors last
representative. I would presume
that the, um the written tree of
the hearing.
Would outline is, um
Most. Um, but I would guess that
Providers.
And that
The other thing that worries me
is
Something that we can do.
Madam Chair representative would
not presume to tell the
Legislature what to do. What
doesn't What doesn't just
interesting
Madam Chair representative would
not presume to tell the
Legislature what to do. What
doesn't What doesn't just
suggest it is
OK. Thank you Manage here.
It.
I mean, it looks like there are
quite a few different things
that can, uh
How I don't know. The statute
itself says, Um And I actually
just thank you for having it up
The statute itself says that the
court is not allowed to order.
Um, basically anybody to pay for
this. It enumerates a health
maintenance. The court cannot
order
That any of those entities pay
for this
Uh, so I would guess that in
practice, if the if this
respondent happens to have
private health insurance that
would cover this, Uh if they
happen to have state Medicaid
that might cover a portion of
the treatment, it might cover
it, um, otherwise.
Uh, so in theory
It's
Because these things are listed,
able to cover it. But do that
Madam Chair representative.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you for the presentation.
Uh, I've been around long enough
to have a live through a tier
and Marty Chavez, uh, proposed
this and we were at now. I think
it would be helpful to explain
1st 1st question.
What exactly does Plier County
that steps up? What? What is
their role in this? In other
words, the court has got to
agree with the
Doing and we'll get that from
that going. OK, what's their
obligation? And what? What
exactly are they providing?
Uh, Madame Chair, Senator. A
great question. I don't know the
exact details of that It's not
outlined in the statute, but I
would presume that their role is
to make sure that these services
are available, um, that their
county has an a OT program that
is functioning that is able to
provide at outlined in the
statute, if not additional
things, and and that they're
keeping track of the
participants in the program.
So on Madam chair. And basically
as I read this if
If a district court decides they
don't happen.
The local government decides
they don't want to participate.
It doesn't happen. Uh, what
about the, uh, requirement for
representation by council?
Who? What lawyers?
But does a public defender have
rep Hemry question? Who pays for
it? Uh, madam Chair Senator.
Another great question. The
public defender is not involved
in these proceedings because
they are not Crip on their
plate. Um, but I believe that in
Dona Ana and we could ask them
to clarify I. I would guess that
there's respondents. Um, but I
assume other than that it's
private pay. I'm not sure
Thing.
We spent a lot of time on the F
coming over.
Very concerned about the
contempt power. There wasn't
some contempt.
Requirement for but I'm just
trying to figure out
I mean, someone who's not
basically if that's the if
that's the violation, and
there's not the additional
threshold elements at that
point, there's no there's no
other.
Madam Chair, Senator, if I may
that will be talking about
tomorrow because the answer to
your question is, I believe
under the A statute you are
done.
There is no penalty, but then
Next step would be
So in that, so, Yeah, No. And I
appreciate that Madam chair, So
that's that's the when the
material thresholds are met.
You're basically opening the
door into. But if those, uh,
material head unless these other
thresholds are under the A OT
act, That's information that the
committee I really think so as
we move forward, we might have
V brow, right?
It might be interesting to hear
how that is done, because I know
there could be done. But
obviously the statute um yeah, I
Presentation coming in a little
bit. It is by ideas about how a
OT might be used from their
OK, we're back.
And I see on the screen. We have
Someone who I believe is Betsy
Johnson. So we're on our next
segment. Um, a OT competence and
disgust. I believe in the Dona
folks have have had some any.
Um, so we have Betsy Johnson, a
OT policy advisor from the
treatment. Amy Lukes, director
of a
Miss Johnson. Can you hear me?
How you but maybe I should have
asked that earlier. Are you
there? I can hear you. This is
Betsy. OK, great. You were a
little faint, Can you? Um I
don't know if your volume can be
turned up or our volume can
based on the volume so
Miss Johnson. The floor is your,
uh, Well, thank you very much.
Um, are my, uh, I, I was told I
would be able to share my
screen. Is that yes. And so
let's see. Can we check Miss
Johnson?
Sure.
The question.
OK, Um Miss Johnson is full.
Terrific. Can you hear me?
Yes. Um, it would be great if we
could hear you better. I don't
know. If you have volley. Do we
have volume? We can adjust.
Thank you.
All right. Well, thank you so
much for the invitation to be
here today. My name is Betsy
Johnson. I am with the treatment
advocacy center. For those of
you, who are not familiar as a
nonprofit organization based in
Arlington, Virginia. Uh, we're
actually small but mighty. Um,
if you're familiar with the
National Alliance on mental
illness, we we have some of the
same founding fathers we've been
around for over 25 years. Um,
but our mission is more, uh,
specific and that we
VC for individuals with severe
mental illness, primarily
schizophrenia, Major bi polar
disorder and major depression
with psychotic features. Um, one
of our, um primary areas of
advocacy is in, uh, assisted
outpatient treatment because we
believe this is one of the few
programs really, uh, designed to
address the needs of those
individuals who lack insight
into their illness, a condition
known as Anis.
Um, it doesn't mean that
In denial that they have an
illness. I truly do not believe
that they're ill. So
consequently, they don't follow
through with treatment. Why
would you if you don't believe
you have the illness, so they
typically don't take medication
to get caught in the revolving
door of hospitalization, and,
uh, incarceration, oftentimes
for for minor offenses.
So that is who we're here to
talk about today.
Um, just very briefly. My
background. Uh, I've been with
treatment advocacy center now
for going on nine years prior to
joining Tech I was with with
NAMI, Ohio. I was there for 10
years as the associate executive
director, And if you can see on
the screen is a picture of a
group of women who came to meet
with me. Um, back in about, um,
about alley. I think it was
2011 now a a long time ago, but,
um, the women you can see
gathered around this table.
There's two on the left and
In the right. They came to me
and shared their their stories.
They all had grown adult
Children who again lacked
insight into their illness. Some
of the moms had shared that
they're they're their sons had
had, um, lost their lives due to
their untreated mental illness,
and in fact, both of them had
walked across the freeway,
thinking that they were heading
home because they're under a
delusion that that that was
safe. Um, uh, another mom had
lost her child to Su.
And two others had their sons
were living in their basement.
Uh, in and out of the hospital,
um, didn't follow through with
treatment, just really
struggling with just sort of
getting, uh through life on a
day to day basis, So they all
knew that they their Children
would benefit from treatment
They had seen them stabilized
before, but, uh, they'd go into
the hospital. They'd come out. I
think that they didn't need to
take their medication and kind
of fall into that. Revolving.
Um, uh, door. So, um
So they they came and asked, you
know, can I assist them in
helping to get an assist?
Outpatient treatment? Uh, past
and we worked on it in Ohio for
three years and ended up passing
unanimously in our house and
Senate. The governor you can see
here, Governor John Kasich
signed the bill. We had a big
party celebrated and woke up the
next morning and realized OK,
Now we've got this great law on
the books. How do we go about
implementing it? So I reached
out to treatment advocacy center
and said, Can you guys help us
and I said, no, we really don't
do.
Yeah, but why don't you join us,
and you can, um, you can do
that. So I joined treatment
Advocacy center and we've been
working on getting programs
implemented across the country
and also here in Ohio in my home
state. We've now got 34 counties
out of 88 that are using a OT.
uh, here in Ohio.
Um, so real quickly. I know you
just had a presentation on a OT,
but I think it's really
important that we we all have
sort of the same basic
understanding in terms of what
constitutes an effective a OT
program. So I'm just gonna do a
quick overview on a OT talk a
little bit about the competency
restoration crisis, which you're
probably all too familiar with.
I wanna talk to you a little bit
about how dismissing upon civil
commitment with a OT is one tool
in the toolbox that we believe
would really be effective for
again. This specific
That I mentioned earlier and
we'll talk about what the
pathway looks like to get into a
OT from, um from, um, a a
competency restoration situation
and then talk briefly about some
of the resources that we have
available at treatment Advocacy
center.
Uh, just so really quickly. I
just wanna make sure we're sort
of all on the same page in terms
of our our understanding of a
OT. Um, and just to be clear. It
is a collaboration between the
civil Court and the mental
health system. So, uh, not
criminal court that a civil
court that we're talking about,
Uh, a OT is involuntary. So
that's a lot of folks are
confused by that issue, And I
heard I just hopped on and just
caught the end of the last
conversation where
I think that you had mentioned
the possibility of looking at
California's a OT program, a
OAOT in California is a very
unique and it is not an
involuntary program. It's really
so we don't look at their
program necessarily as the ideal
model. So if you're going to be
looking at other, um other
states programs, I would, uh
like to talk to you more about
which ones we think it would be,
Um, um more beneficial for you
to to visit. Um, certainly, um
or have them visit you
Certainly.
Uh, Texas is probably their, uh,
one of the closest ones to you
that have, um, some quality
programs there, um, so we can
help you make those connections.
Um, So, um, so I just to
clarify, so it's involuntary. So
it's not like the, uh, a
treatment court in the in the
criminal justice system. Those
programs are voluntary, so the
individual has the choice either
go down the traditional path, uh
of of a criminal court or to opt
into either a mental health.
Or veterans Court or what have
you? Um so that is voluntary, So
a O is not voluntary. Um, but it
allows for a quick, quicker, uh,
return to the community. So
oftentimes some folks who may be
in the hospital or, um, you
know, and and they're given
this, uh, you know, presented
with with a OT as being, um, uh,
a good option for them. They can
think that they're volunteering
to be in the program, but true,
but they could say
I don't want to do it and still
be placed in a OT. Sometimes
people go into it, though,
thinking that that they
volunteered because, um, they
wanna do it because it may mean
they're getting out of the
hospital or getting out of jail
sooner. Um, and it's Yeah, so
which is certainly a
possibility. It's the least
restrictive setting certainly
far less restrictive than a
hospitalization or a jail
sentence. Or even in some cases,
guardianship. Sometimes a OT is
an option prior to, um to
putting
Somebody under a guardianship
situation.
It is a civil court order. It is
something that's being uh, you
know, AAA limiting a person's Uh
uh, movement, so there's a full
due process protections are
afforded for anybody for whom an
A OT petition has been filed.
And just as with any other kind
of criminal situation, um the
needed treatment is provided in
the community it this doesn't
require new types of treatment.
These folks at some of these
individuals may require, um more
intensive treatment in the
community. Others don't require
anything more than uh than maybe
medication, adherence or
medication. Monitoring. Um, it
varies from person to person.
But it doesn't mean if you have
an a OT program that you have
to, um, establish all these new
treatment.
Program, so you do not most
communities already have the
types of treatment that these
individuals need to succeed in
the community under an a O
order. Uh, there, uh, adherence
is monitored closely, so if they
miss appointments, Miss, um are
are you know are following
through with their medication.
Um, the the system is able to
intervene quickly to get them
back on track. You don't have to
wait for them to become a danger
to themselves or others before
you can intervene because
they're under this court order.
It works because of the black
robe effect. Um each program
looks different than the next In
terms of the the level of
judicial involvement. Some
judges see individuals every
week. Um, once they're they're
placed in the program. Uh, and
then maybe, and then then spread
that out every two weeks every
month. Every you know, depending
on how you know as they're doing
better than they see them less
frequently, But, um other judges
may only see them if they're
starting to decompensate or if
they've
Something spectacular that the
the the court wants to, you
know, commend them for, um They
just sort of bring them in, Um,
intermittently as on an as
needed basis, so a very
significantly from program to
program, but it's very clear
that there is a you know,
judicial involvement in that a
judge is monitoring this
individual's com com You know,
adherence to treatment.
And it's also important to
recognize that it's not just the
participant that's under this
order. It's also the treatment
system. Um, so the the the
treatment system is also held
accountable. So if the
participant says I missed my
appointment because I didn't
have transportation to get
there, That's not the
participants fault that would be
the treatment system's fault for
not making sure that that person
had what they needed to to
succeed in the program, so the
treatment system knows, too,
that they are going to have to
come before you know, appear
before.
The court with the participant,
and, uh and they, too will be
asked, you know, by the judge,
You know how come you know XYZ
didn't happen and and And if the
judge doesn't like the answer,
um, he'll certainly or she'll
let that let that be known to
the system.
Um, I know you just went through
all the the C the legal criteria
for civil commitment. You can
see this lack of compliance with
treatment, which we believe is
often caused by that lack of
insight into the illness. Uh, as
a major component or unlikely to
voluntarily participate in
treatment, uh and without
treatment they're likely to
become, um there's a
deteriorate. Um, but there are,
um
We'll, We'll go over some
additional criteria. Uh, in a
little bit. Uh, How does a work
petitions filed the hearings
held in civil court due process
rights are protected. There's
clear and convincing evidence
standard has been met. Aot is
ordered, um there's AAA
treatment plan that's developed.
Uh, usually it's filed with the
court. The needed services are
provided. Um there's a somebody
monitoring the individuals
adherence to treatment that's
done very closely.
Ideally, the person engages in
treatment, and that means it
doesn't mean that they just
adhere to treatment. It's really
important, you understand they
have to engage in treatment
before
a, um an order is dismissed, so
it means that they without the
order, they will continue to
follow through with their
treatment, because somehow
they've made that connection
between the fact that their
following through a treatment
and their quality of life is
improving, and that's done with
the judge and the treatment team
working with them to help them
to make those connections.
Um, but if they're just adhering
to treatment, because they've
got this court order and if the
court order goes away, they
they've told their psychiatrist.
I'm not taking my medication,
then that's somebody who's not
ready to graduate from the
program. We would really
recommend that they continue to
be, you know, remain in the
program until such time as they
can take, um, ownership of their
own self care.
And then uh, after that, then
the person uh, graduates that's
uh, typically, uh, how the
program works. There are
consequences for Noher.
One of them would be the
frequency of those court check
ins. As I mentioned some courts
see people you know, every week
initially and every two weeks
and every four weeks and so on,
if the per person has missed a
few appointments or starting to
decompensate, um, that the judge
can say Hey, listen, I'm worried
about you. I want to start
seeing you every week again for
a while till we get things back
on track. Um, so that is a
consequence for not following
through. They can also have the
length of the time that they're
in the program extended and
Vary from state to state in
terms of how how often they that
can happen, Um
But hopefully you know as often
as necessary until they start to
engage in treatment.
Um, they can be transported for
evaluation. If there's if the
team is concerned that they're
decompensating, um they can be
transported in have them
evaluated and if they meet
hospital level of criteria, then
they would be rehospitalized. So
there are consequences for non
Aer.
Uh, a OT is effective. We've
got, uh, oodles of data coming
in from New York State. New York
is the only state in the country
that mandates a OT and that they
mandate their programs to
collect very specific data, and
they report out on that data on
a regular basis to their
legislature. So you can see
here, um, Their program has been
in effect. It's Kendra's law if
you've heard of that, um, but in
effect since 1999 and, uh, you
can see here reduces
significantly hospitalization.
Homelessness, Um, arrest rates
and, uh uh, incarcerations and
at the same time as saving
considerable money because
you're not paying for that
expensive care.
Uh, there are three paths. Um,
that somebody can get into the A
OT program. The most typical one
is upon discharge from a
hospitalization, typically an
involuntary hospitalization. If
this is somebody again, who
meets criteria, they're kind of
caught in their revolving door,
Then the hospital files a
petition with the court and they
go into the program from the
hospital. Um, the other way is
directly from the community.
Most states allow for community
members to file petitions.
For a OT if they if they have
reason to believe that the
person meets criteria. Um that's
a very difficult to prove in
court, particularly for somebody
who hasn't been engaging in
treatment because you don't have
the clinical documentation to
make the case to the court, and
in some instances, however, you
can show that there is probable
cause in which case the court
may be willing to have that
person picked up and brought in
for evaluation if they're not
willing to to come voluntarily.
Which, oftentimes they're not.
um so that, uh, that's the step
up process. And then this kind
of was a new term that we've
kind of coined called step over,
And that is as a diversion from
jail, um, particularly as an
alternative to competency
restoration, So I'm sure again
as I mentioned you all are
probably very familiar with, um,
this competency restoration
crisis. But this is the, um, the
the fairly recent
And of of, of course, uh, and
prosecutors, um, placing people
in state hospitals to have them
restored to competency. We
believe that's as often done
because the court is frustrated
or the the the The prosecutor is
frustrated because the same
person kind of keeps coming back
to jail, and they want to make
sure that they get treatment, so
they're trying to get this
person um, you know, helped by,
you know, by, um, getting them
into the hospital through this
door. Um, what's
Though, is now the the beds at
state hospitals are filling up
with these patients, and there's
no longer space available for
civil, um civil patients who
have chronic needs, who are a
danger to themselves or others?
Because there's no room at the
end because they're filled with
other people being restored to
competency. So you can see on
this chart here. Uh, since 2010
between 2010 and 2013, the, um
the number of forensic beds
Has got have increased by 58%.
At the same time, the number of
civil beds are declining, uh,
drastically. Um, II, I We've got
a copy of a report that our
organization issued recently
called Prevention over
punishment.
Um and it looks at the you know,
kind of the status of state beds
around the country State by
state, and I know that that, uh,
in New Mexico, you have 6.5 beds
per 100,000 population, the
average around the country is
10.5 beds per 100,000. So that
puts, uh, New Mexico at uh, for
ranks you as number 43 in the
country so clearly, you guys
have
Um, I have a a bed shortage
situation. It looks like so I
imagine this problem. Um, that
only exacerbates this problem.
Um, So as I mentioned, there's
there's lots of consequences to,
um to these beds filling up with
forensic patients. One of them
is obviously fewer state
hospitals, Uh, beds for patients
who are not critically involved.
Um, it also means of individuals
who are in jail, waiting to be
restored to competency are
waiting longer, Um, on average
organ A, according to the report
that our organization issued,
uh, recently, uh, the average
weight across the
Country is two months for a
person to go move from the jail
into the hospital to be restored
to competency.
What this means is they're
sitting in jail, oftentimes,
with an untreated, serious
mental illness, which means
there are greater risk for
victimization. Um, the
likelihood that they're, uh,
gonna come, You know, Um uh, get
additional charges, um, filed
against them because of their in
their in that situation where
they're untreated, I when I was
at, uh, NAMI, Ohio. I
But worked with a family whose
loved one had been she had been
doing is doing great for a long
time. She was stable. She was
living in a group home, but she
met somebody and, um, left the
home one night and and met up
with this gentleman, and the two
of them were out drinking in the
the towny and the town, Uh, next
door to them in a different
county. Um, they got picked up
by the police for, um, for
public intoxication that
Police weren't familiar with her
because this was not her home
community. So they brought her
in. Uh, you know, she went to
jail. She was in jail for
several weeks without any
medication. Um, her mother
didn't even know where she was,
Uh so she she was in jail. And,
um, uh, for again just as minor
crime. But while she was there,
she, uh, held off and slugged
one of the the, um correctional
officers. So then she got, uh,
charged with a
Assault and waited for for
months to get a place at the
hospital to be restored to
competency. She got restored to
competency was there for several
months came back to jail. Um,
her trial was still several
weeks out, so she decompensated
again and had to go back to. I
mean, it was just this awful
situation That really could have
been, um, addressed more easily
had, um, had that community had
a OT. We'll talk a little bit
about
That looks like but that that
situation, it really is not
unusual at all. We hear that
those kinds of scenarios quite
frequently at our organization.
So what are states doing to
respond to this crisis?
Uh, I can tell you here in my
own home county of Ohio, they
passed a law a couple years ago
prohibiting the placement of
misdemeanors in state hospitals
for competency restoration. So
that means, um prosecutors have
three choices. They can either.
um they can either have them
restored to competency in gel,
which some states are doing.
They can put them in a community
based competency restoration
program, or they can just
dismiss those charges
altogether.
And the person goes back into
the community without any
treatment only to reoffend and
and wind up right back in the
same boat. A few you know a few
weeks to months later.
Um, some states have passed
laws, including Ohio, Um, to
encourage the use of dismiss
upon civil commitment with
assisted outpatient treatment,
I. I know some some, Um um
states who are looking at this
concept, they call it dismiss
and refer or dismiss and
transfer, but we feel strongly
that it really has to be
dismissed upon civil commitment
with a OT. It's not enough just
to take a situation.
Dismiss the the charge and file
for a petition for a OT with a
civil court. If there's no a OT
program, so, uh, it,
um so
If you just dismiss and transfer
and there's no a OT program
likelihood, the person may go to
the hospital for a little while
and get stabilized and then get
discharged with, uh probably,
um, you know, um, an appointment
for a follow up with, uh, with
the treatment team. But if that
person doesn't follow up, then
they're gonna go back into the
community and and which is, uh,
you know, most likely they're
not gonna follow up if they have
an Assia, and then they're just
gonna go back into the community
without any kind of
So we feel strongly that this is
only a viable option for those
communities that have effective
a OT programs they need to be
discharged to a program where
they're being monitored and
supported and encouraged to, Um,
uh, to engage in treatment.
Um, I'm gonna skip this that I'm
gonna talk about this in a
minute.
So, um, so one of the benefits
then? Um, well, there are
several benefits really to, um,
dismissing the charges, Uh up
front. So if a person is
arrested and identified early on
that they meet the civil
commitment criteria that they
are unlikely to be restored to
competency. Oftentimes they have
a history of already, um having,
um, um not been restored in the
past and been discharge or
Missed, uh, Heather case
dismissed and back in the
community. So, um, what we're
recommending is that those cases
be dismissed and then at the
same time charge or a petition
for a O TB, Um
Filed with the, uh, civil court
system, and there's lots of
advantages to doing this one,
obviously is. It's gonna open up
beds as we talked about. It's
gonna get those folks out of
those. Those lengthy hospital
stays, get them back into the
community, then open up those
beds for other, uh, ill patients
in the community who need those
civil civil beans. It's gonna
improve outcomes as we talked
about, uh, a OT. Um
And we've got oodles and oodles
of of of research that shows
that it reduces hospitalization
reduces arrest reduces
homelessness and incarceration.
And then the other big advantage
is, um, dismissing upfront and
putting a in an A OT program
means that they can be followed
up in the community. If you just
dismiss the charges, there's no
way to monitor that person in
the community. It's not like
they're on probation, and
they've got a probation officer
checking up.
And making sure that they're
following through with
treatment. That's not the that's
not an option. So, um, in a OT
program, they've got a treatment
team. They've got a case
manager. They've got a court
that are making sure that
they're where they're supposed
to be doing what they need to
do. And as we talked about it
saves saves money by not having
to pay for that expensive care.
So I want to talk a little bit
about who is a good candidate
for dismiss upon civil
commitment with a OT. So, um,
they the person has been charged
with a low level offense. So
this is not an option for
individuals who have felony
charges or have committed some
offense of violence. Um, they
meet criteria for civil
commitment, and I know you
already kind of discussed that
earlier. Um they have an a OT
program in in place in the
community.
They're unlikely to be restored
to treatment within that, uh,
that allowable time. Um
depending on most, uh, usually
it's like somewhere between 3090
days that they have to be
restored to competency or they
have to be let go, so if they're
not likely to be restored to
competency within that period of
time, then they would be a good,
uh, candidates for a OT. Um,
they don't present a public
safety risk. So you know, so
long as they're treated, they
may have
Aggressive behaviors when
they're not taking medication.
But if they're taking
medication, and and that is, um
um the the medication is, um
Affecting that, you know, or or
ensuring that they're they're
not acting out, then they're
good candidates.
Um, they don't have a
significant intellectual
deficit. They could have some
developmental delays. But if
they don't understand what is
being requested of them under
the court or be ordered to them
under the court order that you
know that they need to take
medication, and that they need
to show up to their, um, uh,
appointments and that they need
to come to court. Those are the
three
Things they need to be able to
understand.
Um, I if they have a substance
use disorder. That's a primary
diagnosis, then they're probably
not good candidates for a OT.
Certainly, uh, individuals with,
um, co co occurring substance
use disorders is fine if they've
got the the mental illness is
their primary disorder, And
there they self medicating.
perhaps, um, absolutely. They're
they're good candidates. But if
they're, you know, addicted to
meth, um this is not the
solution to that problem. I'm
afraid. Sorry. Um
There has to be the the
treatment that they need has to
be obviously available in the
community if they need a
specific type of treatment
that's not available, then it
would not be fair to place them
under a court order.
They should be housed or there's
housing available or, at the
very least, that their location
is known if they are homeless,
but they stay in the same place
so that the case manager can
check on them and know you know
where to find them and how to
monitor their adherence to
treatment that that's has to be
If they're just, you know, uh,
transient and moving from place
to place, so probably not a good
option.
Um, I can't take pleasure in
being hospitalized, You know? So
somebody, perhaps with a
borderline personality disorder,
who has their bags packed when
the police come out to to, um,
pick them up.
Um, that's probably not a good
can a candidate for a OT?
because these are folks who
don't want to be hospitalized.
They don't wanna be in jail.
They wanna be living in the
community.
Um and they shouldn't if if
they're, uh, a candidate for
mental health court, and that's
an option and they're willing to
volunteer to participate in
mental health court. That's
probably a better place for
them. As you know, you know,
mental health court is a
criminal court. So they have, um
more, um, sticks than you have
in the, uh, civil court system.
The person doesn't adhere to
treatment. They can be, um,
picked up and put in jail.
Obviously, we don't have that
option in
T. The whole goal is to keep
people out of jail so it
wouldn't make sense for us to
put them in jail if they're not
adhering. Um So, um, so we have
to do other things to get them
to want to adhere, So it's a
little trickier. It takes a
little bit more work more, um,
to get them engaged. It takes a
special kind of judge who's
willing to, uh encourage and and
support them and help them make
those connections between. Um
you know, um, living in the
community and staying out of
Hospital and following their
treatment plan, and then it
takes a treatment team that's
willing to go the extra mile to
help them be successful.
Um, just wanted to talk a little
bit about the pathway. So, um,
we just talked about the
criteria so somebody who meets
all that criteria that we just
discussed, Um, chances are
they're going to need to be
hospitalized for a short period
of time just to become stable.
If they meet all those criteria,
they're probably pretty ill. So,
um, this will just be a short
hospital Stay. This is nothing
like the lengthy hospital stay
that's required under competency
restoration, But this would be
just maybe.
You know, four or 56 days in the
hospital to get stabilized, um
so that when they get to court,
they can understand what it is
that the judge is ordering them
to do.
Um so that you have to have a
prosecutor that's willing to
dismiss the civil com Uh, the
the criminal charge. Um, that's
uh um
uh, you know, um
Some prosecutors are or are on
board with that others are not.
Um, but they have to be willing
to dismiss those. And then um,
and then a petition is filed in
civil court for a civil
commitment. It can be filed by
the prosecutor. It could be
filed by the court could be
filed by the hospital or the
mental health system. It doesn't
really matter, Um and it just
needs to be filed, Um
There needs to be a
psychiatrist that's going to be
ready to testify to demonstrate
that that person meets criteria
that then that's why, uh, it's
helpful for the person to come
out of the hospital so that you
have all that, um, documentation
from the hospital or they can be
evaluated while in jail as well.
But
Um And then, um
And then once the civil
commitment to a OT is ordered at
that point, the prosecutor
typically dismisses the charge.
And then, um, the person adheres
to treatment as we talked about
and and and engages in
treatment. You know again, it's
more than just adhering. They
actually, uh, embrace treatment
and recognize that this is
something that they need to
continue doing on their own.
Once that happens, and the
person graduates from a OT and
when they do, that's a big
celebration. Um, oftentimes they
will be like a graduation
ceremony at the court. If they
don't, um and then the
Computer can be notified, And at
that point, the prosecutor can
decide whether or not to refile
those original charges or not,
Um
If they do if the prosecutor
does is not ready to dismiss,
uh, right away, they can wait
until after the person has been,
um, evaluated and deemed to be
incompetent to stand trial, And
at that point, they can, um,
dismiss the charges at that
point and file for a OT in the
charges at that point and file
for a OT in this in the civil
court system, or they can wait
until they, um go through the
whole competency restoration
process. And if they don't get
Stored then they can, uh, they
have to by law have to dismiss
the charge, but they could still
file for a OT in civil court.
Even after that. Our hope is
that, um this process earlier it
takes place. Um, the better for
everybody. There's more money to
be saved. There's more hospital,
It requires less hospital. Um,
bed space, and it's just AAA
better fit, but it can be done
at any point along the continuum
that the prosecutor is willing
to dismiss.
So the treatment advocacy center
has two resources that we just
wanted to bring to your
attention. Um, the first one is
is a white paper. Um, that walks
you through the imp. You know
how you implement a quality a OT
program And then the second one
is, um goes into more detail
about some of the information
that I just covered. Um, it's a
dismissed upon civil commitment
with a OT handbook, uh, intended
for advocates and implement, so
these are both available on our
Website.
And, um, I'm available for
questions, and I believe my
colleague Amy Lukes is
available. I think she's I can't
tell if she's on here, um or
not, but she's available, too.
So we're happy to take any
questions.
Thank you very much, Um
Thank you. It's just so much
information and I have
I'm gonna go back to
It. Just the pages aren't
numbered, but it's stopped The
revolving the header here. Um,
just a question when on 0.2 of
the prosecutor dismisses
criminal charges prior to or in
lieu of competency restoration,
with or without prejudice.
Just in reference to competency
restoration and something that
our presenter mentioned about
our state hospitals.
In the beds that we have.
Madam chair.
Um, I'm
I'm debating, or I'm trying to
look for the exact information
that I have. And we were
presented. Uh
In our last committee that we
don't have a problem.
Our forensics at our at our
hospital Behavior Health
Hospital in Las Vegas with a
with additional need for
additional beds.
That we we're okay. That's
We didn't have a problem with
with with the breads, but we
have a problem with so
I don't know if if you're going
over any of that information as
you're looking at in from, um
data and statistics for New
Mexico, But that is so and I've
and I've heard that too. Um,
another meetings that I've
attended Madam chair That is not
really a problem there, uh, per
SE specific to our state
hospital and to add, or state
hospital is also under federal
guidelines and how they have to
operate, so I would
I would I just like a response
or a few can give some
clarification in respect to
How you're looking at that day
because to me what we're
Told over and over and over
again. It's the jobs. It's the
workforce that we don't have
enough. I'm sure
Well, I would and and that's
good news. I'm I'm glad to hear
that. That's not an issue for
you. Um you you're a unique I
can tell you amongst other
states in terms of having
sufficient hospital bed space,
But in terms of the workforce
issue, we often hear that from
communities. Um, that you know,
are contemplating whether or not
to implement a OT. But then they
you know, they said, But we You
know, we can't take on a new
program because of all the
workforce shortages And we would
argue that these are folks
They're already serving. These
are folks who are serving in
costly placements or in your
jails are already in your
hospitals. They're already in
your communities. Um, you know,
we're creating issues. Um,
they're creating issues for
families that these aren't new
people that are gonna come out
of the woodwork because you've
created this new program. Um, so
there are folks that you should
be already be serving. These are
the folks that you know, in
years past. We're living in our
state hospitals. And when those
state hospitals close down, they
came back to the communities.
Um, So these are the folks for
whom the community mental health
system was designed for? So we
argue that they should be
prioritized. Um, um and it's not
a lot of people. Let me just
clarify. I mean, this population
we're talking about is really
quite small. Um, the the the
folks that are kind of caught in
that revolving door, the
familiar faces that we often
hear about, Um, there's not a a
huge numbers, um, just to give
you an example I was in a in
Community. Um
That was the population was
about 100 and 20,000. So medium
size county they had all their a
O
stakeholder sitting at the
table, which was the sheriff,
the mental Health Authority, the
the hospital, the the the mental
health providers, the NAMI um,
affiliate all sitting around the
table, and somebody asked a
question. Well, once we have
this program fully implemented,
how many people do you think are
gonna be in it and the the judge
said 15.
Mental health Authority, 15, you
know, the the sheriff said 15.
They all started laughing
because they knew exactly who
those 15 people were because
they're the folks that they're
serving that they're seeing
every day trying to get them
help, and they're just not being
successful. So, um, just
So we we, You know, this is not
an expensive program. It's not
new people. It's really just
realigning. Redoing. How how you
you do business, uh, is
communicating and that's the big
The big hurdle is just
communicating amongst the, uh,
the key partners.
Thank you, man that I appreciate
that additional information and
III. I strongly agree with you
and and understanding those, uh,
those numbers and
They all deserve better Madam
chair and I think that's where
we're all in agreement. But,
yeah, I would.
I'd like to talk to you.
probably more offline and get
some more information.
Oh, thank you, representative
and
A OT generally.
But this kind of program that
you're another pathway
potentially is clarifying that
so that's what we're talking
issue and competence. Johnson.
That's correct, OK?
And because it's it's likely the
charge. So do I have that right?
Yes, the charges would be
dismissed of. We would, um
At the same time or a Sim. You
know when the at the same time
that the petition is being filed
with the civil court, so that
may mean take a little while. So
while that's happening, the
person is getting stabilized
ideally in the hospital, so when
they come out of the hospital,
they're coming out under a court
order in the civil court system.
OK, uh, under the program that
you're you're you're presenting
to us. That's how it works in
our world. It was pretty much
that in occur, all right. So,
um it has to meet the criteria
and in our jurisdiction and
members, That means danger to
self or others. If am I missing
any of that?
Yeah, OK. Um, OK, I thought they
lack of compliance with
treatment.
No I. I do not believe that's
part of our system, and I'm
looking at my colleagues, some
of whom are attorneys. So
That's um I see our staff
nodding. I'm correct in our I
defer to them. Yeah, yeah.
So there's a gap there because
That's a pretty high standard.
Um, you're saying other
jurisdictions have amended
there's in other states? Yeah,
great, Gravely ill. And, um
yeah, psychiatric deterioration.
Correct. So that's a gap we
would have. Should we ever be
interested in pursuing this? And
and so then, if you're qualified
for civil commitment instead of
civil commitment, which would be
a problem, um
You would go into this out.
Peat. Uh, just wanna make sure
we've out it is still a civil
commitment to a OT. Yes, it is a
form of civil commitment. It's a
less restrictive setting, OK,
and they're unlikely to be
hospitalized. Commitment to me.
Sounds like your hospitalized in
some way. Um, but this is
And now
Correct, correct, but if they
don't adhere to treatment, and
they decompensate, then there's
a potential that they could be
placed in a hospital.
OK, all right.
Thank you, Um, representative
Chasey. I
Uh, yes. Thank you, Madam Chair
and thank you very much for your
presentation. You had a slide on
the effectiveness of a OT and
Data on cost savings in New
York, North Carolina, Ohio and
California. And I'm just
wondering if statute
Requires, um, collecting these
kind.
Are you asking me about the New
Mexico statute? Well, I, I was
just wondering if if you know, I
mean, you're in Virginia. Do you
have some states require it? Uh,
me as I mentioned New York is
the only state that mandates a
OT so they mandate data
collection. There are a couple
of other states that are, um,
have pilot programs so there are
states have identified you know
23 $4 million that they're
piloting a OT.
In a select number of counties
and as a provision of that pilot
program that required to collect
data, so that would be Georgia
and Kentucky.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Madam Chair and and I
don't. I don't know, Miss
Johnson, if if you know the
answer to this, but I was just
saw on the the treatment
Advocacy Center website. It had
a brochure from the second
judicial district here on their
a OT program. Um, and there was
a an AOP ed that came out here
in May from, uh judges, Uh,
brick house in Rams about the A
OT program, which I'm very
confused about because we're
hearing
That it's only in Dona Ana. And
so I don't know if you know the
this is Johnson. I'm only asking
you because I saw the brochure
on the the treatment advocacy
Center website. But do you have
any idea about what's happening
in
Yeah. So in Albuquerque? Um
yeah. So they, uh they were the
recipients of a federal Samsa
grant of a federal state. Uh,
Federal, um, a OT Grant, which
is roughly about $4 million over
a four year period, and I
believe it was awarded in
Amy is on the line with me. Um
Amy is on the line with me. Uh,
2018, right, so they implemented
it for two years had a
exceptionally, um, effective
program there. We're doing it
really well, And then they had,
uh, difficulties with their
provider agency. So, the
provider agency quit serving
that population and they have
since, um um so they've been
working all since 2020 to try
and get that program restored.
Back to its original form. I
believe, um, they're set to
start it back up again this
summer.
Great. Thank you very much.
Thank you, ma'am. Thank you. One
point. I think, um
That was brought to my attention
in terms of the beds, and this
is for the K when we were
talking about that there was, I
think adequate available. That's
a different thing, and we don't
I don't see any OK, um, very
much appreciate the
presentation. It's clear to me
that there's a lot going on as
la Luke's, um
So, um, might be nervous that
it's not here quite here yet. We
were set to adjourn. And so I
would suggest we all take a
break and come back at
