Um, my name is Debbie Sarina. I
represent House District 21 in
Berlio.
Good morning, Madam Chair. I'm
William Hall. I represent
District 3, San Juan County,
Aztec Bloomfield area.
Good morning. Thank you, Antonio
Maestas, state senator district
26, which is west side of
Albuquerque, Burnell County.
Good morning, Madam Chair
members. Um, I'm Cynthia Brego
and I represent uh West side of
Albuquerque, Cottonwood Mall
area.
Good morning, Madam Chair, um,
everyone, um, Representative
Andrea Romero from northern
Santa Fe County with 4 sovereign
publics.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Um,
I'm Antoinette Zedilla Lopez and
I represent District 16 in
Albuquerque, and I've been
reminded that it includes um CNM
as well as UNM, um, and that
area. Thank you.
Oh, sorry, I am Joseph
Cervantes. I represent about 4
of Donana County. It's the
southernmost district in the
state that borders Texas and
Mexico.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Good
morning, everyone. I'm
Representative Janelle Yonoru,
District 19, Albuquerque, New
Mexico. It's kind of like the
southeast quadrant of the
Albuquerque metro area.
Good morning everyone. Peter
Worth, Senate District 25 in
Santa Fe.
And so Bill O'Neill, Senate
District 13, lots of
neighborhoods.
Um, Martineztown, South
Broadway, you just name it, I
represented, so it's uh
There you go, cause I don't want
to borrow how many
neighborhoods? I'm hearing a
poem coming here. Oh man, I got
it, I'm on fire. Anyway.
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee,
Representative Amos Casano. I
was district 70, which is San
Miguel in Torrance County. It's
a pleasure to be here with you.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Greg
Nibert, the center from District
27 representing parts of Chavez
and Curry.
All of Debaca and Roosevelt in a
very small portion of Lee County
Tatum.
Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chairman.
John Blockhouse District 51 in
Alamo Gordo. Uh, we are blessed
to be in Otaro County, right in
the foothills of the Sacramento
Mountains, so great to be here,
Madam Chairman.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Um,
everybody else, good morning.
um, Andrea Reeve. I represent
Chavez, Curry, and Roosevelt
County District 64.
I'm Representative Christine
Chandler from Los Alamos.
House District 43, and before we
go into executive session, I
really just wanna give my
sincere thanks to every member
of CCJ who has worked very hard
over the last, basically 2
months and trying to come to
some resolution on on some of
the governor's proposals.
Um, it's unfortunate we haven't
been able to get to that place,
but I, I recognize that every
person on this committee.
To a tea has participated
actively and constructively and
coming trying to come fashion
legislation that
Both chambers and the executive
could live with and I think
we're all committed and moving
forward to try to um address
some of these issues, um, as, as
the interim progresses, and I'm
certainly committed to doing
that and I'm sure our vice chair
as well, but I won't speak for
you, but you can jump in. No,
but I would like to add for the
members I'd like to just echo
those in which you all may not
know is the number of hours that
you are worth, uh,
representative Chandler.
Senator Stewart and I and
others.
I have spent meeting outside of
the committee process days and
days and hours and hours and and
then really with the support of,
of Cen Worth and the speaker, we
actually retained and hired
outside counsel. Uh, we went
through the whole process. We've
had a.
Brandon Cummings, you all know
him. We've had Megan in here.
They've been working largely,
um, almost full time at, at, at
many of these weeks as well too,
um with you all support, so the,
the, there's a lot of things
that they are even outside of
this committee process that that
have involved a lot of work and
so I wanted to thank the, the
chair for that and uh wanted to
make sure all of you knew about
that as well. Thank you. So, and
I'm really impressed with the
attendance of the committee, and
I want to express my
appreciation for that. It's
really
been a very strong committee and
participation. So, uh, thank you
very much and we'll be moving
forward, hopefully in the same
vein as over the next few
months. Um, with that, um, I
think we have now an executive
session scheduled to hear um.
Executive session to discuss
Attensio versus the state of New
Mexico or outside council is
present. Is there anything in
particular I need to do in
calling on executive session.
Mm.
