Um And I believe Nancy from our
staff sent it out to all of you.
This today. So so So, look for
it in your email from today.
You get an idea of what those
bills might look like, and we'll
hear from the governor's staff
At that time at 315. My goal is
gonna be to keep
On schedule and get us out at
415.
430 at the very latest as our
schedule shows, so, uh, with
that said
Um, we have our 1145 behavioral
health. Criminal justice there.
Please introduce yourselves from
the staff. Let us know what
you've been up to.
All the
Mr Chair members of the
committee. My name is Eric
Shiner, and I'm, the LFC,
analyst for the Healthcare
Authority, formerly the Human
Services Department.
Uh, they formally switch over to
the health care authority. Uh,
in
Just a few days from now.
And then sitting next to me,
I'll have her introduce herself.
Ah, Mr Chair members of the
committee. My name is Rachel
Garcia. I'm the LFC analyst for
CYFD, but also, um, previously
did some evaluation work related
to behavioral health access. Um,
that I'll talk about
Yeah. I'm sorry. Thank you.
Nancy. I'm I'm hoping that, uh,
you were advised to make sure we
leave plenty of time for
committee questions. And so, uh,
I hope your presentation
somewhere in the neighborhood
about for about 30 minutes. I'm
hoping Is that work for you? So
please watch your clock and, uh,
leave us that amount of time and
otherwise, as you wish, all Miss
chair. I just wanted to point
out that the I'll be going over
the, uh, PowerPoint that should
be in front of you. Hand out
Looks like this.
Um on on the first page, Um
I'm gonna go over a little bit
about Medicaid. The background
of Medicaid. I don't know. Um,
how much you all know about it,
so I just wanted to kind of set
the stage for how you know how
much we're spending in Medicaid,
that sort of thing.
Um, you know, and I'm gonna
mention we've done a lot of
increases over the last few
years, um, in behavioral health
and elsewhere.
Um
The Legislature has made a lot
taken a lot of action in the
last few years as far as the
increasing funding for
behavioral health. Thank you.
And then, um, we're also gonna
go over, uh, kind of the history
of some of LF C's
recommendations and some of the
things that agencies or courts
haven't um, kind of taken up as
it relates to, um behavioral
health. Um, you know, we're
we're doing that kind of as
preparation for you all, uh,
going into the special session
that starts in a few weeks here.
Um and I wanted to know, um, a
few things about the data that
I'm gonna go over.
Um, I. I just wanted to mention
you know, I don't know if all
you are finance folks, but some
of the data that I'm gonna go
over is prior years, you know,
so it's already happened. Some
of the data will be current year
or budgeted year and some of
some of the data is projected.
And so if you're trying to,
like tie some of the data
together back to, you know,
prior years or something like
that, it's not always gonna tie
back. So I just wanna make sure
that everybody's kind of clear
on that as far as some of the
spending
All right. I'm gonna skip um
Page three. That's just for your
information. Let's go on to Page
four here, and we've got a chart
here in the middle. Um, Medicaid
enrollment.
Revenue and expenditures.
Uh, I just wanted to mention
about 42% of the states, uh,
population is covered by
Medicaid.
And by far Medicaid is by far
the biggest, um, payer for
behavioral health services
within the state. Um and I. I
believe that's around 70 80%,
depending on on what we're
talking about.
Um so I'm gonna go over this
chart here. Just kind of
mention. Um, if you look at the
FY 24 over there on the right
hand side, you can see there's a
line at the top, and that's
that's telling us what the
population in Medicaid is. I
just wanna kind of set the stage
for you and and remind you that
we just finished our public
health emergency. And, um, the
population that is being served
by Medicaid right now has
decreased quite a bit by over
100,000.
Down to about 879,000 as of
April.
Um, but we are projecting that
to come back up a little bit,
Um, over the next few months, Um
Another thing I wanted to point
out is Medicaid overall.
We're spending about 10.3
billion
And that includes about 8
billion, um, in in federal
Medicaid revenue, and the rest
of that comes from state funds.
And so you can see the the blue
there at the very bottom. That's
our state funds. The green there
in the middle is, is our, um,
federal funds.
Um
Moving on.
Just wanted to mention a little
bit about the behavioral health
Collaborative. I think a lot of
you probably know about this,
but it was established in 2004.
It's It's got 17.
Agencies that are members of the
collaborative and we're
spending, um, outside of
Medicaid. Medicaid's also a
member, but outside of Medicaid,
we're spending about 100 and 90
million, um or projected to
spend about 100 and 90 million
in FY 25 through behavioral
health, collaborative agencies.
And that's just one piece of it.
There's also the Medicaid side,
which is about another $830
million. OK, so and then you've
got a It's a total of about $1.1
billion
He, um, responsibility of the
collaborative is to, um annually
do a needs and gaps. Analys
analysis, um, contracts for
delivery of services and also to
develop a master plan. Um, a
couple of things I wanted to
mention the CEO of the, um
collaborative right now is
vacant has been vacant for about
a year. Um, And then also, we
they haven't met since, um,
speaking to the the behavioral
health director.
Uh, right before this, and they
haven't met since about October.
Um and so
Just wanted to put that, um out
there.
Moving on to Page six.
Collaborative agencies are
budgeted to spend about 1.1
billion in FY 25. This is about
a 25% increase since FY 22.
Um, so on on one side of this
Here. You have.
All of the spending that is
related to the health care
Authority Department.
And then on the right hand side.
you have all of the spending
that is related to most of the
other agencies within the
collaborative within the
Behavioral Health Collaborative.
Um, if you look at this pie
chart here on the left hand
side, you'll see that about 831
Million is budgeted for FY 25,
just for
Uh, Medicaid, managed care
services, And then there's
smaller amounts for Medicaid fee
for service and, um, just
behavioral health services
division. Um, funding.
Um
And I wanna mention too within
that $831 million
Uh, we have the Legislature you
have done, Um
In the 2023 session. You did
$7.1 million in rate increases
to raise provider rates. So
that's how much each provider on
the ground should be getting
paid. Um
You raise those rates to 100 and
20%. We did another $7.1 million
in the 2024 session and, uh, the
department's plan on those rates
is to take those rates to 100
and 50% for this year.
Um, coming up and so
That's that's a pretty
significant increase for our,
uh, our providers out there.
On the right hand side. These
are all the other collaborative
agencies.
So you've got the administrative
office of the courts. Those are
those treatment courts. Uh, I
think I believe you heard from
this morning. You got CYFD. They
spend money on Children's
behavioral health. All this
money, by the way, um, goes
through most of the money, by
the way, goes through.
UM and administrative services
organization, and they contract
directly with, uh, those
providers on the ground, so just
just to kind of keep that in the
back of your mind, Um, so then
there's the Developmental
Disabilities Council. They they
spend money on Guardianships,
um, in financing administration.
They have DW I prevention and
treatment services. Um, and then
one that I wanted to point out
to you is in DOH. Uh, this is
primarily for their, um
It's about $30 million, and it's
primarily for their facilities.
One thing I wanted to point out,
though, is, um Turquoise Lodge
Hospital, which is a, uh
Uh, drug abuse. Um, I'm sorry.
Substance abuse.
Uh, rehab facility and also an
MRC, which is the New Mexico
Rehab Center, which both deal
with Sud, Um
The turquoise lodge is only
about 41%.
Uh, full of using its capacity
and and a R or C, Um as of the
end of May was only at about
23.3% capacity, so there's a lot
of extra capacity out there to
serve more people, um, that were
not serving right now. And so
just wanted to point that out.
And then in early childhood, we
have home visiting student loan
repayment and higher Ed. Um and
then at the Corrections
Department, Reentry and Inmate
Behavioral Health service.
Moving on to slide seven just
real fast between FY 22 and FY
25 projected spending for the
behavioral health program will
grow by about 25%.
Much of the increase in recent
years are related to increased
provider rates.
And again, that's that moving
from, uh
Up to 100 and 20% of the rates
that Medicare pays. And then,
um, this year, going up to 100
and 50% of what Medicare pays so
paying more for the services so
that we can attract more
providers out there.
Um
Moving on to slide eight.
Medicaid, behavioral health
spending. So this kind of breaks
down some of the, um
Managed care spending that $831
million. I was talking about a
minute ago. This is a slightly
different This is from 2023
836 million. Sorry. Um Most of
the services are in outpatient
services. So that's your
evaluation and therapies Applied
behavioral analysis. Um your
local federally qualified health
centers are getting some of this
funding. Um, and this is just in
behavioral health. We're not
talking about Medicaid as a
whole, um, outpatient.
Facility treatment. Foster care,
Um
And then you also have your
inpatient services, which is
another big chunk. Uh, at
pharmacy. Um, and then some of
the other services out there.
Uh, moving on to Page nine.
Collaborative agencies received
about 407 million in non
recurring behavioral health
funding between FY 23 and FY 25.
That's a that's a pretty large
chunk of money. Um most of that
is going towards capacity
building, so what we're looking
at doing is increasing funding.
Um, on the front end.
So that providers out there can
Um, deal with some of the start
up costs.
Of starting a new service line,
whether that be bringing people
in or you know other costs that
that might come up, you know,
setting up billing system and
and some of the technical
aspects of sitting of setting up
a whole A whole new, UH, service
line.
You'll see on that Capac
capacity building. Uh, we've
appropriated over 200 million on
that very little of it has been
spent yet, um, but in in
conversation with, uh, the
healthcare authority it it does
seem like they've granted out
they have granted out this
funding. Uh, at least the FY 24
funding. Um, and that'll start
to be spent more and more as we
go forward.
You'll see on the workforce
side. This is primarily for, um,
endowments for higher Ed. Uh,
institutions. And so that's why
that's you'll see, it's it's a
pretty high spend rate on that.
Moving on to slide 10.
Um I'm gonna go ahead and
actually pass this one off to,
um
Rachel.
So Eric walked you through you
all as a legislature have made
significant increased
investments in behavioral health
over the last few years, and
we've seen a significant
expansion in the coverage of
people so, particularly during
the public health emergency,
many more people were enrolled
in Medicaid Behavioral Health,
which, as Eric mentioned is the
primary funding source for
behavioral health services in
New Mexico. Um LFC has done a
series of program evaluations
and studies around what has
happened to people and what has
Looked like, um, over that
period of time. And so these
next couple of slides walk
through, um, sort of what are
the needs and the gaps in the
system.
Um, one slide 10. We know this
is gonna be very familiar to
you. All but New Mexico ranks
quite poorly when it comes to a
variety of behavioral health
metrics, um, and some of the
findings from evaluations we've
done on access to Medicaid, um,
substance use treatment and
things like that point to real
challenges and people's ability
to get care when they need it in
those areas, So while they may
have coverage under Medicaid,
they have challenges getting
access to care.
Evaluations have pointed to a
variety of things, including a
lack of behavioral health
providers. Um and that is why,
for example, you all in the
Legislature have made
significant investments in
things like developing the
workforce. Um, and increasing
the rates, uh, through Medicaid
for behavioral health providers
to try to get more into the
system.
Um some of the other things that
are evaluations have noted, um,
is that we also lack, um great
data around how many people are
actually able to access services
and what types of services Um
people are receiving. So that
tends to be a gap in a need in
our system. Um, but we have
pointed in a few evaluations to
to some estimates around those
types of things. So, for
example, um in 2020 DOH did a a
needs and gaps. Analysis.
It's a substance use disorders
and found there are probably
about 100,000 new Mexicans. Um,
who needed substance use
treatment and weren't receiving
it.
Um
Similarly, um, we've looked at
some of the Medicaid. Um,
measures around access and
timeliness to care and found,
um, that those things um, tend
to be challenging in our state.
So if you look at slide 11
in the, um
2023 LFC Medicaid Accountability
Report. We found some measures
around utilization for care. We
actually declining even though
more people were covered, um
through through services, but we
did see an uptick in behavioral
health visits overall and
And so, um, some of the
recommendations coming from
evaluations have pointed to
things like, um, strengthening
some of the managed care
contract requirements when it
comes to, um, access and
timeliness to care because
Medicaid covers so much of our
state's population, um, as well
as trying to gather and, um
analyze better data when it
comes to Medicaid, because again
we don't have great data around
how many people are actually
able to access care and what
types of service
Cause are they getting though we
have seen an evaluation, some
things like, um, relatively
stagnant utilization. Um, for
things like math or medication,
assisted treatment, even though
it's covered by the Medicaid
program.
Um, so that's why 11
Um, on slide 12, you'll see some
colorful kind of heat maps and
what we've done is some analysis
around just the number, um of of
providers, um, within managed
care, particularly behavioral
health, um, and the key trend
that you'll pick up in in kind
of the colorful maps is that we
have seen some growth in the
number of providers, um across
the state, but that growth
hasn't necessarily kept pace
with the growth in the enrolled
population and so again.
Can can experience challenges
when trying to access care,
though they may have coverage
through the Medicaid program, Um
So those are sort of some of the
key trends. Um and then on the
last slide, um, slide 14 You all
heard about treatment courts?
Um, but this just shares with
you some data around kind of
funding increases for treatment
courts as well as a trend, um,
in sort of excess capacity. Um,
though, that has, um
Ticked up a little bit in FY 24.
All right, Mr Chairman, so I
wanted to switch gears a little
bit here and start talking about
what FC has about the LF CS
research over the last few
years, Actually, some of it
going all the way back to 2013
and some of the recommendations
that we've made some of those,
um have, you know, haven't been
adopted yet or fully, um, acted
upon yet And so I just wanted to
go over some of this stuff with
you here, and that would be on
slide 15.
Um, So one thing that we we were
constantly talking about is the
prison revolving door, right?
So, um some of the things that
we have found, um LSC is found
or evaluated Found is that NFC D
does not consistently use a
validated risk assessment tool
for appropriate inmate security
risk classification.
Um, the 2020 report. The LFC did
found that at or at the time you
and M um
The U UN M was working on, um,
validating the risk
classification. We still haven't
seen, uh, the study from that,
um, at this time
Uh, an M CD does not use needs
assessments to reduce the risk
of recidivism and determine
appropriate services that
inmates should go into or you
know, during parole, probation,
that inmates should go into, Um
Uh, you know, so that we keep
them out of, uh, prison again.
One third of new prison
admissions are for technical
parole violations with most
related to substance use
disorder.
A state law allows for high
caseloads, and there's no
treatment requirement for
intensive parole supervision.
Intensive supervision is only
effective when caseloads are
manageable and offenders receive
services.
Uh, another thing that we found
is that other states allow
Medicaid coverage for
incarcerated individuals. 90
days prior to release
Mm.
Uh, New Mexico does this, But
it's 30 days prior to release
So some of the options that I
think, um, the Legislature has
and also just the executive has
as far as um, working on the on
the prison revolving door issue
is required in CD to use
validated risk assessment. Um,
tool and needs assessment tool.
um, on all inmates to determine
appropriate security
classification and needs.
Another thing that could be done
is to require, uh NM CD to seek
alternatives to reincarceration
before revoking parole for a
substance use violation.
Again, You know a large portion
of folks that go back into
prison. Um, the the recidivism
are related to that to the su
abuse. Right? So, um, set
caseload standards for intensive
supervision and require services
such as behavioral health
treatment.
Uh, in New Mexico should also
seek a Medicaid State Plan
amendment to increase that from
the 30 days, Uh, prior to
release Medicaid coverage, 30
days prior to release increase
that from 30 Days to 90 days.
Uh, California is already doing
that. Um, And we think we could
do that. Here. Uh, so that, um
folks can actually receive
services.
Uh,
You know if if there's a
waitlist for a service on the
outside of prison, maybe they
can get put on on the wait list
before they get out, and they
have services immediately as
they get out of prison, So
that's kind of what we're hoping
for. On that.
All right. So here's another
issue, uh, limited access to
care in high risk communities.
This is on page 17.
Um, successful treatment of SUD
often requires screening
assessment, detoxification,
outpatient and inpatient
treatment.
Medication assisted treatment
counseling, recovery support and
other services.
Pharmacies often limit the types
of medication assisted treatment
drugs available in areas with
high rates of opioid use
disorder.
And currently, providers must
become credentialed for
providers through each managed
care organization Separately
before seeking reimbursement
from that one MC O or manage
care organization, so right now
there's three MC OS starting
July 1st. We're going to four NC
OS. And if you're a provider,
right now, you have to go to
All four MC OS separately to be
able to seek reimbursement from
each of those, uh MC OS, And so
we're looking for the department
HS DH C a to do single
credential.
Issues. Identi. Oh, I'm sorry.
uh, limited access to care and
high risk communities Options
required Medicaid funded,
certified community behavioral
health clinics in high risk
communities to ensure access to
the full array of services. Um,
right now, uh, this year in 2024
we put in 15 million in start up
funding for certified community
be behavioral health clinics,
and the department also received
a grant from Samsa. That's the
federal
Federal government agency. Um
for these, and they're working
on setting these up. Uh, we
might want to look at possibly
requiring it in certain regions,
certain high risk areas. Um,
whatever, so that we can make
sure that those areas have the
full gamut of services of
behavioral health services in
those in those areas.
Uh, another thing is authorize
the pharmacy board and DH to
require pharmacies and high risk
locations to make available
medication assisted treatment.
Um, require Medicaid to
implement single credentialing
to reduce the need to work with
multiple M CS.
Uh, moving on to slide 19.
Um, currently there are no
statutory standards or I'm
sorry. Let's take a step back.
Um, this is the issue around
ensuring public safety prior to
adjudication.
Uh, currently there are no
statutory standards for pretrial
services.
Pretrial risk tools do not have
statutory guardrails about
validation, re evaluation or use
in decision making.
Pretrial services lack needs
assessments. There is no
standard approach for who
requires 24 hour ankle monitors
and there's little statutory
basis for pretrial metrics and
performance data or how criminal
justice coordinating counsels,
Uh, should use performance
measures, which are now part of,
uh, House Bill two or the
appropriations Bill.
And so what are options here to
kind of work on some of these
issues? Um, outline minimum
standards for on slide. 20 here
outline minimum standards for
pretrial services with the
administrative office of the
courts, providing certification
programs that meet these
standards Grant the Supreme
Court additional rulemaking, A
authorities for these services.
Require periodic validation of
risk assessments and implement
needs assessments for services.
Require rules for when and for
whom to mandate. 24 Hour live.
Monitoring create release via
ankle monitors.
And require reporting and use
pretrial performance data to
improve safety and report
findings on pub public facing
facing dashboards, and then I'm
gonna go ahead and wrap up here,
but there's a few things I
wanted to leave you with, Uh,
before I before I, uh, finish
Um
Number one. There's a lack of
community based treatment
options. Um, you know, high
quality options that are
evidence based, uh, within the
communities and you know,
there's you can see that. Uh,
I'm sure you guys have evidence
from your own communities. Um,
on that.
There continues to be
significant, unspent balances
from non recurring
appropriations. One thing I
wanted to mention is, uh
We appropriated $20 million to
both HSD and to the Children,
Youth and Families Department a
couple of years ago.
During the 2023 legislative
session very little of that
money, and it was meant to stand
up providers right to deal with
those start up costs. Um, very
little of that money has been
spent.
Today. Uh and so
And also the the plan that I
I've seen, Um for spending that
money doesn't necessarily fit
with kind of the letter of the
law, the language that was
included, um, in that, and so
You know, it's
Uh, we gotta get the agencies
kind of moving on spending some
of this money out there.
Um, and then the other thing,
and I already sort of went over
this a little bit. But DOH isn't
Department of Health.
They have those their rehab
facilities, and they are not
keeping their capacity full.
Um and
You know, DOH needs to work on
that.
To filling up those facilities
and making sure that um
That services are are available.
And if we're paying for those
services that folks are using
them. Obviously, people need
these services. And so I think
that's that's kind of an
important piece, Um, moving on
on page 22. I'll go ahead and
and stop now, But you have our,
um contact information on page
22 there. There's some
appendices in the back. I'm not
gonna go over those. But those
just kind of explain some
background information for you
on that. Um, And with that, Mr
Chairman. I'll go ahead and
stand for questions.
Yeah.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
All right. Thank you so much. I
really do appreciate it. I think
you, uh, the nail on the head
for me. Uh, what I just wrote
down, um
From your final words of where
the funding is. How is the
funding? Getting out is my
question. Um, who is
administering the do the
dollars? Uh, that we've
Appropriated. Um and how many
are being, um
Documented to RFPS or other
processes of of they're under
$60,000.
And how much how much.
Do they need to spend from other
appropriations Still from the
Arber funds that they haven't
spent in our I'm talking about
our agencies, or, uh, do H and
other agencies before they can
even get to the new dollars that
we've appropriated.
Mr Chair.
So, um, Mr Chair and
representative Lujan.
Um, just unpack a few of those
things so
Within the collaborative
agencies. Most of those agencies
funding for the collaborative
gets, um funneled through what
is called an administrative or
administrative services
organization. It's sort of like
a MC O. Right? Um so you've got
CYFD. Some of DOH is funding. Um
What else? Some of HSD funding.
uh, goes into this
administrative services
organization called falling
colors. It's a private
organization.
And they contract directly with
the service providers on the
ground, right? So we have we go
through one big RFP for that a
SO.
Um, you know a lot you guys
might remember way back in the
day like Optim health and and
those folks, that's what falling
colors does nowadays. Um and
then they contract directly with
those providers on the ground.
Um, when it comes to the DOH
Department of Health facilities,
those rehabilitation facilities
Those, um you know, they operate
those themselves. They operate
them directly. There's no
contract. Um, un unless there's
a contract for, say, staffing
within the facility, but they
operate the facilities directly.
And so we make appropriations to
those to the Department of
Health to operate those
facilities through the
facilities management program.
Um, and that's how how that
works. They also get billing
revenue and other other sources
of revenue. But a lot of it's
uh, general fund revenue.
Um
I'm not sure. What else of your
questions I haven't answered.
Um, H. One put that on public
record record, because Mr Chair
I've been meeting with, uh,
nonprofits and other behavioral
health organizations, and
there's been a wall around of
either communication or the
understanding of how they can
get access to some of these
dollars for the pro. The pro pro
provide that they have.
In the programs that they have
more on the side of program
dollars, and I know we are in a
transition right now, with HSD,
Um
I know that there are things
that are moving and we've given
them some graces. But when we
have this amount of money of our
budget being put into
behavioral, health and mental
health
UM programs and organization
organization spending.
And I'm getting feedback that
these dollars aren't going to
some of the these programs and
organizations that are
Are ready to to put, um
Their programs and and their
their their, uh, product to use
so the providers to use and I'm
so I'm having a
I'm having some issue with with
what is actually going on in
some of our agencies, Mr Chair
around.
The amount of money that we are
providing through our budget to
these agencies, and I just
wanted to bring that to light
because
Um, I don't. I don't want things
falling through the gaps again.
We are here to rebuild our
behavioral health system and
talking through the process with
the justice system right now,
And if we're not able to really
manage that through what we
already have in statute, how are
we supposed to solve these?
These additional problems where
you are judicial systems. Um,
there's a lot to
To unfold here for me. Um and
I've been talking about this.
I'm glad you're you're engaging
here and talking about the the
youth and and child programs as
well. I think that this is just
such a big, big, big issue, Mr
Chair, and it's
It's uh, it's coming to a full
head for me, and I've had
already several group meetings
with nonprofits and
organizations about some of the
problems and issues and and, uh
uh, boundary or barriers that
they have to even accessing
these dollars.
That it's it's um It's not easy
for me to sit here and and and
know that this is what's
happening. So some of those
questions I'd like to have
unfold and really bring to light
Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. I
shouldn't take longer than that.
But thank you very much, Uh,
Um, analysts, um, LFC, As you
recall, Mr Chairman gave us some
fantastic recommendations on
DOC. When was it 2017 And, uh,
those those recommendations are
gonna come to fruition one of
these days, but these are great
recommendations. Um
Um, a quick question on page 15
and 16. You have some DOC
recommendations, and then you
say
We should, uh, New Mexico should
seek a Medicaid State Plan
amendment to allow the Medicaid
coverage 90 days prior to
release
Do you know, Uh,
Is that a petition by the
executive or does that need a
statue? Statutory change?
Uh, Mr Chairman and Senator.
Yeah, so they you, You could
either do it through. Uh, a, um,
legislation just required them
to seek out
Uh, State Plan amendment with
the federal government.
Um, for that 90 days.
Or, um, it's something that the
executive could do on their own.
They don't need they don't need
legislation to do this. You
could spur them along a little
bit to to get him to do that.
No, thank you. Thank you very
much. We should definitely urge
the executive to do that, Um
Um
It was a
It was. It was like pulling
teeth to get inmates signed up
for Medicaid.
But it was great and the day
they get out they have, you
know health coverage, but to get
him up to go from 30 to 90 would
be
Would definitely be
advantageous. And then also, uh
you set a peculiar thing.
There's no statutory framework
for pretrial services. You know
this, um
Which which is a
Huge state responsibility that
essentially emerged overnight,
You know, after money, Bell was
Was, we were reminded that money
bail was unconstitutional.
But it might be something that
we should look at, uh, with the
leadership of the current
pretrial services, folks,
they're implementing national
standards, Mr Chairman.
But we don't really know what
those standards are and and
we're not really kind of
critiquing those standards as a
legislative branch, but
definitely we should
Move forward with some
With some DOC bills during the
60 day that are amenable to the
To the chief executive and the
secretary and continue to move
forward into the future of on
those recommendations today, and
those recommendations from 2017.
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. Uh,
sorry. I had to step out of the
meeting for a few minutes. And
if these questions have already
been answered, just
I mean, they've been asked and
answered, and I'll move on. Um
On Page five. I'm very, very
curious about the collaborative.
It's just it's leadership. Um,
do you know we're close to
having a CEO? Are they
interviewing? Are they
How How is the collaborative?
Working.
The leader.
Uh, Mr Chairman, Representative,
Um, you know, there's there's
there's not a leader. I know
that they've done some
interviews. Um, I don't. I don't
think those interviews ended up
going anywhere. Um, my
understanding from the the
director of the behavioral
Health Services Division there
at at a
Um, and there's not been
meetings. I mean, the meetings
are kind of the main thing right
to kind of direct the work of
the staff, and, um, I'm not sure
there's been
Much collaboration, uh, for lack
of a better word. As far as, um
You know, coordinating the
The services and then you know
as we go into the budget request
cycle here in in September.
You know, um, making sure that
those requests are kind of
collaborate. You know, they're
being collaborative in the
request for the budgets, that
sort of thing.
Um, I I'm not sure how that's
gonna work out in the next few
months because because the
collaborative has done great
work. I had a seat on that at
one time.
Um
And I just think
You know, I. I hope this thing
moves forward. My my concern is
Um how, who has oversight of the
$190 Million that are being con?
Uh, Mr Chair, Representative.
So, uh, like I said, Uh um
Well.
There's an administrative
services organization each
Agencies so like, say, CYFD, For
example, their money goes
directly to the administrative
services organization following
colors.
That organization contracts
directly with those providers on
the ground, right? And so that's
kind of how that works.
Thank you, mr Chair. So that's
there's that organization in the
middle. That's
You know, contracting for the
services and continuing what
it's always done.
At least for the past. What four
or five years?
Um, but that's that's it.
Thank you, Mr Chair. And so this
is an outside agency.
Mister John Profit Mr. Chair
representative. That's correct.
All right. Thank you, Mr Chair.
Those those are my questions.
Thank you, Mr Chair. If I go
over, you can stop me. Um
Thank you all for your
presentation. I just wanted to
mention that I've done a little
bit of my own research looking
for behavioral health studies in
the state contacted some of your
staff and I am aware
Of a couple of studies that you
mentioned. I think that are
coming to you in July, right?
Um, from you and him.
And, uh,
Yeah.
So
When I go to page
Well.
You guys kind of break down.
Sort of a needs.
By Metro non metro et cetera. Um
For me, it would have been
helpful to know where these
cities are in our state.
Because when I when I guess when
I I'm trying to get at is, uh,
Mr Chair sort of a needs
assessment statewide on a
geographic basis.
And as a former city planner, I
kind of break the state down in
four quadrants.
And then the fifth would be be
Leo County, which is the largest
county in the
In the state.
Um, and then kind of in my mind.
Think about where we're putting
our resources and if we're
putting them in places that the
highest needs are occurring and
I guess Page 12 kind of gives me
a little bit of a snapshot of
that, but it doesn't really
break it down geographically,
and I wondered if you guys have
thought about that, Um, so that
when we're making public policy
we really are putting our money.
In the places that are the
highest need.
And Mr Chair, just kind of in
reference to that.
On page
A team.
You guys talk about High-risk
communities.
And I just wondered how you
define high risk communities if
we don't have those breakdowns.
So, Mister Chair representative,
Um I will note that on slide 12.
This data is providers in the
Medicaid managed care
populations that are broken down
kind of under the categories
that are outlined in their
contracts. We can follow up with
you and have done some analysis
that breaks down kind of
providers and workforce by
county. Um, if that would be
helpful.
Mr Chair. Really? My my, my
really sort of bigger question.
For the state and for, um LFC is
whether or not we're doing.
Sort of our due diligence in
terms of of, uh, doing a
comprehensive breakdown or where
our funding should be.
Sort of directed
In on a geographic basis. And
and how long has it been since
the state has done a
comprehensive analysis because I
couldn't find it? And I
contacted some of your staff?
Um, I'd be happy to sit with you
guys and and talk about that.
But it seems to me like
You know, we're sitting up here
trying to make decisions on
where
Our funding should is best
served for our population.
But yeah,
There's information that we're
lacking.
And I guess that's a question.
Mr Chair and representative.
What I would I would say a few
things. Um, on that.
One. This is kind of this chart
here on page 12.
A lot of this is actually pretty
new data that we haven't been
able to kind of get out of the
department. And so this is
We're kind of working on doing a
more comprehensive needs
assessment. Um, in terms of
where do we need providers? That
sort of thing? Um, And so, you
know, I. I know our director.
He's He's sort of, um, directing
us to
Hopefully get to the point to
where we can have a dashboard
and kind of drill into some of
this data so that you can see a
map and drill in and see what
kinds of providers are in your
community. That kind of thing
that would be that's where we're
hoping to get. But for now,
We're just kind of bringing you
that some of this preliminary
data that we're working on.
Mr Chair, I. I certainly do
appreciate that that you brought
us this information, But I'm I
guess I'm looking for something
that's a little bit deeper and a
little bit more thorough and
what what I would say Mr Chair
and representative also is, you
know this is something that LFC
staff is kind of taking on, but
it it is a part of what the
behavioral Health collaborative
should be doing in statute that
is part of their, um,
Mr Chair, I. I certainly do
appreciate that that you brought
us this information, But I'm I
guess I'm looking for something
That's a little bit deeper and a
little bit more thorough. And
what what I would say, Mr Chair
and representative also is, you
know this is something that LFC
staff is kind of taking on. But
it it is a part of what the
Behavioral Health collaborative
should be doing in statute that
is part of their responsibility
is to is to do
These needs and gaps assessments
for the state.
Um, you know, we're trying, you
know, since they haven't been
meeting that sort of thing we're
trying to do some of this work
ourselves, but, um, because we
need to know for funding
purposes, just LC staff and how
to recommend to the Legislature
how to fund stuff. We're we're
trying to get to the bottom of
some of this ourselves. Um, And
so that's that's why we're
bringing this data here and
hoping, you guys um
And Mr Chair. Just on that note.
I think it would behoove the
state to do and to fund a
comprehensive study. Um
particularly since we're looking
at creating good public policy
around this issue and making
sure that people and communities
that are, um
As we mentioned in this report.
High risk communities are at
being adequately funded. Um and
I and I realize that it's really
hard Mr Chair, but because
people migrate and they go where
there's treatment, so we're not
probably getting a true
reflection in a sense of where
those individuals live, because
sometimes they go to Albuquerque
and they might live in Mota
County or somewhere else. Um,
but
I just wanted to mention that Mr
Chair is that we may want to
consider funding a comprehensive
study. Um, in the future that
gives us sort of a true
geographic reflection, but not
just geographic also gives us a
true reflection of the types of
substances, especially when it
comes to substance abuse that
we're dealing with.
So thank you for that, Mr Chair.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
I'm I'm looking at page 13.
And you might have talked about
this, and I just missed it. But
Can you explain a little more
about what? This means? That 71%
Of the total expenditures of HSD
or unclassified. Yeah, so I
think we might have accidentally
skipped might have accidentally
skipped over this slide. Um and
I can go over it real fast.
So the
Accountability in government
Act. Uh, that's you know how we
get all of our performance
measures from all the agencies
and that sort of thing. We also
have a requirement that we put
in a few years ago as far as
creating program inventories
for, um certain agencies so
every year C picks, Uh, five
programs within five or six
programs within, UM state
agencies and we go to those
agencies and we say, Hey, do a
program inventory on all the
That you guys operate, Um and we
help them with technical
assistance, that sort of thing.
But tell us how much of those
programs are actually evidence
based, Um and we asked them to
classify them on these
different, um
Items here that you can see on
that pie chart on page 13. And
so, Yeah, uh,
You know, out of that 1.7
billion, And this there is some
overlap here, here and there, so
it doesn't does it again. It
doesn't tie back to some of
those earlier slides. The
numbers don't
But yeah, about of the 1.7
billion. There's about 1.2
billion. That, um HSD doesn't
classify or is unclassified as
being
They don't know if it's evidence
based, they don't know if it's
research based, if it's um
You know if it's very whatever
like there's
We don't have that. And so
that's one big piece that, um
we're hoping to work with the
agency on over the next few
years, is getting a grip on
Whether or not services that
were providing are actually high
quality and evidence based
Well, mister care and thank you
for working with them on that,
because that's kind of scary
that we don't know if the vast
majority of those services and
programs are evidence based or
not.
And then there was one other
thing I wanted to ask. And now I
forgot what it was. Oh, for the
the pre
You. You talk about there not
being kind of a statutory
standards for pretrial services
are
there non Staat standards like I
know that Supreme Court has
issued rules around, you know,
pre trial release? Are they do
they have those same rules
around?
Service pretrial services.
She has some
Uh, AC has rules that they've
set up, but they're not in
statute. Um, and I'm not sure
they
They go back and review whether
or not um the different courts
within the system were actually
Following those rules and that
sort of thing. OK, Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you, Mr Chair, and thank
you, Mr Shiny for the
informative presentation, Um,
going back to our discussion of
the behavioral health
Collaborative. You mentioned the
Master plan. What is the status
of the Master plan?
Um, I. I haven't seen one.
And I. I don't have a status on
it. I apologize. I don't know
if, um anybody in the room has a
status on it. But, um
I don't think so.
And and thank you, Mr Chair, and
I think that actually brings to
light. One of the biggest
problems we're having is, I
think that there we've been
struggling with the the
Collaboration aspect, um, with
the collective for a long time.
I think that we have had
leadership changes and changes
in direction. And I think that
maybe one of the things that we
can try to concentrate on is
getting the collaborative to a
place where it can be effective.
Um, because we are lacking
leadership. I think in this in
this subject overall, um we're
going in a million different
directions and we need to just
pick a couple
Um, Mr Chair? Um
And Mr Chenier.
We're talking about. We have
record amounts of substance
abuse disorder in our community.
We have record amounts of mental
behavioral health issues. Um,
and a lack of services. But yet
we have empty beds. And so, um
to me, that's pretty astounding.
And I think, uh, there's
disconnect somewhere. So, Mr
Chair, Mr Cheer Can you talk
about what this legislature can
do today to help alleviate that
disconnect so that we can begin
to provide services tomorrow?
With all of the resources that
we've already
Put towards this venture.
Mr. Chair representative. We did
look at the state facilities.
Um, a couple of years ago in a
program evaluation and were
puzzled by this, Um, challenge,
one of some of the
recommendations that came from
that, um, were to do things like
review, um, and publish
admission criteria for those ST
facilities that are having, um a
lot of open beds, so that's one
thing that could be done. Um, a
another was just a focused kind
of outreach and
Communication that these
facilities exist. Um, because
providers may not know that they
are a resource funded and
available by the state, so those
were two specific
recommendations. Um and we could
share more from that facilities.
Report. Um
Thank you very much, Mr Chair,
and you know, we're talking a
lot about, um, competency,
right? And so I think one of the
issues that I've seen and so one
of the contracts I have. It is
as an attorney is I work with,
uh, Mental Health Court and
second Judicial District Court
and I work a lot on civil, um,
competency issues, and and I
think that our statutes have
kind of impossibly high
standards that that in, uh
police officer police officer
needs to meet in order to bring
identify.
One who's having a mental health
crisis and bring them to a
resource. Right? So, um I hope
that we can begin or continue to
dig deeper in that issue. Um,
another question I have Mr Chair
is just with pretrial services.
You state that there's no
statutory standard, but we do
use an a tool or an algorithm,
at least in the second judicial
district called the Arnold Tool.
Can you talk to me a little bit
more about the standards that we
use for that? Um so
I. I think what the issue is is
you know you do have some of
these things being used. Say in
the second. Um, but it's not
being used across the board
with, you know, with all the
different, um, judicial
districts. I think that's kind
of what we're getting at is
there needs to be more
standardization across the
board. Um, and then also, you
know, one of the recommendations
is for a OC to certify that each
of those, um district courts or
judicial districts are
Actually, um, using
That, uh
Are actually using that, um,
certified
To, uh within their district.
Thank you, Mr Chair, Mr Chenier,
I. I believe a bill was brought
on that a couple of years ago. I
don't think it went anywhere,
though. Um, last question I have
Mr Chair, Mr Shy. So, also
talking about, um, the
credentialing issue that we have
with our managed care providers.
Um, Mr Chair members of the
committee. I mean, I think at
one point LFC was talking about,
um, incorporating performance
measures or the need for for
contract providers to
Submit performance measures to
the state in order to get these
contracts Renewed for Medicaid.
Um Mr Chair, Mr Shiner. What do
you think about the idea of
requiring, um, a standardized
credentialing process across the
board as well?
Absolutely. And I mean, we We
definitely, um, support single
credentialing so that um
providers don't have to work
with a bunch of different MC OS
to get, you know, to become a,
um
Provider and get paid by those
Cos
Um
Yeah, absolutely.
Um, Mr Chair, Mr Chenier. So,
yeah, exactly. And if you want
to get if you wanna be a
Medicaid provider, you have to
have a standardized process
Sounds. I mean, it could be
either in contract or we could
pass a law if necessary. I don't
think it would be, but thank you
very much. What one thing I
would just mention before you
stop his, uh, you know,
Single credentialing. The
department is sort of tied that
to their it system. It's this it
system overhaul.
Of the department called Miser.
Um and it's
Been delayed by years and years.
And so, um, you know,
It. It is a piece of that. And
you know if we could get that
miser system moving along, this
is a consequence of not having
that that system up. Thank you,
Mr Chair. I think the miser
system is missing a letter a Y.
Think it was.
O'Neill.
Okey dokey. Thank you, Mr
Chairman. So, I, I don't have a
question, but thanks for your
presentation, but I immediately
I can't help but I got to page
15 and I just want to alert
The committee and everyone, Um
one third of new prison
admissions are for technical
parole violations.
Which related to with most
related to substance abuse
disorder. No
With my good colleague, Senator
Mayes, as we have been trying
to, like work with DOC.
To acknowledge that we can do
better. OK, it's $20 million, at
least to the state, and we need
to do better with the technical
parole violations. That's you
know, people are addicts and you
know they need to be held
accountable.
And and we've we've passed this
by this chamber passed in a
bipartisan way Parole reform and
unfortunately it was vetoed. But
on the other hand, you know DOC
and we're working with DOC. And
I'm sure Senator Maestas will
carry the torch with this, but
this is very important. And, um,
it it would be, uh, you know,
it's just inexcusable that one
third of our prison population
is in there not for new
felonies, but for technical
parole violations. So thank you
for flagging that
And I don't really have a
question. Thank you.
Thank you, Chairman.
I have a question on falling
colors. I think you mentioned
them. They they pick providers.
How much do they charge the
state?
And what is their role as far as
picking providers for the state
in my school for Medicaid?
Um You know what? I don't have
that data with me right now.
Uh, but we can get it for you.
Um, yeah.
And I know they serve.
A few agencies correct.
HSD, uh, Department of Health
DOH and some other ones. Uh, Mr
Chairman and Representative Uh
yeah.
I. I think almost all of the
agencies in the collaborative
they serve.
OK, if you can get that for me,
I really like to see how much
What they charge the state how
much we're giving them in
funding and how What are the
results that we're getting as a
state? Thank you, OK?
Uh, I just wanted to mention
that I did get an email back
from LFC regarding, Um uh,
representative Hoffman. V Hill's
question about, um, the studies
and I'd like to share it with
you and Nancy and maybe we could
distribute it to, um, the
members.
Mhm.
Thank you.
Thank you.
OK?
Questions myself. Um, the, uh,
if you look at the, uh, slide
Page six
Trying to follow up on a point.
Made earlier by Senator Stewart
and that I've tried to
Re emphasize a little bit.
I'm trying to look at all the
various
Sources or I guess recipients of
funding that we put into any
number of different behavioral
health. Um, agencies categories.
They seem to be all kind of
synthesizer on Page six. Is that
right? Slide six. In other
words, if I'm reading this right
when you're looking at the pie
chart on the left
We've got. What is that about?
Starting at the top. There's 67.
0.67 0.7 million.
Right? Yeah. Contracted for
Medicaid, Behavioral health.
Was chair that great
These are all annual figures. Is
that right? This is in our
budget That's correct. And then
so below that be below that
67.7 million, then we've got
Uh, 35.8 almost 35.9 million.
Contracted to behavioral health
services.
In mental health community
mental health services, right?
And then we've got another 45
million contracted for substance
abuse.
Behavioral health services to
behavioral health services
division.
That's another agency. I guess.
Another program.
I'm I'm just going through the
program after program, Right? So
we've got you know the 67 6
almost 68 million and then we
got the 35.8 million and then
we've got the 45 million and
then we've got below that the
opioid fund.
Uh, transfer. I guess that goes
to the treatment as well, too.
Is that right? So that's another
7 million. We've got the
Medicaid and hear health managed
care expansion. Um, that's 311
million.
These are all annual dollars. Is
that right? These Mr Chair
that's correct.
Um, and then we get over to the
bar chart. Beyond that, we've
got the a OC.
Numbers. And if I'm looking at
that it looks like that's
somewhere around. Looks like
maybe 25 million. Is that about
right?
That's about right. Maybe 26 25
26 million into the a OC we
heard from them earlier today
into their program and then CYF
DS got, uh, a Children's mental
health.
Budget item that's looks like
that's about another 27 $28
million.
I keep going down through all
this Developmental Disabilities
Council. They've got theirs.
Finance. Uh DW I prevention and
treatment program over at
Finance and administration.
We've got the Department of
Health.
Or DOH facilities. Looks like
there's some around close to $30
million.
Uh, transportation departments
got
Small piece of the pie, but they
still get $4 million for a
program to NDW. I got early
childhood, which a lot of us
have worked, Uh, for many years,
that's now approaching looking
like a $40 million.
Uh, into into behavioral health
and then at the higher Ed
I guess that student loan
repayment I I'm not sure about
Well, that factors in there But
maybe it does, I guess in terms
of behavioral health, um
How? How is well, I'm not gonna
dig into that too much. And then
we've got the Corrections
department.
Looks like again. Another maybe
15 $20 million, So we've got a
lot of money.
Uh, going in a lot of different
directions all under the
umbrella, I guess of behavioral
health. Is that a fair way to
say that's what we're seeing a
all summarized somewhat on on
that page six.
On Page six. That's all those
are all collaborative agencies,
So behavioral Health
collaborative? Yep.
Yeah.
And Mr Chair. And when we say
collaborative, I guess that's
the question I've got is how
much collaboration is going on
between all these agencies when
we're spending. I'm not gonna do
the quick math here, but I'm
sure it looks like it's probably
gonna be one of Mr Chair. That's
1.1. You got it there at the
top. You did it for me. Thank
you. So, Yeah. So we've got 1.1
billion to all these different
agencies, all these different
groups, all these different
contracts, and and so who's
responsible for coordinating all
of these, So it makes it
collaborative.
Uh, Mr Chair, so the
collaborative is is should be
responsible for, um
Contracting with as I said
earlier that administrative
services organization falling
colors and then that a SO so
most of the services here on
that you see on the right side,
OK, the smaller agency the
smaller amounts that money goes
through that a SO, um, the money
on the left hand side there.
that money goes through. Uh,
most of it goes through
Uh, managed care organizations,
uh, through the regular Medicaid
process.
Again, I, I I'm still back to
where I'm trying to figure out
which is who who is ultimately
responsible for assuring their
collaboration between all these
recipients of the $1.1 billion
every year.
Should be the collaborative.
Statute. It's it's the
collaborative.
How do they do that?
Uh, Mr Chair on a quarterly
basis there, uh, supposed to
have a meeting? Um, with all the
members, uh, you know, 17
different agencies.
Um, and those members decide on
exactly
Um
How to distribute the money. Uh,
the staff at the agencies also
supposed to come up, you know,
be coming up with
recommendations as far as
Um, needs and gaps. Analysis.
The master plan. Um and that
sort of thing.
And you've used you've heard we
used the word carefully that
there's that's what they're
supposed to do. I'm gonna assume
the best and assume that's what
they do. Do
Um and and and ultimately who?
Who, uh, who is responsible for
the collaborative? You know it,
Is it the board? Who does who do
they answer to?
Mr Chairman, The the
collaborative is housed at, um
within the behavioral health
services division at the health
Care Authority. So HSD
That's the new healthcare
authorities. HSD is now changing
into health care authority. And
so we're we're just standing
that up now. Is that right?
That's correct in a few weeks or
a few days, actually.
Well, let's hope for the best,
All right, anyone else?
Questions? All right. Thank you
all for the presentation very
much.
Um, I'm about 10 minutes ahead
of schedule, but
Oh, you're ready to go back
there. Come on up. Glad you're
early. Thank you for that.
Is a
The Governor's council is coming
up.
And I don't see his mystery. So
there we go, Mr Baker, too.
Thank you. Both, Um
If you would begin, please.
Miss agai and, uh, if you would,
um, tell us what I think the
members received an email with
Bills, uh by email.
And I wanna make sure that what
they got
Is the, um, bills. You want us
to be aware of, Um, perhaps
looking in on today. If, uh
If you want us to do so. So if
you could just give us an idea
of what we should have in our
hands, what we should know about
and perhaps T or or a number so
that we can refer to them and
maybe just give me a list of
what? What? We should be pre,
uh, prepared for you to present
today, please.
Sure. Thank you very much, Mr.
Chair. Um
Depends on which email I think
that you're referring to. It
sounds like there have been
emails with drafts of bills that
actually aren't our bills that
have gone out. So let me go
through that. I'm sorry. Say it
again, please. Um, my
understanding is there was an
email that went out.
Little more than a week ago,
containing what was supposed to
be our office's bills in
particular containing what was a
competency bill. That is not our
competency bill, and I can
explain that. I think it was
probably a staffer was asked.
Where's the governor's
competency bill and sent a bill?
Um, it's the draft that we were
working on from last session
that we were continuing to
update
Um, that is not the governor's
competency bill when Justice
Zora testified at the last
meeting that she's been working
on it for a year and still needs
another few months. That's
clear. I can't do a better job
than she can. Um, so we
We were not working on that and
have not been, um, the
competency bill that the
governor is presenting is the
one that was sent. I believe to
the chairs on Friday, Um and
then we distributed it, Um, to
the whole committee this morning
via Ms Martinez. OK, so we have,
um
A bill.
Looking for the it's a ending in
597.2 GLG.
That's related to commitment
procedures. I'm sorry, Nancy
asked me. Have you read the
whole number? Please? Oh, sure.
Ok, 0.228597.
0.2 GLG. The next one is
Um
The the next one actually
doesn't have an actual bill.
It's a word document. I can show
you what I have, because it's a
discussion draft. I believe Mr
Dolan put it into a bill draft
earlier today, but it's a PDF of
a word document with red lines
in it. That is the discussion
draft of the competency bill,
And if I may interrupt it has
that been emailed to our staff
as well, too.
Yeah. Um, Mr Mr Chair that was
sent to you. I believe last
Friday and I sent it to Ms
Martinez this morning. OK, Thank
you. Um, Mr Baker has the three
public safety uh, crime bills.
If you'd like those numbers as
well, I'm not sure if there's
any attendant, please, if you
just identify the bills, just so
we have an idea of what we're
what we're looking at. Certainly
Mr. Chair. Discussion draft. Uh,
increasing P penalty for a felon
in possession of a firearm
0.228616 0.2.
Additionally,
Um, enacting unsafe roadways Act
0.228557 0.2 GLG.
Excuse me, Mr Chair, the one
that I have is 0.1. I say 0.2 on
the 1st 1.1 on the 1st 1.2 on
the second one. My apologies
Committee chair. OK, just so we
because I had the same question
so let just so we're not all
talking over each other. The the
F in possession.
Should be a the last should be
16.1 that right? Right. OK,
because I I do think you said
too. So pardon. Pardon that
That's all right. Um and last
not Yes, sir. Last but not
least 0.228580 0.1 GLG. And this
has to do with law enforcement
reporting of crime and ballistic
information.
All right. So we got the three.
Then you're putting. You're
calling those a category. You're
calling those? Maybe. Did you
put those in a separate
category? Did you call them
public safety or those are the
the criminal Code Bills.
Criminal code. OK, so those
three and then apart from that
We have the, uh 597.2. That's
the harm to self. And then what
was the The other one is the one
that you said is in a PDF form.
It's a PDF with a of a word
document with redlining. That's
the competency bill we received
at about 11 or 12, the actual
bill version of it today, but we
had already sent this out to you
all this is the discussion
draft. OK, members want to
follow along with that that was
given to us when we sent it to
you on Friday, Mr Chair and I
sent it to Miss Martinez this
morning, OK? And thank you. And
I appreciate you all have been
doing this, I think
The leadership is asked to kind
of send them to us as the chairs
and then our job is to get them
to Miss Martinez and Miss
Martinez to the whole committee.
So all right, So we're looking
at Yeah. Center work. Can I just
clarify a couple of things? I
think the so the felon in
possession Bill is the same
version that was sent
Prior. It's been sent out to
courts. Corrections. 0.1 hasn't
changed. I correct in that Mr
Chair, Senator, That's correct
and Mr Chair. The reporting bill
has not changed. It's the same.
This chair, Senator worth
correct, But Mr Chair, there is
a change in the roadway bill, So
I hope you're going to talk
about that.
Mr Chair, Senator. We Yes, sir.
And then I just want to be clear
that the a OT rewrite.
It was previously sent out that
is no longer part of this, uh,
Mr Chair leader worth that. That
is correct. The the the major
rehaul of a OT. Um, Governor.
Here's what you're saying that
it's too much to do in a special
session. We paired it down to
even a smaller redo of the A OT
and and I think what we're gonna
do instead is just focus on the
people that are more marginal at
this at this juncture, right? I
think that helps. Thank you, Mr
Chair. Thank you very much. All
right. Thanks for helping us get
ourselves oriented. A little
bit. Um, the floor is yours.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um I also
want the committee to know as
well. I'm sure you all have seen
a, um, a PowerPoint that was
distributed earlier that I sent
to Ms Martinez a couple of hours
ago, um, involving some a OT
data that we received that was
distilled into, um
The the data was compiled with
regard to competency
proceedings. To the extent that
the committee has any questions
about how that data was, um,
broken down. Uh, Mr Hatch, Sam
Hatch from our office is here.
He's the one who did it. So if
anybody has any specific
questions about that he's here
to answer those questions. Um, I
would also be remiss if I didn't
wish. My good friend Mr Baker.
Happy birthday today.
Um,
best best thing you can think of
doing.
Uh, Mr Chair.
The governor, as I was just
saying, um, has
Um
Listened and been listening to
the committee and to your
thoughts on on the big lift
that, um and I've and I've been
listening this morning as well.
The big lift that retooling, um
that part of our behavioral
health system is going to
entail. So what we've decided
instead to do is is
Condense.
The the goals here and what we
are looking to do with the
governor is looking to do with
the bills that I'm going to
discuss it first is to really do
take some small necessary steps.
Um to really
Help those people who are
either, uh, the an extreme
danger to themselves or an
extreme danger to others.
So I will start with the bill
that is in the discussion draft,
or that is in the, um
That is in built form. That is
the relating to commitment
procedures, Bill
And you can see what this bill
does is it does two things. It
does the same two things in two
different places, basically, but
what it does is it changes our
definitions in our involuntary
commitment. And in our a OT
statutes that changes the
definitions of likelihood of
harms to self and likelihood of
harm to others.
The Supreme Court of the United
States has essentially said in
order to mandate somebody into
involuntary civil
Commitment. They must be found
to be a danger to themselves or
others. The Supreme Court of the
United States has specifically
declined to say what that means
States and legislators in
particular, have, uh, extreme
latitude in making those
determinations because it is
very different. Um, in every
state.
Our current version of danger to
self and others, essentially
with some exceptions, of course,
but essentially means that the
person or or requires the person
be basically suicidal.
Um, So what we are doing is
removing the current definition
of serious harm to oneself,
which is currently reads as
follows. More likely than not.
That in the near future, the
person will attempt to commit
suicide or will cause serious
bodily harm to the person's
self.
By violent
Or other self destructive means,
including grave passive neglect.
That is gonna be changed. That's
and it will be on Page five,
starting at line nine.
The new definition is that the
person is unable without care
supervision and continued
assistance of others.
Not otherwise available to
exercise self control, judgment
and discretion in the conduct of
the person's daily
responsibilities and social
relations or to satisfy the
person's need for nourishment,
personal or medical care,
shelter, or self-protection and
safety.
And number two. There's a
reasonable probability that the
person suffering S, Uh I'm
sorry. Uh, the reasonable
probability of the person
suffering serious physical
debilitation in the near future
unless adequate treatment is
provided pursuant to the code.
Showing of behavior that is
grossly irrational actions that
the person is unable to control
behavior that is grossly
inappropriate to a situation or
other other evidence of severely
impaired insight and judgment.
create a prima facie inference
that a person is unable to care
for oneself.
Similarly harm to others.
Current definition more likely
than not that in the near
future, a person will inflict
serious, unjustified bodily harm
on another person.
Or commit a criminal sexual
offense.
As evidenced by behavior,
causing attempting or
threatening such harm, which
gives rise to reasonable fear of
such harm.
That definition will be changed,
as you can see at the top of
page six. Harm to others means
that within the relevant past
the person has inflicted
attempted to inflict or threaten
to inflict serious bodily harm
on another.
Has acted in such a way as to
create a substantial risk of
serious bodily in bodily harm to
another, or has engaged in
extreme destruction of property
and that there is a reasonable
probability that the conduct
will be repeated.
Those and those are the two
changes. Um, that is in the
you'll notice the first part of
the bill.
In Section one, you'll notice
again, it comes up. It's the
exact same changes starting on
Page eight for Section two.
That's the assisted outpatient
treatment Act, Um, where they
again discuss the self, uh,
danger to self and harm
criteria.
Um I would also like to note
just as a as a pause in case
because I do know even though we
started a little early that
we're pressed for time, Um
I. I was on a call earlier today
with Karina Lopez, who is the
director of peace place, which
is the interfaith shelter here
in Santa Fe. Um and I discussed
this exact issue with her and I
and I discussed with her the
changes that we were looking
for. Um, she's gonna try to
listen and comment if she can,
at the end, But she, uh,
explicitly gave me permission to
say that this is a change she
thinks is needed. This is
something she sees every single
day with the people that they
serve at the shelter.
The next discussion draft is for
competency, um and and rather
than kind of going through all
of this line by line. I'm gonna
just explain Generally speaking
what this does. I'm happy to
answer any specific questions.
But what this bill does is, uh,
it in a case where somebody has,
uh, been found incompetent to
stand trial.
Uh, just as a general matter,
the court must
Advise the district attorney to
consider initiation of
involuntary commitment
proceedings. Um, by way of
understanding for all of you who
don't spend enough or not enough
who don't spend time with us the
district attorney's office is
the office that is charged with
this with these proceedings, so
the court is telling the D a
that they should consider
filing.
And that is a that is the court
shall advise the D A to consider
it, um
The court also may
As a general matter when there
is a finding of a lack of
competence, uh, can find someone
for up to seven days for mental
health evaluation to see whether
or not they are an appropriate
candidate for involuntary
commitment.
Those are maize.
If the charge
Any of the criminal charges were
either serious, violent offense.
A felony that involves the use
of a firearm or if this person
has been previously found
incompetent to stand trial two
or more times within the last
year.
Uh, In those circumstances, the
court shall order the defendant
held for up to seven days to
facilitate. Uh
An involuntary commitment
petition later on in the bill.
What that explains is the court
directs the district attorney.
The district attorney must file
the petition. In those
circumstances. Um, those are the
changes in these two bills. Um,
I will turn it over unless
anybody wants to do questions
now, But otherwise I thought I
would turn it over to Mr Baker
for his bills.
Baker.
Mr Chair members. The committee.
Thank you. Thank you. Holly for
announcing to the world that I'm
getting older.
Grateful for that. Um it's an
honor to be here in front of you
today. Um, thank you to the
community members who have
arrived in the law enforcement
professionals that have joined
us here today, Grateful, uh, for
everybody's interest in these
important topics, um, starting
with film in possession of
firearm, and and I will be brief
as I have heard, uh, the will of
this committee and the comments
from previous testimony. I'll
try and touch on things that
have not been discussed before.
Um, in preparation for my
testimony here today, I went out
and gathered a data from the
administrative office of the
courts that will paint a
statewide picture. Um, of the
current situation relative to
this crime in New Mexico so that
we won't be dealing in in
anecdotal items or or one offs.
Um, a OC provided me uh, from
2017 till May 31st of this year
So a month ago, approximately
data for all
The in possession charges. Um,
and keeping in mind that a
person can be charged multiple
times, which is part of the
reason why I think we're here
during that time frame. Um
The trend in 17 and 18 was
approximately 1400 cases per
year in the state of New Mexico.
That carried for those two
years, 2019 saw a significant
reduction down to 921 no doubt
Covid related 2020 2021 saw
almost no charges of felon in
position to fire which I also
attribute expressly to covid and
and and the situation that
existed there. 2022, there was
an uptick to 220 or 202. Pardon
me and in 2023, which is the
most relevant data and the most
recent. I think we have a return
statewide in New Mexico to pre
panic.
1378 charges of felon in
possession of firearm. 1378,
sir.
He's done the data provided by a
OC. We also have the up to May
31st of this year and at
present, we are at 864.
Report that to you, because
while no one can predict the
exact future of what will happen
these statistical analysis,
particularly looking rearward,
seven years, um we are on pace
if we just were to multiply that
to be at a rate that is higher
than any of the previous seven
years. If we were to escalate,
which I'm here to provide you my
observation through my
experience in in this place, uh,
and the space relative to to law
enforcement and charging is that
the summer months will likely be
a higher
Incidents of these crimes if the
past is any indicator, and so
the reason why I bring that to
this community's attention, is
they deliberate on this
important topic is that this
statewide charging events have
increased in data that isn't
just confined to Bern County.
Um, it is a statewide concern,
So I raised that for you. Um so
that you will know precisely
what we are dealing with.
Statewide from a OC data. What
happens to those cases, as they
are charged is a question that I
think this committee will want
the answer to. So I went and got
that data as well. The A OC was
able to provide it.
During the same time period 17
to present effectively 52% of
those charges are dismissed in
two ways that are very important
to understand. Um one is through
no prose, so 36% of those means
they are flat out.
Dismissed by the prosecuting
agency. The other portion of
that 52% is 14%, where in the
defendant pleads guilty to
another crime associated with
that combined charging event in
exchange for the dismissal of
the felon in possession. That's
an important nuance that some
people in the room who I know
have practiced criminal law on
both, uh both kind of sides
understand the importance of
that, Um, so we're talking about
52% in total, do not ever get
adjudicated as a guilty finding.
Uh,
36 and 14 is the breakdown 24%.
Of the seven years worth of data
resulted in a conviction either
through trial finding or plea of
guilty 13% are transferred to
other courts and I'll talk a
little bit about what that looks
like. And why, um, a,
particularly from a law
enforcement perspective will not
spend a ton of time on Burnley
County because I feel like we
covered that, Uh, Last time I
testified in front of you, but,
uh, the same trend continues.
where the the data there is, is
100 and 51 so far, so
effectively. One day one per
A person is charged with
possession over the first five
months of 2024.
Um, I did do some work down in
Dona County so that I could get
some some regional perspective.
Um and I got that data from the
Donan County specifically from
their jail. 2019 to 2023 was the
data and you have an uptick 73
to 91 to 99 to 157 to 140 to 65
to date in May of 2024 So so
again in Donna, we see, um, a
significant, you know, 30, plus
percent rise between 2019 and
2022.
I think is important And and
interesting. Um and I wanted
this committee to be aware of
those details in in some of our
non
You know, not in the middle of
Albuquerque, which has has had a
lot of discussion. The question
the committee may ask is whether
or not the federal government is
the solve or the answer to the
question related to felon in
possession of firearm in New
Mexico, and we respectfully
submit that while great partners
and we regularly look to them,
um, to help us charge folks,
particularly when felons who
possess firearms murder police
officers, which happens all too
frequently, um I pulled their
data so that you would know what
their capacity is when you're
looking at that 13%.
Carve out of New Mexico's total
F IP charges and 17.
Through 21 is the most recent
data that the DOJ has, but they
prosecute 6000 persons in, uh,
2017 7600 persons in 2019 and
7400 persons in 2021 for the
crime of Felon in possession,
Firearm federally nationwide So
New Mexico's a fraction of that
in total, if you were to take
our average number, for you
would represent about 18% of the
federal prosecutions nationwide.
So what is obviously capacity is
not designed for them to do all
Prosecutorial work. Uh, nor is
there a capability to do that
the average sentence for a
federally charged felon in
possession of a firearm is 60
months.
So I bring that to folks
attention because I think
there's a very common
misconception about precisely
what that looks like. And this
is straight from the Department
of Justice's data. So 60 months
yes or five years.
Well, a great partner in an
invaluable resource. Um, as I
mentioned earlier, they
certainly can't handle the
volume um, and the 13% that is
already being transferred to
other courts a large fraction of
that.
Goes to the federal court. That
number is wholly almost wholly
made up of of that fraction.
Um, is an important factor to
consider creating a statute in
New Mexico that can be effective
It safely incarcerating
dangerous previously convicted
offenders.
We believe is a part of the
overall solution that cannot
wait.
Um, the changes in the statute
that I think are are material
are enhancements to the criminal
penalty.
And while no doubt, uh there are
studies and, uh, findings that
increasing criminal, uh,
charging increasing criminal
enhancements does not
necessarily eliminate or even
reduce
Re offending by persons. And and
while I, I accepted those those
studies exist, and I'm aware of
their existence. I also believe
that that there's multiple
facets to the criminal justice
system and deterrence is not the
only one the community safety
due to incarceration and
separation from the community so
that one can't reoffend our
important point that I'd like to
raise to the committee. As I
present the changes in the
years um and and one of them is
a very recent example.
From a criminal offender in our
community in New Mexico.
Who was arrested for and and
again I'm gonna be clear that
being a felon in possession of
firearm is a is a rare one must
already be convicted.
Um, lawfully of being a of of a
felony in New Mexico.
Then they are put on significant
and and undisputable notice that
there are no longer permitted to
touch handle the imp possession
of firearms. That is one of the
penalties for being convicted of
a Flo felony in New Mexico and
in the United States, So it's
not my belief that there's any
absence of understanding of what
the expectations are going
forward. What ends up happening
in in the evidence that I will
share with you today?
So you have previously convicted
felon.
Narcotics trafficking in this
case and possession of
narcotics, um, was charged
subsequently after serving a
period of probation with
Farms related crimes, which that
person is not permitted to
possess firearms. He was
charged.
Adjudicated guilty for the crime
of being a felon in possession
of a firearm that was in April
of 2024.
Sentenced to three years of
probation.
Two weeks later, the police see
this individual walking down the
street holding a firearm. He
resists. He runs conceals the
farm. He's ultimately arrested
and put back in front of the
court.
For a probation violation
related to his previous
sentence.
He was sentenced to intensive
supervision probation and has
not served any time in the
penitentiary.
Despite the penalty for that
crime existing within the state
Legislature and
It's my observation through
looking at a lot of this data
over a lot of years that we are
failing to both prevent and
provide the community safety
necessary that that exists when
a person is incarcerated instead
of being free in the community
to choose to reoffend the stakes
when a person picks up a firearm
don't need to be explained to
this group. You are very well
aware of that.
Um, that is why we have
suggested raising the sentencing
duration for felons, uh, found
guilty of being a felon in
possession of firearm, making it
a second degree felony instead
of the third that is today and
raising the penalty to a
minimum.
Of nine years.
The second significant change is
raising the penalty for
seriousness. Just like, uh, you
you, uh, spotty, understands.
Well, there's a delineation
between
Um, you know, first time
offenders in serious violent
offenders that is already law
and I think that distinction is
important, um, raising that
criminal sentencing to a basic
term of 12 years, as well as
increasing the penalty from a
third to a second.
Additionally, and kind of
finally, the bill contemplates
the elimination of meritorious
time and deductions being
awarded for persons convicted of
either of the
Um, and I think that that more
more or less covers the the
significant changes in the data
that I wanted to bring to the
awareness of this committee. I'm
happy to answer questions or
move on at the church.
Direction.
That is, that is, uh, Mr Chair.
Uh, members of the committee.
That is not my belief. No. This
This was introduced previously.
Yes, sir.
Yes, sir.
Yes, sir. And there will be I'll
be brief.
10 minutes or so. Absolutely Mr.
Chair. Members of the committee,
Um, will be brief, uh, moving on
to unsafe, Uh, use of public
highways and medians. Uh, the
goal is to refine previous
efforts in the air of pedestrian
safety and its intersection of
the vehicle traffic. I have
listened to this committee and
its feedback, um, as well as
done more research and homework
that I think hopefully will will
provide. I'm utility for for
this body, um, without getting
into too much detail. Uh,
National Highway Traffic Safety
administration in the last five
years has
Determined that pedestrians
accounted for 16% of total
traffic fatalities, but yet
pedestrian trips like 11 walking
to a place that counts for only
10% of all transportation modes.
so there's an extraordinarily
disproportionately high
frequency of people dying when
they happen to be pedestrians
nationwide. New Mexico Leeds per
capita and has historically for
many years at the top of most
categories related to pedestrian
death. And so I mentioned that
because that problem continues
to
Uh, exist. It is not solved
itself, Um in in the period of
time during the interim it it
continues to be a real problem
in America. We've seen a 77%
pedestrian.
Uh, deaths, fatalities related
accidents since 2010. So those
are significant, highly things.
Um, I have other details about
where New Mexico ranks. I will
not, uh, go into those because
they are a voluminous and I
think that they will, uh
They they it suffice it to say
we lead most categories where
pedestrians are killed
nationwide per capita. Another,
Uh, piece of information I think
is is important as we
contemplate what's to be done
about, uh, alleviating this
problem here in New Mexico is
uninsured drivers in the
financial impact in New Mexico.
We're talking about motor
vehicle accidents. Motor vehicle
versus pedestrian. We're not
talking about just pedestrians.
Being being killed.
Mexico has the highest rate of
uninsured motorists. Um, the
rate is 24.9%. I'm very recent
data, Um, Insurance Information
Institute. It's who's
responsible for tracking these
things we have experienced in
our our state and our people
have experienced a sharp
increase in automobile insurance
rates over the last year.
Average cost has gone up by a
significant amount. In this case
that significant amount is
34.1%. That's the cost for the
folks who are not part of the
Percent uninsured.
I think that is important
because the two factors that are
strong influences, and while it
is a multi, there's much
calculus that goes into
insurance rates, and I will not
pretend to be an expert on that.
Two factors that are significant
are accidents.
And theft.
And so, so I think both of those
things are important. Um
During previous testimony, there
was questions raised about the
potential constitutionality of
any such bill. There has been,
uh
Uh, some work that I've done
that hopefully will be of
benefit to the committee. Um, I
know that you will be receiving
a presentation tomorrow related
to First Amendment
considerations from some LC
staff, so I won't go into too
huge detail except that I will
cover the three prong test. Uh,
in in the US Supreme Court case.
Rock vs Ward on the three prongs
that were contemplated when we
authored and wrote, Um, this
this proposed legislation are
the regulation must be content
neutral, and that is to say that
it is not matter what the person
is doing.
Or S. Second, it must be
narrowly tailored to serve a
significant governmental
interest.
And in this case that interest
is to save new Mexican lives.
And the third thing is, it must
be, uh, leave available
alternative methods and channels
for communications of the
speaker's message to survive the
First Amendment
constitutionality.
We found the United States, Uh
Court of Appeals 10th circuit
case that I think is
particularly relevant and it
present to this group in a very
succinct way. Steve Ray Evans
versus the city of Sandy, Utah,
there belief that the
legislation being discussed here
today is extraordinarily similar
in its construction and thus
achieves.
This three pronged test related
to First Amendment. So I I
raised that so that
I know there will be discussion
and debate and and I don't
pretend that that is a closed
issue. But I want this committee
to know that that was
contemplated during the
formulation of this legislation.
For going to the bill. Uh,
defines. What is a highway road
median traveling and what is a
pedestrian? Um, it describes
what will become unlawful as
there is the most modest but a
criminal penalty for the
purposes of accountability and
enforceability, Um
It includes occupying travel
lanes, highways, exit or
entrance ramps of highways.
And it talks about, uh, be
unlawful for a person to occupy,
congregate on a median less than
36 inches, or a flat area of a
highway with a posted speed
limit greater than 30, MPH and
again, this is irrespective of
purpose for occupation.
Um there's clarification on what
is still lawful conduct.
Related to legal crossing What's
allowable walking along the
highway, uh, reference to the
new Mexico traffic code 66 73 99
so that there's clarity. We
worked diligently with with the
incredible attorneys that
Legislative Council services
additionally, uh caveats for
road maintenance, police work
entering and exiting buses,
Interactions between person and
cars were a vehicle is legally
stopped or pulled over outside
of a travel lane or where on the
street parking is legal, so that
it
Not encroach upon any of the the
things that that can be
misunderstood about the intent
there. And then there's a
section that deals with
pedestrian roadways, making
clear that a pedestrian shall
not walk upon a highway with a
posted speed limit of 30 MPH or
greater again with reference to
the already existing traffic
code.
The bills, Uh, construction will
conform closely to case law,
which supporters in its
language, Um McCullen versus
Coakley
and it's our belief that because
of the narrow scope of the
items, um
Detailed. It leaves ample
alternative channels for
communication paved comedians
wider than 36 inches, literally
in virtually every sidewalk
statewide, and um and every
other area that's not discussed
within the confines of the bill.
The goal is to narrowly tailor
it to to serve the significant
governmental interest, uh, to
reduce the number of pedestrian
deaths in New Mexico and also
make whole people's ability to
exercise their constitutionally
afforded rights. Um
Again the United States Court of
Appeals 10th circuit decision,
Sandy Evans, we think is helpful
and and and, uh, guiding what
could be a way to alleviate some
of the
Um, I can stand for questions on
that or move to the next. If
that's your
Very good chair. Um, the last
thing and we'll go
extraordinarily quickly, is a
very short bill related to, um,
reporting of crime incident and
ballistic information from law
enforcement agencies to the
Department of Public Safety for
the purposes of having access in
a very contemporary way. So what
the bill contemplates monthly
reporting it has not changed of
law enforcement agencies of
their crime data, including
ballistic, uh, information to
the Department of Public Safety
Monthly so that we can have that
information to formulate.
Responses to make informed
presentations on the current
situation. Um
And
I think that I think that is
it's statistical data for the
purposes of helping us inform.
what's good policy. What's good
lawmaking and what's good
advice, uh, to bodies such as
this?
And with that, I, I am finished,
sir. And I will close.
Bit of time. Thank you, Nancy.
Um I have represented Martinez
to represent REM already. Um,
but there's I'm kind of OK,
Well, everybody just come. Come,
come, come. Well, we're gonna
get there. I'm gonna start from
my left. Uh, representative. He
You've been quiet today
Represent Reeve. You've been
quiet today. I don't know what's
going on with you guys.
Republicans.
Republicans are
well, they're just so excited
about Thursday night's debate, I
think is what it comes down to,
uh,
represents Lord was out of hand
for you. Were you Were you on
that? Are you in this too? I
just kind of come around the
table. Were you put your hand
up? No, you did, huh? All right.
Come around.
Anybody here? All right, Uh,
OK, you know
Let's see.
Rego.
Kenna.
how I'm gonna put you in there
anyway. I already got you,
Martinez. You got you already?
My is this right so and do it,
All right, That's everybody.
Um
2345. I've got 11 folks if
everybody had an hour, we'd be
here for another hour, at least
thereabouts. So I'm gonna do
that. I'm gonna say we're gonna
be done at 430. That's gonna
mean that we're gonna eliminate
the committee discussion time,
though. We'll take advantage of
that window of opportunity. And
then I don't know. Is there
anyone here for public comment?
OK, All right. That'll just be
two minutes or so on on there.
So that'll be all right, too.
So, all right. We're gonna
OK, all right. Yeah, they'll get
two minutes. So a couple of two
minute public comments won't get
into our time too much. So what
We're gonna be done by 430 at
the latest, so I'm gonna
recognize everyone for five
minutes. I'm gonna be strict
about it, so we'll start with,
uh, the order that I wrote you
down a representative Martinez
and represent Ream as I've been
doing today, I'll let you know
the start time. I'm asking you
to watch your
Clock in front of you, and
you'll know when I'm gonna cut
you off in advance.
Representative Martinez and
representative Ream
Thank you.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um
State of Change. And Mr Baker. I
have very quick questions. Um
During the discussion of the
felony and possession bill.
You had a lot of data points.
I can't write that fast. Is
there any way you can share that
with the committee?
Mr. Chair represent Martinez?
Absolutely, sir.
Thank you, sir. That was quick.
My last question is, um
Regarding the reports from law
enforcement agencies on crime
incident ballistic information.
is that not being done
currently.
Mr. Chair, representative
Martinez what currently exists?
Um, some folks on the committee
will remember. Um, UCR data
reported the FBI. Um what What
has transformed to over time is
what's called neighbors data and
it's uh, you know, it's it's a
functional great way that
specifically categorizes crime
but is voluntary.
And one of the things
particularly I have noted in the
in the job that I currently
occupy. It is very difficult to
pull together relevant and
contemporary data that paints a
picture statewide. We have 100
and 93 public safety agencies
throughout our state 33 counties
as you guys all know, you
represent all of them, getting
them to share and collaborate on
the data piece is critical from
from our perspective, and so,
uh, to answer your question. No,
it's not being done in a way
that is enforceable by anybody
else.
Um, we have, uh, worked towards,
uh, getting it. I've been
getting it in Buro County for
sure. For the last eight months,
which I'm grateful for, And I
think it actually AIDS our
ability to inform bodies like
this on on making sound
decisions.
Uh, thank you, Mr Chair, Mr
Baker. Um so
The term on Page two line one.
Primary law enforcement agency
in the state shall
That's that's great to compel
them, but
What happens if they don't
Uh, Mr Chair, Representative
Martinez? Um, well, I appreciate
the question is, what do we do
when the cops don't do what we
tell them to do? Um which I
which I appreciate. I think
there are a number of things
that when legislation is passed
by by this, uh, legislature,
particularly as it relates to
any governmental agency that
receives funding there is, uh, a
a appropriate mechanism to hold
to account folks who do not
comply with laws that have been
passed by this this legislature.
Thank you, Mr Chair. And Mr
Baker. Why is that language not
included in the bill.
Because I think
It's in the bill. We pass it,
Governor signs it. Everybody
knows
We passed this version. They're
like
Ask me.
Mr. Chair Represent Martinez?
Yes. Her feedback accepted. Um,
I respectfully submit that my
belief at least was that it was
implied, and I have spent my
career operating as such is that
if it says you shall, then you
shall, but I appreciate your
feedback and I. I hear you.
Thank you, Mr Chair, Mr Baker. I
just think of you know if
there's a law in the book,
saying you should do this, and
they're not doing it should
shall
Let's
Let's enforce the show. I think
it would be better for
everybody. Uh, but those are my
comments. Thank you, Mr Chair
for the time Mr Baker
Appreciate it. Thank you,
Representative reh, and then
represent he, representative
Remits 342 of five minutes.
Uh, thank you, Mr Chair, and Mr
Baker. Let's go to your median.
bill. I've told the, uh,
executive. If you want some
help, I'll help you.
Anyway, Uh, get your pin ready
because you're gonna need to
write a bunch of stuff down.
So did you count consult the
manual of uniform traffic
control devices, because, uh,
median is safe refuge for a
pedestrian crossing The street
Also in that same manual, And
this is how highways are
designed.
Uh, it talks about how
pedestrians are to walk down the
roadway.
Which I'll get to later in your
bill.
Let's uh N. I see what you're
making as a legislative intent,
which is would have been one of
my recommendations.
So then, um
You have 66-7 dash 335.
And 335 is crossing in mid
block, not in a crosswalk.
That's where most of our
pedestrians are being killed
right now, and we have a law for
that.
I. I agree with what you're
trying to do. OK, these are
trying to be helpful.
Um
Um
I think one you ought to look at
because I think this could be
used as 66-7 Dash 340.
And this is soliciting rights.
Now, as you remember, this is
something that we mainly use
for, uh, prostitution.
But what it says is soliciting
employment or
Money. We could add that or
business in it.
So I thank you all to look at
that one because I think you
could make that one wrap in
And then on Page four at the
bottom when you're talking about
pedestrians can't walk down a
highway with 30 Miles an hour or
more. That's an MUT CD issue.
And I think we need to make that
a little more explicit, You
know, for the purpose of
Uh,
Soliciting business or whatever.
Anyway, that was my suggestions.
Thank you, mister. Chair. Thank
you, representative. He for five
minutes. It is 345 and you'll be
followed by represent Reed.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Uh, Miss Agajanian. And and Mr
Baker appreciate, Uh, the
information and I wanted to, uh,
start first. Mr Baker with the,
um
This. Uh uh, I guess crime
reporting, uh
Draft and and just a few moments
ago in response to
representative Martinez's
question, which was very similar
to one I was going to ask about,
Uh, our current statute 29-3
Dash 11 that creates a uniform
crime reporting system. You said
that was voluntary.
Mr. Chair Representative Henry
the reporting to neighbors,
which is the FBI and Department
of Justice System is is
voluntary. That's right.
OK, Thank you. And and so, Mr.
Chair, Mr. Baker. Um, I'm I'm
looking at, uh, 29-3 Dash 11
right now and in pertinent part,
it, says the Department of
Public Safety shall develop,
operate and maintain a uniform
crime reporting system.
Uh then it goes on to say every
law enforcement agency in the
state shall submit crime
incident reports to the
Department of Public Safety.
Uh, monthly. Um so
That that one does not seem
voluntary, and two seems to be
very similar to this draft. We
have right here.
Right? Uh, Mr Chair members of
the committee representative
Henry. I think one of the things
that's really important is that
is that information is all
correct relative to 29 3 11 1 of
the things that has happened
over time, and it's It's a you
know, watching almost 30. Years
of this move is moving from UCR
to neighbors, which has been a
significant national overhaul
has caused for the Department of
Public Safety. Who is our
repository and always has been
like they're selected by the
Department of Justice to receive
this data.
Um, they are the the personnel
who administer and regulate NC
IC, or access to all of the
federal pieces that touch any of
these things, both on reporting
warrants entry missing persons,
All of those things all those
data things exist. I think what
would be the best way to
describe it is that
We think that there needs to be
a revisit of a statute that
makes clear that also includes
holistic data, which is not
included in 29.
311, which is a new development
technology has changed the
reporting. Uh, repository has
changed, and I think what we
need is a new way of getting
that information to us so that
we'll be able to use it on our
level. This isn't just about
facilitating the movement
towards the federal neighbor
system, although that would be a
dual goal from my perspective.
Um, but I think adding the
addition of
What we're finding in the middle
of what we would call a violent
crime gun. Uh, epidemic that is
happening within our state. New
technology exists related to
ballistic information was not
contemplated on previous
legislation. Yes, All right.
Thank you, Mr Baker. I. I guess
I just, um Mr Chair failed to
see how, um, a whole new bill
that also says shall if
something is not being done, it
is better than maybe just
Taking on the existing one and
amending it to include this
ballistics information. Um, I
guess I, I I'm not sure on that.
But I, I did have, um
Um, 11. Other real quick
question for for Miss Gaja, and,
um, Mr Chair, Ms Aga and, um
On the criminal competency when
we were here last month, we we
discussed it a bit and and you,
You said in response to a
question of mine that criminal
competency was not on the table
for the special session that it
needed more that that it it it
was not developed enough for the
special session. What what has
changed in the last month? Sure,
Mr. Chair, Representative Henry
when and that actually goes back
to what I was.
Discussing at the beginning the
entire the retooling and the
overhaul of the whole criminal
competency system. Um, is
Again. It's too much and it is
too big, so we
As as I was saying before we
heard Justice Zamora, um
So redoing the whole thing as
the bill in the last session
tried to do
Is too big of a project and it
is something that is left. You
know, again. I think Justice
Zamora and her folks are doing
um all of the diligent work to
do it so
I don't recall my words saying
it was off the table for the
session. I think what I said
was I didn't have a competency
bill to present to you at the
time. Um and so we have gone
back and again decided to do the
the small changes instead.
OK and and and I I'm sorry,
Representative. If I may I want
to be clear.
When I say small changes. I
mean, we are amending a bill
that already exists. I do not
mean to imply that these changes
will not have a big impact.
Thank you and and I. I apologize
if I incorrectly surmised or or
or paraphrased what you said,
But, uh, thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you very much.
Representative, Uh
Representative Reed and then
representative Block
Representative REITs. 350. You
got five. Thank you, Mr Chair. I
wanted to kind of address the
criminal competency issue
because I kind of look
The civil commitments and I have
to put that on one side and then
I have to put the criminal
commitment on the other and and
the competency issue, and so
I just kind of unclear because
when you we receive this kind of
discussion draft this morning, I
think like at 10, so I'm kind of
doing my best to to get through
it. And I see this change. Um
That's in section a That states.
Um you know you're dealing with
competency, and then let's say,
uh, somebody is not competent.
Um, then the court has to decide
if they're dangerous in order to
send them off for treatment to
competency, basically, and
there's kind of a I've always
thought more of a loose
definition to get you to, um,
get to dangerous undergoing up
to Las Vegas, which, when you go
to section D, it's just
Dangerous means if release the
defendant presents a serious
threat of inflicting great
bodily harm on another or
violating section 3911 through
3913, which is the CS P CS, CS,
um, statutes.
But when you go through this,
you kind of pretty much leave
off the the next big section.
you you go to 31-9 Dash 1.4
determination of competency. You
don't really discuss the next
1 31-9 Dash 1.5, And my question
is under 1.4 again. We get to
the issue of Let's say they go
to Las Vegas and they're not
considered competent. But how
the judge now has a different
standard of what's dangerous.
Um, because when you go
To, uh, basically whether well,
you have a definition under a it
says, uh, within three months of
the defendant is charged with a
felony that involves the
infliction of great bodily harm
on another person, a felony that
involves the use of a firearm,
aggravated arson as provided in
30, 17 6 and then abortion,
criminal sexual penetrations and
criminal sexual contact of a
minor. Um, the court can
basically
Um, at that point can pursue a
civil commitment, so it's a
pretty broad, you know, a
definition of how to pursue that
civil commitment.
But when you jump to the next
section and I, I do this to
explain how complicated this is
When you jump to 31-91 0.5 when
somebody comes back, and they're
not competent and you've got to
determine if they're dangerous.
And what
I believe we would want to do to
protect people from the most
dangerous crimes is to be able
to have that evidentiary hearing
in district court to determine
if their incompetent and
dangerous and get them up to
Vegas to where they can be held
in a secured facility for up to
two years and then reviewed
every two years for the amount
of the crime that they're
they're facing. So when you jump
to 31 9-1 0.5 that hearing in
order to actually get to that
evidentiary hearing, it's so
much tougher. Um, the defendant
is
With the felony that actually
inflicts great bodily harm on
another person, a felony that
involves the use of a firearm,
aggravated arson. Same thing.
Um, so let's say somebody
attempts to stab somebody, but
doesn't
They seem to fit into the
definition of basically
committing him civilly, but not
committing him. Um, for this,
you know the dangerousness and
the actual criminal part to
actually commit him always had
an issue with a different
definitions of dangerous And
why, if we really want to
protect people from people who
have mental illness, and if this
is a public safety issue, why
aren't we making that
definition more usable for
prosecutors to get people to Las
Vegas and make sure that
When he was actually dangerous.
Who maybe tried to stab you, Um,
but does not fit under this
thing to get them to Las Vegas
and all we can do is a civil
commitment. You're gonna get out
in 30 days. It happened to me
many times. A lot of people just
fall through the system. Very
dangerous people. So why aren't
you including 31 9-1 0.5 in your
your fixing of this code if we
want to address public safety
And again just reiterating back.
how complicated this area is and
how these these statutes cross
over and why I feel this is
really a rushed thing to just
fix part of this code and not
fix other parts. Does that make
sense? I think I think I
understand Mr Chair
Representative. I know it's no
no II. I think I understand what
you're saying. And and, um
I should have jotted notes
because I was listening to you
and I and I was figuring I knew
what I wanted to say. And then
now, of course it's forming
right out of my head. But I
think that the answer to your
question. I think that there are
a few, um, the
The definition of
Competence in the criminal.
Perspective.
Is, you know? Are you able right
now?
To assist in your defense and
and again and I know you know
this, but for everybody else,
it's not an insanity defense.
It's not where you capable of
committing the crime at the time
you committed it. It's are you
capable today of understanding?
Um what's happening and and
assisting in your defense?
That's an entirely separate
metric from
The idea of are you a danger to
yourself and others putting
aside your criminal charges? OK,
so
Understanding the difference
between those two and the part
of the competency statute that
you were just talking about and
again. We We all agree, right?
This is really, really hard
stuff. Um is is the way it
works.
Presently about what we do with
people who are found
incompetent and it has to do
with what kind of crime are they
charged with, right? Um if it's
a misdemeanor, and you're found
incompetent.
You walk right out. Um, if it's
a violent felony, and you are
found incompetent and dangerous
In certain circumstances. You
stay in right? And then the
question becomes, it's just
restoration to competency. And
then you get back out again. Or
you might go to a holding
facility. So what? This bill
right now is trying to, um
encapsulate is not that problem
that I understand. You have and
I do think needs fixing as well.
It's a separate problem, which
is the problem of as you can see
from Page three of this data.
That we have. So a OC literally
sent us 2 million rows of crime
data.
Which Mr Hatch
Bless his heart somehow was able
to distill it and not crash the
computer. But since 2017 16
16,045 cases since 2017 have
been dismissed due to
incompetency 5359 of those were
felonies. 3217 defendants make
up that universe.
And as you can see, later in the
packet, there are the I think
what AOC calls the familiar
faces. Um And I know that the
the officer last hearing talked
about it as well. You have
certain people who cycle through
and through and through who are
Very likely either going to get
worse and and harm themselves in
one way or another, or harm
someone else. And so what? What?
these changes are and this is
sort of what I meant. When I
said small, it's just a certain
parts. It's to get those folks
who are just in and out of the
courthouse several times a week.
It's to get them an assessment
to see whether or not they do
need to be admitted for separate
mental health treatment, because
obviously there is something
going on and the crimes that
they're committing aren't ones
that are violent enough or
Enough to keep them, Um
In a in a different, um
There was a word I was thinking
of, but but to keep them in a
facility until they can
establish competency again,
which is again much different
than than complete mental
health. I'm gonna have to ask
you, Representative Reed. We're
gonna have to move on. I'm
sorry, but I summarize. OK,
Thank you.
Uh, representative block.
358 for five, please.
Great. Thank you. Mr Chairman.
Thank you both for being here.
Appreciate you guys. Uh
Coming down here to speak with
us. So I'm gonna be pretty
Judicious about the time. So,
uh, you know, when the governor
called this special session or
said she would announce it, she
said she looked for input from
all of us, and I appreciate
that, and she called US
colleagues, which I appreciate
as well. And so first of all, I
know a huge issue nationally and
in the state is the border
issue. So Mr Chair and both Miss
Agajanian and Mr Baker, do you
Have you had any conversations
with the governor? Yes or no
about potential.
To focus on the border during
this special session, which is
focused on crime and danger and
risk.
Mr Chair, Representative. Uh, I
don't think it will come as a
surprise to you that I. I won't
disclose my conversations with
my boss. I'm I'm her lawyer. Um,
but what I can tell you is
everything is always on the
table. And we are always
thinking and we're always
talking, um, about all the
different crime metrics that we
have.
OK, thank you. And I appreciate
that I would never ask you to
disclose a private conversation,
but just legislatively. If you
guys have been thinking about
potential things to do, because
Mr Chairman and both of you I
know that states like California
with Governor Newsom and Arizona
with Governor Hobbs. Both of
them have put forward strategic
plans and different legislative
and executive actions to take on
the border issue, and since we
are focusing on crime, and just
this week
The FBI admitted in. I believe
it was a KQE interview that they
said that the crime from the
border is indeed spilling over
to new Mexicans. So Mr Chairman
and both Miss Agajanian and Mr
Baker, I'm wondering
Or is the governor open in any
way to discussing crime in this
next legislative session?
Special session. Mr. Chair, Mr.
Chair, Representative. I'm going
to do the lawyer thing. You just
asked me if the governor was
open to discussing crime.
Absolutely. She is.
And regarding the border
specifically, I'm on the border.
The governor's open to, uh,
always having discussions. Mr.
Chair representative, um, about
about crime and everything else.
I do believe that her, uh,
agenda her call for the session
that she does want to keep it
tight. If you have a specific
proposal, um and I know other
members of the committee I I've
spoken to and and other
legislators if you have a
specific proposal, you are
always always free to reach out
to me and we can discuss it. I'm
I'm not making any
representations about what will
happen with that proposal. But
you and I can sit down and talk
about it.
As long as you'd like. OK, Thank
you, Mr Chair. Thank you Both. I
appreciate that. I would love to
discuss that with you because
from previous years in the
governor's administration early
on, she called the border crisis
a charade. She said that it was
fear mongering to want to speak
about border issues. So I'm so
glad to see that the governor
has changed her position, and
now she believes that there is a
crisis and I sure hope she joins
Governor Newsom and Governor
Hobbs and Governor Abbott in
helping
Fix the crisis, especially
through executive action,
because we've spoken today about
gun violence as an epidemic or
anything else that we've called
an emergency and executed those
governors emergency powers. I
would love to see that happen
with actual issues that people
are dealing with on the border
when it comes to Don and county,
Luna County, Otero County, Our
county is down in the southern
part of the state are taking the
hit when it comes to the border
crisis, so I'd love to see that
kind of action not only
And executive action, but also
in this special session because
if we want to make a tangible
impact, I would say every option
should be on the table as we've
repeated a bunch of times, but I
would love to see actual options
such as tackling fentanyl, uh,
such as stopping these drug
smugglers from having these
stash houses all across our
state, including in my district,
and I think those are things
that we can do. And I know Gavin
Gavin Newsom has indeed done
that. When it comes to fentanyl
he's brought forward National
Guardsmen on the border to
assist
Border Patrol, and I would love
to see that with this governor,
So I don't know if you have any
any, uh, input on that, But I
appreciate both of you. Thank
you, Mr Chair, representative.
The only response I would say to
that. I know, I know.
Um, I understand your point. Um,
I know you're not saying that
these crises that we're
discussing are not actual
problems and that the only
actual problems are border
problems because, uh, our
problems of gun violence and our
mental health problems and how
the behavioral health problems
that we have spill over into the
criminal world that we have our
our very significant. Oh, I just
used Mr Baker's favorite word.
Actual problem. Thank you, Mr
Chair. And thank you so much for
Virginia. I still 20 seconds, Mr
Chair. I just want to make sure
that we all know that all issues
that
Non actual Thank you so much, Mr
Chair. I appreciate that. I have
10 seconds with your for the
Thursday night to you. I've got
to learn how to cut off your
microphone. Uh,
No offense at all but re
represent the Lord.
It's 403. How's that? I'm tr.
I'm trying to be very specific.
You've got five minutes.
Thank you, Mr Chair. I second on
the border issue because
actually on the FBI just came
out and said that one of our
biggest issues is a crime
spilling over the border into
Albuquerque, which is my
district, So I think that's
something we definitely need to
deal with. Um and
Let me I'm gonna briefly go
through each one of these really
quickly. So the problem we're
gonna have, you know when you go
down central that there's a
bunch of people doing the
fentanyl shuffle across. I mean,
it's like playing Frogger, and
that's
Being kind of glib about it, but
it's a reality. When I go down
that street. I have to be so
careful because people just walk
right out in front of you. There
are people just walking across
the whole way down when you're
going down central. So the
problem is we have the art bus
in the middle, too, and they're
walking in the middle to get to
the bus or walking across the
street. What I don't wanna see
happen with this is because this
is more of a mental health and a
drug addiction issue. I I'm
kinda leery about penalizing
them. That makes me I mean, I
get it. We don't want them to be
run over. But
Same time. These are people that
need mental health and rehab
more than they need to be
penalized, and we just had all
these discussions about how we
need to address drug addiction
and mental health. So I don't
know how this is gonna fall in
with people getting repeated
repeatedly penalized for
crossing the street when it's a
mental health and drug issue,
um, for
Um, sorry. Uh, when we talk
about anything that has to do
with penalties for felons, so
here's my issue, so to my my
friend, Jeremy Vaughan was state
police officer. He was shot and
that was horrific. That was a
violent criminal who deserved
everything he gets, Um, just in
hair that was shot. Those are my
good friends, Parents.
Uh, so I've seen that firsthand.
II. I don't care if you're a
serious felon, and you shoot law
enforcement. You know what you
should. I'd push for the death
penalty, but that's not gonna
happen, But it should be life
true Life.
Um, my only concern on this and
it's the only concern I have is
When we say penalty for a felon.
We can't expunge records for
embezzlement and I would hate
for somebody who did
embezzlement 20 years ago who's
trying to turn the life around,
has got kids and got a job, but
they don't get wrapped up in
this if they're caring because
they wanna have the right to
carry. I would hate for them to
be caught up in some sort of
pipeline in prison for somebody
who's trying to get their life
together, So that's my only
concern about that, but violent
criminals. I don't care whatever
Throw them away into. Sorry. Um
I need to remember to sugar coat
things. Sorry. I'm not good at
that. Um, OK. So who came up
with the definitions on this
bill? We took out uh, because
normally, law enforcement walks
into a scene and they say, Are
you a harm to yourself or
others?
So can they still ask that
question and that's enough for
the hold or do they have to ask?
Uh, can you exercise self
control? Uh, do you have
discretion, Social? All this
other stuff. Do they have to ask
all this other stuff? Because my
concern is I don't want law
enforcement to get sued because
an attorney's sorry attorneys
attorney a look at this and say,
Did you ask him all these
questions? Or was it just a
simple do you have plans to harm
yourself or others? Now, Mr
Chair Representative. This is
the clinical standard that has
to be used in the medical
evaluation. OK, and so and that
was the that exactly where they
came from. Where did where did
this word come from? The word.
Is, um
It's it's different statue. It's
different wording from different
states. It's it's North
Carolina. There's some guidance
from New York City. I believe
I can't remember if it's
Wisconsin or Wyoming or a state
that begins with the W. I'm not
not being sarcastic. It was
really one of them. We took a
bunch of them and put them
together. I took out a bunch of
things as well, that I actually
thought were a little too
expansive. Um
And so it's It is a, uh, a
hybrid of what different states
use for their definition for
danger yourself in others. The
main thing is I Mr. Chair is I
just don't want our law
enforcement to get trapped up in
this and you didn't ask all
these other questions, and then
they get sued.
Um
I don't really understand the
urgency of the ballistic
information during the special
session. So here here's what I
have to say.
When we come to a special
session, I think it should be
something that's taken very
seriously and things that are
really affecting th those of us
who are in Bernalillo County.
Especially, we've got a lot of
crime. We have other issues. By
the way. Is there any bill
coming forward that addresses
that all the kids seem to be
getting a firearms off of the
telegram app.
Does that seem to every time I
ask that seems to be where the
kids they're going on Telegram
and getting fired. Is there
anything to address that issue?
Certainly. Uh, Mr. Chair,
Representative, Lord, um, one of
the things that happened with
the executive order and
declaring a public health
emergency is is, uh, special
attention being paid to
juveniles who commit delinquent
acts involving firearm there
have been 175 juveniles detained
under that executive orders
authority since it's it's
initiation. That number has Ma.
To capacity, our ability we are
experiencing a crisis with our
young people and firearms. I
respectfully submit that felons
who have no regard for their
requirement to touch or not
touch firearms, um, are
significantly contributing to
our ability for our kids to get
them because they're not getting
them off a telegram via China
They're getting them off the
telegram from people within
their community, So yes, I
believe so.
Um So, Mr Chair. I think the
only thing I have to say is I
really wish in this special
session. We would have called
more attention to big issues
like COFD and the car and
fentanyl and fentanyl
distribution and the revolving
door and the FBI calling out the
border issue. Pre detention bail
reform because I really don't
wanna waste the taxpayers' time.
And I I'm sorry, but I don't
really see anything here. That
is so urgent that we need to go
to a special session. I see
things that we could have worked
on over the summer and address
them in next session, But I
think this
A tremendous waste of taxpayer
time, and we should have focused
more on on on things that are
true issues to New Mexico. Thank
you represent
Thank you, Mr Chair. Um
So every presentation that we've
heard so far in this interim
Session has mentioned the lack
of service providers in the
state and all the policies that
were proposing would require
a significant increase in
service providers. Great,
wonderful. So what specific
steps do you think need to be
taken to meet?
Um, the goals that we would need
to have functional policies.
In service providers,
Mr. Chair Representative. I
believe Secretary a Miho is
going to be well equipped to
discuss what we need to do. Um,
tomorrow I think she's going to
come with a very specific data
set to let you know what
services we have, where they are
and what's coming.
I'm not. I'm not trying to punt,
but but she knows the answer to
that question better than I
OK, Thank you. Um M AJ and I
will save that question for her
tomorrow as well. And then this
is a total non sequitur. Um, but
Rep board mentioned the
pedestrian issue.
And Mr Baker. You mentioned that
during your presentation as
well. So non sequitur question
When you talked about the, um,
number of pedestrian deaths that
we have, and then you mentioned
how that compares to pedestrian
trips.
Just for my
Curiosity. How did we get at the
number of pedestrian trips that
are being taken? Does that
include, like the unsheltered
population like how do we? How
did we come up with that number?
Mr Chair representative. That's
a great question, and I will get
you the answer because they do
have it. Um, National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration is
the repository for all matters.
That's that's where that data
was pulled from the, uh,
methodology they use for their
statistical analysis related to
how they account for trips is
not a question that I can answer
for you since we're talking
about you know, national survey.
Um, I do think you're right,
though, And and I think you
raise a very important point,
which is there are probably
populations that are not being
captured.
I think that is probably
absolutely likely. And that has
definitely been my experience
and maybe many other people's
experience just in their
observation. Um so I think if if
anything we're talking about a
overrepresentation of a maybe
smaller population, who is it
even more increased risk that
needs this attention. And And
if, if you don't mind, I, I have
no intention. The goal here is
not to criminalize a person who
is struggling with behavior at
all.
However, as was mentioned
earlier by other members of the
committee and I think is right.
There has to be some sort of
incentive. More importantly,
there has to be a a opportunity
for the person that we employ.
In this case law enforcement
largely to be able to interact
with a person because otherwise
you can't. If it's not illegal,
what you're doing, You have no
cause to even have a discussion
with them. And and so hopefully
that answers your question about
the stats. And then I appreciate
you indulging me the opportunity
to answer that other piece
because I think it's important.
Yes. Thank you for that answer,
Mr Baker, because as rep Ward
mentioned, um, that corridor of
Central that's the
So specifically the
international district. That is
my district. Um, and one thing
that I see that is significantly
lacking. Um
Is the availability of
crosswalks the distance between
crosswalks say, and Knob Hill is
significantly shorter than the
distance of crosswalks in the ID
in like the
Louisiana, San Mateo to Wyoming
corridor. Um,
it's like a quarter mile in some
stretches between crosswalks,
which is outrageous, especially
if we're talking about, um, our
unsheltered populations, People
who have mobility issues. Uh,
there's a a constituent of mine
who
Is she's everywhere. I don't
know how she does it, but she's
in a scooter, and she talks
about how she will go all the
way down the sidewalk. There
will be a light pole in the
middle of the sidewalk that she
cannot get around. She has to go
back up the street a quarter
mile to the next crosswalk,
where she can get over. It's
just
Untenable. There's also no bike
lane. So if you fall step, get
shoved off the off the sidewalk.
You are in the street, so that
is also contributing to
pedestrian safety.
Um, so since I have a an extra
minute I get to pontificate a
little bit, So I just, um if we
could address that, that would I
would really appreciate it. But
thank you very much for your
answers. Thank you Represent
Bargo then represent Cadena.
Or 14, representative Rigo.
Thank you, Mr Chairman. I will
try to keep this very short. Um,
Mr Baker. Um, are you familiar
with, um City Ordinance? 8-2
Dash 7-2 occupying roadways,
Certain medians prohibited
Mr. Chair. Representative Rigo
is that Albuquerque City
Ordinance. Um, I. I am familiar
with the existence. However, I
worked for a PD in the nineties.
So it's been a long time since I
will be contemporary familiar
with it. But I I am I'm aware
that such an ordinance is G. So,
um, Mr Chair and, um
Gentlemen.
This ordinance was
Has not too long ago. It's 8-2
Dash 7-2. And what it does is it
basically prohibits people from
being on the medians, um and
asking for money or things of
that nature and it and it
defines very clearly the size of
median that they should not be
on. Um, but it also, um, defines
a penalty and it's a
misdemeanor, so if they're
removed, then they
Have to pay $100 penalty, which
In my mind is like they were
begging for 25 cents. It's It's
You know, it's a really tough
situation that we have in
Albuquerque and I and I know
it's not just in Albuquerque. I
see it in Espanola. My mother
lives up north. Um, I see it all
over the state.
Um, one of the things in this
particular ordinance, there was
an ordinance prior to this that
we, the city of Albuquerque was
sued by the AC LU. And so since
then, this is the ordinance that
was adopted. Um, but the other
thing that's really important
and it concerns me, Mr. Chair.
greatly is that the onus of the
enforcement is not on the
police. Necessarily. It's on
this new city.
Which is called
The give me a second here.
Um
Community Safety Department,
which was created when I was,
uh Albuquerque, City Councilor
and president of the council,
and so
I think, Mr Chairman. The reason
that I'm raising this is because
now and I and I realized that
the city ordinance would be
more, um, strict.
But if you have two ordinances,
and they're not
Say the same thing and we really
could have a problem about
enforcement.
And
Just in general. I'm concerned
that
We're creating a new pathway.
Or criminal.
Liability for people who are
already victims.
And so II. I would really like
for you to look at the this
ordinance and the State
ordinance that's being proposed
and try to come to some
Sort of consensus, um, of what
is actually being proposed Mr
Chair because there are some
definite
Definite differences. I think
So thank you for that Represent
Cadena. It's 417. You've got
five
Thank you, Mr Chair.
Thank you both for being in
front of us again. I've already
expressed my significant
concerns in remaining questions
about other
Proposals you've brought forward
but today I wanted to look
specifically at the, um,
possession of firearm Bill. I do
want to say out loud in my
background and leaning into
criminal legal reform, and I
would imagine the consideration
and compassion held by you all
and the governor. I would love
to see as we move forward. Um
people, first language. Um
We don't have to continue
calling people felons, but
people with a felony conviction
and we've seen that in other
legislative efforts, but to be
more clear on this point, just
to make sure I'm following the
history of of where we got to
the felon in possession statutes
we have today and then the
distinctions between what was in
front of us in the house this
last session and what
Did not pass the Senate. Um it
seems to me like your bill does
increase the
Maximum sentences from the
legislation that we most
recently considered. Can you
explain to me your decision?
Mr. Chair, Representative. Yes,
that's right. And I'm happy to
explain, Uh, those things the
characterization, Um
Did you correctly make related
to the increasing of the penalty
and I and I tried to be clear in
my testimony, and hopefully I
did is that I am aware and I
appreciate that. There are
studies related to the
effectiveness of increasing
criminal penalties and I and I
think that's where we're what
we're talking about. Um what,
What I am experiencing what I
believe we are experiencing in
the state and what I'm seeing
within the data, which is why I
wanted to put it in front of you
and an objective way that it is
just, uh the data is this
problem continues to increase
despite actions
Made by this legislature to
increase penalties and expand
the scope. What I respectfully
submit to this group is the
intent behind this is
Those numbers have not been high
enough to either do one of two
things, one of which we can
control, one of which we can't
provide community safety through
that person not being allowed to
be inside the community to
reoffend, which I'm seeing a
tremendous amount that data
includes repeat offenders during
that same time frame for the
same crime after being
convicted.
So they are not learning that
they are prohibited. And the
tools that we're using are not
deterring them from reoffending
nor keeping the community safe
during the time that they make
that difficult assessment, So
yes, the the rational is behind
that is that it is not just a
deterrent effect. It is a public
safety through inability to
reoffend within the community
and
thank you for that. And
certainly, as we move forward,
we'll continue to debate the
merits of a policy like that,
But I just also want to confirm
and clarify that. Not only are
you pushing for increased
penalties, you
The penalty increases in this
draft proposal that we have in
front of us the 228616.1
Are also an increase for
previous legislative efforts to
address this and, um,
specifically what I want to next
talk about on page two sections,
B and C.
Will you explain to me and I
don't know who your drafter was
or what The intention was here.
Will you explain to me your
intent, like specifically on
section B? I understand, um
between section BC and then E.
You want to establish a
sentence that also is not
eligible for what we call good
time or the meritorious
deductions, But to be clear it's
nine years for a felon.
Air quotes for people listening
in and then 12 years for
serious, violent felon. Of
course, this will interact with
the habitual offender statutes
and otherwise, but it is
Can you explain to me your
intent in doing that in the in
the last couple of minutes? I
have certainly a very well Mr
Chair, Representative Kina. The
the interest is in creating the
art established, Uh, law related
to the differentiation between
serious violent offenders. And
let's say first time offenders
or folks who are not serious
about because Mr Chair we did
step back from that as a
Legislature and we're going back
to set up those categories. If I
understand it, and then
specifically there's folks in
the audience concerned and I. I
feel like I may be heard to use
language that would
At something like a mandatory
minimum. It's not quite crafted
that way. But is that your
intention? Mr Chair?
Mister Chair, representative
Cadena? Yes, uh, specifically on
Page two and section B shall be
sentenced to a minimum term of
nine years imprisonment. That is
the intent. Yes, ma'am, Mr Chair
and presenters without a
possibility for a deferment of
that sentence or suspension of
that sentence. You you are
proposing it as something that
would land like a mandatory
minimum.
Mister Chair, madam. Yes. Thank
you, Mr Chair. Thank you,
Senator. Then Senator Duke. My,
This is 422. And you've got
five. Thank you. Mr Chairman.
I'll try to just take two. Thank
you. Presenters. Ms. Holly, Uh,
Mister Baker. Thanks for
spinning your birthday with us
and your hard work. Appreciate
you The, um just I don't wanna
Previous, uh, legislative kind
of express my concerns with
regards to not allowing
meritorious good time.
It, Uh, it dis incentivizes any
Good behavior. So you you gotta
be cognizant of the the plight
of our correctional officers.
Our Department of Corrections is
very, very thin with regards to
workers. A lot of workers are
working overtime and you know
that tiny bit of incentive for
the inmate to behave is in is in
the interest of public safety.
The last time I saw them, I'm
sure that was bills that have
been introduced regarding
Doing away with good time, but I
personally haven't seen one
Uh, since not the previous
administration, but the one
before that.
And and and after conversations
that bill was pulled by that by
that administration, So just
keep that in mind. Also the
sentencing commission as
chairman, as you know is is
As a vision that that we've
started maybe a decade ago to
have each crime correlate to the
harm to society. Have the
punishment fit the crime In a
perfect world, we go from
jaywalking to first degree
murder and everything kind of
jibes if we were to go nine
years mandatory on a possession
of a
I it it would. It would be off
the chart. It just would not
jive. It would be more time than
a vehicular homicide.
More time than, uh, aggravated
battery, deadly weapon, firearm
enhancement. So that's so we
have to consider maybe a six
year tier kind of
Digressing but a six year tier
in the criminal code.
Uh, to bump a few things up from
3 to 6 and, frankly, a couple of
things down from 9 to 6, But
that's that's for another day.
But, um
I think the the Gov is in her
full right and authority and
To calling for the special
session. I think it's a great
idea because everyone sends the
gov called for the special
session. Everybody's kinda
Picked up their game and
everyone's really cognizant of
fighting crime. It's a fantastic
thing throughout the state of
every day. Every
Every legislator has crime on
the on the front of their minds.
So, um, so that's a good thing.
What we may wanna consider and
what may pass is, uh,
Is not bumping it to a second
degree, but making it up
Like two years mandatory or the
or a three years mandatory on a
third degree felony that may
fly, But the bill is presented
today. I mean, I'm glad you
presented the same bill as
before. That gives us a chance
to look at it a second time, but
I don't believe it's it's just
completely inconsistent with
With good a good public policy.
In my opinion, the, um
And and and Mr Chairman. Lastly,
so the the, uh
Forget the acronyms of a OT. The
A OT bill is Holly. That's off
the table till the till January,
But the competency bill is back
on the table. Is that fair to
say?
Mr Chair, Senator again. Just
it. It's a It's a fine point. A
competency was never off the
table. We just didn't have a
bill that was ready. That was
ready yet. Um, but the governor
is has, you know, Heard about
the big list from the from the A
OT, and so she's going to focus
on the on that competency and on
the definition, bill, Senator so
that again we can. We can do a
better job at capturing the
people that are in the most
danger of harming themselves or
other people. Thank you. No
excellent point. Thank you for
drawing that distinction. Uh, Mr
Chairman.
I think we could move forward on
on a competency bill That's not
inconsistent with what we would
do in January. I think of I
think we should bring one in
January as well. But if we tweak
that statute if we allow a stay
of the preceding and and, uh
And voluntary treatment on
behalf of the defendants that
are cognizant of that situation.
I think it'd be a fantastic,
fantastic, uh, move forward.
Thank you, Senator. Do you
recognize
Five minutes. It's 426.
Senator, I have this for you if
you need it,
you know, I Mr Chair and miss.
Uh
It's like I freeze up now. Now,
Now, now, II, I have a question.
Just marry a Johnson. And it
will do anybody's,
uh, Miss Holly. Um, So thank you
and I'll I'll be quick, because,
uh, a lot of the the questions I
was gonna ask. And and the
points I was gonna make have
already been been stated, Um, on
the, uh
The the criminal Competency
bill.
you're adding in this language,
the dangerousness is not a
clinical diagnosis, therefore, a
finding of dangerousness need
not be based on psychological
psychological evaluation or on
expert testimony. Why are you
adding that language in? Uh,
thank you.
Mr Chair, Senator, That is a
clarification of already
existing law. So this is a
determination that this goes
back to what representative
Reeve was talking about where,
At a certain point, a judge is
having to determine whether
somebody is incompetent and
dangerous. And so what This is
saying is, it's just clarifying.
The judge can make that decision
and it doesn't have to be based
on these clinical criteria that
we're talking about in the other
spots.
And Mr Chair. Miss Holly, Huh? I
just
And one of the rules of thumb. I
think that we've been following
in Senate judiciary since I've
been in there is, uh, if it's
true whether you say it or not,
Don't say it, Um
Because I I feel like this
language would encourage would
make judges think that like
They should not take expert
testimony when when appropriate
and should not get when they're
doing evidentiary hearings
bypass some of the evidence that
otherwise they might think is
important to consider, Um
On the the harm to self. Uh,
Bill. Uh,
I say, Uh where is where's the
language?
I was reading what constituted
harm to self.
Oh, shoot, and I thought boy,
this would apply to to lots of
us right to to have the
legislators. I know
some or or or um, maybe not half
but someone who's unable to
exercise self control or
discretion and such that it
impacts social relations. I
mean, this is this is really,
really broad language, and and I
know there's the second part
that says, and there's a
reasonable
Of a person suffering physical,
serious or serious physical
debilitation in the near future,
But boy is that language really,
really broad and is gonna sweep
up so many people who I don't
think it would be appropriate to
get swept up under this. I
understand And And that's a
question is a question or is
that a That's just a comment?
Was there a question? I think it
was a It was a comment.
Mr Chair.
Um and I will
Oh, here's my my one other
question with that with harm to
others. Uh, it includes, uh,
engagement in extreme
destruction of property, and it
doesn't specify property of
others here, whereas all the the
left preceding language in that
section talks about inflicting
harm on on another or is acted
in such a way substantial risk
to another. And then there's
just this extreme, uh,
destruction of property. What
first? What does extreme
Destruction of property mean and
two under this if I destroy my
own property
That could be harm to others
such that I and I could now be
subject to civil commitment.
Mister Chair, Senator I. I think
that that's a That's a great
distinction, and we could
certainly add extreme
destruction of property of
others.
What? Historically, these, This
language is meant to, um
Uh, to to pull in are people
like arsonists? Um, and who
People who and again you could
set your own house on fire,
right? I mean, so it it really
is. I do completely appreciate
your point. Um, I don't know
that that narrowing it to the
destruction of property or
another is going to it might fix
one problem and cause another
but certainly open to
conversations about that.
Well and and Mr Chair, Miss
Holly. I guess. Part of my
concern is that this could be
used if someone
If I go and I am really mad at
representative small
And I break his windows out. Uh,
am I gonna be subject to civil
to am I gonna be subject to
this?
Just for something like that.
Uh, I'm just concerned about the
whole concept of of property
crimes being wrapped into civil
commitment.
I. I understand. Thank you, Mr
Chair and senator again. There.
There is a section of our
population that does engage in.
It's It's fire. Starting
constantly. Um, and again, I do
understand your your destruction
of self versus others property,
but But there are, um, you know,
unfortunately, individuals out
there and and again, That's
that's where the medical folks
that's for the medical criteria
and and I would
And I can
Hear you talking back in your
brain at me right now, But you
know, these are things that are
medical professionals are
supposed to look at when they're
talking about extreme, um,
destruction of property.
Um and making those criteria
again. What we're talking about
is risk and and that destruction
of property has to include
within it a risk of danger to
others, such as arson.
Thank you. Thank you. Move on,
representative Small. You're
recognized for five minutes.
432. Thank you very much, Mr.
Chair. Um, thank you, Uh, both,
uh, Mr Chair. Uh, as several
questions I have that'll be for
tomorrow. I won't be here. I'll
share those, uh, with the
secretary, the Secretary Miho.
Uh, Mr Chair presenters
in terms of crafting these
proposals has there been sort of
a systematic, uh, approach with
law enforcement organizations
and other community stakeholder
groups? Um, I know it's It's a
lot of work in a short amount of
time. Uh uh, ME and you
mentioned sort of the
conversation you had been on
earlier today with, uh, a
community stakeholder here in
Santa Fe. But how have you all
approached that?
Work with folks across the
state.
Short, Mickey, Mister Chair
representative, I can tell you
at least you know from my
component. Um, I have spoken to.
I spoke to Miss Michaels in Las
Cruces. M. Michael, I think
there's no S at the end. Um,
regarding the a OT component
I've spoken to to Sam Bregman,
The D A in Albuquerque. I've
started talking to the D a here
in Santa Fe. But we're sort of
in a little bit of a of a phone
tag game. I've had discussions
with the Association of
Counties. I met with Ms Pines
and Mr Jackson. Um, I I've been
I met with the folks from the AC
LU to have additional
discussions as well. And
I think that they've been good,
honest discussions. I mean, we
certainly don't agree on
everything all the time, and
they're certainly going to be
places where we're never going
to agree, But but we've had. I
thought very, very at least
forthright discussions.
Thank you.
Mr Chair represent a small same
I go to the the specific groups
because many of them are are
duplicates, but one place where
where I think is important as I
I've spent some time with gun
rights advocates who I testified
in opposition to and they
testified in opposition to me
during last year's session. Many
of you were present for those
things in an effort to
understand their position
relative to specifically felons
in possession of firearms and
have gained significant amount
of knowledge and appreciation
about their perceptions of the
folks that I've met with
relative to
Topic that's been very
informative. And I think has has
helped, Uh, build some bridges I
agree with with what M AJ and
just said we don't agree on some
topics related to control. Let's
say, but we certainly agree on
matters relative to felons. And
I found that to be very
instructive and useful. And I
have met with the community law
enforcement community Leadership
Municipal League, etcetera.
Good. Thank you, Mr Baker. Thank
you. Thank you, Mr Chair. Thank
you, Um
I don't have anyone else on my
list. I. I represent a Cadena.
You're back here. Yeah, Earlier,
You had an objection to
referring to individuals as
felons. I assume that that's
gonna be OK with the Biden
administration, um, in the
coming months ahead of us.
I'm sorry.
Mr Chair. If I may with would
you be willing to excuse me?
Please? I do have a child with a
five o'clock doctor's
appointment. I'm sure you have
what again? I have a child with
a five o'clock doctor's
appointment, which I understand
that too. So you're going to
miss all my comments? Uh, Holly,
which I'm sure I'm sure it would
be your like one. If you'll
allow me 11 of the things that
we do here, you've heard members
talk a lot about and, uh,
Senator Du and others but
unintended consequences and
things that we don't intend to
happen with the bills, and some
of us have been doing this for a
long time are always as lawyers
thinking about what are the
unintended cons.
Of some of these things. I'm
looking for example at the
So-called Panhandling Bill, This
is the use of mediums. If you
were to look just real quickly
at age four.
Which would be a change to this
section five of the bill, this
would be changing existing law
for pedestrians on roadways
here. A new language would say
pedestrians shall not walk upon
a highway with a posted speed
limit of 30 miles an hour or
greater. You'll see that
language there, too, that that
by my reading would ban uh, the
state fair on Central Avenue.
Um, it would prohibit the CIO
pilgrims, uh, going on Good
Friday. The the language
literally is it's written would
prohibit all of those things.
I'm sure that's not your
intention, but that's what we as
There. Sit there and think about
doing if it's if you're banning
pedestrians on any highway, uh
and with the post to speed
limit, you're gonna prohibit the
state Fair parade. Um and I know
that's not your intention. But
that's the the stuff that we
Process right when we're trying
to go through these things, so I
don't wanna keep you from, uh,
from the important job of being
a parent, but those would
probably be the some of the
comments that I'd start going
down through. Some of these
things is start dissecting it
and the the That's the beauty of
this committee process. Frankly,
it's the beauty of the committee
process during the session is to
have, um lawyers, painless
hours, probably painfully
dissecting all these bills and
saying, Gee, do you really want
to stop the pilgrims from being
able to go to CIO on Good
Friday? No. Sure you don't. We
need to change the language, and
that takes time.
I mean, sometimes that's
inconsistent with the, uh,
special session. The time
limitations. There was a quick
comment about the, um and I
think good points made about the
reporting of crime. I appreciate
the comments made about this
probably existing law that says
some of this and requires it
now, um, a suggestion to the
governor. Not that I She takes
too much advice from me at
times, but I think she could do
that by an executive order this
afternoon. Um, I, I can't think
of any reason why that couldn't
be done with an executive order
that seems to be within the
scope of an executive order to
require state law enforcement.
To report to DPS and I, I'm And
if I'm reading the last part of
this, it, says the monthly
reports.
Um, generated by the Department
of Public Safety shall be made
available to state and local
agencies. Um
So you you're saying the reports
by the generated by Department
of Public Safety shall be able
to state and local law
enforcement is is there any
state law enforcement agency
other than DPS?
There is
OK?
Um so I'm trying to make sure
that DPS is not required to give
reports to DPS. So that just
seems like something that could
be done, Um, without um, without
having to do too much work and
do that right away, too. So I
share some with us. Uh,
comments. You all have heard
them before. I think about lan
in possession. I'll just add one
aside. I've been told
anecdotally that that the fact
that we keep changing this law
and as we've done it, I think
four times in the last three
years that the unintended
consequence of that is that
we're seeing a lot of criminal
defendants getting their cases
dismissed.
There's a greater level of
dismissal because the judges in
the prosecutors and others can't
keep it straight. The laws that
we keep changing and I'm looking
over it represent Ree and others
who are wired into that
community. But you know when we
changed the live every year, and
and we delay the enforcement,
depending on the month of
enforcement, the court gets it
wrong. They can't keep it
straight. The D a can't keep it
straight. And so we mischarge
people or we miss sentence
People and cases get tossed, um
on on a review. So if we're not
careful, all of these changes
that we keep making to the
felon.
Possession. Maybe doing the
opposite of I think what the
governor is intending to do,
which is try and keep these
folks from being on the streets.
So that's a That's a caution
there that I think is worth us.
taking some pause to, um,
represent Ream talked about
panhandling, and I think, uh uh,
I think it was rain, talking
about solicitation and
prostitution. It's probably
worth pointing out. My
understanding is Albuquerque
does not charge and arrest
people for prostitution. That's
one of the crimes that we and Mr
Baker, you're nodding your head.
No. Am I correct about that?
Right. That's correct, so we can
pass all the laws up here. We
can pass a law against
prostitution. But if Albuquerque
has a policy of not arresting
people for prostitution, then
it's kind of like the law that
was pointed out, I think by
representative Bargo.
Albuquerque has an ordinance
already against, uh, panhandling
and being on the media, and then
they simply don't enforce it.
And so we can spend a lot of
time here. Uh, I'm using
ourselves by passing a new
ordinance, uh, or a new law
against panhandling. But if law
enforcement is not going to
enforce it if the seat of
Albuquerque doesn't want to
enforce the laws, we
Here. Uh, I don't think the
problem is here in Santa Fe. Um,
I think the problem we should
probably be looking to, uh,
elsewhere. Um, And so again, I
think most of my comments are
probably been dissected many
times before. I do want to thank
Mr Baker and uh and Miss Agen
and for meeting with us
repeatedly for giving us a lot
of time. You've been very, um
good about about doing so, um
and, um, I'll I'll just end
Really, with one observation,
Mr. Baker. You used the word gun
app. Um, epidemic.
I think I'm glad you did. So I
I've always supported the
governor for making crime a
priority as she has, and and
even really, perhaps even giving
it the attention of a special
session. But I I'd like to do
something serious about crime.
Um and we're gonna do that and
your point on the gun epidemic,
I think is noteworthy because I
remember the the expressions on
the faces of some of my
colleagues. When I said the
Supreme Court got it completely
wrong and the Bruin case and
would have to back away from the
president of that case by the
historic now analogy.
Uh, standard that was set by
Justice Thomas in that case, and
of course last week, the Supreme
Court did exactly what I
predicted they would have to do
and tap dance their way out of
their own ruling in the ruin
case because they realized they
put themselves in a box and that
historic analogy Standard is now
left with Clarence Thomas all by
himself out on the on the limb.
I think I think he was the only
descent to that opinion. So
we've seen the Supreme Court tap
dancing its way back to sanity.
I think, um, with the exception
of Justice Thomas and so
That gives us a chance to rook
at gun laws that we've in the
past, said Well, using the the
Bruin standard. We couldn't
justify. Um and that and we
limited ourselves because that
was the law. We were operating
under with the Supreme Court.
Two years ago. Uh, same
justices, but they've had a
chance to sleep. And, uh so now
we have a different standard and
a different test, And I'm glad
to know that that that's the
case. And so perhaps there are
things the governor could be
considering to address the gun
epidemic that I know of so much
concern to her, but we're in a
new playing field and and I
think that's something that that
I'd commend to all of us for a
special session as well, too. So
Uh, we start tomorrow at nine
o'clock. Thank you. Oh, you know
what? I'm sorry. I do have
public comment. We do. We're
gonna take. Oh, I've got a
number of folks. Uh, you all
know my, uh, fondness for public
comment. Um, the, uh especially
when it's by zoom because again,
it really does, um, limit our
time for the committee. But
we'll do that not to be
disparaging to anyone else. So,
Mr Carver, I think are you on
Zoom? I don't see here.
Oh, is Mr Carver here?
He was OK. Don't see him. Uh,
winter. Uh, winter tourist.
1000 once. Yes. So there you
are.
Hiding back in the back. Uh, I,
I got, uh two minutes for you,
ma'am.
Hello, everyone. My name is
Winter Torres, and I am the CEO
and founder of New Mexico
Eviction prevention and
diversion. I am also, um,
leading up the charge on a
collaboration of a number of
housing groups. Probably about
40 of us across the state. We
are now the new Mexico housing
Alliance. Um, informally, but we
have a name now, instead of the
Monday morning coffee group, Um
and, uh, we are aligned also
with the number of the
disability rights advocates, as
well as the office of the
Public defender, Um
I don't think this session is
about public safety. I think
it's about criminalizing
homelessness. That is the
primary target of the majority
of the bills that are being
introduced and there has not
been community interaction or
consult consultation about that.
Um, this is part of a national
movement and actually who's
funding it is private prisons is
behind all of this, Um, along
with some other folks.
But
We know what the answer is to
folks who turn it's permanent
permanent support of housing.
And we know what the evidence
is. We know criminalizing
doesn't work.
We think that Medicaid waivers
can help with folks who who turn
as well and Medicaid can pay for
housing. Um and
Housing is a primary social
determinant of health and
locking folks up is not a
treatment modality.
Um, and for being succinct, Uh,
Matt Dean.
Are you still here?
Chairman, Chairman Cervantes.
I'm sorry, but my name is Peter
Cobra. And I am not understand,
Have you? I have you, Mr Ker,
I'm getting get to you. You're
on zoom. I'm going to people
here that are here today. First,
please.
Excuse me.
Is Dean. Welcome. You recognized
for two minutes, ma'am.
Thank you, Mr Chair. Members of
the committee. My name is Nat
Dean. I'm a disability advocate
and a person with disabilities.
I'm gonna try and do bullet list
fast. SSRIS are antidepressants
Take 6 to 8 weeks to reach a
level of efficacy and require
adjunct counseling and therapy
to become, uh, an appropriate
treatment modality.
Um
Waiting list increase. Uh
Sorry.
From 30 days to 90 days is a
very good idea. But there is a
large percentage of the
population that might not be
eligible for Medicaid and may be
involved in Medicare or other
insurance options. Um, persons
within the justice system may
not necessarily have a access to
the Americans with Disabilities
Act for effective communication
so that they fully understand
the and comprehend the processes
and the procedures. Um, patient,
Cus
Not necessarily be, um
Patient of population within
treatment facility may not
necessarily be be directed to
the number of beds but the
amount of staffing that is
available to serve the, uh,
persons that are within the
health care facility. Um, thank
you very much for your time, Mr
Chair. Members of the committee
and I apologize for not
recognizing you. Formally in the
beginning. Thank you so much.
That's quite right, Miss. Thank
you for being here again. Today.
We know you are a frequent flyer
with us. So, uh, Mr Cora, you're
the only person I show
Zoom. You're recognized for two
minutes, sir. It's 446. Mr. I
hope that being a frequent flyer
is a positive. We're happy to
have you. Thank you, sir. I'm
sorry for my ineptitude. Um, I
just wanna say this. Many of you
know that for 47 years I have
represented thousands of people
who get involved in the criminal
justice system because of their
psychiatric conditions. And I
just wanna ask you to please
slow this down. Uh, what I heard
today in terms of changing the
entire civil
Commitment statute is more
controversial and more
impactful.
Then things that we have spent
literally
Eight sessions, trying to sort
out with respect to force
treatment, and so it really
would deserve every person with
a disability in New Mexico for
you to act under these
circumstances so swiftly.
And then I will just say the
unintended consequence.
In addition to harming the
people with disabilities who are
not eagerly seeking treatment if
we were to enact the things
being proposed by the
administration, there are
countless people, hundreds of
people who are begging for
treatment who would not get
access to the bed.
That they're begging to get
into and instead we would be
holding people against their
will, in a form of treatment,
involuntary treatment, which is
almost never effective. Please
slow this down and let the
regular session address these
issues.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you
for being succinct. Um, I wanna
make sure that all members and
those that are listening and
participating. No, I don't mean
disrespect to anybody in the
public comment portion just
realizes the chair when you
open, uh, the meeting to anybody
who's got a laptop at home to
comments it makes it nearly
impossible for me to manage a
good meeting and to know how
much time we'll have for the the
subjects for the members. And so
that's my only, uh, sometimes
concern about opening our
meetings to public comment. Uh,
we, uh, we have our start time
tomorrow at nine.
We have another full day. Uh, if
there's no other business, I'm
sorry. We didn't get to, uh,
free for all time on the
committee, but I'm glad it rips
and Chandler now adds that to
her agenda, and maybe we'll have
time for that tomorrow.
