So next on our agenda is um
senator linda trehio and she's
is going to be presenting on the
missouri juvenile justice model
and how it might intersect with
new mexico's interests
thank you madame chair and first
of all I just want to do a
disclaimer i'm an attorney but
even i'll justice is not my area
of expertise
I really this is just from a
matter of doing research and
talking with folks and getting
information so I tried to make
sure that whatever information
is on the slide is accurate
but I may not be able to answer
all of your questions I do have
captain lawrence bernett coming
from the santa fe police
department he is on his way over
here that's okay he's on this
way over here and he's going to
sit up here and and help with me
with some examples
I have had the opportunity over
the last couple of months to
talk with the number of people I
just want to acknowledge those
folks mark stewart who is the
director for the missouri used
service initiative and he's
basically one of the folks who
started the misery model and the
m y s I is the arm it's a non
profit arm but they keep the
training and the process itself
going and we also met with my
fitzert fits in a pitson pat zn
here's the division director for
the missouri division of use
services and he brought in a
number of staff for us to meet
with also
them the division of you
services is what manages the
juvenile justice in missouri and
they're part of the misery
department of social services we
met with bob clevel who is the
director of juvenile justice
here in the mexico at cyf.
And he took us on a two and we
got to meet with his staff we
probably spent a good three
hours there
of the y d DC and alba kirky
which is the youth development
and diagnostic center.
I've met with sanity county
commissioner lisa kicari stone
with county manager or santa fe
county manager greg shaper to
get an idea as to what are the
challenges that have been
happening at the tension centers
here in the mexican please join
me thank you and i've also met
with the district attorneys for
the first judicial merry car mac
wise and the second due to show
somebragman
in addition to that there's been
a group of us senators and
representatives that have
attended the meetings with
missouri attended the the two or
and have had much discussion
sender linda lopez center katy
do hig center heather bragman
and senator stewart
representatives list thompson
and representative joan ferrari
this is really an open group and
i'm hoping that we can begin to
add folks to the group to get a
better idea as to how do we move
forward so i'm really just going
to kind of talk from a high
level in regards to what the
misery model is so I found this
quote on the children's defense
found and I thought you know
it's kind of sums up exactly how
this juvenile justice cannot
seem to go not just did in
mexico but across the country
one of the most persistent road
blocks to juvenile justice
reform across across the country
is resistance to change and it
really is I mean I guess we
could say that for a lot of
different issues but in this
case it's a real it's a real
barrier we need a system that
returns young people to the
community prepared to succeed
and become productive adults to
serve as a model for the entire
nation quite honestly that has
become the missouri we don't
need systems that do further
harm and return youth most of
them non violent violent
offenders.
Back to their community is
hopeless angry and i'm prepared
to succeed in life
so here are some of the
fundamentals of the misery model
they use small
separate cricket they use small
non institutional type
facilities that are close to
home and
pictures of their models shows
bunk beds living room areas
pictures on the wall in
spirational
you know posters they have it
close to home because part of
the treatment is that they'll
have an opportunity to re engage
with their families when that's
possible and to re engage with
the community they serve youth
and groups of ten to twelve so
not large groups but closer to
ten to twelve
their treatment is looking at
the whole person it's very
intense and they are not just
looking at the crime that the
child has committed but they're
really looking at treatment if
that means psychological
treatment if it means medical
treatment whatever kind of
treatment it's very intense they
also treat their youth as a
group model so they get
individualized care where they
each have their individual plan
but they also do the the
counseling and that there be and
the work together as a group
which is kind of how it is in
our families right when we have
problems in our families we work
together as a group and we try
to resolve that they do
recognize that their safety
through supervision structure in
relationships.
They integrate their treatment
with education and their
education is not just during the
school day but their education
is year round so they have a
year round school regardless of
what time you're in the facility
you are going to have year round
school
they also believe strongly that
families are incredibly
important out one of the things
it has come up over and over
when we've talked with folks is
or what about those families
that just don't have the the
they're just there there
involved in drugs they're
involved in alcohol and they're
just not receptive that's not
the end of rate they still work
with those families and if they
can't build from that family
then they find relationships
that they can build from and
that's where they look at
communities as a partner they
have two of their facilities in
a state park and the youth there
go out and work with the state
park staff b do all kinds of
learning they in one community
they talked about building
relationships with the
connectors club and you know
those kinds of organizations
where they'll come into the
facility and do you know talks
on leadership or talks on
community projects and so they
build relationships with mentors
that are in the community
positive adult mentors so that
once they're released from their
detention they are becoming part
of that community they also work
to try to build relationships
back with the educational
institution that they'll attend
once they release a final thing
that is really critical is that
they support them through
transition and provide after
care and we'll talk a little bit
about why that's incredibly
important.
So how did misery become a
national model i'm not going to
read this but basically they
were in the same position that
everybody else was in the late
nineteenth and and twentieth
centuries they were housing you
think large facilities they were
predominantly doing a detention
type work instead of
rehabilitation
while the rest of the nation
began looking at how do we
be stronger and tougher on crime
for kids they began to look at
how can we rehabilitate and how
can we provide therapy to care
for these kids so today they've
got five regions that operate
thirty two residential
facilities now their population
is six million it's over six
million so that significantly
different than the mexico
they've got forty five juvenile
courts and driven out the link
winds are committed to the dys
when the juvenile court
determines that there's no
community based services
suitable for the us I did learn
that their detention centers so
this is the post trial which
could be referred to as the
incarceration stage where
they're actually held
prior to that which is similar
to our detention centers pre
adjudication those centers are
managed by their court system
that's how they have ours
divided ourselves our managed by
the counties and the cyfd
manages the post and a
judiciation.
So the division of youth
services that is actually the.
Equivalent to our cyfd juvenile
justice system
they have again the
individualized care and family
engagement they have the they
have day treatment and resource
centers so you have their is if
the courts see that there is
this kind of day treatment
available where this where this
youth is residing then six days
a week they go to this it's not
score but they're getting
education while they're there
it's therapy it's activities so
six days a week are they will go
to these days centers and they
will get their their treatment
that they would get if they were
in residential treatment they
also have the obviously
residential treatment education
services and after care
so what is individualized care
they get assigned a service
coordinator
when they get when they arrive
this is like a case manager that
overseas all of their services
and the thing I liked is that
they listed them user these are
words that are taken right from
their website and from the
conversations that we have they
become an advocate for the child
so instead of a parole affair
sir they are an advocate for the
child they do a risk needs
assessment
very quickly upon the student
or the the youth being arriving
I understand that that
assessment can take days and can
take hours to accomplish then
they come up with this
comprehensive individual
treatment plan which of any of
you are involved in special
education it would be very
similar to an ip like what are
the needs of the child what are
the things that can meet those
needs and how can we help them
reability after six months they
have an administrative review.
And they work on a community
integration plan.
So family engagement and this
was different than what I found
here in new mexico they truly
believe that families are
integral part of the stood of
the use rehabilitation they do
family strengthening family
counseling parent support
services and family engagement
activities when we toured why
ddc we did find that they do
have family engagement and
family activities but it didn't
seem as though they actually
provide therapy for families so
that the families can help heal
and they can help learn ways to
resolve problems and solve
issues in a more productive
manner
the day treatment again they are
their six days a week and they
get all of the treatments from
this individualized plan they're
just not residing at the the
residential
but is very similar the
residential treatment again it's
a ten to twelve youth they try
to keep them ten or fewer at any
given facility but they're
facilities maybe divided like a
widely to see I think they have
five parts and in those parts
and missouri would be a group of
kids that for the most part do
not interact with the other
parts on the keep them together
and they get their treatment and
their group tip treatment
together
so they've got ten of these home
like facilities and nine
structured moderately structural
facilities and for secure
carefacilities
the educational services they
actually work with their
department of education.
They employ a hundred and twenty
certified teachers at their
twenty seven sites and many of
those teachers are certified in
special education
as I said earlier they follow a
twelve month school plan and
they are signed a full day
schedule of classes.
Employment they have continue
our cities so they train their
kids on things that they can do
when they leave the facility.
So the missouri used services
institute believes in our
rehabilitative approach
and again i'm not going to read
this this just comes from their
website there is a video that
i'd like to see if I can make
happen.
How do I do sound.
We had this problem yesterday I
know we did and that's why I was
like i'll see if I can make this
happen.
What he wants the classrooms
nobody wants in their community
but these kids deserve second
chance their needs there once
are the same they're like just
any other
they want a feeling of hope that
they can have a decent wife they
need to know that somebody
really cares about and so many
of the kids
have questions about that do
does anybody really care about
me.
The.
The.
This.
The.
The.
The.
The.
The.
When I value I had an english
phone was to do but I think i've
been working on here they do by
now
I think when you get mad and
chose to make a joke out of the
still
site you know what's he going to
do when you get selling
when he first got here how
quickly to get upset
and then working at the jane
transfer sixteen years when I
first started we were in the old
correctional program and there
was six staff watching a ninety
six kids
I hated you know the way I had
to be to have the fall over the
kids I did not like always
punish
we have to believe it is
possible for them to change also
last weekend so right how my
baby change my thoughts and also
ready to hear to spray myself
out of your bar and have it make
you feel when you wrote it well
I don't know if she's
made me feel
like from the bar of my house
and seeing across I want to make
someone happy buying savings as
I rediscount I watched it the
next time you start thinking
about
thinking about her that letter
knowing that you weren't going
to be around so what are some of
the goals behind punishment
order some of the things that we
want a cute to understand what
more creating
okay so we want to teach them a
lesson
remorse remorse
respect I was there go to an
intensive training many many of
them still come here with the
correctional mansate and we have
to help them to try to leave
that behind
different states will take our
model it make it their own but
the court principles remain the
same
with their putin model teachers
you if they you stole these
dominants.
So because of that there is a
price to pay and you will be in
this program but in this program
you'll be introduced to
resources we're teaching them
patience we're teaching them
communication skills were
teaching them a lot of things
that they did have when they
came in the door so adds to you
versus when you're in the
correctional approach a lot of
that takes away from you because
you're fighting you're having to
still take what you
because there's abuse that
occurs there that occurs a lot
of people learn how to commit
more i'm set up in their way in
the correctional system because
it doesn't for building me
he gave us a tough is young
ladies in new york city to come
so this facility we have young
baby jumping out this window we
were restraining ladies finance
there goes again arrested girls
trying to clam overstaff to get
to another girl I there know
nothing about the missouri
hello that might not gonna work
for me this thing was only was
like moving with the group into
an everything as a group and
free thing as a group so I never
thought my she was not work at
all
everybody looked at these direct
yeah
typically used for
second street near the bonus
emotions which we have a lot of
incorrect
tendency to overwhelming so that
we give you a straight
now is that in the point that
you know because they believe
that the program will be doing
here how many people still
believe they is therefore
the implemented together until
unit as far as the so call up
the check in the cool
everything started getting
better.
Like these growth is able to
express their films till their
life story management data left
and I was going neat when they
came back to
it to sleep and went completely
worse a lot of our kids come to
a lot of traumatic experiencing
a lot of rough backgrounds
a lot of times when I find in
june assistance is there it does
come up with a little book on
the program and there's been an
hour a day working on those
things you know but I as sixteen
years of neglect in the band in
the
day it's not going to get me to
where I need to be as critical
there juven our systems create
an environment that allows the
keys to go in their process of
dealing with that deal with
their frustrating as twenty four
hours a day seven days a week
if we don't
opportunity to engage and work
about
what they become adults the path
because much more
they think you don't care about
this easier for them to turn up
to play something thinking care
about them to have their best
features
look they smiled and I have
business assessed based on keys
take it all society definitely I
want to add differently I
wouldn't become something
different.
A lot of people
I can't watch that and without
being emotional um
I know a lot of you have heard
me tell the story
I was a foster child for the
last two years of my high school
year I was not a good kid I had
a lot of challenges had a lot of
family challenges and I just
wish that there had been people
like this that could have been
there to help me overcome that
i'm sixty six years old and i'm
still struggling to overcome
some things and so the idea that
we're teeth that they're
teaching these youth how to
communicate how to resolve
problems how to wreck ignites
the feelings that they feel
because we all have feelings but
if you talk to people in prison
one of the biggest challenges
that they have across the board
is that they don't know how to
identify or recognize their
feelings so they'll they'll have
i'm happy or i'm i'm angry right
there's a lot of variations in
between that and learning what
those variations are and when
it's time for me to listen to
some music at a very loud sound
to kind of overcome some of
those feelings it's taken me a
lot of time and so I I you know
moving in that direction this
state has been moving in that
direction for fifteen years and
I want to give you the story of
what happened minute some of you
in this room may already know
back in two thousand and three
it kind of started and this was
under the richardson
administration
the acl was approached by a
number of parents and
adjudicated youth that were
being they were lacking in
mental health treatment they
were being physically a.
Used including from their peers
and staff between twenty twenty
three and twenty twenty five the
aclu new mexico monitored
conditions within our facilities
and they documented verbal and
physical abuse by peers and
staff
by twenty twenty by two thousand
and five there was a class
action suit that was prepared
and negotiations began at
cuifties request.
In two thousand and six there
was an initial agreement in two
thousand seven a c l u fine
filed a suit following a tax or
up till two thousand seven they
had tried to work out so that
you're talking about four years
they had tried for four years to
work out an agreement with CYFD
j when i'll justice to come up
with some what they considered
to be humane treatment are you
there was an attack on advice
developmentally the late team by
staff
they want to closure of the new
mexican boy score at springer
and they wanted the youth to
have access to behavioral health
medical care and community base
services cyfd ultimately
ultimately paid seven hundred
and five thousand dollars and
hired the missouri youth
institute tom implement the
misery model
back in two thousand and seven
we brought them in to new mexico
and had them do an analysis of
what is it that we need to do to
get to where you are
in two thousand and eight and in
this is information that the
legislative council service
pulled up for s
and i've got a whole shared
violent anybody wants it with
all kinds of news articles and
reports and there's a lot of
information that's available
two thousand eight there's a
mention of cambia
cambiar is what new mexico
timed use the term that was used
for the implementation of the
misery model funds were
appropriated and
there was an retraining staff
followed passage of house
memorial eight
by two thousand and nine.
The acl
a cell you lost it was settled
cyfi paid the ecu and additional
five hundred thousand for legal
fees and a new that new
agreement ended undecember
entered until december thirty
first two thousand and ten
again were in two thousand and
twenty five and they're really
isn't a whole lot of change to
the work that we do
by two thousand and ten they
filed another lawsuit and by two
thousand and seven eleven they
got a restraining order against
you if d and extended the
agreement but they were only
granted another seven months and
they were only given over sight
of the sand one detention center
so new mexico and again i'm not
the expert i'm as telling you
information that i've gathered
and what I know
from our research we've got four
yes i'm sorry
to induce the general next i'm
sorry because i've been
wondering if a little while now
his name and so we all know
what's going on there this is
captain lawrence
bornett thank you I knew I was
gonna remember capped and I keep
one in the call and chief
captain lawrence burnett and he
is with the santa fe police
department and you're going to
hear from him in just a few
minutes because he is going to
share some information that even
talking with law enforcement at
breakfast other communities are
experiencing the same
frustrations
thank you and i'm chair now
that's okay so pretty
adjudication we leave that up to
the counties
I thought we had thirteen to
fourteen detention centers in
the past I learned this week
that we had eighteen so we've
gone from eighteen detention
centers.
In regional communities down to
four and I will tell you that
across the board it's a
financial issue the state is not
reimbursing counties for care
for juveniles we are not we're
not providing any so that's
going to be part of my at the
very end poster judiciation is c
y fd's responsible for we've got
two centers we got the ydc
center in albuquerque and we've
got the
the john paul taylor center in
los cruces I have not had a
chance to tour the loss crucial
center but from everything that
i've heard it really is a
an amazing facility and it's
probably
in my opinion the closest to the
misery model that we have here
in mexico
here we are juvenile's conserve
one year or two year commitment
see we have d make sure that
federal requirements are met
they make sure they oversee
juvenile detention compliance
certification I looked on their
website and and basically they
go out once a year and they
recertify a detention center
they do referrals
so
this is how we get referred and
I had to look this stuff up
delinquent referrals are you've
broken the law you're used and
you've broken the line and the
laws are the same for adults as
they are for kids rate is not a
separate set of laws it's a
separate set of of how do we
deal with it the
status of fence means that you
done something but it's only
breaking the law because of your
age in other words.
You've purchased alcohol that
would be a status of fence
because adults can purchase
alcohol but as a youth you can't
purchase alcohol
and then we get probationed by
those are the reasons that kids
go into our detention centers
and into our
incarceration centers
we got the jack and here's a
list of the things that they're
responsible for they do review
grants from local communities
who are looking to provide
that's kind of a diversionary
treatment services.
We have a risk assessment
instrument that I talked with
the days they're they don't feel
like that risk assessment is is
is a great risk assessment cyfd
revisited it in two thousand and
twenty two sell like three years
ago and in their opinion it is
updated
so happened captain lawrence
barnett here to talk just a
little bit about some of the
challenges that sanify county is
experiencing and that we're
hearing from other counties
madame chairman members of the
community thank you for having
me here today um I do have three
examples of
incidents that the sanity police
permit encountered in the last
month beginning july one
one case does
begin in april of twenty twenty
five in which a drive by
shooting was reported in one of
our residential neighborhoods in
downtown sanity
when our officers did arrive on
seeing they identified the
residents and we knew that there
was a juvenile that had lived
there at some point
or after his beginning process
in the scene and we recovered
over a fifty shell casings from
three different weapons one
including an sks style
rifle
through the course of the
investigation our detectives
were able to identify a juvenile
fender in that case and
petition the court for an arrest
the rest weren't was signed by
just a court judge and sanity
and the juvenile was brought to
the santa fe police department
about three weeks ago
are detectives affected the rest
on the juvenile in contacted
juvenile probation office
informing them that we had
arrested a stupid hour.
On the fell any warrant
did you now probation office
reported to our officers and
detectives that there was no
room to house this juvenile even
though he was involved in a
serious gun crime with a felony
warrant from santa fe district
court
the district court judge was
contacted
he made several phone calls to
the given our probation office
and ultimately it was a greed
upon that the detectives would
release the juvenile to his
mother
with the strict order from the
judge that he would have to show
up to court the next morning
uhm from speaking to detectives
and preparing for today
it's been confirmed that
juvenile did report as ordered
by the judge
and he's been put on.
Pressure services through the
gpo office
the next case arm that I wanted
to mention is occurred july
second some of you from the
sanity area a greater sanity
area may have been familiar with
it but we had five juveniles and
wanted dot that came into the
city of sanity are the five
juveniles of a reported as being
disruptive in destructive along
serious road
when our officers were
dispatched out there for the
initial call they are unable to
locate the juveniles but while
they were investigating that
initial car
a fighting progress or the solt
and progress was called in at a
local burger king breakdown the
road
it was reported that the five
juveniles were involved in a
physical alternation was staff
members of the burger king as
well as two patriots
a husband and wife and the wife
was pregnant or is pregnant arm
the five juveniles were alleged
to have battered all staff
members and the two citizens in
the burger king prior to our
officers arrival
the juvenile's flood and our
officers were soon able to
locate them during the course of
that investigation in prior to
the juvenile's being transported
to the sanity police department
a citizen in the area reported
that he found
Further to the police department
two of those five juveniles were
found to have active fellow new
warrants at a district court for
their rest they were
incarcerated on those warrants
however the charges that they
obtained in that incident they
were not incarcerated on
and then all the remaining three
juveniles were released to
parents at that point
the last case that I have to
mention
is
I juvenile offender was stopped
for a minor traffic violation in
the city of santa fe after two
am about two weeks ago he was
found how the
warrant out of district court
for an alleged aggravated
assault in kidnapping with
firearm the juvenile was placed
under arrest and the firearm
that had been identified in
the warrant was recovered from
that juvenile the juvenile was
transported to the sanity police
format and again the juvenile
probation office was contacted
and incrustration was refused
for
not allowed because they didn't
And he
again contacted the gpo office
but down
it was determined that that
driven now would be released to
his parents as well with the
same recommendation from the
previous juvenile with the
warrant that he would have to
report to
district court the next morning
and again
based on what I know in
preparing today that juvenile
did the other five individuals
that I had previously mentioned
we are unable to confirm on that
information and then lastly I
just want to mention that those
three cases that I didn't
mention that the sanity police
firm it has been investigating
has been dealing with these
jupenous the ages range from
twelve years old to seventeen
years.
Thank you
thank you capped and I
appreciate you being here and
and this is just a small example
within the just the last few
months in santa fe alone
I
have I was going to share but
i'm taking a little more time
that I had hoped I thought I
could talk faster I do have a
cambre presentation that was
presented to this committee back
in two thousand and thirteen
it
it doesn't really say a lot but
i'm happy to share it with
anybody that would like it I
also have a two thousand and ten
feasibility study that was
created as a result of the last
suit and new mexico trying to
move to this camber model and
one of the things that sticks
out it's a pretty long
feasibility study that the thing
that sticks out the most for me
is that there was a plan to have
regional detention centers and
regional centers where youth
would be
residential treatment and when I
took the why d DC and met with
the staff I asked them like
what are the centers what what
is happening and where are we at
where fifteen years into this
twenty year plan and quite
frankly no one knew about the
plan
and so we have a plan but we
haven't done really much to
implement it but one of the
things I guess that sticked out
to me the most is that if you
look at the northeast corner of
new mexico we literally in santa
fe as been your last vegas
towers in that whole area and
everything in between we don't
have anywhere for our used to go
if they need to be detained.
And so santa fe is taking our
youth up to sound one and I
learned that even was ross well
that we were talking to this
morning portalist thank you
there even taking some kids up
to sound wind because of the the
beds are county manager said
that we pay for six beds
whether they are filled or not
and
the san one count he has agreed
to extend it to one more
because we do have a need for
facilities in south are county
transport's kids and so the
police department doesn't have
to stop what they're doing the
county has taken responsibility
for transporting but I
understand that's not the issue
around the state so
what is what can we do first
they want to just this is
something that
I found
in a in a research during
adolescent teenagers experience
a hyper sensitivity to emotional
contact while their ability to
self regulate their reactions to
those emotions and accurately
predict the consequences of
their behavior have not fully
developed and so it's like it
just reminded me of being a
child again right and yes we
have stronger motions probably
emotions that are stronger than
any other time in her life but
we don't have the skills in our
brain to really figure out like
what's the long term
consequences of that
so
what are the challenges and what
are some of the next steps and
again suggestions that i'm
throwing out there this is a
conversation that we all need to
have but there really is a lack
of regional detention centers
and in my community
predominantly we experience that
at a really high and an obvious
level.
There is not the ability so when
our youth I live on the south
state of sound a fee when youth
and I know of a family whose
child has been is up in sound
one
they cannot get to sandwan
county to go and have the
european reengage with their use
there's apparently the ability
for them to do zoom but trigger
the sakes I did soon during it
we all did zoom during covered
and it is not the way to build
relationships right it just
isn't it gets you through but
it's not a good relationship the
cost to local governments is
really the reason that we've
lost our facilities I met with
sound a fee county and they said
that back in two thousand and
two thousand and twenty that the
facility and santa fe needed
nine million dollars in in
remodeling to even just get it
up to a standard that it could
be used I don't know what that
number looks like now but it's
going to be it would be
significant there they're what
they're going to do is their
actually going to tear that
facility down and they have
plans to build a
day treatment program for adults
and youth so and that's just
down the street from where I
live right so um
that that site is not available
obviously to be reopened but if
it were the cost of doing that
is just it is not it's not
available our counties can't
afford to do that I think that
we as a state should take
responsibility for entering that
we have detention centers that
meet a standard and that provide
the resources that we need to
and that are local and in our
communities I think is a state
we should take that
responsibility
their significant
miscommunication between cyfd.
And local law enforcement this
has played itself out in the
paper with the five years that
the capped and talked about see
way of disas they didn't ask for
them to be detained law
enforcement says the called back
and said there were no beds why
they would say there was no beds
if they didn't ask for them to
be teen I don't know
but there's a lack of
communication there and that has
created um some of our problems
there's limited space because
we're down to four detention
centers
there is we do not we do not do
complete mental health
assessments at our detention
centers and when I ask you ifd
staff like why why isn't that
part of what's required they
said that because it's short
term stay and it's better for
them to get that analysis an
individual plan if there
after their adjudicator
so
I don't think that we have
capacity to improve juvenile
justice at cyft it would be hard
for me to try to sell that see
why take on more responsibility
I e take on the responsibility
of managing detention centers
having regional system
I think we need to have either a
new agency or we need to move it
to the departme.
We need to improve the
coordination between pre and
post attention I don't see any
reason why we can't do a full
analysis of our youth if they're
detained even for twenty four
hours we need to understand
because the chances of them re
offending the chances of them
leaving the detention center
without us knowing what it is
they need to change their
behavior of a re offense is
ninety percent
ninety percent
and I believe that we need to
develop a comprehensive
reabilitation training and
continuing education I think
that's something that we need to
do with our community colleges
maybe it's a certification
program but we need to have we
need to move in the direction
and in missouri they have this
non profit that provides that
training that's wonderful but is
the legislature we can't really
create a non profit so are off
you know opportunity is for us
to look to our higher education
institutions to create a
training system that insures
that we are doing this kind of
treatment for our youth
across the state so that's yet
that's everything that I have
and madam share we stand for
questions
questions comments
okay
anyone else
okay to deal with this.
I'm so i'm sorry
i'm i'm sorry center a gotcha
sent gotcha.
Anyone else
okay
I got it.
I'm just making my list of
complete.
Okay
represent to chop as eleanor
charles
thank you madame chair
thank you for the presentation
I
have not had the opportunity to
read up on the misery model
from the presentation
it seems as though this is a way
to increase the numbers of kids
who may be are going to be a
detention and i'm a little
concerned about that but I just
wanted to sort of reflect on
some reactions that I had to the
presentation as I was as I was
watching it some of the things
that that really stick out at me
in terms of the of the video
the kids in the presentation
where all kids of color and i'm
going to assume that that's the
same thing for kids and new
mexico who are and attention
they're all kids
and I think that we need to ask
ourselves why that is
is this a systemic issue
is there's something what are we
missing right
I remember when I worked at
chop checked of services as a
cps worker as the couple social
worker most of the families are
great majority of those families
were also familiar
which is very troubling
what are we missing what are we
not focusing on
uhm do we need to have more
discussion and more focus on
prevention in terms of
supporting our families and
terms of identifying at risk
it's early early on so that they
don't end up in the situation
like this are in terms of being
locked up
I think that trauma is
definitely something that needs
to be focused on in addressed.
Because when kids are acting out
they're acting now for a number
of reasons and they're acting
now because of the pain that
they're
and I think that we have failed
to address that you talked a
little bit about the missouri
model I had the opportunity to
work in missouri for a bit st
lewis and counter city and as I
was visiting schools in saint
louis particularly
in neighborhoods where the
majority of cares were kids of
color those teachers had been
trained to respond in a trauma
informed way so that their first
response wasn't to punish the
child but to
understand where the recoming
from and to react with a sort of
justice basically
I agree that the fd is a problem
I don't know that I agree that
moving
june of justice out from
underseyfd it's a good idea
see why I didn't always have
juvenile justice that was that
came about and in the
reorganization of cyfd
cyfi I think that for me lacks
expertise and behavioral health
ins in child welfare lacks
leadership and most of all
that's consistency and that
leadership if you have a
secretary that has changing
every few years
then you're going to have the
kind of miscommunication that
you're talking about people
don't remember plans that that
maybe have been agreed to or or
put in place
so I think those were some
things that we would that we
really need to think about
before we move to a moral that
looks to me like we're going to
set up mini detention centers
around the state and maybe not
have the kind of outcome that we
want.
I have some questions
in terms of you know what our
juvenile detention numbers look
like and I don't know if you
have them and if you don't
that's ok I think that the
examples that
the captain was referring to our
horrible examples and how do we
get their rate and yes we need
to deal with with those kinds of
situations
but we do we apply that to the
whole population until we make
the assumption that are here to
have come in a
have had an encounter with the
law you know deserve what we're
talking about here so one of the
questions that I have is in
terms of the statistics with
regard to
june i'll crime in new mexico to
an attention in new mexico
are numbers going up or have our
numbers gone down with the with
within the past
few years.
Madam chair representative thank
you for that question the
reality is is that they've gone
down to some extent and I just
want to clarify that nothing in
this presentation is any kind of
an indication that we're going
to detain more youth it's the
far this thing from that in fact
I think that we need to have
those treatment plans and that's
what I was trying to show maybe
we need to have programs maybe
we need to have more therapy in
the early stages of these years
so that has nothing to do with
that I I just want to clarify
that but the numbers of use who
are refending
that is where the challenge has
been and I have heard that from
our district attorney in santa
fe I heard it from the district
attorney and albuquerque and I
suspect that if I went and
talked with other district
attorneys I hear it from law
enforcement that these are youth
who have had multiple
interactions when I talked with
ydc they said that they're
actually getting kids who have
had between ten to fifteen as
high as twenty different
programs that they've been
through and their behavior has
escalated
so it's a small group and it's
i'm not obviously i'm not saying
that every child in our state is
a doven out the link went it's a
small group but the small group
that is reoffending are not
getting treated and they're not
getting the services that I
believe they deserve to have
so a follow up to that question
madam chair senator so have we
taken a look at the kinds of
programs of these kids are going
to to determine whether or not
won those programs are right for
them and to whether or not there
need to be some changes within
that program within those
programs.
Madam chair representative that
is not something that i've done
I honestly
if it needs to be done then it
needs to be done but I don't
have an answer for that III
don't I again I said i'm not the
expert in that that would be
something that you probably need
to bring up with j jack and ask
them what their analysis of it
is because they're the ones who
have taken on that
responsibility
a madam chair senator and in
your in your presentation you
talked about residential
treatment centers can you
talk about that a little bit
more
madame chair representative are
you talking about the missouri
model
madam cher senator I I don't
know if that's what you were
surfaced so here in new mexico
we have two residential centers
I don't we don't necessarily
call them treatment centers
right we call them why ddc and
then we have the the john paul
taylor down in last crucials but
in missouri they call them
residential treatment centers
and they have more five of them
and they have small groups of
youth here I believe and and I
and I can't give you the exact
numbers but we have somewhere in
the neighborhood of eighty to
ninety use at why did you see
I don't know how many we have
but I believe it's somewhere in
the neighborhood of maybe thirty
six down in los cruces
albuquerque is by far on the
largest attention center in new
mexico that a misery they have
more and they have smaller
groups and they keep them close
to hot right so so then madam
chair senator then I would not
consider I don't consider why
ddc or jump alternate
residential treatment centers as
you're as you're sort of laying
them out it isn't sound like.
The once a ministry are really
true residential treatment
centers the way someone who may
be a behavioral health expert
might might think about them so
we might wanna dig into that a
little bit more
on and then
one question.
For my other question manager I
guess that would be it then
thank you
senator city locus you're next
thank you madame chair thank you
very much for for doing the
research and in for doing this
did you visit a missouri with
disabled madam chair senator I
have not had the opportunity but
representative ferrari may in
fact be doing that right now
come she was on a trip and we
were able to help coordinate
that she was going to be up in
that area and they said that
they would work with her to get
her on a trip so she should come
back staying in arabian b with
her during the n c sl so
I hope to hear about that
excellent I
actually like the idea of
regional centers whether they're
treatment or not I
visited I had the option to go
visit john pol table and I was
so impressed
it had a lot of which you're
talking about with the missouri
model in terms of wrap around
services on site psychological
treatment
they had a nine site
I think it was a pa but they had
a doctor visit
on site and so
they were really
this with swia and the other
thing that they did as they let
us talk to the kids
without any kind of
you know they just let us talk
to whoever and one of them
almost broke my heart he said
this is the first time i've ever
felt that anybody gives a damn
about me and that just broke my
heart how could you beef I think
he was about fifteen sixteen
years old and that's the first
time he felt that and I answered
that it's interesting he he's
hearing it in an institutional
setting
but he definitely was taking
advantage of the educational
opportunities offered there.
The student the teachers were
very impressive the whole thing
just and again the facility felt
more like a dorm than
then a jail
and these kids seem to be
thriving when you know a night I
like to talk individually
outside of the you know outside
of this supervisors and so I did
a lot of that
there was some complaints about
the food but nothing you know
nothing
nothing horrible in contrast two
what we had a couple of years
ago in critic in berlio county
where the kids I don't know if
your member but they sort of
took over a part of way to see
it was christmas and their
demands were they wanted books
they wanted laundry they wanted
clean sheets and I was just like
my god where is going on there
and what it happened is people
start complaining about the fact
that they're only two
they didn't have enough
supervision of this group that
you know check it over but when
you actually look at the
videotape by that
this wasn't exactly scary
they didn't have with bins or
anything they just kind of
locked out the the supervisors
and then their demands were so
basic I don't know that I just
thought the whole thing was
weird and it made me think yeah
we need a better system
and it happened christmas and in
a my understanding from talking
to some parents is the kids were
upset because they weren't with
their family at at christmas and
so that's kind of what lead to
everything that happened all of
that to say I think the idea of
regional
regional facilities so that kids
aren't so far from their
families and their families can
come and visit and incorporating
the families into the treatment
plans or the ids is you
described.
Um is it's just an excellent
idea because some families just
don't know
how to parents
trouble kids and the way they
got trouble to varies from kid
to kid the way they got into the
to that situation
I joke with my grandson I see
you want to be a good kid cause
if you're a bad kid you have a
target on your back you can't
get away with anything if you're
a good kid and I was a good kid
you know I used to skip school
and you know whatever do these
things that I never got in
trouble and I just and I joke
with him but there's a lot of
truth to that
and so I am just I would I
really enjoyed the presentation
I would like to see some of
those plans you are talking
about because
and I also agree with a
representative of chavis that
creating a new agency or sending
it to the department of health
which is not an expert in
behavioral health and children
is problematic and I think that
that sort of sets us up for
for problems now
I understand you're concerns
about cyfd right now
but.
It's the agency that supposed to
do it and so would it need what
we need is to improve the agency
instead of like creating
something outside of the agency
I think we need to really focus
on that including their their
juvenile justice system
I dealt with them at a hope when
I was in the clinical mark
program at you and and I thought
see what he wasn't necessarily
the problem where I saw is these
children weren't getting wrap
around services there was a
cookie cutter offered to each
one of them and
I felt more individualized
approaches might be better for
our clients what we did is we
researched and found into it
individualized appropriate
approaches that the judge is
really appreciated and actually
so did see why if you cause they
didn't have time to do that kind
of that kind of deep dive into
what this the background the
history and with this particular
child could use
so I am very excited by the fact
that you're looking at this and
i'm very excited by the fact
that we could do better
by these children I think it's a
very important important
investment the alcohol addiction
the the substances addictions of
their parents of the poverty
there's so many
issues with only now we have
there's a whole homeless
programming aps so we have
homeless children it's just it
just breaks my heart so I
might only question I asked you
about whether you visited it is
which I believe we don't
necessarily have to follow a
bottle but
getting informed by these
various models would would be
really good and so my question
is is how did you pick missouri.
Thank you madame chair and think
you sen I I just want to clarify
real quickly to be fair um why
ddc has dental they provide
medical services they've got
AAA very nice gym area
they've got school so they they
do have an and quite honestly
the staff were amazing I mean
they really cared about the kids
that they were carrying for
and they they they expressed
some concerns about the
challenges that they
and they face challenges of
staffing they face challenges
are in a lack of funding anyway
I just want to be a fairly
complete could be remodeled it
definitely does look more like a
prison than the door it was it
was madam chair senator it was
shocking to me to see because
they were really excited about
it seen it the kids were in lock
up while we were there and they
said it was because they were
transitioning staff
but the room are
the size of someone's regular
walk in closed it and they're
they have a dresser in a bed and
um it did feel more like a
detention facility than a home
when I was there so that been
said
tell me your question again i'm
sorry why should a print
missouri why don't I just write
this
because when you google juvenile
and that's all I did rate I I
couldn't support the legislation
that came through in the sixty
day session because I just
couldn't get enough information
and I couldn't get anybody to
answer my questions so I started
just doing some research and I
started googling and the and
casey foundation came up.
They have information about the
misery model the national
juvenile justice
with a federal governments and
it's like an institute I or
something
I don't even know all these
terms as hell new I am to this
they have articles about the
missouri model there's a low
reviews about the missouri model
and so we just kind of like
started like pairing down and
again there's a group of us that
have been having these
conversations and then it came
to our attention that new mexico
had tried to implement the
mystery model so I thought well
well then let's figure out what
it was that we were implementing
where that broke down and and if
we have already committed some
resources to it then and then
let's figure out how we can make
that happen that's all that
happened that that makes a lot
of sense in really it really
does but I I really would look
to john paul taylors model
which I don't know I mean it it
seemed I don't know where they
got there
from missouri okay so that was
it
it was impressive now thank you
thank you madame chair okay I
have on my list
and representative on the cold
charges and represent every
anyone else okay senator
thank you madame chairman
I I want to begin by just
pushing back briefly on the
notion of the faces in the video
evident of a system that targets
a certain ethnic group I think
we all know that children in
need and some of our most
vulnerable population those
children come and all color I
think we all know that that
parents that don't deserve to be
parents of their pieces of crap
come in all color I say that is
one of my countries to see her
account it significantly high
high rate of carcasion the
population there and so the
demographics of children in need
look like that.
The same cannot be said and my
neighboring county of luna but
but this problem certainly
doesn't have a a color to it
I I also senator want to kind of
echo the concerns it that our
colleague city a look at senator
steel low price mentioned as I
think this belongs in cyf detail
and the reason why isn't we talk
about the highlights of this
model it really is not
applicable to high risk or
violent youth offenders and so
that system is a separate system
and a different approach to
handling those violent offenders
and we know which happened cases
are the same time we have a cyfd
crisis and it's interesting that
I would say this belongs in cyfd
because I spent a lot of my time
trying to take everything out of
that agency but the reality is
where i've landed really in the
last session with you is we have
to fix that agency
we have to fix that broken
agency
I when I saw the agenda come out
I did start researching very
specifically dismissory model
and so there were some concerns
that come up one again is this
this does not if we agree
address the violent offender
you completely different issue
but as we move forward I think
it's important to remember that
in two thousand nine there were
significant stay colder groups
and much of the changes that
came out that we that we took
legally within the children's
code came out of the missouri
model much discussion what's
many of the documents you can go
back and see and we adopted many
of the outlines that missouri
dead where where did it go wrong
and I say that because that's
the conversation we need to have
they've implemented a lot of
this the juvenile parole board
was implemented we married the
exact same thing supervised
release we are so a replaced
parole with super buyers
released and then most.
Concerning was the
confidentiality of records and
so here we were we adopted that
in the missouri model and then
we just spent last session and
reverting not and thankfully had
it was sb eighty four in which
we rescended that portion that
we had adopted the mercy of the
the model because cyfd was
really abusing the intent they
weren't disclosing information
to the attorneys they would not
disclose information to law
enforcement had the one
disclosed information to us
legislators and we had to resend
that model back
I I also think one of the most
disappointing was when we
adopted the family engagement
portion which seemed like it
would have been so important
rcyfd agency instead
put reunification at all costs
above the best interest of the
child and that has cost lives in
new mexico that model has cost
lives in new mexico because we
refuse to put children first we
put the need to reunify first
based on this model and many
times we're unit uniting them
with the monster that caused
this this harm so how do we take
the good
and leave out the bad
also concerning as many add
statistics that praise this
particular model are are
outdated in a basic google
search I could find the the
missouri themselves the division
of youth services who has
actually just last year
reporting that the riff citizen
raid is up to twenty seven
percent no longer eight percent
twenty seven percent so they're
kind of facing their own
failures in this model now too
night to see that missouri has
to do it right we know that
we're not doing it right here
but but where do we go from here
is legislators I think we made
amazing progress this last
station by saying something has.
To be done
they're not doing this some of
the aspects we've already taken
are failing
and we shouldn't have to tell
see why fd to do what we've
already told him to do in two
thousand nine so where are we
going this next legislative
session senator and you and I
work well on this issue but but
this is in all this is an all
good either
thank you madam chair thank you
senator
umm I will I will I I just want
to clarify to the the youth in
that video where new york like
yeah you have to look at what
they were saying
that they did a a series on some
new york youth to show that new
york had adopted and had been
done some training so umm III I
agree with you
challenges in you've come in in
all ethnicities
but
where are we going to what I
want to address two things that
you talked about but whether it
should be at cf or not
personally and I think I shared
this with you before I find it
really insulting to have the
idea that juvenile justice needs
to be married with foster
we took out early childhood and
I worked on that bill I was the
house sponsor for the early
education department because
we wanted it to be
stand alone of its own and so we
have not provided see where if
he doesn't do all of the youth
and family services they clearly
don't
but I find it I I just I find it
insulting that those two things
are paired together might not
pair to but now justice with the
because we would never think
about doing that
and the reason that that even
came into discussion is I think
we need to take responsibility
as a state for a detention
facilities and insane imagine if
I had come before you all said.
I think cyfi need to take on
more responsibility I think you
would have rushed me out of this
room faster than I could get up
and grab my things rate and so
i'm like i'll go okay so if I if
I truly believe that we need to
take on the responsibility the
detention staff then how am I
going to answer that question
about are you kidding me you
want to see why I did he take on
more and so that's how that came
up one is from personal
perspective it's just it hurts
me when I see the secretary say
no we got to stay together
because we have to communicate
together well you got a chiming
cape with ped and you got a
communicate with department of
health and and help thirty two
so III still think that it needs
to either be a stand alone so
that we can dedicate the
resources to it and and and make
it happen but that i'm not going
to die on that sword I I just
don't think anybody will will
agree with me that see why fd
needs more responsibility
how do we make them
do what we
say I don't know III don't have
any answer to that one
I do think that if we were to
amend the juvenile justice
responsibility whether it's a
standard loan agency or it stays
with the active way of doing or
we put it somewhere I think we
need to add in just like we need
to add in to see why d some some
criteria for who gets to be
appointed
in other words we don't have
we don't have a responsibility
for what kind of education or
what kind of experience you have
to have to be a secretary nor do
we have qualifications for who
gets to oversee when i'll
justice and I can just refer
back to my own experience the
the nursing board you have to be
in nurse in order to be the
executive director we have those
kinds of responsibilities in
your experience and your
education I think we need to do
that and I and I think that's
the beginning step and I think
great.
Quite honestly
a representative as you know and
I have had that conversation
there needs to be requirements
for what your background is an
order to run an agency at this
nature
thank you madame chairman thank
you senator I I don't disagree
with much of what you just said
I think they're almost need to
be a complete dismantling of
that agency and a rebuild I
don't know what that looks like
I will tell you on the very
particular
programs and a direction that
they take some of them is during
model has been successful much
of it the reality is as it
hasn't and their own statistics
and data say that now what we
need to adopt though I don't
know so some things gotta give
right as legislators we have to
start adopting something that's
going to give reality is is that
I wish it was CYFD that was
sitting before us today ringing
these proposals and solutions
forward and instead that
responsibility is falling on to
a few individual legislators so
thank you to to come up or
something to do that I also want
to say to be fair to the
legislator again I sound like a
chairman just present a sole
hope let me see fair to us again
we talked about funding and this
legislative body in many recent
years see why fd's failure is
not a result of two little
funding that agency is funded
and hold we see reverting
numbers that go back and if you
propose and at this point I
think all of us any solution
that we thought would bring
meaningful results to new
mexico's children I I could I
can't think of a single
legislator serving today that
wouldn't throw all our resources
and to make you not happen but
thank you again for your time
thank you madame chair and thank
you senator III do want to say
that missouri when we met with
them they said that some of the
challenges that have are
changing that they're struggling
to adopt two is the significant
increase in youth that come to
them with substance abuse
disorders.
Thank you madame chairman I
think we would have the same
problem I want to acknowledge
you sitting here is well thank
you for all you do I know that I
see this is very very separate
mission and drives separate from
our violent offenders we have a
a police chiefs here today and I
recognize that is kind of a
separate entity in which you
guys are and we we think you
guys for the work that you guys
are doing an addressing are
really our most troubled violent
offenders so thank you for us
have been here.
Thank you senator representative
necoles
thank you madame chair thank you
senator and before I get into my
questions I just want to say I
am a little disappointed in
hearing the list of legislators
that you've been working with
since I think there are number
of us across party lines that
have been screaming at the top
of our longs that something
needs to change and really
working and introducing
legislation for the last couple
of years that addressed juvenile
reform and clearly I don't think
any of us were contacted so that
is a little disappointing I
think that the missouri model
does work well for non violent
youth I don't want to echo
everything that senator rentally
said but new mexico spacing
violent juvenile chrome and and
that includes an eleven year old
rate shooting at somebody I
think the model doesn't hold the
most dangerous kids accountable
which is what we're facing here
in new mexico our laws have been
involved in thirty years and I
think it's great that we're all
trying to look at what is
working
I think that looking at missouri
the model is built around
rehabilitation but not
accountability for the most
violent offenders which again is
what we are really seeing as a
crisis today and it shows little
evaluation and outcomes because
they haven't seen anything
regarding transparency the
wrister doesn't rate and I just
want to know did you look at any
other models during the research
madam chair representative I
apologize that you weren't
contacted literally I might
disclaimer at the beginning is I
am not the expert and I am just
here to present the information
that i've gathered together that
my my district legislative at us
that the people that I named off
are like my close friends.
Right and that's the only reason
I told representative read that
I need to talk with her I have
talked with a representative
charges I need to talk to you
are told representative of
sedelop has I need to talk with
you I am happy to talk with
whoever I can
but but I also emma full time
legislator and a part time
attorney and I have a family I
you know got grown kids but i've
i'm just saying I am not the i'm
just the messenger okay so i'm
not sitting here in the capacity
of a secretary when I was at
regulation licensing your could
beat me up for whatever I didn't
do i'm just here as a legislator
saying this is the information
that i've gathered and want to
share it with you because I
would like us to continue have
this conversation um i've a
couple of times and I I meant to
address it the the missouri
model doesn't factory very
violent youth and so they don't
have like a separate entity
where violent youth go they work
with them in this system across
the board and that includes
youth may end up in adult
detention at a later time but
and and they separate them out
nut by age but by age and buy
crime rate they don't have youth
who have done a small crime in
with youth who have become very
violent and so so that's that's
not it's not accurate they do
treat very violent youth in
their facilities they just I I
didn't talk about that but what
was your question I was in on
what other models that
I started doing this research
when the session was over and
and what i've looked at is is
what i've shared with you so if
if if you all want different
models to be researcher.
I encourage you as senator said
madam chairs center that you
bring you bring the experts and
and that cyfd and ask them those
questions okay thank you and
before my other questions I do
want to say that I have been
researching this for several
months i've actually been
working with lawmakers who
passed different models for the
last two months I wanted change
for almost a decade so I would
like to present on a model that
i've been researching and
working with other legislators
but a question is out and tell
any of us
include us in those
conversations I did mention it
in the last interim committee
when we are in the talks but
it's it's evidence based it's a
balanced approach it's cast
effective it was a bipartisan
passed in that state and it and
it deals with both violent and
non violent which is great but
we can talk after this but thank
you so much but my next question
is what other states have
adopted this because in the
video I did see new york and
california in the videos do you
know what other states have
adopted the missouri model now
I do agree with you about the
facilities we don't have enough
I know they closed one of the
facilities at ydc because of
staff we do need more facilities
across the state and hopefully
especially for rehabilitation
reabilitation and substance
abuse I think sometimes those go
hand in hands are hopefully with
the money that we've budgeted I
hope to see a bunch of those
facilities going up soon
so that would be a great step
forward I do just want to thank
you for bringing this like I
said i've been researching what
models have worked in what
happened especially in recent
years and I really think and I
hope that this committee looks
at the differences when we're
looking at something that's
going to work at both addressing
the non violent criminals and
and how we can get them out of
the.
System rate don't even put them
in the system on what we can do
and then really truly address
thing and holding those violent
offenders accountable instead of
continuing to ask why they did
what they did and hoping that we
could have got him on the front
end because clearly that boat
has sailed and I have heard that
excuse for ten years now we do
have to focus on the why and the
scores but we also have to focus
on accountability because I
think that as we've seen
especially lately and we've seen
that in the high profile cases
some of these juvenile fenders
have been in this system or have
been arrested several times for
maybe non violent behavior and
then it gets a little more
violent and then they're taking
somebody's life and I think a
lot of that has to do with the
lack of accountability so we're
not helping them when we're not
holding an accountable and they
go from point e two point zero
because there's no
accountability and suddenly
they're facing homicide charges
and so you know I think
senator said has said you know I
I talked to people at the I
think one of the facilities that
you visited and and I visited
both and they talked about
education and I know i've talked
to several view about even my
son's murder getting their
education and then moving on to
college
because he was incarcerated at
ydc so a lot of times I know we
want to stale way from
institutionalizing
offenders but when it's a
violent crime when it's homicide
a lot of times the only time
they do see change or hope or
get education is when they are
in car cerated where then
holding them accountable and
giving them the opportunity for
change and so I just hope.
That when we are looking at
these different models and
legislation for next year we
really really are keeping that
in mind and that's all I have to
say thank you so much
if I could just yeah thank you
madame chair thank you
representative um if if if you
take anything out of this
conversation whatever but I
really wanted and that's why I
had captain bornet come and join
me is that we have a pre
detention problem
we have a serious pre detention
problem and and and that pretty
attention problem is is that we
don't have regional locations we
don't have enough and and with
that comes are counties can't
afford to have a center and the
counties that have kept those
centers are falling short on
staff and the reason they're
falling short on staff just
because they're not regionally
located and where it would take
sound wine a a significant
amount of staff to continue to
take in our youth i'm talking
about our youth in my community
if we had someplace you know
located in san affair as beneal
are you not somewhere in my
region we would be drying on
just a few staff from our region
and I don't think staffing would
be as much of a problem as it so
so please i'm not focusing on
posted judiciation as much as I
am because the jumpled tailor
site seems to be amazing I think
we can do some great things at
ydc
but we need to do something
about pre detention because
that's where these kids are
cycling in and out and they're
not getting the treatment.
Thank you chair thank you center
and I agree with you on
predetend to not just for
juveniles but I think adults
that's just an issue across the
board in the state thank you
manager and i've i've said a
couple of times to other people
that i've talked to I am not
touching adult detention not my
issue i'm not researching them
so somebody else's have to sit
here on the heart seek for that
thank you madame chair she did
tell me that this morning so
I researched this model i'll so
as my colleague center brandly
discussed and I was curious also
with the changes we made back
and in the day you know why we
are we're right now but I think
you know you answered that the
the best you could answer that
but specifically on the missouri
model it does it does come
across to me as more
rehabilitative first punitive
which I think it's it's clear
from the research I did but when
you say they are taking violent
offenders a madam chair like
what do you have any statistics
on
what type of violent offenders
are taken we talk at home aside
are we talking you know I I see
this working for a certain group
of juveniles I think that's been
said bet it might the violent
offenders i'm concerned about it
and I guess sometimes I do
believe that they do need to see
the walls of I don't think they
need to be in a cottage type
setting you know when they've
murdered somebody like her son
you know I so i'm wondering what
tight if you can give you some
examples of what type of what
percentage of violent offenders
and when you say violent wet you
mean manager thank you madame
chair thank you representative
so so again I can't give you
examples of those youth but what
I can say is that they don't
have a separate detention
facility that just they don't
have it as separate trap greatly
have two tracks one is what we
call are detention centers that
are managed by a counties.
In new mexico there's are
managed by the court the other
is this you know
division of use services which
is the post adjudication so the
system
is set up in in it to handle you
within two separate ways the pre
adjudication and the post
adjudication they only have one
postage cast in system and
that's managed by dys and so
you'd have to look at what the
crimes are that are happening
the missouri because they are
the ones who responsible for
detaining those youth after
they've been adjudicated okay
and I think that a manager that
would be something data would be
externally important on and
obviously we have a late lack of
juvenile data in our state
and i'll i'll go into that in
the second but do you know what
the cost is per kid to be in
this misery model
madam chair representative i'm
glad you asked i'm rising in a
putting on the presentation
and the other representatives
that were in on that meeting um
when we learned that they have
five centers and they provide
these services and they have six
million populations so obviously
their juvenile
population that are you the
fenders is going to be higher
than ours
they they said that it costs
sixty four million dollars
that's the money that they get
and was one of our one of our
members was like we'll never get
that kind of money but we've
done the research and and and
see why I do we give them about
eighty four million dollars
to manage the post attention
they don't manage pretty
detention you know pre
adjudication to manage postage
occasion they're getting about
eighty four million dollars
right now okay and madam chair
and that's in house bill to you
can look at okay and manager in
senator and the professionals
that are running these obviously
we would all be concerned we
don't even have.
The staff to handle see wefd
I see that as a concern do you
see that as a concern also and
and where are they getting their
professionals thank you madame
chair thank you representative I
do and and you know one of the
things that I also you know this
has nothing to do with this
other than your question
it that i've spent a lot of time
and resources trying to increase
license scene of those case of
professionals that's really my
career for the state rate was
licensing psychology social work
counseling so you know we've
carried compact bills and we
just haven't gotten it over the
finish line i'm i'm still
optimistic that we can do that I
know that I don't research on
other states that have
different types of social work
they've got an associates degree
there's five states that do that
and they still have to be
supervised and we've got a
number of states that have
eliminated or
stopped providing a suspended
the national exam so that they
can have more social workers
those are some of the things on
the flip side for staffing that
we absolutely have to look at
and and I can see
madam chair and you know more of
a balanced approach like rubs
and a charges maybe we use
something like this for our non
violent offenders and and then
really focus in on the problem
we're having with these young
kids eleven twelve thirteen
fourteen you know and what we're
going to do with them and at
that back to the data and there
is some question as questions
about data I definitely think we
would need data on that and
whatever model maybe that
represented chavis wants to
present but there is also the
concern we have no data of our
juveniles here and it's
frustrating because I think
I think we've I know we talked
about cy fd providence data we
got to remember.
Juvenile probation officers are
run by cyfd I attend to agree
with you I do not think that see
where after you should be
running this corrections type of
deal here the assessment tool
we're talking about that's
probably passed from cy fd to
jpos and that's why nobody's
getting held and you know we
don't have detention centers as
you stated and I I do remember a
time twenty years ago when a kid
would come in after committing
to burglary and I could would
send attention for a night we
had a detention center right in
our home town and it scared him
straight and we never really saw
that kid again and there were
just it was just different it
wasn't so cotton it was more of
hey let's we have obviously
probably stronger families and
that was a big part of it but
there was also a shock effect to
you know actually being held for
twenty four hours and then
coming in in front of a judge
and that judge saying you better
keep it in line or bring your
toothbrush come back and we're
going to see you and detention
tomorrow and it didn't hurt the
kids it it really actually
scared him straight and we
didn't see him again and I I can
remember it as clear as day that
it worked and so something has
changed along the way to where
these kids aren't getting held
whether it's the assessment to
all or whatever it is or no
detention centers that I think
we do have to address and I
think part of the data that
you're talking about madam chair
and senator with the numbers
going down but the repeat
offenders going up is you don't
even have to refer mister meters
to the days office and so we
don't even know what's going to
the jpos and what they're just
handling in the way they want to
handle it and whether it's
effective or efficient and so we
need data on that and then
felonies are referred to the
days office i'm sure a lot of
days are just saying hey we're
not going to mess with thirty
four degree felonies where we're
not going to do anything when
the but it back down to gpo and.
So we can't get an accurate
number of actually how many
people are being referred and
tell you the filings are way
down but I believe it's because
these things are being handled
at the direction of cyfd telling
jpo's what to do and tell him
him how to assess people and
we're not seeing them and we're
not helping and I don't know
where that all falls into the
the chain of things but it's
just a concern I think we we I
have and that and we need to be
aware of
I do see that
there are some state holders
here today I definitely know
I know corey over there use the
jpo i'm sure we see way of
demons I wonder where all the
stakeholders are where she way
fd today I mean this is
something that
obviously involves them j jack
whereas j jack is anyone from
jackier
concerning the stakeholders
aren't here I see a d a here I
think that that's great i'm
curious at this model has been
presented to the district
attorneys the department of
justice you know how they feel
about this model so those are
just questions I have a
understand you're just
presenting some options and
appreciate we have you to talk
with you about it but I think
wanding out the last thing i'll
say is a noticed in this message
missouri model
that one of the there was four k
elements that have to be in
place for this to work and one
of them was you have to have
constituency by and i'm not sure
a constituents will buy into
this with the problem we have
right now I think we're at a
point to wear new mexicans want
to see kids being held
accountable and I think if we
percent a model like this to
them without some tough factors
in it which I know we talked
about possibly including
we're not going to have
constituent buying into this and
it won't work according to this
model if we don't so those are
just my comments if you want to
address anything you can but I
do appreciate your presentation
it was very.
Informative thank you madame
share thank you representative
i'm getting the data has been
really hard and my d la and
myself and legislative council
have been wonderful in trying to
track down but it's been really
hard to get comprehensive data
and it's one thing to say that
new mexico's recitivism rate for
juveniles is um low it's another
thing to figure out how many of
those use have found their way
into adult attention and we
don't have those numbers and so
so not having that kind of data
I think that's the long range
rate i'm not looking as much at
the short as I am what's the
long range I think they're both
important but I will just say
that even for these youth who
are committing violent crimes
and and in them even in the in
the missouri model in the video
they said we shouldn't let them
know you've you committed a
crime there are consequences for
it they said that but while
there's consequences for that
these youth are going to
ultimately be back in our
community at some point and if
we don't do something similar to
what representative travel is
talking about her sons
perpetrators then we're going to
end up with violent kids back on
the street as adults and so even
though you know we're
definitely this is not a model
just to for a non violent this
is reabilitation for any you who
get involved in the system I
didn't touch on whether or not
we should change the criminal
code whether we should change
serious youth offenders i'm not
addressing that I have met with
the district attorneys to have
that conversation.
But i'm not at a place where you
know i'm ready to provide any
endorsement for anything right
i'm still trying to negotiate
that out is to work I can move
forward in my community but I
will tell you that my community
and santa fe is not different
than yours
and and the families on the
south side of sound
want their children closer
they don't want them sent to
sandwich they don't want them
sent out a state if there's no
place for them they want their
children closer and and and the
handful of families that that
are just not capable is a
handful but they want the same
thing they want there to be
consequences for the youth who
are committing crime such as the
capped and shared they would
want there to be consequences
that's only reason i'm even
involved in this that's a only
reason is because I have town
halls like you do ray and when I
go and talk and they have
concerns that five youth have
perpetrated a violence against a
family and burger king that is
down the street from me that I
could walk to
you and only two of um were
detained in the other released
and my understanding that is out
of the five four of them had
other interactions and
involvement with law enforcement
so my community wants something
to be done too
now thank you madame chair I
appreciate it and are like a set
our kids are getting transported
to farmington to that six hours
from my home town now that that
that's a definite concern that
it were not close to the family
so I agree with you on that but
thank you I presthank you
manager
representative breaker
thank you mountain
first of all just say that I
appreciate your background.
And especially sharing your
personal information and being
here presenting same with the
representative chavis i've
listened to both of you
about listen to all of you much
as possible and
I came from a community espinolo
which was the **** of jokes for
the whole state um kids that you
know
I grew up with that are
incarcerated in prison because
of drugs or
you know whatever
and an unfortunately still
remains that but of jokes which
really excuse me for saying this
pisses me off a lot I moved to
alva kirky when I was young as I
other kids from albuquerque same
situation and frankly madam
chair little bit tired of it I
live on the west side I
represent the west side and I
know
you know a lied about what's
happening with our
criminal system specially for
youth are too much
one of the things that concerns
me greatly madam chair
is that you know and I
appreciate so much these
legislators that are presenting
to us doing the work and
presenting to us but I think
that and and remember the
background that I come from as a
planner I am looking for a
comprehensive report and can't
seem to find out at the state
level I find out sometimes at
the local level because we pay
for it we initiate for it but at
the state level I don't find
that comparative analysis you
know I just I I found bits and
pieces like you're going to
present today and someone else
presents next week or the week
after her the month after.
And putting it all together in
my head trying to figure out
what the pluses and minuses for
this model compared to that
model really looking for a
comprehensive approach and then
the other piece that goes with
that is you know our needs for
the state of new mexico what are
our needs assessments which I
unless I do it I guess
you know I don't I don't find
that and madam chair that is
very very frustrating to me as a
legislator and I know i've only
been here three years old and
even really on this committee I
am I am advisory but I have to
express this I have to expresses
because i'm not seeing a
document that shows me
nationally here the programs
here is witness mexico's needs
assessment is and here's what
our budgetary constraints are
I mean I I was a bureaucrat for
twenty eight years and these are
things that I did in
in planning these are things and
I it's frustrating to me matter
chair and I don't know how we
get there because I keep getting
bits and pieces of it and you
know trying to put it together
in my in my head and still
understanding cyfd
cyf
we've had mountain chair a lot
of bills and and senator
brantrantley
talked about the bills that were
approved in the last three
sessions that i've been involved
with
and but but but by the same
token I think about
having been in a in a department
for a long time and having to go
to the city council madam chair
every year saying here is what
we've done here's our
accomplishments.
Can you please give us you know
twenty five million dollars to
create this or to do their
implement that
cyfi should be sitting right
here right now listening to us
talking to us and telling us
what they need or what they
don't need and how to make it
better
at city council every year we
would do audits of different
departments and and the audits
always made it better made the
department better whatever
whatever department we were
auditing because then we could
as city counselors or as
department managers we could say
these are the needs these are
where we need to put the money
but for three years i've heard
this kind of story about cyfit
and I don't have kids
but I have a lot of friends and
I have a lot of relatives and a
lot of cousins and you know just
new mexico families that really
care deeply about these issues
and i'm i'm just
you know I keep trying to figure
out what how do we fix this
department how do we from an
organization on behavior but
that's not my job because i'm
not in the governor's office or
not i'm yet i'm a legislator and
I can put money toward it but
that doesn't help the
organization or behavior of a
department so
mountain here I think i'm
expressing some real frustration
here because I so much
appreciate these legislators
taking it upon themselves to
bring these suggestions to us
but I feel like I miss in
pieces in order to be a really
effective legislat and I have to
express this because it's it's
it's troubling the other thing
that I was thinking about madam
chair
was you know we talk about
detention centers or these.
Facilities across the state we
have four that we talked about
today when really we have five
regions if you think about it
northeast southeast southwest
south southwest and burning a
county I was called figure
burning a county as the fifth
because that's the biggest area
but
and that's where i'm from and we
only have four you know in the
whole state and if you think
about the crime that we're
talking about for kids after
times they come from
generational
criminal families and how do we
break those cycles you know and
and I guess the thing that
really struck me in your what
you talked about a senator is
that
the need for these facilities in
the areas if we're serious about
getting their families involved
or even just their friends to
help them
you don't travel from as soon
senator
and was forgetting
senator read mentioned you don't
travel from sound want to you
know
I don't know I mean it is I mean
if we're serious as a stay of
addressing these issues we need
these detention centers where
people's families are located
so i'm sorry madam chair I just
had to I had to say these things
because they were they were kind
of wayne heavily as you know
first of all the need for a
comprehensive
comparative analyst
that shows you know our own
needs assessment but then looks
out all of these different
facilities nationwide and what
works for us I mean that would
be my first thing and then the
second thing would be looking
out.
CYFD and how we can address the
organizational
make up of that particular
department which we seem to be
doing like little pieces to it
but we don't we haven't really
got there yet so thank you sorry
i'm passionate about what i'm
seeing
representative and I
think you madam chair I promise
to keep this very short
but we were kind of sighburning
over here
just about you know youth
generally young people generally
is thinking about your comment
representative re where it's
like what isn't mean to have
some accountability and I want
to speak for my collection
but one of the things we were
talking about it was like with
the younger generation i'm sure
you all have heard the term
yellow you only level once
yellow is a thing
but I really a bit
I know but I think about this I
think about this in the context
because because a lot of young
people are also like what do I
have to live for
like are you gonna scare him
straight because what all right
i'm sitting in a cell what's the
difference and so I just really
want to appreciate you coming
forward with this
senator spot to call you
representative
because I really feel like the
only way we're going to do it is
not necessarily just having
strict punishments where people
are in a cell and there locked
up that just it makes people
worse and it also makes people
even more careless and hopeless
so why would it matter where is
this at least addresses the
underlying group problem not to
say we're going to fix every
single person but
it's a damn good start so thank
you madame chair.
We have legislative council
service who was available to
assist we have lfc a few arm
want analysis and the like an
eye talk to them
fairly regularly about things
that I as a legislator have a
policy interest in
and I think that we as
individuals have certain
responsibilities and that is to
let the staff know what our
policy interests are what we
want you know some support on
and we can get that so I talked
to life see quite a bit these
days and I get information I get
data that I need to make to
formulate legislation and
so I just want to remind people
that exist
and sell representative of you
have an interest in what you
just indicated I would recommend
that you talk to them and they
may be able to help you get that
information
and I think it's a little unfair
to put it on someone who went
out and did some work and now
she is having to explain why it
wasn't something else
what she wants to
but that i'm just that's how
people interpret those kind of
comments on just telling you
when you spend a lot of time you
have a debt a part time job in
this case and a lot of other
responsibilities and then it's
well why didn't you work at this
and well because that's that's
my as a my interest so how come
you didn't look at it I don't
think that's being fair to the
people who are working on some
of these things so i'm that's
just me and that's how I reacted
to it and maybe all of you
thought that was just fine but I
but was very impressed with the
amount of work you have done
remember we just basically I
mean this is july we're not even
you know into the crazy time
after september one
hype tough about some of the
bills were working on.
And so I think it's pretty
impressive we gotten as far and
I wanted to give this model a
chance or the senator right
wanted to give this model on our
chance to be a voice tomorrow
we're going to be hearing about
some other things from different
perspective and many of us have
talked about trying to get
multiple perspectives tomorrow
we'll have some different
perspectives we'll be hearing
about
why it is charges county
shut down there juvenile
facility i'd like to know that
because I agree with anyone who
are those of you and I think
it's probably most of you think
we more need more facilities to
to the house our children we
there is I know that there are
individuals in the legislature
who you know want to do more
incurser reading and
I think the phrase will use this
accountability but i'm
interpreting that to me placing
people in attention okay that's
a fair okay I don't want to
misinterpret that will where we
can put him
where we're going to put i'm
you know it when we bring up
some of us bring up counseling
in this kind of a model where's
the staff that's the first where
the staff
we don't have the staff for that
who's going to pay for it how
we're going to handle out the
family you know is that or
etcetera well where is the where
where is the staff for the
juvenile attention facilities
where are these good juvenile
attentions facilities when we
only have four we hear from lawn
forcement we got examples today
we needed to hold these
apparently very serious offen-
offending use and we don't have
a place to put
so you know it's a tough problem
that's I guess the bottom line
in we all have to be open to
various ways to address this
situation and in just one last
thing if we want to reduce
juvenile violent crime and i'm
sure every single person in this
room on set every single person
in the state wants out we do
have to have multiple programs
because this program is will in
is intended.
To reduce juvenile violent crime
but it's starting at this end
and then we have those that are
up already unfortunately
over the you know gotten past
that and we have to learn how
systems that will address those
that appear at least on some
liable to be fairly entrenched
in those poor behaviors and you
know but totally inappropriate
and illegal awful conduct so one
may not be necessarily exclusive
of the other so just yet so
appreciate really senator all
the work you've been doing and
you've heard people on the
committee interested in helping
so you got more helpers so right
thank you madame chair I will
just see your your your comment
about we we got to start at the
far in i'm a former hit start
teacher eight I probably more
appropriate over in the other
conference today because that
she is over there and they're
having fan
they're having first
and so you know that's been my
whole career right is is trying
to do prevention and trying to
make sure that they don't get to
this point but when I hear from
my law enforcement in my county
commissioners and my community
that we've got some broken
issues that's the only reason I
got involved in that and just
the last thing I will say is in
full disclosure
I made it as far as the
reception area of the detention
center because they picked me up
for running away and I was a
silly child I state ran away but
I still went to school because I
had to go to school right of
course that's where they picked
me up and and they got me into
the reception area and some nice
line forcement person said I
don't think we should put her in
let's see if we can find a
receipt
match how it went but to this is
really personal to me too thank
you for your thank you for the
time.
Thank you for your questions
again i'm open available those
of the you that have my phone
number please feel free to call
me I tip typically respond
better to text cos i'm usually
doing something but thank you
madame chair for helping us to
get this done to thank you and
thank you captain for coming
down and sharing some of your
experiences we really appreciate
it thank you.
Hey so we are getting close to
the end of our agenda and the
last item on our agenda is
committee discussion and so open
discussion anyone wished to kick
it off.
Senator
figure
thank you man chair with the
respect to the last presentation
i'm gonna ask if we could get
that out and continue this
discussion in parallel with
things that we sell apart which
department of health and
addiction treatment we heard
this morning there was a couple
references to how much addiction
is fueling some of the crime so
how much crime how much were
juvenile crime and if we are
talking about reconstructing
centers facilities treatment
models are we're going to
parallel that with with
addiction treatment or we're
going to enter twin this plan
and work on both things together
how we're going to do this so
for further discussion yeah and
helpful it would be helpful for
me if you send us an email or
send an email to lfc week we do
have an assigned lfc staffer who
works on criminal justice issues
for us and so we can get some
work done and and that regard
and he he has been here this all
day except to have just left so
unfortunately.
Senator city alopes
I agree I totally agree with the
senator february but I also
was really intrigued
that um holly you pronounced her
name so beautifully again janie
augagenia yes I hope that's
right but I think it's mostly
right
wiz was pretty open with us
about what the governor is
interested in in pursuing which
I hadn't seen before that like
literally at one of my bills
were selected way into the
sector session
so this was really great and I
think that we should
have discussion you're talking
about the three thirty eight
yeah about the thirty day I
think we well and also this is
probably true for the special
session
probably more more relevant for
this special session but I think
we should really focus on things
that we know are going to be
dealt with in the session as
opposed to you know it just kind
of focused more on and what we
talk about because it's
frustrating where you talk about
something it's not held in the
session and they have to
remember it a year or two later
so
I point out a number of the
bills that she identified or
issues are things that we've
already had bills on truthfully
yeah answered some of them have
been heard if not all of them
just saying well I think that's
true but also
probably the bills at least in
my case one of the build is
changed a little bit so it
wasted so that we can just
refresh ourselves into what
these bills are and get the new
people up to speed the newer
people up to speed on what's
been done over the years and
these bills that have come in
over and over the c c j does
have a a dedicated time when we
look at bills so it might
suggestion would be that would
be the time to do it oh could
you see what I mean that makes
sense although yeah I know that
although.
The time when we look at bills
as pretty limited I don't know
if I I just that would struggle
me at least there are couple of
things that she mentioned and I
don't know my list that the
transfer the matter is you can
please none of the people none
of the time I think that that's
true
but this aggressive for example
this
there are couple of things that
she mentioned that I wasn't
familiar with there's probably
been house bills
for a while
but haven't gone over to the
senate
you better start
okay
never mind
but anyway that's that's what
struck me that I just was really
impressed with it and really
glad that she did that and I I
want to be prepared personally
but I could also prepare myself
I guess and then the other the
other thing I wanted I think
that it would be about.
The the
I really appreciate the gun law
update and
I don't know how to say this
exactly but it we always
introduces and constitutional
bills
I don't agree with that so i'm
sorry well I
the reason I again we have
different experiences in the
senate but at least the comes
before
committees there I mind we get
these bills and it's like
they're so obviously on
unconstitutional of course i'm
on a judiciary so anyway i'm
like oh my god and so.
How do I put this
and I think I actually think
that the chair is interested in
this is is we should
since where courts corrections
and justice
try to make sure that the bills
that get introduced have people
understand when they introduce
an unconstitutional bill there
it's probably not going to go
anywhere and that the should
fix it and in there at least
several times in my committee
we've ended up killing a bill
just because it's
unconstitutional and that person
doesn't get you know they're
just all the you know the
committee didn't vote for your
bill
you you know they watch the
negative vote in the and they
don't get the help that they
need to address the
constitutional issues and the
reason I point out for gun
context is I have introduced an
unconstitutional
in the going context and you
know finally got it passed and
fixed the billing hard broke you
don't fix the issues that that
were in the first draft of the
bill so anyways it's just a
function that this committee
teacher do it something that the
chair does talk about but i'd
like to see it more actual waste
and you can respond if you want
to seem to be happy to wait
so I guess I should bartify what
I said there are members who
file bills that don't realize
that the legal implications of
some of the bills are filing
many in the legislature not
withstanding common opinion are
not lawyers we have actually
very few lawyers and the
legislature relative to the way
people talk to me like they
think it's just loaded with
lawyers it is not so I can tell
you what how our committee
judiciary handle sings and that
is when we see something that
may be problematic we talked to
that person are my committee
staff my committee south
goes if it's it's a bill that is
important.
You know and that's kind of a
judgment sort of that the
committee chairs make in a way
they work with that individual
and try to point out to that
individual where there are
problems and then we help them
modify it if it's modifiable and
I will not hear a bill sometimes
if they're for those problems
will not be addressed so
sometimes a bill won't get heard
because the sponsor is so dead
set on the way it is drafted or
there because I think they think
we're guarding something and
that's what they want it all
along and i'm like what you
can't do that
whatever so the senate and the
house don't necessarily approach
these things the same way but we
try to let people bring bills
before a committee knows a
problem is coming and we're
happy to work with them on
trying to fix it and if the
person refuses to fix it for
whatever reason sometimes that
bill won't get heard
that's our job in the judiciary
to try to make sure we're a
backstop on the legality of
things
absolutely and I guess what I
was suggesting is maybe this
committee could lighten some of
your load and let me just say
that
it doesn't always work that way
and you're in our side.
Yes representative free and I
would just earn madam chair and
respectfully to senator stealer
because I I don't think that we
should necessarily just be
focusing on special session
staff or thirty days stuff we
don't know what's going to get a
message in the thirty day and it
could be some legislation that
we want to all talk about
medical malpractice we you know
had other bills we want to
discuss I think this is at the
direction of the chairs and the
committee and we should discuss
what we want to discuss and
that's our job and not let the
the governor you know push to
push us in a way to discuss
something cause you're right we
have heard a lot of the stuff
already that's going to be
coming down the pipe and sell I
don't want to limit ourselves to
just things that are coming up
in a thirty year this special
because I have some bills that
who knows maybe I will get a
message on you know you never
know
and last year we knew what was
coming for it and guess what we
had extra c c j meetings well
we're not having extra ccj
meetings this year and frankly
part of this I love to just have
educational sessions where we're
learning things about so that
would set us up for the next
time we want to be working on
bills so
that's part of what this
committee is for just to have
open conversations about
different ideas like like what
senator trio brought forward you
know that's a different we have
an it's been years since that
models been discussed it was
good for us to hear about it so
now we know it's it could be a
tool in our toolbox along with
other tools so
yeah
any anyone else happy to
hear from you all okay
really appreciate your
participation today tomorrow
we're in rose well remember ten
o'clock at eastern new mexico
correct I don't
I don't is it not on the rest of
the
country.
That was I never see things like
that so
it probably would be it's oicy
is there a building or anything
that we're gonna we need to know
building at a minimum
well
okay would be help okay are so
well if you could send an email
out letting us know where the
building what building and room
have that's possible that would
be helpful thanks for pointing
that out
representative
with regard to dinner I think
people are going to be on their
own tonight many of us are going
down to rose
okay
it's going to be set up okay I
take that back there will be
a dinner available for those of
you who are spending the night
here okay and it will be next
door five thirty
three
anything that i've missed.
If if people are planning on not
attending tomorrow's meeting be
sure to get your paperwork in
now okay great well appreciate
all of your participation and
see most of you I hope tomorrow.
