Hi, Janice. Thank you for being
here.
Oh, you are most welcome. I'm
trying to get my video on. There
we go. How are you today? I'm
doing well.
Good.
Everything OK?
Yes.
Busy day, especially coming back
from a holiday. It seems like
you're playing catch up, even
though the rest of the world
took off too.
Oh
I'm having trouble hearing you.
I don't know if it's my computer
or
Well, that's not good. Let me
see if I can work out something
with my settings. Thank you for
letting me know.
Mhm
I'm using my webcam. Are you
still having problems hearing
me?
I, I think it's probably my
system cause I just, it's faint,
but I can hear you.
OK, I can try to speak up.
Volume to it. I'm not a very
loud person, but I can try. I
have that problem too.
Did you have a good long
weekend?
It was got to spend time with
some grandkids, which is always
awesome.
How was your holiday
or your weekend very quiet
actually, yeah, nothing too
exciting.
Hello, everyone.
Hello.
Andy, are you our webcaster?
Um, no, that is Janice, Janis
is, I believe.
I don't know about that. I don't
know what that entails.
Running the show. Yeah, you're,
you're hurting the cats today,
Janice.
Hi everyone, uh, Chief Justice
Thompson will be joining us at
3, but in the event that he's
delayed, I'm here as his
designee.
Good afternoon, everyone. Thank
you for being here.
On another call there for a
second.
Quickly, wanted to check my mic.
Can you all hear me?
Yes, great. Thank you. Good
afternoon. Uh, Secretary Silva,
I, I haven't heard from the
speaker's office today.
I assuming that he was going to
chair, since you're presenting,
but
Um
Let me know how you'd like to.
Handle that.
Thank you, Michelle. Um, do you
wanna wait another minute to see
if he's gonna attend?
I'm sorry?
Do you want to wait another
minute to see if he's, thank
you.
And why
We'll wait till about 3:04,
OK. Michelle, have you heard
from him?
No. OK. I'm not. All right, no
problem. Good afternoon
everybody. Um, my name is Anna
Silva. This meeting is being
recorded.
For the General Services
department, and we will go ahead
and call the meeting to order.
Um, Michelle, can you please do
a roll call?
Yes.
Representative Armstrong,
present.
Secretary pros.
This is Wesley here for
Secretary Post.
Secretary Garcia Igrego.
Michelle Roberts for the
secretary.
Uh, Commissioner Garcia Richard.
Selena Romero for Commissioner
Garcia Richard.
State Treasurer Montoya.
Dennis Brela for the state
treasurer.
Secretary Serna.
He
Uh, Senator Scherer.
OK, now I'm here.
Uh, Senator Stewart.
I'm here and the speaker has
just texted me and said that
he's ending another Zoom he's on
and he should be here soon.
Thank you.
Chief Justice Thompson.
Good afternoon. I'm here.
Um, Speaker Martinez, we're
respecting and Secretary Silva.
Here.
You have a quorum.
Thank you. Thank you, Michelle.
So, um,
Senator Stewart is, uh, was a
speaker wanting us to wait until
he arrives to resume the
meeting, or is he wanting us to
go ahead and continue?
Well, he, he didn't say anything
about that one way or the other.
He says, I'm on another zoom but
almost finished. So I think
probably go ahead as long as we
get him up to speed when he
arrives. Sounds perfect. Thank
you. We'll go slow till he gets
here.
All righty, so with that, the
next item is approval of the
agenda. Do I have a motion to
approve the agenda? So moved.
Do I have a second?
Second by Janice Barela.
Thank you. All in favor,
signaled by saying I.
I, I.
And he opposed? Perfect. Thank
you. The agenda passes. Um, do
we have the minutes? Do we need
a few minutes to go over the
minutes. I know that several of
you have not been here in
previous meetings, so we can
take just a minute, uh, to
review the minutes.
Haha
That was funny.
Are they, are there any
questions on the minutes?
Uh, this is Ricky motion to
approve the minutes.
Thank you, Secretary Serna. Do
we have a second?
That
Senator Stewart
Thank you, Senator.
Do we have any questions,
discussion?
All right, all in favor?
Bye. Bye.
Bye.
Any oppose?
Perfect. Thank you.
The um minutes, uh.
Have been adopted. All right, so
we have our first action, which
is adoption of open Meetings Act
resolution, and we have our new
director, if you have not met
her yet, um, Shana, I'll go
ahead and let you introduce
yourself, and I will go and turn
it over to you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the commission. My name is
Shawna Keiser. I'm the somewhat
newly appointed director of the
Legislative council Service. Um,
this first agenda item is the
adoption of the open meetings
resolution. This action is taken
annually by the Capitol
Buildings Planning Commission,
pursuant to the requirements of
the Open Meetings Act.
The resolution before you, which
is a handout for this meeting,
and I don't know if we can get
it, um.
On a shared screen to uh show
you all, uh, but the resolution
before you is the same as in
previous years, except for
updates to the dates, and this
resolution sets forth what
constitutes reasonable notice to
the public of the Capitol
Building planning commission
meetings, and I stand for
questions.
I have a, I have a question if I
can.
Sure. So, so right now, is this
live streaming this meeting is
streaming live or available for
live streaming by any anybody
from the general public?
Madam Chair, Secretary Serna,
that is correct. It is streaming
on the NM legis.gov webpage. Um,
you can find the link uh to the
Zoom and to the webcast from
the, the legislature's web page.
OK. Is, are there, um, is there
a need for those provisions for
the group to meet remotely in
the openseeing Act resolution.
Are they, I, I didn't see them.
Madam Chair, members of the
commission offhand, I do not
believe there needs to be a
separate resolution for that.
Um, I believe the open Meetings
Act, I'd have to do a little
digging to get the precise
provision, um, but I believe it
allows for virtual meetings to
take place.
Um, and I do not believe there's
anything specific in this
resolution itself on that topic.
OK. I, I may be mistaken, but I
thought the Open Meeting Act
yielded to the adoption of a
virtual meeting policy, um, at
the discretion of the
Governing body, but um
That may have been updated. And
so I thought the opensee Act
deferred to
The provisions.
Adopted by the public body and
maybe those would be in our open
meetings resolution, but um, you
may know, you'll know better
than I, I will for sure.
Thank you, Secretary Turner. Um,
I'm wondering, Shawna, or um
maybe Michelle, you would have a
little bit of history on this.
Um, during COVID, I remember us
doing something at that time,
but I don't know if it expired
or if there was something way
back when, I know we had to do
it at that point, and I don't
know if it's still standing or
if there was an expiration date
at that time.
Sure, I do not have that
information readily in front of
me, um.
My apologies.
Madam Chair, I think we did make
those changes during COVID and
those have remained in the open
meetings resolution to enable
people to
To uh meet virtually.
May I ask a question in
reference to the same topic?
Yes
Good thank you
Go,
um, on the resolution under now
there 4 number 1, it does state
that all meetings shall be held
at the state Capitol in Santa
Fe, New Mexico, or as indicated
on the meeting notice, which I
believe would cover us for Zoom
meeting if it's noticed on the
note, uh, written on the notice.
So I guess that wasn't a
question, but I, I guess my
question is, does that suffice?
Shana, um, we'll go and turn
that question over to you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, to the
best of my knowledge, the Open
Meetings Act does not make a
distinction between virtual and
public meetings, I'd have to
research that a little bit more
to confirm, um, but I think that
is an excellent point that the
resolution which sets forth how
the commission is going to uh
provide reasonable notice does
allow for um indicating on the
agenda how the meeting is going
to be convened and, and how it
will take place, which uh was
absolutely the case for this
meeting. It was a noted on the
agenda that this would be a
video.
Conference. Um, and that is my
recollection as to how we all
proceeded during the pandemic.
Thank you, Shaw.
Um, Janice, did you have another
question?
OK. Thank you.
Um, Representative Armstrong,
did you have a question?
Uh yes, ma'am. Thank you so
much. Uh, my question was, uh,
it wasn't really clear. Uh, this
is my first meeting, so excuse
the, the questions, but it
wasn't really clear that it
would be just a video
conference.
Um, and so I, I drove to Santa
Fe, thinking I had a meeting in
the Capitol at 3 o'clock today
until I got the link from
Michelle. I had other business
here, but, so if in the future,
if we could, and now that I know
actually that it's always gonna
be video conference if we could
just be really clear, because
some, uh, you can go to on Zoom
and some are uh in person but
have a Zoom link. So I, I
misunderstood, so that's, that's
on me.
but just in the future, if we're
always gonna do video, I would
like to know that ahead of time.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative, and
um usually these meetings are
always in person. I think we
made an exception for this
meeting, um, Michelle, can you
kind of
Right? Is that the case, or I'll
let you go ahead and answer
that.
Thank you, ma'am. Sure. That is
the case, uh, in the past, most
of our meetings have been, or
most of the commission's
meetings have been in person and
I think um it was a preference
of uh the speaker that this the
virtual.
Today and uh usually that's at
the call of the chair.
For the, you know, decision of
the chair to do that, but um,
We do appreciate when the
commission can meet here in the
Capitol.
Thank you, Michelle.
So I think uh lesson learned for
next time, definitely will get
the communication out earlier,
um, in the event that we do have
these meetings on webcast, but
it has been my experience since
I've been on the commission that
they have always been a person,
um, except for, uh,
Um
As Michelle described uh when
there was a request by the chair
at that point.
Um, any other questions?
All righty. Um, OK, so now we'll
go on to um item number 2, which
is master planning and statewide
inventory activities. Oh, I'm
sorry, did you have a question?
We got to take action on that
puppy.
Oh, see, there you go. That's
what happens when you're online.
You just move to the next agenda
item.
So with that, um, do I have a
motion for item number 1 to
adopt the Open Meetings Act
resolution of 2025.
A move we adopt the resolution,
share.
Thank you. Do I have a second?
to consider Stewart. Thank you,
Senator. Um, are there any
objections?
So I changed it up on you guys
just to, you know.
All right, um, all in favor
signal by saying I.
Hi.
Thank you very much. Motion
passes, and I do see Speaker
Martinez has joined us, uh,
speaker, we are on item number
2. We've had some discussion
just to catch you up very
quickly on um whether these
meetings are going to be virtual
or in person in the future, and
um I can go and turn it over to
you if you want to have further
discussion on that, but we are
on item number 2, which is
master planning and statewide
inventory.
Great. Thank you, Anna, for, for
pinch hitting. Apologies for the
delay, everybody. Uh, Michelle,
I can't open my agenda, um, so I
don't know if you want to throw
it in the chat or or what or
whoever's next, just go ahead
and and present, please.
Oh
OK. Uh, good afternoon. I'm, I'm
John Petronus. I'm the president
of Architectural Research
Consultants, um,
I would uh like to give a uh a
short, uh,
Uh, status report on our current
planning activities and update
on the New Mexico inventory
facilities and property.
Uh, Andy, can you go to slide 3?
Uh, I would like to, uh, first
by giving a, a reminder to the
Capitol planning commissioners,
some of the key objectives of
our planning activities and you
can see on the screen.
Uh, seek opportunities to move
state agencies from lease to
state owned space.
Dispose or acquire facilities to
improve access to services,
promote economies of scale and
achieve cost-effective
operations and make the most
efficient use of space, uh, uh,
in accordance with states space
standards and best practice.
Looks like, Andy.
So over the years, the
commission has promoted uh some
strategies and processes to help
manage the state facility's
assets effectively, uh,
including the aforementioned
inventory of facilities and
sites, uh, and Mr. Aguilar will
discuss that in a little bit
more detail in a moment. We've
developed a tool for life cycle
costings, uh, for lease purchase
decisions. We have uh developed
and adopted space standards. We
have
developed in adopted area master
plans for Santa Fe, Albuquerque,
and Las Cruces.
And, uh, all along we have been
encouraging agencies, long range
planning. So, uh, with that, uh,
Andy, uh Aguilar, will you
Uh, fill in some detail on those
activities. Yes, good, good
afternoon, uh, Chairman
Martinez, uh, secretary Anna
Silva and members of the
commission. Uh, again, my name
is Andy Aguilar. I'm with
Architecture Research
Consultants and forgive me for
looking askewed, I'm looking at
two different screens here, so
I'm turning my head a little
ways. Uh, very quickly, just uh
update on some of the recent and
current planning work that we
are doing, flood planning
commission and for GSD.
Uh, in 2024, our primary focus
was assisting the Legislative
council service and developing a
space and furniture assessment
study, uh, and with that, for
that ARC assess the supply and
demand of the office spaces and
uh provided some recommendations
for furnishing upgrades to the
council service. And for those
of you who uh noticed during the
most recent session, uh, LCS has
already started implementing
some of those
recommendations, you should have
seen some new chairs in the
committee rooms, and some new
tables in the smaller committee
rooms, uh, that is the very
first phase of what counsel
service is gonna be working on,
uh, and you'll see more coming
up in the next couple of years,
uh, they're also working on
Uh, taking over, uh Capitol
North for for legislative
purposes over time, uh, AOC has
already moved out and our
understanding is that there is
some action in the work to uh
move the uh Secretary of State
out of that building as well.
Uh, one of the other studies
that we completed in 2024 was a
master plan for theexico fire
Training Academy, uh, for the
Department of Homeland Security
uh in Socorro.
Currently in 2025, we've got two
major master planning efforts in
place, one for the Albuquerque
area, uh, where we are working
on
Updating uh the area master plan
for office space use in
conjunction with Hoover's
Silva's crew at uh at uh
facilities management at FMD, a
big piece of that is completing
a facility condition assessments
for all of the office buildings
in Santa Fe as well, and Anna
has some more to talk about that
in just a little bit in terms of
facility condition assessments.
Uh, we are also in the midst of
a major uh master plan study for
the
mix uh corrections department,
and that master plan encompasses
looking at the uh long range
needs for the state's prison
facilities across the state, um,
and again for that one, we are
doing facility condition
assessments for the lion's share
of uh facilities that are
occupied by corrections
department.
Also in discussion of none of
this has come to fruition yet,
but we have been, we are in
discussions, uh.
With GST there are some facility
assessments that they would like
done statewide, uh, DOT we've
also had some discussions, uh,
Mr. Serna, with your crew about
doing condition assessments for
the Department of
Transportation.
Uh, we've also had some
preliminary discussions with uh
ALTSD and ECECD about doing some
master planning for those
agencies, which is, uh, again,
as John mentioned earlier, uh,
in support of the encouragement
of the capital Buildings
Planning Commission to have the
agencies all do long range
facility planning.
With regard to the building
inventory, uh, our work
continues to focus on two key
areas in terms of work efforts.
The first one is just
Ongoing updates to the state
inventory, we work monthly with
GSD and uh do it staff to make
sure that uh all new uh moves
are coded such that they can be
uh connected and shared uh with
the location coding efforts, uh,
so we do that on a regular basis
and
Provide you codes for any new
locations for agencies have
moved or relocated, uh, we are
also working with GST staff on
on a regular basis to assign new
building and site codes when
they have new facilities coming
online or in the planning
stages.
Um, and we're also still
continuing to do some revisions
of all of the data just to
reflect changes in agency names
and some of the reorganizations
that have happened over the last
couple of years. Most of that is
already in place, but we're
always finding a few things that
need to be changed and adjusted,
and we're working with on staff
to do that as, as we go along
and find new items that need to
be.
Tweaked
The other effort we're doing,
uh, which is something we
reported on last year was adding
and expanding to the inventory,
the holdings of the higher
education institutions, and we
have done a little bit more work
on that, um, ARC has had the
opportunity to work with a
couple of of the uh
Colleges, uh, over the last
year, and we've added a little
additional data to the
information we had prior, uh,
and we are working continuously
with uh HED to work on a review
process where HED has their
agencies uh look at the
inventory and give us updates on
a regular basis.
And for those of you who are new
to the uh accountability
planning commission, uh, you can
find the link to the inventory
at this URL, uh, feel free to
take a snapshot of this.
Otherwise, we will send this uh
presentation to Michelle and she
will distribute it, uh, but this
is an inventory, uh, when you
get to it, it's pretty intuitive
to look at. Uh, we're not gonna
do a demo today. Uh, we did that
last time for most of you.
But, uh, this is split into 22
different sections, one section
for the executive judicial and
Legislative uh
type facility holdings and the
second section is focused on the
higher end holdings. So if you
click on either of those two
pull down menus, there's
different ways to search for the
data and different ways to look
at it and if anyone has any
questions on it, feel free to
reach out to us.
Uh, with that, we will stand for
questions on the updates that we
have provided for the inventory
and for our uh current and
recent activities.
Right. Thank you very much. Any,
any questions?
OK. What is the pleasure of the
group. I believe we have uh an
action at him, right, to uh
approve the renewal of the
master plan.
That is actually the next item.
This is a presentation got it.
All right, go ahead to the next
item.
Um
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, the
next item for the commission to
consider is the master planning
contract renewal.
So in 2024, the Legislative
council Service issued a request
for proposals on behalf of the
Capitol Buildings Planning
Commission for master planning
and statewide inventory services
as we're just described to you
all. Um, architectural research
research consultants, also known
as ARC, was a successful
respondent on that RFP and a
contract was entered into for
these services on an annual
basis. Uh, the current contract
will end on June 30th.
The renewal that is before you
for your consideration would be
the first under the contract and
pursuant to the procurement code
and how the RFP was drafted, the
contract could be renewed for 2
more, uh, 2 more times
thereafter.
If this renewal is approved by
the commission, the council
service would issue a new task
order to ARC for the ongoing
inventory updates, and I stand
for questions.
Any questions for Ms. Casebeer.
Ms. Barena, I have a question.
Uh, thank you, sir. Um, my
question is,
Is the, the renewal for the same
dollar amount as it was last
year. I, if I read correctly,
there is an opportunity for the
vendor to
Uh, provide a
Increase in their salaries if
done within a certain amount of
time of the expiration date of
the contract was that submitted
or is the agreement gonna
continue with the same terms as
far as the financial part. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. The contract
itself is silent on the specific
compensation, and that is
subject to the individual task
orders.
I'm not sorry to answer the
second part of your question.
Um, I'm not aware that um
specific personnel rates have
been submitted yet, um, but if
the commission were to approve
the renewal, uh, we would work
with ARC to, uh, flush out those
details.
Thank you.
Any other questions?
Right? What is the will of the
committee, subcommittee.
I move adoption of the new
contract with ARC.
Right, there's some motion from
the pro tem to
Renew the contract with ARC any
discussion, any opposition to
that?
All right, I don't see any, so
motion carries.
Uh, let's go to the next agenda
item, and that would be item
number 4, facility condition
assessment in executive office
building funding update from
Miss Silva.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, members of
the commission, I'm going to
share my screen.
Um
Can you guys see my screen?
Uh, not yet. Uh, there it is.
OK, perfect.
All right, so, um, this is just
a little bit of an update on our
current situation with um the
Albuquerque master plan and
facility condition assessments
that are currently underway.
Right now, uh, we do have um a
task order that we're using with
ARC and uh we have evaluated 34
facilities out of 55, uh, in
Albuquerque. We have a 21
facilities still remaining to be
um assessed.
It's a gross square footage of 1
million a little over 1 million
in Albuquerque. Here's a few
pictures, um, that we're
showing.
Um, some of the things that
we're looking at when we um
assess the facilities, number
one is the ADA compliance on the
exterior, so we're looking at
damage asphalt. We're looking um
exterior of the buildings, um,
parking lots, uh, building
envelope um um issues that we
have, window and door upgrades,
that's on the exterior
facilities and as you can see
from these pictures, a lot of
our buildings are in need of
a lot of capital outlay.
Um, on the interior of our
facilities were also looking at
ADA compliance, restrooms, um,
door hardware, damaged and
outdated finishes, uh, HVAC, uh,
basically all, um, mechanical,
uh, improvements, safety and
security is also top of mind
when it comes to our agencies,
um, that's just around the state
and it is something that we deal
with on a regular basis, um,
especially when it comes to
uh homeless um encampments that
were also dealing with um in our
facilities.
And also fire suppression
systems. Um, this year,
I'm gonna go ahead and stop
sharing. This year we were
successful in receiving $10
million in capital outlay in our
uh statewide funding $2 million
of that is specifically for
facility condition assessments.
So after we complete
Albuquerque, then we'll move to
the uh next area uh still to be
determined. We also received um
$6 million to work with uh
Department of Transportation,
$500,000 of that will also be
used to.
uh DOT facilities, patrol yards,
um, statewide, so we'll be uh
working with DOT to do that. Um,
regarding facility condition
assessments and um some of the
monies that we received this
year in Capital outlay and our
master plan in Albuquerque, um,
that's kind of like a synopsis
and before I go on to executive
office building, um, Mr. Chair,
should I ask if there's any
questions or go ahead and move
on to
Executive Office building
updates. Uh, let's go ahead and
move on.
OK, so unfortunately we were not
successful in receiving the $120
million that we did request for
uh executive office building.
However, um, that's not
necessarily a bad thing because
we are still moving forward with
the design, we are working with
the different uh entities that
are going to be moving into the
executive office building, so we
will be working with the
different with uh Secretary of
State, um, PED DFA state
auditor, state treasurer,
lieutenant.
Governor's office on programming
their different areas. We'll be
um working in parallel as we are
also working with the city of
Albuquerque and the historic
Review Board on some of their,
uh, we had a meeting with the
subcommittee, and they had uh
their input, so we're
incorporating their input into
the design. So the design is
gonna take roughly 8 months to
complete the design, then we
will go back before the historic
review board.
Uh, around July, August time
frame, um, so that we can seek
approval for the demolition of
the Casitas and the concertisi
Pino Building, and then once we
receive uh their um uh either
approval or denial, then we know
what we're going to be doing as
far as next steps. But right
now, we did not receive the
funding, but we are still moving
forward with uh the design of
the facility. And with that, I
will stand for questions.
Any questions for Miss Silva?
Uh, President Putin.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I, I
just wanna say what a great idea
it is that you're working with
each of the entities that will
be in this building. I've never
heard, I have not heard this
before.
That we're doing that. Getting
by in by having uh those
departments uh involved in the
design, I think it's a really
good idea, so thank you for, for
moving forward with that in that
way.
I'm sure they're all thrilled
too.
Thank you so much.
I believe everybody has um
received their letters, so if
you haven't, uh let me know.
Agreed. Any, any other
questions?
Ms. Silva, I think you alluded
to this, but uh, are we pass the
issue with the Santa Fe, um,
zoning issue.
That blew up last year.
Um, Mr. Chair, unfortunately
not, um, so we had to um
basically work with the
subcommittee from the historic
review board, so that way they
could then give their input into
the design where incorporating
their uh comments once we get
their comments, then we'll go
back before the historic review
board, so we're looking at a
July August time frame to do
that. How confident are you that
with that feedback taken into
account, we'll be able to get
past that vote.
Uh, Mr. Chair, honestly, I think
that it doesn't matter what we
design. I don't think that
they're going to really be in
favor of it, but that's OK.
We'll just go to the next step,
um, which is the, uh, joint
committee, um, members and um so
we'll just continue through the
entire process until we're at
the end, but I'm confident that
in the end, uh, regardless, we
will still be able to build the
executive office building.
All right, very well. Thank you.
Any other questions before we
The journey.
Mr. Speaker, Madam Leader. Uh,
thank you for that, uh, it's,
it's interesting, um, this is my
first meeting, of course, but,
uh, talking about the issues
with the uh zoning, um, just
have to say now you know what
it's like to do business in
Santa Fe.
Had to add that.
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
duly noted. Uh, any other
questions? Any other comments?
All right. Um, I think we'll
adjourn. We'll, uh, thank you,
Ms. Silva, for pinch hitting
again for the 1st 20 minutes.
We should do this every time.
Appreciate you guys. We're
adjourned.
Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you, everyone.
Mm, thank you.
