those of you who were here on
time and who are ready to start
and I appreciate your patience
for, uh, allowing us to get
started a little later, um, so
I, my name is Doreen Gallegos. I
am the chair of the committee
and I've got uh my trusty
sidekick, Carrie Hamlin here.
um, I'll go through and have
everybody introduce themselves
and we'll just jump right into
the presentation if that works
for everybody. If we could start
with Senator Brentley.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
Senator Crystal Brantley from
Senate District 35 down the
southwest corner of New Mexico.
Representative Duncan.
Good morning, Madam Chair Mark
Duncan, uh represents San Juan
County District 2.
Morning.
Morning, Madam Chair. House
District 63, Martin Samora, glad
to be here. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee,
Charlotte Little, uh,
representing, uh, Albuquerque.
House District 68.
Thank you.
Good morning, madam.
some
fun.
District 4, Northwest New
Mexico.
Morning.
Good morning, Madam Chair. This
isn't working very well. I'm
Susan Herrera. I am from, uh,
District 41, which includes most
of Reba County, a little bit of
Santa Fe, Sandoval, and Taos
Counties. Uh, good to be with
all of you this morning. Thank
you. And if we could get the
staff to introduce themselves as
well.
Martin.
Thank you.
We do have a
We're doing introductions
representative if you wanna just
go ahead and.
Representative Janelleyonornu
from House District 19. It's
Albuquerque Fairgrounds
International District, and I'm
not late at all.
You're right on time and Senator
Hamlin.
Thank you, Senator Hamblin,
District 38, vice chair of this
committee. Thank you everybody
for being here. Alrighty. Well,
thank you all and um.
Uh, we're gonna go ahead and
just jump right into the update
from the New Mexico Finance
Authority. Marquita, if you want
to introduce yourself as well
and um then go proceed with your
presentation. Thank you so much
for your patience and thank you
for being here today, Madam
Chair, thank you, uh, for the
invitation and for
accommodating uh me from last
meeting. I apologize for the
delay in getting there, uh,
hopefully you all had a
productive meeting. Uh, my
name's Marquita Russell. I'm the
CEO of the New Mexico Finance
Authority. um, I've been in this
role, uh, coming now.
years, been with the agency.
24 years. So, uh, got a little
bit of experience in this
particular, uh, department, and
I'm happy to share some of that
with you today. Um, so I'll be
speaking from a, a PowerPoint
presentation with our name on
the front, um, and they're just
a couple of, uh, background
pieces of information I want to
include if you're not
particularly familiar with the
New Mexico Finance Authority. So
starting on page two, would just
like to remind you that the
finance Authority is an
independent agency. We are
governed by a board of
directors.
Uh, the board is appointed by
the governor either directly or
indirectly. There are several ex
officio members as well as uh
governor appointees that are
then confirmed by the Senate.
We're chaired by a woman named
Cathy Keith, um, and she has a
long and distinguished, um, uh,
Career in economic and community
development activities, uh, so
she's really very well suited
and from and from rural New
Mexico, uh, so she has a uh
significant understanding of
what it takes for a small
communities to thrive, um, and
we're happy to have her as
chair. Uh, I would also note
that we um have an oversight
committee uh New Mexico Finance
Authority oversight, which is a
tasked with overseeing our
activities and, and providing us
with advice and consultation.
It's currently chaired.
by Senator Michael Padilla and
vice chair Representative Joy
Garrett. We finished our last
meeting yesterday, so it was a
productive interim, um, but the
Finance Authority is also um
paired up with several other
boards and commissions, uh, we
are administrator to 4 other
boards including the Water Trust
board and the Colonnius
Infrastructure Board and now
most recently the opportunity
Enterprise and housing
development review board, um, so
we do a lot of board
administration in addition to
programming activity.
I mean, our program activity,
I'll just turn you to page 3,
just giving you the statutory
reference and uh a visual of the
expanse of the programs that
were authorized to administer
legislatively, um, so we now
have 25 different programs that
have been authorized through 13
different uh acts, the largest
of the two acts are the New
Mexico Finance Authority Act,
which governs primarily local
government lending and um.
Then the statewide economic
Development Finance Act, which
is now um 21 years old and that
is the the act through which we
do most of our economic
development lending. Just noting
on this, uh, page on page 3,
you'll note that in the first
from 1992 until 2010, um, only a
third of our programs were
really suited to our economic
development or community
development activities. They
were largely directed towards
local government activities, um,
but from 2011 on, you
that all of them are
non-traditional credits they're
either local government, they're
non-traditional local
governments like charter schools
or they are uh businesses or
nonprofit uh entities, so most
of our activities, most of the
expansion that we've seen in the
last 1015 years has been in the
area of uh economic development
and community development, um,
much of the economic development
that we have been operating is
uh federally funded.
So about 95 or 97% of the
funding that that goes through
the
State small business, I'm sorry,
the uh.
Statewide economic development
Finance Act comes from federal
dollars, so the activity and for
economic development really ebbs
and flows with federal dollars
coming into the state.
Um, and we are just received um
some uh good news from the
Department of Treasury. We are
now authorized to start in the
newest activities which I'll
touch on in a minute, uh, which
will help us deliver about $65
million of federal funds to
economic development projects.
So turning to page 4, just a
little bit more about that
statewide economic development
finance Act, we call it SWEDFA,
um, it's not a great name, but
it's what we call it, um, and it
is again, it's the it it
partners the finance authority
with the economic development
department to help make certain
that businesses that need
funding are able to access those
dollars. We primarily work
through existing credit, uh,
institutions, banks, credit
unions, um, in order to provide
the funding, the funding
that we have for the statewide
economic development Finance
Act, we don't do it by
ourselves. We are stretching the
dollars that your local banks
and credit unions are providing
to your businesses and we're
filling that last gap through
loan participations primarily,
but there's now a new tool that
we have on board as well, um,
and it has 11 fund within uh
SWETDFA, which is the economic
development revolving fund. We
operate 6 different programs out
of that one fund to touch on
those. Um, and then we also do
the new market's tax credit,
which is a federal program
through the statewide Economic
Development Finance Act, um, but
the good news that we got from
the treasury was that we were
approved to start authorized,
start lending from the uh state
small business credit initiative
SSBCI of that $65 million. So we
are going to be, uh, the state
is going to be administering 4
different programs and the
finance authority will be
responsible for 3 of those, um,
and this is not where it's not
new to us, the state's small
Business Credit initiative,
SSBCI, uh, was first initiated
in 2011 as part of the small uh
business Jobs Act. We only had
$13 million in that instance and
this year the initiative is
quite large, then Mexico can get
up to actually 74 million if we
meet some of the incentives that
they've, uh, put into the bill.
Uh, the big issue with SSBCI is
that it needs to leverage
private capital, so for every $1
every federal dollar, we need to
leverage $10. So that's not
money from the state, that's
money from banks, that's money
from other investors but not
state dollars, private capital,
so our targets there are
significant a 10 to 1 leverage
is a pretty big lift.
Um, on page 5, I just note that
as I mentioned we have 65
million and can get up to 74
million, that difference, that
$9 million difference will come
from whether or not we're able
to meet the targets that they
put into the legislation for
meeting businesses uh that are
socially and economically
disadvantaged individuals, SETI,
um, and very small businesses if
we're able to meet those
targets, an additional 9 million
will flow into the state and
given the state's makeup, we're
fairly certain that.
will be able to meet that target
pretty easily, so we're, we're
really, uh, banking on the fact
that we'll get all 74 million
in.
We get the funding over in 3
different tranches, uh, we
received 22 million at the point
at which we get that, uh,
committed 90% committed then the
Department of Treasury then
releases the next tranche we get
that committed and out the door
and they released that last
tranche of 22 million.
Uh, so we are pretty excited
about those dollars. It took us
a long time to get the treasury
to approve them, and we're just
now getting ready to open that
application, but the four
programs that were able to
operate as a result of that
Department of Treasury approval
is a collateral assistance
program that's operated by the
Economic Development Department.
In those instances, they will
put a CD in your uh bank credit
union, or, um, even your uh
CDFI, um.
in to help support a lack of
collateral, so the business is
otherwise really creditworthy.
They simply don't have enough
collateral to meet the lending
institutions policies, then
they're able to get a uh CD
that's put into the bank and
available so at the point of
liquidation there not be enough
collateral to fill the loan. So
that's been an ongoing program
of the economic development
department and they'll continue
to use about 20 million of that,
um, uh, to, to help in the
collateral assistance.
Uh, we'll be operating a loan
participation program, um,
that's the only program that we
operated back in 2011 for all
$13 million that came in.
will be operating a new capital
access program, I think 2 years
ago when I first talked to you
about this potential, uh, we
talked a little bit about this
program in particular, because
it's new to New Mexico. What it
allows us to do is to take the
federal dollars and match the
lending institution and
borrowers' contributions and
build a debt service reserve
fund within uh or a collateral
pool within that lending
institution for enrolled loans.
So
see a loan that meets our
criteria and they otherwise want
to do that loan, but it's
slightly riskier than they
typically like to do, they're
able to then again use a portion
of the loans to uh make a match
into that fund and any enrolled
loan therefore has access to
those dollars. Um, it's not
particularly successful in high
interest rate environments, so
we have
Um, tempered our expectations
for how much of that we can do
because it ends up, you know,
sort of adding points, uh, to
the interest rate to the small
business, um, but as interest
rates start to fall down, we
expect to be able to see some of
that happening, uh, in New
Mexico. And then lastly, our
venture capital program, which
I'll spend a little bit of time
talking about today.
Last time I talked to you, I
think in Silver City 2 years
ago, probably, um, I talked
about a, uh, a study that we had
done and we took on this study
for two reasons. One was to
figure out how to best tailor
our venture capital program and
the other was to help us, to
help inform us on how the SSBCI
dollars which we had known about
but not been authorized to use
yet could be best utilized. So
we engaged a firm called Next
Street, uh, to come.
and look at the landscape of New
Mexico businesses, so this is
verbatim from something you saw
two years ago and I just wanted
to remind you of what we're
talking about when we talk about
New Mexico's small businesses.
There's not anything new to you,
but the numbers are very stark.
There are 168,000 roughly small
businesses that have fewer than
50 employees and 75% of
businesses in New Mexico don't
have any employees.
Um, of the 76% of those employer
small businesses have fewer than
10, so 76% of the 167,000 have
fewer than 10% and they account
those 10% account for nearly
half of the private employment
in New Mexico, so New Mexico
small businesses are very small
businesses, um, and 42% of those
employer businesses are located
in rural communities, so again
not.
anything new to you, but the
numbers are really quite stark.
Um,
I'll turn you to page 7 and just
talk to you about what we saw
the results of that landscape,
uh, study that we saw, we saw
that there is a significant
amount of small business
capital, um, from either CDFIs,
the Community Development
Financial Institutions, and
those are dream spring West
Nina, uh,
The loan fund that they provide
a lot of capital to the small
businesses, um, but there is not
enough of those CDFIs to meet
the volume of small businesses
that we just talked about. And
so there's a gap between startup
capital, which can sometimes be
funded by those CDFIs and
sometimes potentially funded by
venture capital, less likely,
um, and where banks typically
come in.
And so it's not that the banks
are underperforming in New
Mexico. It's that there aren't
enough CDFIs to fill what
typically is non-bankable. So if
you go to other states that have
fewer small businesses, you'd
see different statistics, but we
have such a high level of very
small businesses in New Mexico.
We need more CDFI's to come in.
We've been helping with tools
like the loan participation now
like the the collateral
assistance program and the
capital access program, but
that.
won't fill the entire gap.
There's no way to fill the gap
that exists really between um
the very early stage capital and
before a bank comes in because
they typically will come in for
at a certain size business and
for a certain size loan and so
what we're talking about is
helping to try to fill those
gaps. There's not one solution,
um, and I just would note that,
you know, it'll take everybody
in the room, uh, to fill that
gap.
Um, and on page 8, you'll just
see from the 3 programs that the
finance authority administers to
sort of side by side with those
SSBCI dollars, our venture
capital, which again I'll spend
a little bit of time on in a
minute, um, typically our
venture private equity funds
because with the federal
dollars, we can't do anything
fancy. We can't do flexible
debt, um, it has to be fairly
straightforward private equity,
uh, venture capital, and those
are for early stage businesses.
Um
Again, there has to be that 10
to 1 match and it all has to be
invested in New Mexico
businesses. The SSBCI Capital
Access Program and loan
participation programs as we
mentioned on the earlier page
kind of fit different targets if
there are a smaller business,
they are far more likely to need
the capital access program
because those typically handle
are for smaller amounts and as
they start to get bigger loan
participation is a really
popular program. That one will
happen.
if you, if you have a, um, maybe
a construction project and the
bank is got figured out how to
get the permanent financing done
maybe using the SBA's 504
program. Uh, there are other
tools available, but those
programs won't do the
construction. You have to get
the construction permed out. You
have to have a final, a
construction cost. You have to
have a certificate of occupancy
before they'll do the permanent
financing. And so this program
can come in when there's usually
a collateral gap.
During the construction period
and help finish that
construction. So that's a really
good use of this program. It
goes in for maybe 18 months
during the duration of the
construction and then it's
repaid where we can then turn
those dollars into another loan
that helps us meet over time
that 10 to 1 leverage.
Um, so that's where we see a lot
of that activity. We also see it
in letters, lines of credit,
things like that, but
construction lending is probably
the most prevalent use of this
fund, at least based on our 2011
experience, um, and we're again
just now starting to uh talk to
banks again since we've got
federal approval about 2 weeks
ago.
Um, the loan participation has
two different models and on
page.
I'll just touch on those
briefly. Um, on the left-hand
side, you'll see the co-lending
where the uh business will
actually make an application to
the finance authority, and
they'll make an application to
their bank and we'll each make a
loan down to the small business.
It'll be the same, roughly the
same ratio of dollars going down
to them typically 90% bank 10%
of finance authority funding,
uh, that makes up 100% of their,
their loan needs.
In this instance, it's a lot
more difficult for the borrower
because they now have to make 2
applications they have to deal
with two different lenders and
the requirements and timelines
for two different lenders. So
this is not a preferred method
from the finance authority's
perspective and from the
business's perspective because
you have double the cost, you
have double the time.
What we prefer to do is to use
that right-hand model which is
called a purchased
participation.
So we will go in and the bank
will make that same loan.
And we'll then buy a 10%
interest in that bank's loan.
It's very common amongst banks
to do that now. Uh, we had a
state program which
Was funded, I think with a net
$5.1 million and that's the only
program we operated out of that.
It's very successful when it
works, um, you know, in the
right, in the right, uh, for the
right project. The bank has to
be willing to be the originator
and to then report back to the
finance authority, but in those
instances, the borrowers got
one, application that they have
to make. They're dealing with
one lender. We may have
additional questions, so there
might be a second relationship,
but they're not having to
supply.
Financial data to two different
institutions. They're not having
to do twice the work even once
the loan is made. They just deal
with the bank and then the bank
gives information over to the
finance authority, and we can do
that in one of two ways. We can
do that where we share an
interest in the collateral or
where we take a subordinated
interest in the collateral. In
those instances of
subordination, that just means
that when the bank, if the bank
has to foreclose and they have a
lack of collateral uh value that
comes out.
There's not enough money to
satisfy the loan, then the bank
gets paid first and what remains
goes down and it pays the
finance authority using these
federal dollars. So, um, it
allows them to stretch that
collateral just a little bit
further.
So that's the most likely
scenario in this interest rate
environment that we expect to
see with these dollars, um, and
it's been, as I said, very
popular, at least according to
the 2011 program.
On page 10 there's that SS just
a graph that goes through.
The SSBCI Capital Access
Program. Again, what happens
here is that we use a portion of
the federal funds to make
deposits into a uh collateral
pool debt service fund, um,
credit enhancement fund,
whatever you want to call it, at
a local institution. So if it's
a CDFI, if it's a bank, um, a, a
credit union will take a portion
of those federal dollars up to
4% and make a deposit into their
fund and they will
match that through a combination
of of financial institution
contribution as well as borrower
contribution.
And they'll do that for every
enrolled loan that they've got,
so they can't, they can't later
on as they amass this reserve
fund or guarantee fund they
can't later on say, well, I
didn't enroll it, but it kind of
met the, the, the targets and
now I want to use that money for
a collateral shortfall.
That doesn't work. It has to
have been enrolled in order for
them to use the funds for any
deficiency of, uh, payment.
Um, so that's, that's a very
straightforward project. In the
loan participation, we actually
will go in and underwrite the
project, make sure it's
something we're comfortable with
our board will approve it here,
it has to meet the targets of
the program. There's a checklist
that we'll go through, but the
bank makes its decision about
whether to lend the money and we
just say yes, it, it qualifies,
it meets all the terms, there's
no additional underwriting. So
it's maybe a two day process as
opposed to a 4.
5 to 50 day process on the loan
participations. That's what
makes it ideal for these small
businesses.
Um, Madam Chair, I'd like to
then turn to page 11 and talk a
little bit about the venture
capital program again because we
are able to use that state small
business credit initiative for
these, uh, for this program, as
well as because we have from
2022 and 2023 and uh a program
that was authorized for NMFA to
operate and I want to give you
some, uh, updates on where we
are in the operation of that
program.
So 2022, the New Mexico Venture
Capital Act was signed into law,
and it was expanded uh in the
2023 session. What happened in
that 2022 is they said, please
do something different than the
State Investment council, not
that they are doing anything
wrong because they have a great
program, but they have a very
specific purpose, uh, for their
program. They are about yield
generation and then secondarily
about economic development, but
their job is to raise money for
the state.
And then to help diversify the
economy thereafter. We don't
have that same primary mandate.
Our mandate from the 2022 law is
to do something different to get
funding to businesses that don't
typically get access to venture
capital or any other flexible
debt program. So in 2023 we
amended the law to actually give
us the tools to meet the mandate
that you gave us in 22, and a
total of $50 million was
allocated to the program.
through those two different
years. Um, but what we can do
with that uh through the law
that we have now is we can
either uh invest into private
equity funds.
Um, so you know, go to a an
investment manager who's got a
specific policy uh uh target
niche, either, you know, some
sort of industry that they're
very good at. This typically
happens with high-tech
industries, um, we of course are
not looking very much at high
tech because that's already
served very, um, admirably by
the State Investment council,
uh, but we're looking, you know,
for a firm that understands, uh,
the market that they're
investing in, or we could do
them directly. We could
actually.
take applications from
businesses and make the decision
independently. We have not
chosen to go that route. We
think that there's a number
given that we're still very new
in the venture capital, uh,
program we don't think that it's
wise for us to start with
initial direct investments. So
all of our funding to date has
gone to an investment manager.
They make the underlying
decisions about how to
distribute the capital that
they've gotten from all of
their, uh, investors, and they
report back.
Um
and I will just take you right
to that page, which I think is
pretty exciting, um, because I
think you'll see that we are
hitting that target mandate of
doing something different, um,
alternate financing. Um, so what
you'll see here on the right
hand side, we have set in a uh
in a investment policy document
that was approved by our board
certain mission and
diversification objectives, um,
and so that is, are we, uh,
supporting local companies are
they supporting local jobs?
these underserved markets or
individuals, is it a diverse
sector, something different than
what typically venture capital
goes to and are we leveraging
highly private dollars. So those
are the mission objectives that
we set out, those 5, and you'll
see the key here if it's
entirely filled in, that's very
strong. If it's 3 quarters
filled in, that's strong. If
it's halfway, we have a medium
impact and if it's uh just a
quarter filled in, then we are
looking at a week.
impact. Um, so here's what
we've, uh, invested in, pretty
excited. I'd love to hear a drum
roll, um, all right, if you
don't have one of those, thank
you.
Thank you. Uh, the first fund
that we, uh, closed on was
called Raven 2. it's managed by
Raven Indigenous Capital
Partners, and they invest in
early stage native owned
companies building sustainable
native economies. Now this is a
binational fund, uh, they are in
Canada and uh the United States,
um, we have committed about $7.5
million which is 7% of this
particular fund. They actually
had a target of $100 million
they had filled that target.
And then we got introduced to
them. They opened up their fund
and uh redistributed capital and
allowed us into the fund after
they had already closed and met
their match. This is a highly
successful, uh, group, and we're
really excited to be part of it.
Um, they won't necessarily
commit to $7 million or $7.5
million ending up in New Mexico
businesses, but they've actually
located an office here, so we
think it's very likely that they
will have even far more than the
amount we've, uh, committed to
them.
happening in New Mexico. So
you'll see here that we, uh, we
have them as a uh medium for
local companies, for local jobs,
a very high, very strong, um,
uh, ability to serve the
underserved markets.
Uh, gosh, I can't even do my own
key here strong for diverse
sectors and very strong for
private capital. So that's,
we're excited on that one.
Tramway 3, which is in New
Mexico fund, it's operated by
Tramway Ventures, which is a
woman-owned firm in Albuquerque,
and they invest in early stage
medtech, biotech and health tech
companies. We put in $7 million
of the state small business
credit initiative. We've um,
we've
We've obligated that, uh, we
have not yet fully uh dispersed
all those dollars, but they
will, as they meet their match,
we'll uh send money over to
them, so up to $7 million there,
uh, dangerous New Mexico, which
is a new, um, fund, dangerous
ventures is operating it. They
are, they are, there's 3
partners throughout this uh
nation. One of them is uh
located in New Mexico and they
will be investing in early stage
New Mexican companies that are
building for sustain
able futures. We have up to $5
million committed there, which
is a 25% of their fund.
Um, advanced New Mexico, which
is really exciting. It was the
fund that we, uh, built on the
back of that study that we just
talked about. It's um being
operated by mission-driven
finance, and there we are doing
flexible debt, so this is not a
a traditional venture capital
program. Here we're giving the
uh we're investing our money in
advance, New Mexico, and they
are making partnered loans in
businesses that wouldn't
otherwise get uh that kind of
collateral.
That kind of capital they
probably have no collateral.
They may be very much a startup
company, um, and they may have,
they may need money to fill a
contract and not a strong uh
track record of this. So it's
riskier than even what a CDFI
would do, um, but we think that
this is the money that's needed
to get them to that next level.
Um, we have committed up to $10
million of the state funds for
that, and it is 50% of the
match. So this is one where
we're leading the way we've
developed a program and found
the right man.
manager to run that program.
Tiverton 2, which is operated by
Tiverton Advisors. They're uh
target is um agricultural
production sectors, primarily
farms and ranches and what they
do is, um, when a family owned
farm is ready to, no one wants
to, to take it on, and the fear
is that it will not.
Continue, uh, where they, the
jobs will go, they'll run down
whatever remaining stock they
have or take down their final um
Crops and then kind of shut down
business here what they'll do is
they'll come in, they'll operate
that farm, they'll buy that farm
out, people will continue to be,
um, uh, employed. These are not
big ag firms or, you know, uh,
they are, there's gonna remain
small firms, but they'll
probably modernize them. They'll
probably, you know, do more
vertical integration, um, so we,
we're really excited about this
fund. They have already invested
in in a New Mexico business in
their prior fund and
we and they have people on the
ground in New Mexico. So we
expect to see some really great
things from them. They're a
national fund, uh, that's found
in New Mexico.
year we're doing $5 million. It
is just 1% of their target.
So they'll be making investments
of probably 25 to $35 million in
each of these farms that they uh
managed to, to find and take on,
um, and there crops are highly
aligned and they're with our
particular state.
Of almost 2, which is invests
its mos ventures. It invests in
Latinx and diverse teams doing
scalable tech-driven, uh,
companies we're, um, $7.5
million.
It's 8% of their targeted fund,
um, rethink, which is their 3rd
fund, uh, it's operated by
Rethink Impact, which is a
women-led uh investment company,
and they invest in women-led
businesses that use technology.
Um, we are $2 million and we are
there just 1% of their total
fund. They do more late stage
investing where several of these
firms will do very early stage.
They do late stage. They come in
for the follow on capital after
there's been some.
Success, you need to keep
feeding, uh, the company's
growth, and that's what this
company does for women owned
businesses.
And then lastly, a fund uh that
we, that we closed yesterday,
the Perennial Fund 2, it's
operated by a group called Mad
Capital Out of Boulder, and they
support farms and ranches that
are transitioning to organic or
regenerative, uh, farming
through flexible debt. So again,
these are loans where Tiverton
is an equity investment. This is
a loan, a flexible debt product.
Some of those crops take 3 to 5
years to get fully transitioned
over. They also have a nonprofit
associated with.
them that will come in and do
technical assistance for farmers
who are interested in moving
their crops to organic or
regenerative processes. Um, it,
because it, it takes a whole new
learning and so they're, they've
got a nonprofit group that comes
in and does this for their um
for some of their companies. Not
all of them will need it, so not
all of them will get it, but
they have committed to doing at
least, I think 7 was the number,
um, uh, advisories, uh, through
this nonprofit and helping these
These companies grow. So we're
excited about that one as well.
That's not something that you're
going to see from a traditional
venture capital program, the two
flexible debt programs, advanced
New Mexico and Perennial Fund
are because we were able to make
that change in statute in 2023.
These are flexible debt and so
100% of those dollars will come
back. There's still risk, so,
you know, we know that there
will be losses, um, and they're
not ready for banks by any
stretch. So these are really
good.
um, uh, funds for us to have
used that new
Legislative authority you gave
us in 20203. Advanced New Mexico
is one I want to spend a little
time on. I've just got a slide
on page 13. These are loans
again, they'll work with
probably other CDFIs, uh,
they'll make loans of 100,000 to
$1.5 million. The loan terms are
right now are between 3 and 30
months, so they're very short
term debt. As of July, the
interest rate was 11.5%, which
at that point was + 3, and, uh,
The application fee is very
modest. It's $250 and there's a
2.5 point closing fee. There are
no prepayment penalties. Uh,
there's no credit score that's
required. So if these are credit
invisible companies, people that
are brand new into the um into
the business world. They don't
really have credit. They've
operated on cash. That's not a
requirement, um, personal
guarantees are not even
required. They
It may be something that's
offered and then revenue-based
financing so that we're looking,
you know, at the percentage of
their, um, other revenue take.
So, Madam Chair, uh, these are
the things that we're doing at
the Finance Authority relative
to economic development. I'd
note a significant portion of
them will impact rural New
Mexico as well and with that I'm
really happy to answer
questions.
Thank you for the presentation.
uh, so far we just have Senator
Hamlin on the uh on the list. So
we'll start with you. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and thank you,
Marquita, for being here. Um, I
just want to inform the
committee that when we had
talked about the catastrophic
business relief program, um,
encouraging to see if there were
other funds and other programs
that we could talk to Marquita
and her crew about and, and I do
want to commend you because you
were very open to those
conversations and trying to
figure out ways to help our
businesses,
our rural businesses, um, who
might experience a catastrophe
that could just literally shut
them down. Um, and I, and I want
to assure the committee that
there are continued
conversations about ways to do
that to where it's not an extra
burden on the department, but it
is a service that we can
certainly, um, do, and it looks
like more of an appropriations
rather than a bill, um, that we
would do. But Marquita, it,
there's so much information
here.
And so one of the things that I
think, um, is just in terms of
our conversations with
department heads, um, and
secretaries is how do we get
that information out, right? And
it's like there, there are so
many, so many different programs
that are available. And it's so
hard to get that information. I
think I'm just encouraging.
Relationships with chambers of
commerce, local businesses, um,
because I would love to be able
to share this in my capacity in
my job, share that. And I think
all of us who are members of our
communities and who are doing
things and giving back to our
communities. And so, if, if we
can have a conversation to work
together because I, I think
it's, there's an easy way to do
it without putting too much of a
burden on your PR people, but
where all of us could be able to
have one pagers that would be
able to, we would be able to
turn to. So I
don't know if that's something
you're already marinating on and
working on. Um, but it, it's not
necessarily a question
markquita, but I know that like
we have this opportunity to work
together and I'm really excited
about it. Madam Chair, I'm
really um very happy that that
was brought up. So the, the
venture capital funds are
marketed and they have different
screening processes depending on
who the manager is and on our
website you will see links to
those underlying funds, um, not
that it will help here, but
these are all hyperlinks. So
should you get the PDF?
You can hit a hyperlink and go
to the page that is uh that the
manager has operated so that
exists, I think, uh, we can get
you for the venture funds, we
can get you those right away.
And for anybody who might be
watching or watching this video,
there are hyper, this is on, on
the website, uh, in the agenda
in the hyperlinks are all there.
So, um, so I'm grateful for
that. So I didn't mean to
interrupt you, but um please
keep going. And Madam Chair, for
the others, the two, the state
small business credit init.
as I mentioned, those will end
up going through banks.
And given that we were just
given authority in the last week
or two, to operate those
programs. We're talking first to
banks and we we uh expect to do
a push out in uh January to
businesses, so first let the
banks know, first let um the
banks, the intermediaries which
will include the chambers of
commerce, Economic Development
organizations, um, accountants,
uh, will let those folks know
and then we go to the
businesses, uh, so that the
people that the
businesses will first turn to
either their advisor or their
bank have more knowledge about
it, um, and so that they're not
caught unaware. So that's the
way in which we push this out.
We'll have marketing collateral
at that point, um, but again,
starting with the banks, um,
making sure they understand it
and we've been, we've been
talking through their
associations to the banks.
That's fantastic, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Marquita, because I
think of like through our social
media and and my colleagues in
the field, it's like there are
many businesses who aren't able
to be members of the chamber,
but they
follow their social media just
for that information and events
that they're doing. So I'm
looking forward to that, and I
hope maybe what we can do is use
what you all are doing as a
model from for some other
departments that are also
understanding that there needs
to be a greater impact from our
State departments because, you
know, I think uh representative
Armstrong, and I know like
anything south of Socorro, um,
you know, it's like Socorro
Magdalena is like the area and
anything below that, it's really
hard to get that information
out. So I would
I really like to help drive that
effort so that our small
businesses can learn about these
different programs because
there's so much here.
And and then our economic
development department, there's
so much there. And we, we need
to, I think, do a better job of
getting that information out. So
any way that we can help you do
that, um, I'm looking forward to
that. So that's, that's all I'm
just excited. Thank you,
Marquita. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Such a little button for this
big thing. Sorry about that, uh,
Representative Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um, I,
in reference to page 6,
Thank you for your presentation.
This is, uh, it is very exciting
to see how uh small businesses
can uh reach, have access to the
capital that the capital they
need to either continue their
business or grow their
businesses, so I'm curious on
page 6 you, um, the last uh
bullet, um, a minority owned
businesses being significantly
underrepresented, um, statewide,
Madam Chair, uh, I am one.
wondering now that we had this
information presented that I see
this information presented on
page 12 and listening to the uh
what's available in rural and
tribal communities. There's 22
facets to this. One is, I'm
wondering.
Um
If you have information on just.
How
Uh, if you have detailed
information if that might be
available to to uh show the
Um, those that are declared
native owned businesses, um,
because I would think that.
also included in this, uh, would
be farmers and ranchers who um
might also be native either in
their on tribal lands or
otherwise
that uh they might be able to
access.
Not only Raven 2, but the
perennial fund.
Uh, Madam Chair, is, am I
understanding that correctly?
Madam Chair, yes, so the, the, I
believe that um
Raven looks at businesses and
not agricultural businesses, so
I don't know that they would be
a good match, even if they are
native owned, they're going to
have a specific expertise in
agriculture really is a
different, uh, it's a different
world than other small business
lending. So, um, Tiverton and uh
perennial fund are more likely
if they're an ag business, that
would be the place that they
would go because that takes a
special expertise to understand,
you know, the ability for uh
that company to be.
successful.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair, and thank you for that
response. So, um,
Um
The, uh, can you, you mentioned,
um, or it was mentioned rather.
That
The advanced New Mexico, um.
Fund is managed by
mission-driven finance.
Um
Madam Chair, I'm curious as to,
it was explained a little bit
about the uh entity that is
managing this, uh, but I may
have missed the description of
the uh management firm mission
driven Finance, uh, it, I would
appreciate, um.
Be reminded perhaps of who, who
is managing what the makeup is.
Certainly, um, mission driven
finance is a social impact
manager out of San Diego and
they have helped um governmental
entities in particular, uh,
cities, uh, help, uh, with
social impact investing. So they
are a social impact investor,
um, and they are very much
mission aligned. They obviously,
no one in that group is in the
business of not making money, so
I need to.
Make it very clear that they
are, they are investors and
their job is to return capital
as well as economic impacts, um,
and there's is uh they are
primarily a social impact
investor.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
That's all my questions.
Thank you.
Uh, we've got a, uh, Senator
Rodriguez.
Morning. Good morning, Marquita
again, always, um, you know,
I've listened to Marquita for
many years, but every time that
I hear her, I learn something
more. Oh gosh, do I feel like an
infant even after 29 years,
Marquita, thank you so much,
Madam Chairman, I just have a
quick question, Marquita help me
as briefly as you can. I know
you have told me a lot of this,
if not all before, but I wanted
to on this venture capital
program, uh, if you go to number
11, page 11, I just wondered on
that second bullet.
What does it mean, um, when you
mentioned that investments are
made, um, where are we here as
equity or debt.
On that 2nd bullet.
And um is it it says through
venture private equity funds or
direct investment the only
question I had is, um, like this
venture private equity funds I'm
picturing, am I wrong? I'm
picturing a business that
advertises itself at uh that
actually provides, uh, venture
private equity funds, is that
what it is? Is it a business or
or is that, could that be um
NMFA.
Madam Chair, so excellent
question. The first one is a
professionally managed, um,
equity fund or flexible debt
program as we just talked about
with Advanced New Mexico. So we
have very specific criteria
about what uh professional
office looks like, you know,
what the makeup is of a
professional office. There may
be individuals that do
investing, but don't have a back
room, they don't have experience
in track record. We're not
dealing with those folks. These
are folks that have experience
and they're vetted.
Significantly by a group called
Mikita Investments. They're a
global multibillion dollar
venture, uh, consultant, and
they do the vetting of all of
those funds for us. So that's
the first group. The second
would be NMFA. Should we choose
to ever make direct investments,
we have the authority under
statute, um, to actually make
those direct investments and
while I feel we have very strong
personnel on board. I don't know
that we're really well suited at
this time to make direct.
investment. So you've given us
the authority to, we have shied
away from it and we are sticking
first with the experienced uh
venture, uh, firms.
Thank you. Well, thanks for all
that explanation. It makes lots
of sense. You clarified it.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chairman.
Thank you. Do we have any other
questions? Uh, Representative
Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for the presentation,
Marquita.
A lot of information, it all
goes to rolling in my head.
But as the state gets involved.
In farming and, and, and then
In financial, the financial part
of the farming.
How does that
Fi
With the federal side.
I've always, as long as I've
been doing it, I always worked
with federal programs.
I didn't, I wasn't even aware
and maybe there weren't any
state programs at the time.
But how are we going to keep
The federal programs and, and
people from double dipping and,
and maybe somebody that.
That's
Use the federal program and been
unsuccessful or we're gonna
bring him right into the state
programs or how's, how's all
that looking?
Madam Chair, that's an excellent
question. So we don't really
consider the Tiverton fund or
the perennial fund as state
funds. We are investing the
dollars, either the federal
dollars or the state dollars
into a fund that does those
investments. So they're not NMFA
funds, they're not state funds,
but their investments that we're
making with those dollars, um,
and the, the companies that will
manage those investments either
Tiverton or Mad Capital.
They're going to be responsible
for ensuring that they've got
the right company selected that
they're confident of its
success. If federal dollars are
already available, they're
likely going to be the first
choice of the farmer because
they're well known, they're
likely going to have long lived,
um, experience with them, you
know, they've been banking with
them for years. Uh, these are
typically going to be in areas
where the, where the federal
programs are not dipping. So,
you know, the making the, the
shift from
Non-organic to organic can take
several years, and there are
years in there that they're not
going to be.
Guaranteed to have a crop at all
or we have a successful crop and
most lenders aren't going to
take that risk. This is geared
to take that risk, to help them
get over that hump and again not
every company or not every farm
that wants to do this will be
selected as an investment.
They're going to go through a
vetting process that Mad
Capitals established and when
Tiberton, they're likely going
to be a, a family owned or a
small farm that's going out of
business and there's not
there's not succession built
into their plan, so rather than
have the farm go fallow or have
the, the business cease, they'll
buy it out and modernize it, um,
and try to diversify the income
that comes out of it and and
keep those jobs in place. So
there, it's not state programs,
and they are, they're different
than what the federal government
does currently.
And, and Madam Chair Marquita.
So then,
We're going to be
As a state, we're going to be
funneling money to the banks,
and they're gonna make the
loans, and they're gonna vet all
these loans, right?
Madam Chair, yes, we'll be
making investments into fund
managers who will do what's
already their profession to make
these investments, to select
these projects to vet them, um,
and you know, with Tiverton, it
could take 8 months, 6 months
before they've made a
recommendation about whether to
proceed with an underlying farm.
It could take a very long time
for that to happen, um, but the,
the, the farms themselves, the
farmers, the ranchers will deal
directly.
With those fund managers,
they'll make the inquiries
directly, um, we can tell them
who to contact, but they need to
contact them and go through the
vetting process of those
underlying the, the fund
managers have.
So, Madam Chair and Marquis, I
guess I'm a little confused as
to who's gonna be making the
loan to the farmer.
Um, in the, in the instance of a
loan that would be mad capital
through the perennial fund too.
They will make the loan.
They'll choose the borrower,
they'll make the loan.
OK, uh.
I think, I think that concludes
my questions, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Thank you. Uh, Representative
Ellison, thank you, Madam.
Uh
Past few weeks
You
I want
Representative, we're, we're
having a hard time hearing you,
um, yeah, there.
In the past few weeks, I've been
approached by two groups. They
are in the form of forming a
501c3.
And the first group is a group
of veterans that want to produce
homes for um homeless veterans
to start with. They have secured
a building site that has all the
infrastructure. What
recommendation or what
suggestions would you give to
them to get started up. It will,
it will be a business that's
situated on the Navajo Nation,
so I don't know if sovereignty
issues would create a problem,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair, that's
an excellent question. So
usually startup businesses might
first go to, you know, a, a, a
known.
Friend, family member, banker,
someone that really understands
who they are and uh they might
take an interest in that.
Company, um, but with a
nonprofit, you don't have
shareholders. That's the
difference between the
nonprofits and the for-profits
is there, there are no
shareholders. So you really
can't, you know, go to a venture
capital, you know, an equity
fund and, and have someone buy a
portion of that company, because
there are no shares for sale. So
they could either again
depending on where they are in
their um in their, uh, business
cycle that they've got an
identified opportunity and they
don't have the capital, I would.
Recommend that they talk with
advanced New Mexico, which is
that group operated um by
Mission driven Finance. That's
the one that I've got
highlighted on page, uh.
13, uh, I think that's the best
one because they're making
loans, um, and so nonprofits
obviously will qualify for those
loans, their startup, there it,
it fits the risk profile and so
they would be the best solution
that I have if they've already
got some capital raised because
there are 501c3, they might have
the opportunity to go to a bank,
um, and then they could talk to
a bank about maybe our loan
participation program or
something else, but if they
don't have any capital raised to
date, I would certainly start
with advanced New Mexic.
Mexico.
OK, I think the capital that
they're relying on is we had
given them some capital outlay
to, uh,
Uh, make an improvement on an
existing veterans building, but
they're running into issues with
uh bureaucracy of the Navajo
Nation government. So they
wanted to see if they can divert
the funds into the building of a
manufacturing.
Uh, veteran homes.
And then the second group, Madam
Chair, is uh another group.
I want to build a truck stop in
the, in our area in, in the
community of Shiprock actually,
because there is nothing, uh, in
that area for truckers, and we
get a lot of truckers like for
Kmart, Walmart, Target, and
sometimes those trucks will be
parked on the side of the road,
creating a safety hazard. So
they want to take on that
venture and my same question is,
what is your recommendation or
uh at least give us some
thoughts on.
Where to go. They had told me
that since you're gonna have a
lot of time on your hands after
December, uh, we'd like for you
to be a, a board member, and we
want you to uh contact your
contacts and help us get
started. So thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So in
that instance, typically that's
larger than advanced New Mexico
will lend. You saw that they'll
go up to 1.5 million, so that's
gonna be, uh, you know, a
startup truck stop is going to
take you into multi-millions.
They're gonna need to start at a
bank. That's the only fund that
I know of, they're gonna need to
start at a bank and the bank may
come to the finance authority
and say we need a little help
and we, you know, we could
probably get them over the hump,
but they'll, they'll need to
start with the bank and have
those conversations about what
the bank needs in order to
get the deal done.
OK, thank you for that, Madam
Chair, and uh,
So my first step would be
tell them to contact advance New
Mexico. Is that correct?
Madam Chair, for the Veterans
Home, I would contact Advanced
New Mexico, and again, there's
that hyperlink in the electronic
version of this, and it's on our
website as well.
OK, thank you for that, Madam
Secretary. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Jareta.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you Marquita, um, I think this
is what you'd call a full court
press, uh, pretty impressive,
uh, thank you for all the work,
uh, this is no small feat. I,
I'm curious. I have a local
small business in my district
rural, uh, probably does 1.5
million a year, probably 9 to 20
employees, a lot of them part
time.
I'm, I'm curious, they're,
they're talking about buying the
building, they're renting a
building now that they use and
talking about buying it maybe
and they invested a lot into it.
It's owned by um a nonprofit who
may be interested in selling it.
I'm curious,
in a, in a situation like this,
would they start with a bank or
would they start with aimmetha?
Madam Chair, I would suggest
they start with the bank. Um,
the bank that already knows them
where they have some experience,
um, if they are underbanked or
unbanked, then, you know, they
can contact us and we can try to
get them connected, but if they
haven't yet established a
relationship with the bank,
they'll need to at some point
because we don't do a 100%
financing, so the bank may do it
all on their own, and that's the
best case scenario. Um, if the
bank can't get it done because
there's not enough collateral
value, um, they haven't been in
business long enough. There are
a number of re
ations that the bank will go
through instructuring and
underwriting its loans. They
can't make that happen, um,
we're certainly uh an easy place
to go now that we have those
federal dollars in hand. So what
we, I'm Madam Chair, what we
need to tell our constituents is
basically always start with the
bank if you have problems,
that's when you go to the NMFA.
That's the story, Madam Chair,
yes, and they should mention the
finance authority when they
talked to the bank. You know
we're gonna do a, we're gonna do
what we can to let all bankers
know, but there's a
A lot of bankers.
There's a lot of bankers in the
state, especially in rural
districts, it's, it's a problem.
OK, thank you.
Thank you. uh, Representative
Duncan, thank you, Madam Chair.
Marquita, I just have one
question on 13, the advanced New
Mexico, um.
Talks about uh making capital
available to small businesses
and nonprofits. Can you tell me?
One, why we would loan to
nonprofits and 2, what type of
nonprofit nonprofits we loan to.
Madam Chair, we are not
responsible for selecting those
projects, um, but there are a
number of nonprofits uh that are
job creating entities that
provide critical services in
small communities in particular
and in large communities as
well, um, and so those that need
to expand their services or just
getting started like the
veterans housing, um, there's an
economic reason for it. They'll
probably be quite successful,
um, and a social reason because
they serve a desired niche.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I was
just wanting to know if you knew
of any.
any of those nonprofits
specifically what, what they do,
not just generic answer if you
have some specifics, I would
take that.
Um, Madam Chair, um,
Representative, we, I don't know
that advanced New Mexico has
made a loan to a nonprofit yet,
so I don't have someone that I
can point to, we will get that
information quarterly from them,
uh, but I don't have that
information.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Marquita.
Thank you and um I don't have
anybody else on the list, but I
wanted to thank you for your
presentation. I think it was
very thorough, um, you know, I,
I look.
I think having this on the
website and being able to go
right to it is gonna be helpful
to people. The only question or
maybe just.
I don't even know if it's a
question, but just something to
throw it out at you, you know,
when you list here, um, not, uh,
Small businesses and then 75% of
New Mexico's small businesses do
not have employees. So I think
for those small businesses,
they're doing the work they're
the, they're the admin person
and they're probably providing
the service. And so these are
the people that we're probably
wanting to, to capture and help
and when you're that busy trying
to do all the work, um, just
even knowing that those services
are out there. So I don't know
if like a PSA would be helpful.
I, I don't know what exactly.
would be helpful to them, but it
feels to me that that's the, the
population that we need to
capture and any help that we can
do to help get that message out.
I, I guess I would stress that
that would need to happen.
Thank you, Madam Chair. We will
come up with some ideas and, and
make certain we
Find something, we'll start
somewhere. Right. Perfect. Once
again, great presentation. Thank
you and your team for their hard
work and thank you for being
here today.
the
All righty, um, I think we've
had a couple of people come in
since um.
Since, uh, we did introductions
if we could start with, um, uh,
Senator Rodriguez, did you
introduce yourself?
Thank
Oh
Push the button.
Oh,
Gets off this one here. Oh good,
thank you, Madam Chairman, good
to see you. I'm Nancy, Senator
Nancy Rodriguez. I'm from Santa
Fe District 24, and I'm here
with you today, maybe this
morning, uh, as your guest. I'm
not ordinarily a member of this
committee, but I love it, such
good issues you discuss. Thank
you. Thank you for being here,
uh, representative, uh,
Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Alan
Martinez, House District 23 in
Sandoval County.
Represent the northern part of
Rio Rancho in the western edge
of the town of Berlio.
Wonderful. Good morning,
Representative Armstrong.
Good morning, Madam Chair. My
apologies for in and out and
being late and I'm really
disappointed that I cannot sit
by Senator Hamblin. We have a
really good time. So I thank
you, I think for separating us.
I don't know. Uh, anyway, I
represent district House
District 49, uh, Socorro
Valencia, um, Sierra and Katrin,
uh, I hail from Magdalena, New
Mexico. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you for being here. And
Senator Stefaniks.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. It's a
pleasure to be here. I was
presenting in courts and
Corrections this morning on a
bill that I'll present to you
all tomorrow and uh for those of
you who might know him, uh, I
just heard this morning that,
um, former Senator Tom
Rutherford died or passed away
yesterday.
But it's a pleasure to be here.
Very sorry to hear that, um, is,
I think that's all our everybody
else that has come in today, um,
already if we can get our next
presentation our next presenter
is up, um, update from workforce
solutions department.
Wonderful. And I, you know, the
seating is kind of a little
funky. So, however, if you,
however you want to sit it's
fine.
If you want to introduce
yourselves, um, and then we can
go right into your presentation.
Thank you.
I think you've got to hold it
down the whole.
The whole time.
The whole time? Oh, the whole
time, OK. We, we do a lot more
work here in the hold it the
whole time.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, my name is Marcos
Martinez. I am the uh deputy
secretary for the Department of
Workforce Solutions and I have
with me um Katrina Viil who is
our state apprenticeship.
Um, coordinator, I'm sorry.
Thank you both for being here
and look forward to hearing in
the presentation.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, we were asked to talk
today about, uh, uh,
apprenticeship program,
pre-apprenticeship program that
that we're working with um and
that we've, that we've been
working with for quite a while
and then also talk about some of
the other employment programs
that we have with uh with
Workforce Solutions, so, um, on
slide number one, we want to
start with our um Bro be proud,
um, we had it here last year for
the legislature. It is a semi
truck with um 12 virtual reality
stations inside and, and the
idea behind this.
And this was funded by the
legislature, so I thank you for
that. The idea behind that is to
be able to expose uh the youth
in New Mexico, especially rural
New Mexico, um, to the different
trades and the different career
opportunities that are out
there. Um, it's, it's, it's very
important for them to just
understand, touch, feel, um, see
what it's like to sit, um, in a
semi truck and see what it's
like to drive one, see what it's
like to operate equipment and
and those types of things. So we
have had it in operation
probably for the last.
18 months, um, and we've got
some data here so we've had
almost 8000 folks go through
that, the majority of these
folks are, um, about student age
16 and above, um, we go to high
schools, we go to um charter
schools, um, we go to boys and
girls clubs, um, wherever we can
find, um, youth that we want to
expose to this, um.
Of the 8000 folks that that
we've, uh, that we that have
gone through the truck, we see a
little over 3000 that have been
interested in some type of trade
and they talked to us a little
bit about what the salaries
could be in those occupations.
What kind of training is
required to be able to do those,
and we have a huge database of,
of those types of things to be
able to get them interested and
excited. Um, we also use our
career counselors that we have
in our 25 offices statewide for
those that are truly interested
and get them engaged and see if
we can move them, um, further.
into the uh into the process,
um, we've had 101 tour stops,
that's what we call, um, when we
go and we park in a community,
um, the majority of time we're,
we're parking in, in high
schools. um, this is a huge semi
truck, so it needs a big space,
um, in some cases, especially in
your rural schools where maybe
we can't get in the road or we
can't get in the parking lot,
um, we'll park at a grocery
store right outside and the
school systems have been really
good about either bussing the
students or walking the students
there.
Um, so, um, and we've been in 69
cities, um, so far, um, to give
you an idea, the rest of the
tour stops we have set up um
through December of this year,
uh, Mescalleto Apache schools,
um, will be, um, in Albuquerque
for national Apprenticeship
Week, um, we'll be at the Youth
Challenge Academy in Roswell,
um, in the next couple of
months, the Lake Arthur High
School and Artesia High School.
So what we're trying to do is,
and we're learning how to
operate a semi truck as far as
um it's it.
It's, it's a lot of work to get
it out and bring it back. So if
we are in Hobbs, we will hit all
the schools in that area, uh,
for the week if we're, um, you
know, in Gallup will hit all the
schools in that area as well,
so, um, but some of the other
tour stops just to give you an
idea, we've been all over the
state. um, we've been in Rio
Rancho at those high schools,
grants, Laguna, um, we were up
in Maxwell Roy Springer
Mosquero, um, Ratton Taos High
School, um, along with, with,
uh, with many others.
Um, next step into and, and, and
this is also, um, thanking the
legislature. This was also
funded by, um, an allocation,
um, a couple of years ago, um,
and then a new allocation last
year, but as our
pre-apprenticeship program, so,
um, as we take these students
through the Bro be proud
workshop as we're um visiting
the high schools and talking to
kids about career opportunities
and those types of things. It's
really important that we have
this pre-apprenticeship program
and basically with this
pre-apprenticeship program is,
is it gives
students, it takes them from
just the concept and the semi
truck of being in a simulator to
actually sitting down and, and,
and working with an employer,
um, to get their hands dirty as
you would say to, to really
truly understand what it's like
to do that work, so, um, the way
we've structured our
pre-apprenticeship program is we
um enroll students that are
interested. We find employers
that are willing to take these
folks on.
We cover 10 weeks of wages and
10 weeks of training we cover
all of the costs for the
employer. We also cover the uh
workman's compensation as well,
so this is a good incentive for
employers to take advantage and
employers to start actually
participating. One of the things
that we've truly seen with our
employers that has been really
good was the initial concern was
that they might.
Take advantage of the program,
free labor, right? because we're
paying the wages, but when we
meet with those employers ahead
of time before we even put a
participant there, um, we talked
to them about the importance of
getting that student excited
about the industry. You want
that student to either go to
college if it requires college
or go get a CDL license if
that's what it requires and come
back to that industry. So it's
really important that the
business is exposed them to
everything that that industry
has to offer, so um it's a 10
week paid program.
In the last 2.5 years we've run
736 um New Mexico students, um,
whether they're high school
students, um, traditional
whether they're going for their
GED doesn't matter, but we've
run about 736 statewide through
the program of those about 31%
right under 200 have been hired
full time and the reason those
numbers are, are that low is
because a lot of the students
that we work with and expose our
10th graders, 11th graders, so
they're not ready to go to work
just yet, but it gets.
I'm excited, it helps them to
understand, um, it helps them
relate a lot of what they're
learning in school to how it
impacts them in their careers,
um, moving in, in, in the
future. So some of the, some of
the uh uh occupations we put
them in building trades,
education, health care,
management and administration,
tourism and hospitality talking
to the students at the end of
their 10 weeks is just really,
they talk about how it's just
broadened their mind and it
helped them to understand, um,
we talked to a lot of students
that say, you know, my parents.
expect me to know what I want to
do when I'm finished with high
school, um, society expects us
to understand, and we really
don't know what's out there,
right? And, and these, these are
the type of programs um that you
fund again, thank you, um, that
really exposed these, these
folks to this is what a career
as a truck driver is. This is
what a career as a crane
operator is this is what it
pays. These are the type of
credentials that I need to get.
These are the certifications
that I have to get to be, uh,
that I have to have to be hired,
so, um, we're pretty excited
about that.
And we've had just under 300
employers participate, um,
employers are really excited
about the program as well, um,
we hear from parents a lot that
are just super excited, their
kids have sort of come out of
their shell, um, my kid didn't
even talk to me at some point
they would, I had a parent tell
me and now, um, they, they, they
learned about sales and they
learned about those types of
things and now they can talk and
they can express themselves in
those types of things. So it's
really just, um, way back in the
day when, when I started, I
mean, we started working at 1415
years old.
Um, a lot of students these days
don't, um, we were exposed to a
lot of that, a lot of those
things that the students today
aren't so, um, that's what the
pre-apprenticeship program, um,
does, and, and, and we feel that
that's been pretty successful.
Um, we got a new allocation last
year from, from you folks for
$600,000.
Um, that will fund about 100
students statewide, so, so, um,
that's, that's, it's gonna help,
but it's, it's just, it's just
not gonna do enough just because
right now we're sitting on about
500 a waiting list of about 500
students that want to take
advantage and we'll be able to
serve the first, the 1st 100
that we have, um, for, for this
new, for this new year.
Um, the other thing that we
think will help is we just
received a grant from the US
Department of Labor and it's a
pre-apprenticeship slash
apprenticeship grant, um, and
the idea behind this grant is to
get students or, I keep saying
students, but young people,
older people that, that, that
are looking for different kinds
of occupations to get them
excited about infrastructure
jobs to get them excited, um,
uh, uh, about, uh, highway
building and construction, um,
I'll I.
all of those types of jobs, um,
so we received $5.9 million from
the US Department of Labor and
this will fold in nicely with
the dollars that we received,
um, from the legislature to be
able to, to, to, to continue the
program and be able to continue
to serve, um, to serve you. The
only challenge with this grant
is this one is specific to, um,
we can only serve students that
will transition from a
pre-apprenticeship program into
full-time work immediately so we
can use the $600,000 that we
that we received from the
legislature to serve maybe
younger youth 9th, 10th, 11th
graders give them that
experience and then we would use
these dollars with seniors or
college graduates or community
college graduates that are
actually ready to go, um, back
to work.
So what we're doing with that
funding is we've set aside about
3.4 million of those funds to
cover wages and workmen's
compensation for those workers,
so that means that we would
continue to cover the 1st 10
weeks of work and any type of
education that they need before
they start that, um,
pre-apprenticeship, um, our goal
is to serve about 450
pre-apprenticeships, uh,
statewide, um, we're also, um,
RFP about $750,000 to any, um,
uh, community college.
or any um apprenticeship program
now that wants to build a
pre-apprenticeship program, um,
nationally there's a lot of
success in pre-apprenticeship
programs here in New Mexico
we've seen a lot of success as
well, so we're our RFP um
750,000 7 grants of $100,000
each or 8 grants, um, with the
idea being that these folks
would actually build
pre-apprenticeship programs we
also are working really hard to
expand from just the trades, the
trade.
s have figured this out for the
last 100 years. They've been
super successful with
apprenticeship programs they see
a 90% retention rate of those
students that finish an
apprenticeship program that
actually stay with the employer,
so, um, there's, there's a huge
success rate there, um, we wanna
start with pre-apprenticeship
programs we want to build more
so um we'll be allocating, um,
$750,000 to that, um, of those
federal dollars again, another
$700,000 is going to provide.
um, support services, any kind
of tools that a student may need
to start the job, um, we know we
were learning in our, um,
electrical apprenticeship
program that students have to
have $1200 worth of tools day
one.
And that turns off a lot of
students because they just don't
have those dollars and their
parents don't have those dollars
as well, so those are things
that we can cover out of this
grant and be able to help those
students get into those, um,
apprenticeship programs and then
we also set aside $600,000 to
incentivize employers to hire
those apprentices, so that'll be
a $1500 payment per apprentice
um for those employers that hire
them and keep them at least 6
months. So that's the breakdown
of the, of the grant that we got
from US Department of.
labor and um how we're gonna do
that, um, now going into the
full blown, um, apprenticeship
program and apprenticeship
highlights it's important to
understand, um, that
apprenticeship has been around
for a long time, but the, the
key idea here and why we're
seeing so much success now is
the the key to apprenticeship is
that you're learning.
And you're working at the same
time and you're getting paid
and, and that's the key for a
lot of young folks these days is
that they cannot just afford to
go to school and not work,
right? They've got to figure out
how to cover tuition. They've
got to figure out how to cover
any bills that they may have,
they may have, uh, children,
they may have child care
expenses, all those types of
things. So the idea behind an
apprenticeship program is you
are working day one, you're
going to school at night, you're
going to school a week, uh, uh,
uh, every 6 months, however,
it's structured, but you're
actually.
working and gaining a wage. The
other beauty of an of an
apprenticeship program is there
structured so well that when you
get in there, you understand
what skills you're gonna learn,
you understand when you're going
to learn them, and you also
understand when your pay is
gonna increase as you go along,
so there's, there's, there's a
training plan for you day one,
you know when you become a
journeyman, you know what your
salary is gonna be at that point
as well. So that's, that's the
thing about apprenticeship
programs so um.
Uh, Miss Vil here she manages
our apprenticeship program
statewide and these are the
numbers that she gave us. So
right now we have 2550
registered apprentices in the
state of New Mexico and that's
an increase of over 70% from
2014, so we have a lot of
apprentices apprentices in the
state right now, um, we have
about 300 that completed their
program this year, um, another
250 that completed last year,
um, and, and, and these programs
are 234 year program.
programs, depending if you're
gonna be a licensed plumber, an
electrician, those types of
things, so the programs are
long.
Um, we also, um, some of the
other highlights for
apprenticeship program is we did
get increased, um, uh, funding
from, from the legislature to
aid um those programs and
helping them with the cost.
We'll talk about that a little
bit later, um, we've seen
programs expand people companies
learning from the trades program
and expanding apprenticeship
programs, um, the some of the
newer ones, um, we have a we
have a teacher apprenticeship
program here in New Mexico right
now where you can start as a
teacher apprenticeship and
go through the process, um,
early childhood educator,
project management, animal
trainers, autoglass technicians,
so a lot of
New apprenticeship programs that
are outside of the trades and
we're pretty excited to see
those, um, uh, come through. We
also have um increased um
federal funding as well, so the
feds have actually come in for
the first time in I mean we've
had these programs forever. This
is the first time they're
actually helping us fund staff
and funding the program as well,
so, um, we've received about
400,000 from the feds last year
to fund apprenticeship and about
$500,000 this year, um.
To, to fund them.
So if we look at overall funding
for the apprenticeship program,
um, our public works, um,
apprenticeship program. Um,
it's, it's interesting, so, um,
we, this is a program that we
administer to help those
apprenticeship employers, um,
with some other costs, right?
Um, you bring in an apprentice,
you've got to get them trained,
um, you've got to allocate a
journeyman to help train them,
all of those types of things. So
we've always had a program in
place where we help reimburse
the percentage of their
cost to make it a little bit
easier for them, um, in FY 24,
we were reimbursing them about
$7,001,700 per apprentice, but
thanks to the infusion of funds
last year, 2.5 million from the
legislature we were able to
reimburse them about $2600 per,
um, apprentice. um, it costs a
lot more than that for them to
run an apprentice through, but
they appreciate the funds that
we that we do help them with,
um, in our regular
apprenticeship, those are jobs,
those are apprentices that are
working.
jobs that are public works jobs
state funded, um, in our regular
apprenticeship program, um, we
fund them per instructional hour
so every hour that the that the
person is at work and they're uh
well actually I'm sorry, every
hour that they are in
instruction, actual learning
time, um, we reimburse them as
well, so we were reimbursing
them prior to the legislature
helping us. We were reimbursing
them $2 for every hour that the
person was in instruction that's
not enough to pay for facilities
and.
Um, instructors and those types
of things. So again, thanks to
the funding we got from the
legislature last year we were
able to reimburse them $11 per
instructional hour, so that
really helps them again, it
doesn't cover all the costs, but
it, it, it truly helps them, um,
so, um, we truly appreciate
that.
Um, other, other programs, other
employment programs that we
have, so for, for, for those of
you that may not be, um.
familiar with our agency we have
25 workforce offices statewide
located in, in, of course 25
communities throughout the
state, um, in, in the last 3
months we've seen about 2100 job
seekers go through our offices,
um, either unemployed looking
for work or underemployed or
just are looking for a change in
careers, um, that number is up
thankfully post COVID we weren't
seeing a whole lot of folks
looking for work, um, that
number is, is slowly climbing.
Um, so again, um, I'm sorry, I
got those numbers mixed up. So
we've, we've worked with 2000
employers, um, statewide that
are trying to hire folks, um,
we've seen about 15,000 job
seekers come through our offices
um in the last 90 days and um uh
generally when we look at our
performance that the feds hold
us to, um, about 65 of those
folks that come into our office
for 65% of them, uh, find jobs
within the 1st 90 days.
Um, when they come into those
offices, we help them with
letting them know which
employers are hiring we help
them with um interview prep, um,
resume prep, all, all of those
different types of things.
Um, we also have a rapid
response program that's funded
by the federal government. This
one is a program to help
employers who are getting ready
to shut down, um, they're
they're they're closing for
whatever reason or they're
reducing their workforce and we
can go in and help that
workforce find new, new jobs. So
I listed a few there, so, um,
the, the, the, the layoffs that
we've seen in in the last 6
months, um, in Bernalillo County
we had um Bimbo bakeries, they
laid off 123 workers, um, Otero
County, I think this was.
A Gordo CTI laid off 67
employees, um, in Bernalillo
County Jabeel, um, that's
Albuquerque again 130 employees.
Colox County, really sad to see
the Saint James Hotel closed
down, uh, they laid off 58
employees and um in Curry
County, I believe that was
Clovis, um, Halconcorp uh shut
down and laid off 118 employees,
so, um, staff is working with
those employees to get them um
back back to work as as soon as
possible, um.
an unemployment insurance, uh,
perspective we manage that
program as well. We talked to a
lot of employers um that tell us
that you know that basically
people don't wanna work because
we have them all on
unemployment, um, I can tell you
that, um, we have 10,000 people
on unemployment, um, statewide
that is probably the lowest
number of folks on unemployment
insurance that we've seen in a
really, really long time. So we
try to ensure, to assure
employers that we do not, we are
not paying these folks to stay
home.
Um
Uh, we, we also manage the state
veterans employment program we
have about 15 veterans
representatives that are located
around the state that help these
folks, um, that help veterans,
um, find employment and right
now we're, we, we've helped
about 55% of the disabled
veterans that come into our
offices gain full full time
employment.
And on the last slide here, um,
we were asked to talk a little
bit about some employment
initiatives for next year. So
one of the things we're really
excited on uh those of you that
are familiar with our centers,
um, our main office is called
the Department of Workforce
Solutions. Our offices in the,
in, in the communities are
called the New Mexico Workforce
Connection.
So the US Department of Labor
has been pushing all states, not
just ours, for sort of a rebrand
to standardize those offices so
that if somebody moves from um
Utah and New Mexico, all of the
offices will be fairly similar,
so the rebrand, they're gonna be
called America's Job Centers New
Mexico, um, every other state
is, is moving in the same
direction. So if you have an
office in Farmington, it will be
the American job, the American
job center Farmington.
Um, and that's the way they'll
be, they'll be labeled around,
around the, uh, the, the areas
they will give us um some small
funding to rebrand these centers
and to and to market, uh, the
centers as well, um, we're
excited about our apprenticeship
expansion, uh, the dollars that
we receive both federal and
state will help us expand that
program a little bit more, um,
we get about, um, in our work
opportunity tax credit another
program these are tax credits
that employers get for hiring
individuals in different target
groups.
Right? So if you hire, um, an
individual who's maybe on food
stamps. There's a tax credit for
employers at that point that
they can that they can pick up.
So we are upgrading our system
so that we can get those tax
credits to employers, um, a lot
quicker than what we're doing
now, um, we have started moving
some of our workforce centers
into community colleges so that
we can capture those students,
the student populations as well
and be able to help them get
jobs once they're starting to
finish school. So we're excited
about that, um, we're located.
in San Juan College in
Farmington we're located at ENMU
Roswell, um, and in Santa Fe
Community College, um, as well.
Um, and we're also reviewing all
of our workforce leases right
now we know that um leases
leasing is getting expensive, so
we're working with our um other
state agencies to see where they
have leases coming up as well to
where maybe we can all move
under one roof and truly be able
to support us an individual
coming in without having them go
to different offices, um, in
different communities, um.
We have been working hard to
strengthen our engagement with
our, uh, Native American
partners as well. There are 4 or
5 other, um, uh, chapters out
there that, that do workforce
development and we have been
meeting with them monthly and
seeing how we could sort of
co-fund participants because
they don't have as much funding
as we do and we want to make
sure that we can stretch those
dollars, um.
And that's, sorry, that was a
lot, but that's all I have.
Thank you for the presentation.
You're right, it was a lot of
information. I do have, um,
We're going to start with
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, Mr.
Martinez, just a quick question
if you could, uh, kind of
explain how this works. I'm a,
I'm a high school senior. Uh,
I'm not in a technical high
school. I'm in a regular high
school, but I'd really like to
go into plumbing.
Walk me through that and tell me
how that happens.
Absolutely. So we may or may not
have gotten you into our Bro be
proud mobile truck, but it
sounds like you already know you
want to be a plumber, um, so at
that point we would um have you
come into the office. We would
talk to you about the different
employers in your area that are
hiring, um, plumbers if you
don't have any experience at
all, which you would not have,
we would enroll you in that
USDOL grant that we have and
then we would go out and find an
employer that's willing to take
somebody on, we would cover the
1st 10 weeks of wages to
So that you and the employer can
sort of get to know each other,
um, if that relationship works
out then at that point the
employer would bring you on, um,
they would still have the $1800
incentive that we would give,
um, and they would put you in,
uh, their structured
apprenticeship programs so that
going in you would know um
exactly what your pay is to
start, what your pay is every 90
days where it increases and at
what point you'd be ready to be
a licensed, uh, journeyman
plumber.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So Mr.
Martinez, would I, um, get off
school at noon and go to work,
or is this something after
school?
Um, it, it, it would depend on,
on the program and what your
availability would be, um, I'm
sorry, Madam Chair, it would
depend on, it would depend on
what your availability would be,
um, because we'd cover the 1st
10 weeks of wages, um, actually
it's 400 hours. So if you're in
school and you could only work
half days, we would work that
out with the employer where you
would just work half days.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. So
would you also work with the
school to see that I, am I
getting credit for working from,
from noon until 5, at my school,
would I be able to graduate?
Uh, Madam Chair, we're, we're
not at the point yet where um
we're fully integrated with the
schools where you would get
actual credit, um, but you would
get the work experience and that
would count towards your hours
towards your, your journey.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair,
that's what I needed, um, I, I
was just wondering how that high
school kid could get credit for
that if I'm not in that
technical high school just in a
regular high school if I'm in a
technical school, would that
then that would probably already
be worked out or at least they
would say, OK, this is where
you're heading. So, so thank
you, thank you for that. I
appreciate that. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Uh, Senator Stefaniks.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and um
Mr. Martinez, the uh grants that
might go to the community
colleges.
I'm assuming for apprentice
programs, I'm assuming that you
all would give them.
The appropriate trades to start
looking at for apprentice
programs that are relevant to
our state.
Uh, Madam Chair, um, member
toonics, yes, so what we do is
we look at one of the
requirements for that RFP is
that they already have to be in
alignment with employers so they
would have to show us that if
they're gonna, if they're gonna
put 10 pre-apprentices through a
program they've got enough
employers to be able to take
those 10 pre-apprentices on. So,
um, it's gonna the the demand is
gonna have to be in that
community for us to be able to
fund it.
So, uh, Madam Chair, um, a
follow up question, could the
jobs not be statewide. So for
example,
Solar industry, uh, there might
not be 10 positions in Santa Fe,
but they might be 10 positions
in a 100 mile.
Area.
Madam Chair. Yes, no, it, it
would, if, if, if a school came
and they proposed that these
were statewide jobs, um, that
would be fine as well. We would
fund that. We would just make
sure that the students that were
entering that program understood
that the jobs may not be local.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, uh,
thank you, Mr. Martinez for the
presentation. I, um, I have a
question on if we have 10,000 on
unemployment, uh, I would like,
and it could be your opinion or
maybe you have some other
information that I don't, that
we're not aware of. But why is
the workforce participation so
low, if there's only 10,000 on
unemployment.
Madam Chair, so, so we have to
be careful when we look at, when
we look at the workforce
participation rate that is
everybody that is not working
right now, um, that does not
mean that those are folks that,
um, are drawing unemployment
benefits, so we have to make, we
have to make that distinction to
be able to qualify for
unemployment, you had to work
the last 9 months, um, and you
had to be laid off. So if you
were terminated, if you quit,
chances are you wouldn't be
eligible for unemployment, so
the participation rate shows all
working age.
folks that say that they are
looking for work, not
necessarily those that are
drawing unemployment benefits.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Mr. Martinez, but do
you have any idea why the, the
number is so high.
Of, uh, the workforce that could
participate, that's not. Any
clue?
Madam Chair, the, the things
that we've, that we've, when we,
when we've looked at this
number, the things that we've
seen is post COVID we saw um a
lot of two family workers go to
one family because they've
decided, hey, we did it during
COVID and it worked, so we lost
some of those, uh, we did see a
high number of retirements of
folks just saying, hey, we, we
don't want to do this anymore.
Uh, we saw that as well and then
we saw a lot of.
Younger folks probably.
Age 30 and younger that moved in
with parents during COVID and
have decided that they're pretty
comfortable there and they're
not moving out.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair, and
so do you count, um, in, in the
workforce. Is there any way to
track someone that's working,
that may be working online out
of state.
Uh, Madam Chair, so, so this is
what's interesting about, about
our department. We know where
you're at if you're working in
state because employers are
required, of course, to provide
those, um, wage records to us,
right, for unemployment
insurance. So if you're working
in the state, we know where
you're at. If you're working out
of state and live in state, we
know where you're at, um, if
you're an employee, if you are a
1099 employee or self-employed,
um, we wouldn't have, um, that
information, but if you're
working in the state,
Um, we would know where you're
working if you're if you're
unemployed and drying
unemployment, we know where
you're at. If you're just
unemployed, um, those are the
folks that we're struggling to
find.
Thank you for that. I, I never
really understood how you kept
track of it. So that's helpful.
Uh, the other thing is on your,
one of your last, I believe it's
your last page. Um, you say
stronger partnership with PED
HED and HCA. Can you, um,
elaborate, please?
Uh, Madam Chair, absolutely. So,
um, public ed department has
some work-based learning funds,
um, as well similar to our
pre-apprenticeship program, um,
like I mentioned earlier, we
have a waiting list of about
40-500 students that we can't
serve. They have a summer
work-based learning program, so
we'll work with them to help get
all of our participants in some
type of hands-on learning so
we're working with with them as
well, um, higher ed, um, thanks
to the legislature just received
the grow money for um.
certifications outside of a
degree, right? So they can pay
for CDLs and those types of
things. So we want to make sure
that when an individual comes to
our office and says, hey, I, I
really wanna get a CDL license,
then we have that partnership
with higher ed to say look
they've got funding to be able
to cover the cost of that. You
don't have to be out of pocket
with that, um, so we will refer
those to higher ed. We'll revert
those to community colleges as
far as um HCA.
We, we're understanding that a
lot of the customers that they
see, we see the same ones
looking for work as well so if
we can co-locate with them, if
we can move staff back and
forth, it would save that
customer from going to 2 or 3
different locations, um, so
those are the types, types of
ways we're working with the
other state agencies. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and thank you so
much for trying to unsilo the
silos. Thank you, uh,
Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Mr. Martinez, I had a, I had a
question on your rapid response.
Program
Um
So who makes
Who contacts your office? Does
it?
For instance, in, in Sandoval
County in Rio Rancho.
You know, we're dealing with the
shutdown of US cotton.
Does, does the county contact
you, the company, how, how does
that work?
Uh, Madam Chair, so it, it works
in several different ways. So
there's something called a
warrant notice that federally
employers, um, if they're gonna
lay off at least 50% of their
workforce they're mandated to
let us know, um, the challenge
is that um there are employers
that do not let us know, and
there's just not a lot of teeth
in that national legislation
that holds them to it plus if a
company is shutting down, I
guess they're not worried about
retribution. It's the fact
they're they're gone, right? So
that's one way, but because we
have the.
Employment insurance program
we're looking at folks that are
filing for unemployment on a
weekly basis. We're looking at
that master list. If we see 2345
from the same employer, then we
know something's up, um, and
then we'll get in touch with our
staff in that community if
they've got to go knock on the
door of the business to figure
out what's going on. We can, we
can do it that way as well, um,
so it just depends on how, how
we get noticed, but we're pretty
proactive even if they don't
send us that notice, um, once we
see a trend or we see some
layoffs going on, we'll make
sure.
that we contact that employer
and see what's what's going on.
So it's your local office, Madam
Chair, that kind of keeps a
pulse on.
Employment in in that area.
Madam Chair, yes.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. One more question on your
state veterans employment
program.
55% of disabled veterans
entering employment. Can you
kind of explain to me what that
figure means.
Uh, Madam Chair, absolutely. So,
um, we have staff that
specifically work with disabled
veterans and getting them
re-employed, um, so they each
hold a caseload of 20 to 30
individuals, um, a lot of times
what we see with people getting
out of the services they want to
use their um.
Their GI bill. So a lot of times
we case manage those folks for
567 years while they're going to
school, um, and being able to
line up employers, um, those
that are ready to work right
away will start working with
those as well. So, so we're
required by the federal
government to look at every 3
months how many of those folks
that have come in that were
getting employed, so right now
our numbers at 55% of those
folks that were getting into
full-time employment.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and Mr.
Martinez, is that, is that
trending up? Are there more
disabled veterans?
Flying through the DOPs.
Or is it kind of stable?
Uh, Madam Chair, it's been, it's
been stable for the last few
years.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Martinez.
Thank you. uh, Representative
Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
I wanna, I want this young
lady's job she hasn't had to do
much today.
Mr. Martinez doesn't let her
work.
Uh, our kiddness side, Madam
Chair, I'm sure she works hard.
She's probably.
His right hand person.
To help them through things.
Uh
Mr. Martinez, how?
Has it affected the state of New
Mexico with all the people
coming across the border.
I'm sure there's
A lot of those individuals that
came in and looked for jobs and
are probably working here in New
Mexico.
But they're undocumented.
I suspect that an employer might
be paying him cash.
Is there any numbers or
statistics on what's going on
there and, and do you have any
kind of
Maybe feel of it for your, from
your perspective as to what's
going on, how does that affect
the state?
And how do we move forward with
those people?
Being accepted into the
workforce.
And being documented and, and
paying their taxes and
everything else.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I wish I had a better
answer for you. The, the
challenge becomes if they're not
on payroll, right? So those that
are working for cash or those
types of things, we have no idea
where they're at, how many are
out there, um, because we only
get official pay records, um,
employers technically can't hire
them, uh, because they wouldn't
have the correct documentation
for a 99. So, so that, that
becomes a challenge, um, we do
have, we did get a private grant
and we did start an office of
one.
It's called the Office of New
Americans and it's, it's located
in Department of Workforce
Solutions to try and get those
stats, right, to try and
understand um how big of an
impact they're making in in the
economy, how big of an impact,
um, that, um, they're making
with different employers and
those types of things. It's
gonna be tough to get that
information because not a lot of
people want to talk about that,
um, but we have a person that
started last month that'll be
dedicated to be able to pull
that data for you.
And, and Madam Chair and Mr.
Martinez, that's, that's exactly
where I'm getting to is, is when
you said that employers
can't legally hire this person.
But they're being hired.
Because there's some of them
that are working and, and they
came to work, some of them did,
some of them, some might not be,
but they're being hired and
How does, how do we
Approaches
Or the employers
Have an undocumented person that
wants to work. How, how do we
approach that from your, from
your perspective, what, what do
we need to do as a state?
To fix that problem because it,
I believe it is a problem, if,
if the way I understand it.
Uh, Madam Chair, um, so what
we're looking at here with this
Office of New Americans, right,
is to be able to pull the data
to find out where they are and,
and, and what they're doing, um,
the other thing, the other focus
of their job is to help these
folks, um, get work
authorizations as soon as
possible, right? So right now
they've got to go through um
through the US Department of
Labor for Work authorizations
and from our understanding, it
takes 6 months to 12 months if
you're even eligible to get it.
So, um, this office.
would help sort of facilitate
that because the sooner we can
get them work authorization,
then employers can pick them up
legally, um, pay them wages, and
they're contributing to the tax
base and all, all of those types
of things. So the idea is to get
them through that process of, of
a work authorization as soon as
possible.
And, and Madam Chair, Mr.
Martinez, so are we talking
state level or federal?
Uh, Madam Chair, that's federal
level.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Mr. Martinez.
Thank you. Do we have any more
questions?
I have actually just a couple
before we wrap up, um.
You talked about.
Some of the, um,
Programs that you're doing with
the schools, do you all do
presentations at the schools to
get them, um,
Signed up or interested, or do
they need to go out to you all.
Uh, Madam Chair, great, great
question. So, um,
With, with, with some ARPA
funding that we got from the
legislature, I think about 3
years ago, we were able to
actually hire um what we call
career consultants and place
them in the school district so
that the students would have
access to us right there. Um,
once that money was spent, we
weren't able to do that anymore.
Um, we have 5 people now
statewide that will try and hit
all of the high schools, um,
along with our local offices as
well will work with their uh
superintendents to be able to go
and do presentations on resumes,
those types of things.
Their job is also to facilitate
employers coming in to talk to
students about the different
types of careers that they can
have. So, um, no, they, they
don't have to come to us, um,
our managers in our 25 local
offices, um, are responsible for
building that relationship with
the schools and providing them
whatever expertise we can.
Wonderful, good news, um, is
there a money management
component.
Um, when you all are dealing
with students.
That you're working on because,
you know, all of a sudden they
could start getting potential
income and, and I mean it's good
to get them started early so.
Uh, Madam Chair, another great
question. Um, yes, we do. So,
um, in a lot of our communities,
um, a lot of the banks will do
that as well, so we'll partner
with them and we have them come
and speak to students when we go
into the schools. We also have
an orientation when we bring
participants into this
pre-apprenticeship program where
they'll start getting paid and
we talked to them about savings
accounts and those types of
things.
You know, I know, uh
You know, back in my day is
checkbooks and I, you know, I
still carry a checkbook every so
often, but, um, you know, I
think with kids, um, or you
know, young adults, they're,
it's a different type of banking
world and so just making sure
that they have access to
understanding how to make sure
to keep a certain amount in your
account and making sure that
they don't overdraw those
accounts because sometimes those
those numbers seem very um.
Fluid.
I guess this is what I would
say. I'm sure you're correct,
and I will tell you that, yeah,
we, we don't teach them
checkbooks anymore, uh, but we
do talk about savings accounts
and, and, and saving for the
future and those types of
things.
Um, also, um, you talked about
not getting that you you haven't
partnered with the schools yet,
um, to get, to get those
credits, um.
Why not?
Madam Chair, so, so we've been
working with that. So some
schools already have some
work-based learning programs and
in those cases, some of them are
paid, some of them were unpaid,
so we will partner with those
and actually cover the costs,
um, and those programs have
already worked it out because
they're school-based, right? So
they've already worked it out so
that that school credit. Um, we
have been working with some of
the school systems now. It turns
out it's a bit more complicated,
um, to be able to, to, uh, make
hands-on work-based learning,
count as school credit.
Um, but we're, we're working
down that path because a lot of
students need that school credit
and it would be nice if they can
get it.
Very good. OK, it looks looks
like we have a, an additional
couple of questions from Senator
Stefaniks. So Madam Chair, um,
it's really a follow up on your
comment about the banks because
um.
While the next generation, I'm
still on the checkbook for the
next generation is not they
think that the money is forever
and so I do know that some banks
are letting um fees just rack up
and rack up and rack up even
when somebody has no funds in
their accounts and I've even
talked to a couple banks about
this, and they haven't like cut
people off so that might be an
issue that we look at, um, in
the future.
Thank you very much for bringing
up that topic.
Alright. Thank you. Does anybody
else have any questions before
we.
We close up this presentation.
Well, I don't see anybody else.
um, thank you for your
presentation today, um, lots of
good information I think
especially for me I, I like
hearing about how you're you're,
um.
Following up with our youth and
making sure that you kind of
launch them into a good start.
So appreciate all your hard work
and thank you to you and your
team.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you very much.
All righty, we're gonna start
with our next presentation, uh,
public banking.
We can get our next presenters
up.
Hello.
And she will put everybody up
here.
OK
Sure.
No, that's OK, where you'd like.
Sure
So what I'm gonna have you do is
each um introduce yourselves and
tell, tell us who you're with
and then uh we'll go ahead and
start with your presentation.
And I don't think you've got to
hold the the the button down the
whole time you're speaking. OK.
Thank you.
And thank you, Madam Chair, and,
and others in the committee for
um.
The uh
the time to spend with you this
morning and share this update on
public banking. I'm Angela
Merker, executive director of
Alliance for Local Economic
Prosperity.
Um, Aidan Lopez. I'm, uh,
shadowing, uh, lobbyist Pilar
Faulkner today.
And I'm Pilar Faulkner,
registered lobbyist for the
Alliance for Local Economic
Prosperity.
And uh Harold Dixon was going to
be with us today, but he got
called out of town today, so he
won't be with us.
We believe that after several
years of making our appeal that
now is the time for um.
A state public bank
Um
For New Mexico and to invest in
New Mexicans, um, you've heard a
lot from um Marquita about the
what's happening with the NMFA
and the amount of money that's
coming in to fund especially,
um, noted for small business and
uh rural needs, um, and we've
noted in the past that in our
research we have um found.
similar, if not even stronger
data that um that have come from
the study that was uh reported a
year ago by the NMFA.
We know that we do have these,
um, over 167,000 small
businesses in the state.
Uh, that, um.
There are a large number, um, I
believe it's less than 1/3 that
are led by uh self-employed, um,
people of minority.
Um, distinction.
Uh, we know that there are many
challenges still in our
financing programs there's uh
it's not only about getting the
collateral, getting the capital
it's about um identifying
collateral it's about bias in
making the loan decisions it's
about um.
Shifting criteria for approvals
and we believe that a state
public bank can help to level
the playing field here, um,
we've had contact, um, and have
been engaged with creative
industries and the
outdooreconomies groups in the
last 3 to 4 months and they have
reported um both through their
formal surveys and through the
um the
informal surveys that they've
conducted as well as the
interviews we've performed with
them that uh their number one
issue is lack of access to
capital and it's often related
to um number one being that
they're a single proprietor to
start out and so those startup
moneys are really, um, a
challenge to acquire.
Um, the lending programs thus
far are just not reaching our
small businesses in rural New
Mexico, um, I've identified um
on slide 3 that, um,
We have one example among many
um is a couple on Navajo land
who uh started a baby food
business just before and right
at the time that the um pandemic
started and they wanted healthy
baby food for their own child
and they could not obtain
financing to support what they
wanted to do with um processing
the fresh fruits and vegetables.
Um, to make them, um, to dry the
food and then to make them
accessible to just add water.
Um
And they're doing well now, but
they have had um.
They had major challenges and
they had to start out with
personal credit cards and um
essentially begging, inviting
family members to participate
with them, uh, to get them
started and that's one story
among hundreds that we know
about here in the state.
Um
In addition, even though the
Federal Reserve is reducing um
the interest rate, the prime
rate, um.
Banking newsletters are
consistently pointing out that
small businesses are having an
even tougher time accessing
capital while mid-sized and
large businesses are um able to
access more fully.
Um, on slide 4 you see um a
piece from the NMFA study that
again highlights the no man's
land and also um additional
details, um, identifying the.
The um the 76% of the employer
owned small businesses have less
than 10 employees we have found
that outside the I-25 area, um,
there is high interest among the
people that we've been
interviewing who um.
I want to talk about how can we
better access capital? What does
it take to actually, uh, obtain
the funding.
Um
As an a side note, um, this,
this committee and a couple of
others have encouraged us over
the last several years to um
test out our ideas more closely
in, um, with the people of New
Mexico and we are currently
doing that. We have 33
foundations who have funded us
to um engage in what we're
calling uh the North Central
Prosperity Project we are.
engaged with, uh, in
conversations and some um what
will be formal community
conversations.
In 5 counties in northern New
Mexico and they have been
supported, um, and encouraged by
the by these foundations and
that includes Eorum, who is um
very interested in what we're
doing in, uh, building these
community conversations and
identifying what does a
prosperous community mean for
Espanola for Las Vegas for Chaos
for Mora for Raton.
And the surrounding areas what
what does, um, their idea of um
the big picture community
development look like for them.
So that's a piece of what we're
engaged in now and over and
over.
Never mind the FEMA monies and
the impact of the fires and the
flooding, there's still the
issue about financing for
startups for expansions for, um,
and this includes tribal lands
also, um.
And I'll get into more of that
and and in just a moment, but um
the needs the needs are
definitely there and, um, I
applauded with the legislature
has done in um passing these
funds that uh NMFA and EDD are
using now to put more focus to
those areas.
We've been saying for the last 4
to 5 years that those those
needs are definitely there, um,
we think that what they have is
a start with that 54 million for
the venture capital is only a
start, and, um.
And there's
I'll address this more fully in
a moment, but there's also a
question about what the federal
flow of money is really going to
be, are there going to be halts
in some of what has been
previously been committed.
Um
In fact, I think I'll jump to
that, um.
And over to.
would be um slide 7.
About the financing gaps there
are ahead. We know that there'll
be reduced.
revenue eventually from oil and
gas and that.
The federal moneys through the
IRA are uh expected to, um, and
The federal moneys through the
IRA are uh expected to um end
around uh 2026 and with the
current administration that we
just brought in last week, um,
there are chances are probably
slim for an extension of that,
of any of those financial bills
there's also uh the impact of
project 2025, um.
The
I've been reading that off and
on the last couple of months and
um you'll note on slide 8 that
Project 2025, um.
I see impact for uh New Mexico
they're related to the small
business funding, um, there's a
note in that.
that indicates initiatives aimed
at inclusivity.
In fact, creating exclusivity
and stringent selectivity and
deciding what types of small
businesses and entities can use
SBA program.
In addition, they also, there's
also um a note about um the SBA
program is being uh focused
disproportionately unimpacted
politically favored or
geographically situated small
businesses and entrepreneurs and
we actually have been, um, the
recipient of some some
favoritism there because we had
been underfunded in the past
and.
And so I think there's um
potential here for uh reduced
small business funding to be
looking for ahead of time, which
all goes to point toward um what
can we do in the state to expand
our financial support and invest
more strongly in our small
businesses and in our rural
areas particularly revolving
funds are important to start.
But they don't expand beyond the
established amounts that they
That they um identify.
So our proposal is that we
passed this legislation, get it
through in the next session we
would ask for a one time
appropriation of 50 million to
get excuse me, 50 million to
capitalize the bank 60 million
that would be moved from say
Wells Fargo on deposit and it
would go on deposit in the
public Bank of New Mexico, so
that's not an appropriation.
It's a just a movement.
The public Bank of New Mexico
becomes.
One more bank to put New Mexico
revenue into and that 60 million
would only be a very small
percentage of the 2 to 9 billion
that's deposited in our Wall
Street banks on any given day.
And that could be added to the
state of the treasurer could it,
um, decide to add more deposits
of the from the revenue that's
coming in over time as the bank
is established and um proves
itself in which we think it will
show by the 3rd year it will be
in the black.
But with passage of the
legislation.
In on July 1st we begin the
process of chartering the bank.
Identifying the board members,
uh, determining the bank
location and recruiting and
hiring the executive team along
with developing loan programs
that would be based on a lot of
the information that we're
collecting now about the types
of loans that are not currently
being made or that are needed by
these um.
Identified groups in our rural,
especially in our rural areas,
um, and, uh, and previously
underserved areas, um, they
would be.
We'd be developing partner loans
that would not compete with any
of them, um, we have spoken with
uh community banks we know that
the association has spoken
against the bank, but there are
individual CEOs who absolutely
see the value and the potential
with doing the partner loans
because number one it's
increased business for them #2,
it allows them to generate more
loans.
With
the support and backing that
some of the collateral support
that the public bank could
provide and it also means that
um.
They see that the communities
will generate more GRT for
income revenue for the those
local communities.
The same with uh 9 credit unions
that currently do commercial
lending and I've spoken, uh,
just this week with a couple of
people from CDFIs who also say
are very interested, especially
since they've lost some funding
this year from, um, the federal,
um, CDFI fund, um, by August in
the range of August to October
of 26, the public bank of New
Mexico.
could be up and running and it
would.
be right around that time that
those IRA funds are diminishing
and it's also at a time when
these other lending programs or
the um
Venture capital programs they're
starting out, but um,
Those that 54 million is only
going to be that the NMFA has is
only gonna be a, you know, one
time and it's not possible.
And it's probably not going to
go all out at the same time the.
60 million on deposit in the
public Bank of New Mexico
because it's a bank.
It's going to allow for lending
of anywhere between 480 and $600
million. The bank, because it's
a bank.
can leverage that 60 million,
um, 8 to 10 times we're
suggesting that 8 times the
depository amount is the more
conservative way to go and
that's um more of a best
practice, but the fact is that
there are banks in the country
that are leveraging almost up to
um uh almost up to 10 times and
during the pandemic they were
going.
7 times, which is not
necessarily the best way to go.
But it's an investment of public
moneys for the public good and
it keeps the dollar circulating
here in New Mexico.
Um
I do want to emphasize, um, just
as, um, the loans that uh
Marquita was talking about
earlier with the NMFA monies,
um, the borrowers would, um.
Access the this lending through
the bank's credit unions or
CDFIs and they would be built on
MOUs that are based on
identified lending programs that
the bank would know about the
bank is going to know what the
administrative fee is going to
be that they collect as a res
result of participating in that
loan and if there are any
issues, obviously there's
communication between the
financial institution.
And uh the public Bank of New
Mexico, but once the loan is
approved the payments are made
to the um local institution, the
public bank is not a retail
bank, so, um, there's no.
There's no, um.
The, the sole investor initially
when the bank opens is the state
of New Mexico state of New
Mexico revenue and fines is all
that will be deposited there.
Over time just as with the Bank
of North Dakota it could be that
other governmental entities
choose to deposit put deposits
in that bank, but initially it
is totally the state.
And as I mentioned before, it
stayed on and stayed um in
independently managed.
Um
The types of loans um are noted
here on the, um,
Next slide on number 11 I think
it is a 12, um, I want to
respond, um, with another
example of a loan that was based
on a question that was asked by
a committee member during uh
Marquita's presentation.
Um, we see, um, in talking with,
um,
Uh, the Secretary of Agriculture
we have identified that one of
the.
Challenges in accessing USDA
monies that um many of these
programs are 90% funded with
10%, um, the borrower needs to
come up with the additional uh
funds for that and he said that
often it's that 10% that they
that they don't have access to
and that they would like that
that is limiting them from
accessing these other.
monies that have been coming out
of USDA.
We see the bank in a position to
be able to um make these 10%
loans or make a smaller
percentage of them, but to help
uh, back up the collateral so
that the farmers are not being
put into a corner they don't
want to collateralize their
land. That's the last thing in a
farmer ever wants to do and so,
um.
We have always built in the
potential of doing uh these 10%,
um.
Loans that would support the 90%
USDA monies, um.
to allow access for these um
environmental adaptation, um.
Irrigation, uh, adjustments, uh,
food processing, um, potential,
um.
And, and a number of other
adaptive practices that would be
possible in the agricultural
area.
Um
In the.
And slide 13 you'll see the.
Slide with the.
What we see the flow of moneys
being similar to the flow of
water through our assass if we
deposit our revenue into the
Bank of New Mexico we developed
lending programs that truly
support these programs that are
are needed by.
Our small business entrepreneurs
and our farmers and ranchers,
um, and that includes tribal
lands as well. Then we see
increased community prosperity
and also increased wellbeing and
our rural communities will not
be shrinking and withering
rather they will begin to be
more of the thriving communities
and obviously this isn't a one
solution one time.
one swirl or solution, it's one
that is added to programs like
Main Street that have been very
successful, um, and others out
of economic development as well
as um.
Um, NMFA, but we do need the
increased uh the bottom line is
we need the increased financial
capacity to make possible a
wider spread of the investment
of our funds into these
communities to help them thrive
and uh frankly after um.
Lots of um conversations over
the last week we're gonna need
this kind of support even more
going into the future, um, and,
and there's some concern about
um.
Losing some of what's been
committed after, uh, January
2026 or yes 2025, so, um.
I don't want to end on a
pessimistic note, but I see this
as a light as a great potential
for um.
For the state and for our people
and um and there's a high
interest in this. I just met
with a New Mexico impact
investment collaborative
yesterday and um there's
especially interest in
Um, helping make this work for
the tribal lands, um.
Where, where there has been a
major issue around how do we get
private investments into the in
for indigenous our indigenous
population, so
Um, this is where, this is where
we are now.
Um
One time appropriation um move
some deposits and we can, we can
make this work. We, we have the
strong implementation plan we
have a pro forma that shows that
by the 3rd year we're in the
black and um.
I'm glad to take questions.
At this point and thank you
again for the opportunity to
share the this update with you.
Thank you and thank you for your
presentation. We do have people
on the list for questions. We'll
start with Representative
Duncan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, let
me, let me come right out of the
gate and say I don't like this
idea at all.
So I'll state that I think, um,
have you, have you worked
closely with the SPN their
microloans or the Advantage
loans for minorities.
Have we worked with them?
Have you shared that information
with folks that that are coming
to you asking for the state to
put tax dollars to use here.
Um
Madam Chair, um,
Representative Duncan, we have,
um, talked with um a number of
those small business development
centers and uh other SBA
officials about what we're doing
and they see it as an
enhancement to what's been um
available because the SBA moneys
don't address all of the needs
that there are in the state at
this point.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um, and
I, I can appreciate that there
are probably some areas that are
that no man's land we've talked
about, um,
I, I think probably anybody that
started a business at some point
in time, probably use their own
credit card unless they had
daddy's credit card.
Um, for myself, I use my own
credit cards a couple of
different times, as a matter of
fact, and I, I want skin in the
game. If I come to you and say,
I'd like a $100,000 loan, but I
have, I don't have the $10,000
I think there needs to be skin
in the game. If there's not skin
in the game.
Um, how can we expect that
individual to work 80 to 90
hours a week to make sure that
that's successful.
And so that's one point, um, and
then I, I guess the other, the
other point I'm gonna make and,
and probably not gonna make any
friends with this. There are
probably some people that
shouldn't have the opportunity
to get a loan.
Um, because that means that
everybody in this room is gonna
pay for that loan and it's
happened before and it'll happen
again. Um, so I just caution
when we're using state funds for
this, we need to be really
careful how we use those funds.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
May I respond, Madam Chair?
Um, a, a very short response.
We've got some other people on
the list.
Did you want to respond?
Uh, Madam Chair, um,
Representative Duncan, um, I
just want to clarify that these
aren't gonna be subprime loans
so they, the borrower would be
expected to have some skin in
the game, as you said, and, and
so we're not talking about
subprime and I'll just end it at
that for now.
Right. Thank you, Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for the presentation.
Um, I, I have a few questions on
How much money
Uh, who's creating the rules?
And
Uh, let's start with those two
things.
Um, Madam Chair, uh,
representative Armstrong, um,
how much money is the one time
appropriation of the 50 million
for capitalization of the bank
and um then moving 60 million in
deposits from one of the current
depositories to deposit in the
uh state bank which would still
be state moneys it would just be
an additional an additional bank
to put New Mexico.
revenue into so it's not an um
it's not taking anything away
from the state. It's not an
expenditure. The 50 million is
the only expenditure and that's
to capitalize the bank.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair and
who makes the rules on how this
lending will be
Um, and, and it's just lending,
is that correct? It's not like a
checking account, you can't open
a checking account there. This
is just lending and who makes
the rules on percentage down? Is
there going to be collateral,
uh, different things like that.
Madam Chair, uh, representative,
the rules will be made by the
combination of the executive
team that's recruited that will
have um.
Intended to have a strong
banking uh finance background
and the governance will be
handled by um a board of 11 that
will include the state
treasurer, the NMFA CEO.ED
secretary and then 4 members,
um, uh, from community who have
a strong community development
and finance background and for
members who have strong banking
and finance.
for 2 of each of those would be
um.
identified through the
legislative council for um
Membership to so a total of 4 of
them would be selected by
legislative council and 4 of
them selected by um the
governor's office.
Uh, thank you for that. Um, as
far as, uh, Madam Chair, as far
as like farmland, um, there's an
entity called the NRCS.
That uh is federal money that
they can apply for to, uh, and
it's a lot of it is for, um, you
know, small farms that want to
do irrigation or different
things on their land and, and
people who make too much money
actually don't qualify. So there
is another avenue and, and it's
unfortunate that we don't know a
lot of those, you know, are
siloed. And so, uh, the other
thing that, that I want to
Caution
Is
Creating an entity and then
creating the rules.
We've seen how that's gone in
the past.
And in, in my opinion, it hasn't
gone too well.
Um, having bureaucrats in
charge.
Being appointed, however,
they're in the law in the rules
that they make, are they
appointed by the governor? Are
they appointed by the
legislature, the House, the
Senate. That's the normal thing
that happens, but then that
changes with the changing of the
guard. And it, um,
It, it, it's worrisome to me.
Um, I understand that you're,
you're trying to fill a niche
that, that you think is not
there, that, that there's a
hole, the no man's land, but um,
My husband and I own several
businesses and the one we
started when I was
19 years old and he was 21.
Uh, it wasn't easy, and we
couldn't, we did it on our own.
Not with any money from anyone
else except we saved our money
up because we had a dream.
And uh
People now may think that we
just sit around and eat bonbons
and, and take the money. It's
not true. My husband works more
hours now than he did when we
started our business.
And uh
He gets approached all the time
to sell his business to
corporate.
He will never do that.
He gets approached all the time
to buy other people's businesses
that are failing, but instead,
Madam Chair, he says no, let me
sit down with you and show you
some ways that maybe you can
make it.
Uh, we can save the business and
we can make it a good business,
and let me advise you.
And so.
I worry about.
People exactly what uh
Representative Duncan said that
actually really, they have a
dream.
They don't understand maybe the
the the matrix of running a
business and the hours and the
Blood, sweat, and tears that go
into it and the doing without.
Um
And so I'm uh I.
Would, would, would caution
giving state taxpayer money.
to an entity where the rules
aren't made first and knowing
what we're going to be getting
into because I think a lot of
people will, will frown on that,
um.
I thank you for your, for your
indulgence on, on my story and
uh, hope that.
We could do this other ways and,
and maybe we need an entity that
helps direct these people on
where to go to, to get this
money from the federal
government or from state or
angel investors, entrepreneurs
that are willing to take a
chance and invest in someone and
be a mentor to them. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you, Senator
Stefaniks.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you uh for the presentation. Uh,
I've been a supporter of uh uh
public bank, but it started so
long ago that I think that um.
The concept has changed over the
years, uh, from the beginning
and so first of all, I want to
ask a question. It was at the
very beginning.
Of your presentation and you
talked about.
Um, LULAC notes redlining
continue continues in New Mexico
banks.
And, uh, Madam Chair, um, Ms.
Merker, uh, isn't there, um,
A reporting mechanism for that
type of discrimination within
the state?
Madam Chair, uh, Senator
Stefaniks, um, I believe there
is, um, I haven't, um,
researched that, but.
What my uh reporting from that
came from interviews with a
couple of the LULAC leaders, um,
about a year and a half ago and
when we were discussing the
public bank and.
Um, I'm just asking them where
are the issues that they're
aware of, and they were quick to
say right off, uh, they said,
well, first off there's still.
There's still significant
redlining going on and we hear
those reports, um.
Regularly, so that's where that
came from. OK, so, Madam Chair,
uh, two questions or comment and
a question. I believe that
regulation and licensing still
has a financial institutions
division.
And I would, uh, I'm asking if
you've had any contact or
discussion with them, number
one, and number 2, within your
plan.
How would you ensure there would
not be redlining.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Chair Senator Stephonics, um,
that would come through the uh
risk management and uh um that's
built into in the regulations as
well there would be um a strong
component in in the
identification of the uh
procedures and guidelines and
potential loan programs that we
have.
Developed, um, up to a point
until we get this passed, but we
have done work on this and um
there is a strong risk
management, uh, component in the
structure of the.
personnel of the executive staff
and also um procedures in terms
of uh designated auditing
procedures, um, that are, um,
we've already identified.
And so the redlining would be um
something that would be, um,
also incorporated um.
Or the caution the prohibition
on redlining would be built into
those MOUs with the banks,
credit unions, and CDFIs.
And the second part of my
question, Madam Chair, had to do
with the financial institutions
division at RLD.
Um
Madam Chair, uh, Senator
Stefanik's, uh,
Yes, that would come in with the
auditing that they would do and
um it's something that I'm gonna
follow up with them. We've had,
uh, several conversations, um,
very positive conversations
about the chartering process and
what to address in the
legislation and any exclusions
from current chartering
requirements that might be need
to be noted in the legislation,
so, um, I will, I am going to go
back to them and um identify
them.
How we address that in there.
And make that explicit upfront.
So Madam Chair, I just want to
be clear, you have been working
with financial institutions.
Madam Chair, Senator, yes, we
have.
Thank you so much, uh, that
answers my question, and as I
indicated, you know, the, the
group has been working on this
for many years and uh it has
evolved and I think the issue
is.
Letting everybody individually
know how this might assist
people in their communities.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. Thank you, uh, Senator
Brantley.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you guys for your time. We
really do appreciate it. I found
some conflicting information.
Can you clarify?
Is this public bank FDIC
insured?
It would not be, is that
correct?
Uh, Madam Chair, uh, Senator.
It wouldn't, um, we're we can.
Excuse me, let me back up. It
would not be FDIC insured
because the FDAIC is not
ensuring public banks because
they um.
The deposits that they're
ensuring are $250,000 size and
we'd be well beyond that and we
are working with FID to identify
uh which what other regulatory
agency would best um address and
meet the state require meet
state requirements for the
auditing and oversight and so
it'll be one of two agencies,
but we haven't locked.
on which one yet, but we are
working with them on an
alternative, but there will be
oversight thank you Madam Chair,
and I appreciate that answer and
well, while there would be
oversight, ultimately that puts
the risk back on.
Taxpayers of New Mexico who then
would be assuming that risk
without
That insurance, I, I guess I
would make this point because
that's certainly something we
need to
Discuss further is that
It can be argued that the New
Mexico legislator and the
executive for that matter, has a
history. I'm just this
administration, but a history of
really kind of mismanaging some
programs or even agencies as a
whole, that we are statutorily
already obligated.
To manage and I don't have to
point any further than CYFD and
being 50th in the nation when it
comes to child well-being or PED
and continuing to be on the
bottom of the list.
Over agencies or entities that
we are already responsible.
In
Governing you can look at.
A crime crisis or a broken
healthcare system and, and I
think that a lot of the failures
in that, it can be argued
because there is not continuity
and leadership. And so then
moving a financial institution
over to that.
Once again, would fall subject
to political uh waves and
movements and political
pressures.
And I've said this before, but
politics has a long history of
just kind of poisoning a lot.
And, and the politics that would
be involved in here, then puts
the risk back on.
Taxpayers and
And then I think that what, what
was it is unfortunately, there
wasn't a representative from our
independent bankers because as a
rule New Mexican, as much as my
district, I think we need to
give credit to our, our local
banks.
And how nimble and quick they
are to respond, and we can point
to their quick response during
the pandemic.
And they were really the
financial heroes when it came
out of this, how quickly they
process, you know, PPP checks
and SBA loans. They came in
really helped our small
businesses and community. And
here in government, I'm still
trying to get a $50,000 junior
money, you know, through the
system that's 3 years old at
this point. We, the wheels of
government are so slow and so,
so slow to respond to community
needs, and that has not been the
case with our local banks, and
if we talk about even
further, the greater impacts
they have on our communities,
it's those local banks in my
small rural areas that really
invest in Little League
sponsorships. Their names are on
the every local gym. They pay
for our parades, our health
clinics, whatever it is, they
become invested in a community
providing in some cases some of
the best jobs in town.
And the impacts that this would
then have on those banks there.
I, I would argue you started
this conversation by saying you
think this is the time to do
this. I would wholeheartedly
disagree and I would say this,
because we have banks in, in,
in, in place that are doing a
great job in our communities,
and there are so many questions
and concerns with this, I would
say what what we're doing is
we're sitting here trying to fix
something that isn't broken.
And in New Mexico, we have a lot
that's broken, and we have a lot
on our plate going into this 60
day session to come together and
fix that what we can agree on is
that it's broken. How we fix it
and maybe where we disagree. But
this, I would have to argue, is
not broken and the last thing
you want to do is hand it over
to government because if it's
not broken now, we'll send it
back broken, highly likely, um,
with that, I do appreciate your
time.
There we go.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, uh,
thank you, presenters for the
information. I, I have a couple
of
Questions, um.
Can you tell me how many states
are currently doing something
like this?
Um
Chair, uh, Madam Chair and
representative of the Bank of
North Dakota has been in
existence for 105 years.
And it is um very strong, very
healthy, and um I think in its
last um.
Annual report was showing.
Something close to an 18 or 20%
return on investment with the
bank.
So Madam Cur's just that one
state, North Dakota.
Yes, primarily because the Wall
Street banks have resisted, um,
have had such strong lobbying
power against um.
Against uh public banks.
Um, thank you for that, Madam
Chair. Uh, my next question on
page 5, your very bottom bullet,
minority owned businesses are
significantly
underrepresentative
underrepresented in small
business ownership statewide.
We, where do you get that number
from?
Uh, Madam Chair, a
representative of this came out
of the study that was conducted
um.
Uh, and reported a year ago to
the NMFA, but it's um.
We also have seen data that also
shows about 47% of the um small
businesses are minority owned.
In these, um,
And the edge comes back in this
data.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
because if you drive anywhere in
northern New Mexico, the
majority of them are owned by
minorities. You drive through
Rio Rancho.
The same thing. You drive
through the South Valley, I
would say that the number of
minority owned businesses is
probably close to 100%.
Uh, so I would, I would
question.
That data point and I'd be
interested in some follow up.
Um, on how many.
Or actually minority owned as
opposed to.
Um, showing that they're
underrepresented.
Um
Madam Chair, on page 7, your
reference to Project 2025 and
the effects on.
Government
Um, as
Everybody should know Project
2025 was a report put out by the
Heritage Foundation does not.
Carry the, the weight of law um.
So I'm not, I'm not even sure
what that whole thing is.
Um, but
Madam Chair,
Following up on Senator
Brantley's question.
If this bank is not going to be
federally insured.
How is, uh, I, I'm, I'm just
trying to wrap my head around.
We're gonna use
People's
Tax dollars
With no guarantee that there's
not going to be a run on the
bank. There's not going to be
some type of
financial disaster that's going
to completely deplete this fund.
And I don't think we're doing
enough to protect.
people's hard-earned tax
dollars. Can you explain to me
how
I can go back to my district.
And say this is what your tax
dollar is gonna
Go to and this is how the state
is going to protect that.
Madam Chair, uh, representative,
um, the.
Bank of North Dakota, um, is
backed up by the good faith and
credit of the state and they
have not had a run and they have
a an under the US average like
about a 3.5% um.
Bat loan rate, which is below
average, um, the kinds of
financials that we're
projecting, um, are working with
the same kinds of percentages,
um.
We have, we can identify other
types of collateral, um.
If desired for that legislation,
but with over $50 billion in
reserves this bank is gonna be
one of the last spots for when
if there would be any kind of
run that there would be, um,
Issues on we believe with um in
terms of.
Um,
in terms of that need for that
backup and we understand that
we're not saying don't have any
backup, but there's, um, but
FDIC right now can doesn't even
um fully uh ensure more than 20%
of the banks of our deposits,
our personal deposits that are
in the banks now.
It doesn't have the full
collateralization behind it for
what it's ensuring.
I'm not saying that's a that's a
good reason for us to, um,
advocate for something else, but
um the
Ensuring with FDIC as they've
noted in uh letters to the
California group that's um
developing and that is um.
Selected their executive team
and is progressing with their
bank.
Um, FDIC has noted that they all
have deposits that go from a
single deposit or or actually
from 4 depositors for
governmental entities that go
well beyond the 250,000 so they
don't believe that that it's um.
That it makes sense essentially.
To um make that uh commitment on
making that insurance coverage
and that's why we're saying it
doesn't make sense here because
we would have.
The 60 million and which would
be well beyond the 250,000.
Now there are other ways that we
could back that up with other
state.
State funds.
But we're not going to do
subprime lending. I just want to
highlight that again.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
I, I just have, there, there's
way too many questions for me to
even
Uh, be comfortable and.
pursuing
Even legislation like this, um,
There are, there's just too many
questions in my mind that this
is the right thing to do with
Um
Taxpayer dollars, uh, without
any of these guarantees without.
Um
Answers to some of these
questions, I just, at this time,
I, I, I'm just not comfortable
with this. I I have to be honest
with you.
Uh, but thank you for your time,
Madam Chair. Thank you, uh,
presenters. I appreciate the
work you put into this.
Thank you, Representative
Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, and
thank you for the presentation.
I remember the last time we went
through this presentation, I
believe it was on the Senate
side.
You had a young
Uh, maybe Hispanic or maybe
Mexican young man with you, uh,
how's he doing today and, and if
I remember the presentation last
time.
He went to several banks and was
denied and then he finally found
a bank that accepted him and,
uh, worked on his loan with him
and, and how's he doing and
how's his business?
Madam Chair, um,
Representative Zamora, um.
He's the last I heard he's doing
well and he's been able to uh
acquire that equipment and make
some of the changes that he
wanted to make in his farming
practices.
So
So far so good.
And I'm glad for him. He, he
seemed like he carried a good
spirit about himself.
Uh, I'm glad he found a bank
that took them on and, and
worked with him.
I myself, in my past when I was
young, I started banking at the
age of 16.
Working with a banker to get
loans and back then, we just did
a note, what we called a note
and you, and you, it was one
piece of paper, and he put the
amount there and you signed your
name to it and he gave you the
cash and you walked away.
But bankers were very cautious.
About who they lent money to and
you, you had to have a character
witness or something to, to get
a loan, which
I was very blessed to have.
I do, I do too have concerns
just like a, a lot of other
people in this room.
Uh
A lot of my questions have been
answered.
But explain to me.
How you feel
Why do we have this no man's
land?
Is it because regulations.
That banks have to follow so,
so, so if I come into the bank
and I want
X amount of dollars and I don't
have any collateral, I don't
have any history, and I don't
have
Things to meet up to the
regulations.
created
From the federal level or even
from a state level.
Is that where that no men lands?
comes in, is that what creates
that?
Madam Chair, uh, representative,
yes, um, regulations are a part
of it, um.
Because there have been more
regulations.
Established for the community
banks and and also with the
larger banks, um, so they're
extra cautious, especially uh
through following some of the
last legislation that was passed
that was intended to be more,
um,
Hyper aware about uh any signs
of money laundering, um, any
kind of
Just any kind of potential
illegal activity also, so
there's been a whole lot more,
um.
Oversight
And uh sensitivity about what
kind of loans do we make? The
other part of the other side of
that though is the.
In my mind there's an increased
emphasis on um.
Uh, maximizing profit for the
shareholders and in the past,
um, especially our community
banks put a lot more focus or
much focus on community
development and community, um.
And being able to do make more
community support and that's not
always the case now. The FDIC
and Federal Reserve, um, data
show that our New Mexico
community banks are primarily
lending.
On commercial real estate and
it's because they have the
collateral there with the
building it's much tougher to
get expansion loans or um other
lines of credit for small
businesses and
The lending overall in the state
is.
Below average for farmers and
ranchers, individuals have a
strong relationships and I'm
glad like in Southwest New
Mexico that there are some
strong relationships there. The
state data that shows that the
deposit to lending ratios are
about 55 to 56, 57%, which means
that they're only lending,
they're leveraging 50.
5% of the deposits that they
hold and they're making their
money.
Not just by lending, but they're
also making it by investing in
the secondary market in other
treasury bills and other um
items even derivatives in order
to make that to maximize
profits, but they're not lending
it.
When, um, those that are more.
Engaged in
The communities are have ratios
of up around 75 and 80% and and
a handful even higher, but the
average for New Mexico community
banks is actually about 555 56%.
Thank you for that, uh,
So
Why are the independent bankers.
So opposed to this.
And, and we heard their
testimony last time.
When we're on the Senate floor.
And, and, and Representative, I
don't know that she should be
answering for the independent
bankers. I think that
I think that that's up to them
to answer. So if you would, um,
remember to go to the chair and
if we could just go, um, ask a
question that's directly the on
the presentation.
I would appreciate it. Thank
you. OK, thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
You always do a great job on
keeping us on track and where
we, where we go. And, and
With my Madam Chair, with my
question on, on the regulations
and stuff.
What I was trying to get to is.
I think if we're going to have
A state-run bank, it ought to be
regulated just like any other
bank.
And I think that's what we're
trying to avoid.
By having a state-run bank is,
is we're trying to meet.
And lend money out.
That's not going to be regulated
like every other bank.
And
I've had many constituents.
And many bankers come up to me
and say,
Give me all their concerns about
How
This would affect New Mexico.
And the New Mexico banking
system. I just can't get there.
I never, I haven't been able to
understand.
With your presentations.
The young men that testified
last time he got a loan.
And I believe that in your
presentation today, the young
lady that was wanting to start
her business. She, she's
Got it rolling, got it going.
So, I just, I just can't, I just
can't understand why we need a
state-run bank.
Use
Tax dollars
To
To invest in high-risk
businesses.
And, and Madam Chair, that's
probably more of a statement
than a question.
But I just can't get there. I, I
never, I haven't been able to
get there. I haven't been able
to understand why we would be
doing this as a state.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for the presentation.
Thank you, Senator Hamlin.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Mind
more of, of, of comments and,
and we've had a working
relationship for quite some time
when you brought this, this up
and
And what I would like to offer,
um, and knowing that I'm in
support of this, but I think my
colleagues' questions are very,
very valid. Um, that's something
to, to think about when you're
developing future presentations
because these questions have
been questions that I think my
colleagues have asked.
A couple of times.
And so, and understanding,
wanting to be fiscally
responsible. I think what's
really key for you is to
demonstrate that where there are
gaps that can't be filled by
other state departments because
I know, I believe my colleagues
don't want extra money going to
these this idea when there's
something, there's might be
another resource. We've had
this.
This morning
With our presentations of
understanding that there are
programs for small businesses
that small businesses don't know
about.
And so, how can this is to, to
help you strengthen your
argument is where are those gaps
that you would be able to
address as a public bank that we
cannot do in anywhere else in
the state. And so I think that's
where the the intent is coming
from is that we don't want to
waste that money. We don't want
it to, to go to waste. We wanted
to have the biggest impact for
our small businesses and
especially our rural
communities. Um, what I would
also say, and I'm just kind of
noticing this is that you want
to get solid commitments from
the
people that you've talked to,
um,
Because I heard him mention that
that that would cause my ears to
kind of twitch a little as well
as I've had conversations with
these people. Um, I would
recommend getting solid
commitments like letters of
commitments if you don't already
have that.
Um, because it's easy for any of
us on this floor in this, this
venue, um, to say that we've had
these conversations, but we
really want to make sure we
prove it.
And it's not that I'm
questioning that, but I think
that would also help my
colleagues recognize that there
have been genuinely those
conversations. Also as
representatives Aora pointed
out, the young man that I
remember that, that you brought
in last time. Um, are there more
of those folks?
And if there are, let us hear
those stories because it is hard
to get by in when you're only
hearing from a certain number of
people. I think for all of us in
our different rural areas that
we're representing.
Do we know somebody that could
be impacted by this? Do we know
somebody who could have
benefited from this. That's a
lot of footwork, but it makes it
a little bit easier for us, I
think, to understand that this
isn't just a Santa Fe thing.
This isn't just an Albuquerque
thing, right? And so we want to
make sure that the impact that
you're talking about.
I truly representative in the
people that are living in our
districts. Um, and so I, I would
just recommend because I do
believe that my colleagues'
questions are, are valid. Uh,
and, and that's always a good
thing to, to remember. It sounds
kind of, it seems kind of brutal
to be presenting in front of a
committee. I did it a couple of
weeks, you know, a couple of
months ago in Las Cruces and,
and, but it's always a really
good way to kind of workshop
your idea and understand where
the questions are. And so I know
that my colleagues and, and
You all are welcome to, to, uh,
to
refute what I'm saying, but I
think all of us have good
intentions when we're having
these meetings and these
presentations during our
committees, we really want to
know more about it and like what
can make good policy. Um, and so
please don't take any of the, of
the comments is, is because I, I
don't think they are as personal
attacks. It's genuine concern.
And so
Watch this presentation again
and listen to their comments,
because I do think they're
valid, and I think they're ones
that you can address, but I
think that they, they've got
some valid concerns, but I'm
always grateful because I do see
changes every single time that
you present. Um, and I do think
that it's something that's uh a
long game, uh, even though I'm
not the best at making sports
references. You all know that
reason why. Talk about tools
will be good, long game, no. But
I would recommend, I would
recommend doing that.
Um, because I do think that my
colleagues have some legitimate
questions and concerns. And I
think those are things that you
can answer. It's just kind of
putting in that footwork.
And so that's, that's all I
have, Madam Chair, um, uh, to
finish this off. And, and thank
you for the presentation.
And, and thank you for wrapping
us up. I think that was a a good
place to stop. I
Uh, yes.
Sure.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
So
This presentation was also given
in uh in Las Cruces, I believe.
And I believe Senator Hamblin
was there.
And
was Madam Chair was a and, and,
and presenter was the was the
presentation that you gave in
Las Cruces.
Didn't you present it as to that
you weren't gonna be making any
direct loans. You're gonna be
backing the loans in the banks.
And, uh, and have we changed
that around or, or?
Or am I remembering wrong or
misunderstood something?
Short answer, please.
Madam Chair, uh, representative,
um, some will be partner loans
and some will be more uh
collateral, uh, letting the
community bank know that they're
that the.
Public bank is backing it and
so.
Essentially backing in the
collateralization on it.
But it's, it's not, nothing's
changed from a year ago and in
that respect it's the same kind
of lending program.
Madam Chair, thank you for me,
for letting me get some
clarification on that. Sure,
thank you. Um, we'll go ahead
and, uh.
I, I, I think we've, it was an
update. I appreciate the update.
I appreciate your presentation
today. Um, we're gonna go ahead
and conclude, um, for, for
lunch, we're gonna stop for
lunch, um, there's lunch for
members in the house lounge, and
we will start back up about 5
minutes before 1. I, I could
that'll give us still enough
time to, to eat lunch, uh, lunch
is being provided today by JD
Bollington. So thank him if you
see him in the hall today.
And um we'll see you after
lunch, so thank you.
