I'm hoping that we can try to
get back on schedule. I know
we're already starting late, but
get back on schedule, um, I
wanna not in any way stifle any
type of conversations or
questions, uh, with the
committee, but I'm asking you to
ask your questions and let's
maybe have less commentary, um,
because we want to get to the
questions and we want to get
people in and out because I know
many people have taken time off
of work to be here, and I
appreciate that, uh, you
Making time for us today, so,
uh, with that, uh, Mr. Pacheco,
I'm gonna turn the floor over to
you if you would introduce
yourself, introduce the agency
you're with, and then begin your
presentation. Um, we are just
very pleased that you're here to
present with us today. Thank
you.
OK.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you very much
for inviting me, uh, to be here
to talk about what's going on in
in New Mexico's border region.
I'm representing uh 3
organizations today. One is the
New Mexico International
Business Accelerator, which is
the International counseling
portion of the small business
Development Centers network. The
second is the Border Industrial
Association. We have about 130
members were New Mexico's
largest industrial association
we represent.
Santa Teresa at all levels, we,
um, we, uh, interact with
government at all levels and
especially with the legislature
to try to get capital outlay for
our projects on the border, and
we're contractors for the New
Mexico partnership, so we are
contracted to recruit industry
to New Mexico. So those are the
three agencies we represent, um,
I guess we don't have the
PowerPoint up, but I will, um,
She was
to give us just a second, right?
OK, I'm wrong.
You do have the PowerPoint in
front of you and uh in print, by
the way.
Mhm
And Madam Chair, while we get
the, the PowerPoint up, so can I
ask a question real quick to
clarify. So one was the border
Industrial Association and the
other one is International
Business acceleration. And what
was the other one? The Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
The third is the New Mexico
partnership. I've been
contracted to to recruit
businesses for the partnership.
OK, thank you, thank you for
that clarification.
So Mr. Pacheco, I think we,
yeah, he's, I think it you're
up.
OK.
Thank you. So, um, those are the
three, agencies. I don't have a
4th. We also have the Santa
Teresa Charitable Foundation. We
raised money for uh student
programs in the Gaston School
District, but so, um.
Next slide please.
That is, uh, the Borplex area,
which is West Texas, New Mexico,
and Chihuahua. Uh, that red dot
denotes Santa Teresa. Next
please.
We have great communication with
our partners on the other side
of the border where Santa Teresa
on our side of the border on the
Mexican side of the border, it's
uh San Geronimo. So we have um a
a good affiliation with our
partners and we call this
affiliation Los Santos since we
have two saints on the border.
Next, please.
So if you look at that jagged
yellow line, that jagged yellow
line is the border between the
United States and Mexico, you'll
see Foxconn's campus there,
Foxconn right now has 1.5
million square feet of
production space. Uh, they do
70,000 Dell computers every day
out of that plant. So if you
order a Dell computer comes out
of that plant. Um, and I'll talk
a little bit more about their,
what they're doing, uh, right
now. Are, are Donnelly, uh, does
boards, and then we have two
gummy bear factories right
there. Well, the first one that
was, uh, established about 2
years ago, does about 830,000
pounds of gummy bears every
single day.
And let me, let me emphasize
something here. A lot of people
say, well, what does that mean
for New Mexico? Well.
I'll give you the Foxcon
example. Foxconn has 1.5 million
square feet of production space.
Um, they are related to 840,000
square feet of space that serves
Foxconn in Santa Teresa, so
nearly 1000 square feet is in
Santa Teresa serving Foxconn.
Next please.
Let's talk about Santa Teresa
next, please.
The Senator Teresa areas denoted
by that turquoise area we have
about 22,000 square feet of
developable space, you'll see
the green area is San Geronimo
and we're just to the west of El
Paso, Texas and Juarez. Next,
please.
So in Santa Teresa you'll see
there that we have 4 industrial
parks. We have the airport park,
which is the oldest park that
abuts the airport to the west of
that, we have about 1200 acres
of privately owned rail park.
This is a company called Iron
Horse out of O' Fallon, uh,
Illinois, East Saint Louis. They
do their own rail services. They
have 3 locomotives and they
manage about 13 miles of private
rail. So if we have a rail
prospect.
We put them in that park. To the
left of them is um the West
Park. The West Park is our
newest park that we have, um,
that was established about 2016.
We have about 2000 square feet
there and then at the border,
you'll see we have, um, the
binational Industrial Park. Next
please.
So thanks to uh uh the
legislature and your efforts and
the support we have, the, the
bottom jagged line, if we can go
back to the.
The last slide please.
The bottom jagged line is going
to be a brand new highway that
comes from the the top of the
mess up where Santa Teresa
Industrial Park is down into
Sunland Park, which is going to
give us a second means of
ingress and egress. It really
can open up the industrial base.
Employees are gonna be able to
get there much more quickly, um,
suppliers to the industrial base
and product moving out of the
industrial base. Next week.
Next slide is an aerial of the
Union Pacific project. This is a
diesel refueling station. It's a
crew changing station and most
importantly for us, it's an
intermodal container yard. Um,
this photo doesn't do justice to
the scale of this project. When
it was being built, it was the
largest project in New Mexico.
We opened this on April 1st,
2013, um, just to give you a
scale here, next slide, please.
That's the container yard, that
container yard is 2.
5 miles long, full of containers
2.5 miles long. We get a bunch
of freight, uh, cargo from uh
Asia, we move a lot of freight
from the Santa Teresa Judis in
El Paso area via rail to the
rest of the United States and
the world next week.
So, um, we have the, uh, Dodiana
County International Jet port.
We've got the intermodal
facility, the Pete Dominici
Highway and the United States
port of entry at Santa Teresa.
Next, please.
A lot of people don't realize
that we have in Santa Teresa the
nations and the border's largest
livestock crossing this year
they're going to cross about
600,000 head of livestock at
this crossing. Both sides of the
the border and you see that
black line there, that black
line is the top of the border
fence, um, so it's an
international crossing. Both
sides are owned and run by the
Chihuahua Cattlemen's
Association, which is a very
powerful group. They're they're
gonna contribute.
About $500 million to the
economy this next year, or 625,
excuse me. Next slide please.
Some of the um companies logos
that we have in our industrial
base, uh, we're big in
electronics due to Foxconn, but
we also have ComScoop which does
telecommunications equipment,
but a lot of people don't
realize in New Mexico when I
say, hey, did you realize we
have an automotive production
base in New Mexico and people
look at me like I've grown a
second head. We have an
automotive production space in
New Mexico. We've got FXI touch
your headliner, chances are your
headliner and your car is made
out of Santa Teresa.
DA Inc is a Japanese company
making plastic injection for a
uh Toyota. We also have CN Wire.
They do about 7000 pounds of
copper wire a month. 80% of that
goes into the automotive
industry. We have steel
technologies with the coil steel
that gets slit and also goes
into the um automotive industry.
Acme Mills is there doing
textiles receipts on and on and
on. New Mexico actually is an
automotive production base,
which.
A lot of people don't know.
Next please.
I want to thank the legislature
for allowing us to do this.
Uh, one day I was talking to one
of our, uh, border industrial
association members, and it
clicked to me. We're the
easternmost land port crossing.
Everything to the west of east
of us goes over the Rio Grande.
And so it didn't click in my
head until I had that
conversation. Trucks in Mexico
are allowed to be um loaded up
and as heavy as 96,000 pounds in
the United States, you have to
be at
80,000 pounds. So if you're
crossing the truck from Mexico
and it's a divisible load, you
have to offload by 15% to get to
80,000 pounds and so I wondered,
well, why can't we allow Mexican
trucks into, you know, the, uh,
into Santa Teresa because it's a
law, so we've got a sponsor in
the house, a sponsor in the
Senate, and we changed the law.
So we created a 12 mile, uh,
overweight zone. Then people
would ask, well, why you want to
do that? Well, because you,
companies can load 15
more on each load so after every
6.7 loads, the next load is
free. Why is that to our
advantage? Because we get the
warehousing and distribution
from Mexican companies or
companies that have a maquila
situation where they're on both
sides of the border. So this has
been a tremendous economic
development tool, and I'll talk
about a couple of companies that
are utilizing that. Next please.
Depending on the year, Santa
Teresa is either the 6th or 7th
largest port of entry on the
entire US-Mexico border in terms
of volume of trade, um, if I
took you down there, some of you
have been down to to visit us.
You'd look at our little port of
entry and say that little port
is 6th or 7th. 1 of our major
projects right now is to expand
and modernize that port of
entry. We're getting so much
trade through there that we, we
better plan now for the next few
years. Next week.
So in 2021 we asked NMSU through
Arrowhead and the Center for
Border Economic Development to
do an economic impact study on
the Santa Teresa industrial
base. They updated that study
last year. The study concludes
that we contribute about $2
billion to the state of New
Mexico's economy, and we support
about 7000 jobs. To put that in
perspective, film does on an
annual basis about 800 million,
so we're more than twice the
size of film.
Uh, the Spaceport America in the
15 years that it's been in
existence during those 15 years
has contributed about $1
billion.
A lot of people don't know that
about the santa Teresa
industrial base at the border,
but it's because we're not sexy.
We're not Breaking Bad and we're
not, uh, Netflix, we're not Sir
Richard Branson. I say we're
meat and potatoes. We recruit
companies that spend a lot of
money building a facility they
hire a bunch of people and they
spend a lot of money to keep
their operations going. Next,
please.
I'm from New Mexico. I love New
Mexico, espanola, go espanola,
um.
But when you, when you say New
Mexico is the first in, fill in
the blank recidivism, poverty,
child, whatever, and I hate
that. So anytime we can
celebrate being number one in a
positive thing, we got to
celebrate. That is a chart of
all 50 states exports to the
world. Guess who leads the
nation in export growth
percentage, good old New Mexico,
next slide please.
This is a slide of.
All US states exports to Mexico.
Guess who leads the nation in
export growth percentage to
Mexico. Next slide please.
This is my favorite slide that
top green line is the total
exports that New Mexico ships to
the world. The red line is New
Mexico's exports to Mexico,
which account for about 63% of
all New Mexico exports that blue
line is Dona Anna County's
exports.
Look at that blue line almost
exactly covering the red line
63% of the state's exports come
out of Donana County. But we, we
know Las Cruces, the economy is
supported by the university.
It's supported by White Sands.
It's supported by an element of
tourism, and there's a lot of
service, not a lot is made in
Las Cruces. So where are these
exports coming from? Santa
Teresa. So we can, we can deduct
that Santatricia accounts for
about 60.
3% of the New Mexico's exports.
Next slide please.
Let's talk about some recently
completed products, projects in
the last 4 years, we recruited 3
Taiwanese companies. So when you
read in the newspaper or
magazines about reshoring, near
shoring, where the poster child
for that. Admiral Cable's the
first, uh Taiwanese company we
recruited and you might say,
well, they're not from China,
they're not involved in the
Chinese uh US Chinese trade war.
Yes, they are, because what
happens is a lot of Taiwanese
companies get founded in Taiwan,
but they
Scale up in China and right now
these companies are facing about
a 25% tariff that the US is
imposing on, on goods from
China. So we have the
opportunity, we have the big
opportunity in terms of
reshoring to get a lot of that
business to come to New Mexico.
So Admiral Cable, that's their
campus, they make uh cables for
computers, multi-outlet strips,
symmetric is the 2 Taiwanese
company we recruited. They do
barcode labels. Guess what we
were.
to the Chinese company, Ergo
Motion, uh, world's largest
manufacturer of adjustable
bedding down in the left-hand
corner, uh, Silver Recycling has
about 60 acres of recycling
operation for metal and
cardboard, Ares logistics, we
recruited, that is a third party
logistics. They do public
warehousing. Then you see in the
lower right hand corner two
Mexican fresh produce importers.
The only reason
In their in Santa Teresa is
because of that overweight zone.
Next, please.
A spec building in, in our
industry, we call them spec
buildings. They're speculative
buildings you, the developer
builds a building without
necessarily having a tenant. You
go out and find somebody to
occupy the building.
So you got to have spec building
because there are a lot of
companies that say I gotta be in
the building in 3 months. It
takes us about 12 months to
build a building, so you got to
have spec. So we um tagged up
with a spec developer out of
Dallas, Texas, Blue Road
Investments, and they're
building spec like gangbusters.
The first spec building was a
315,000 square foot building.
100% leased out. Second one was
365,000. That's where the
Chinese.
Company Ergomotion went into.
Then we have our local
entrepreneur billionaire out of
El Paso, Mr. Paul Foster, uh,
decided to invest heavily in
Santa Teresa. He built two spec
buildings identical 183,000
square feet apiece, both are
linked to Foxconn. Next please.
Projects under construction.
Oh these are currently under
construction. Oo Inc is a an
onion processor. That building
is 800 ft long and 80 ft wide.
They're gonna process onions for
industrial users. They're
probably 3 months out from being
complete that building, uh,
this, this next picture in the
middle on the top there, those
are 40 ft vats of chili mash.
Those are full of chili mash.
Chili mash is your basis for hot
sauce. These are the guys that
supply McDonald's.
With the spice for the spicy Mc
McChicken sandwich. They also
are going to build a building
there, but they're currently in
operation. These are all on
rail, by the way. Coast aluminum
is down by the border. We
recruited them out of
Sacramento, aluminum
distributor, uh, lower left-hand
corner, Monty, we recruited them
out of Cincinnati. They do metal
fabrication for Schneider
Electric, and then we have
Franklin Mountain Packaging, Mr.
Paul Foster again, bought a
corrugating operation,
corrugating operations, you make
cardboard for
Packaging so he was not
satisfied with just one
building. He built the second
one at 150,000 square feet.
Next, please.
Next time you go into Ross dress
for us, think of us cause we
have their warehousing out of
Santa Teresa.
Next, please.
Did you know that we have the
largest refrigerated storage or
um warehousing in the state of
New Mexico. If you go into a
supermarket and you buy, um,
frozen bueno brand red chili.
The red chili comes out of this
facility, pecans, um, jalapenos,
onions come out of here. They
can refrigerate to 25 below
zero. They started out with
107,000 square feet a couple of
years ago added another 100,000
square feet, that
there shows you their current
expansion, another 135,000
square feet. All of that is just
tremendous for our region.
Next, please.
New spec building under
construction.
Blue Road just did a 220,000
square foot speck. Then they
turned around, well, they, they
simultaneously built two
buildings at the same time. The
220,000 square foot spec,
425,000 square foot spec. That's
the biggest building in our
entire parks.
Did I mention that the 425,000
is completely leased out without
even being done also related to
Foxconn.
You've got down in the lower
left hand corner Abi Aqsa with
135,000 square feet. They
they're gonna lease that out and
build a second speck right next
to the 1st, and then we have
another investor at the border
can do 120,000 square feet next
please.
This one is beautiful. I go out
there almost every other day to
to look at it. This is the
newest spec that's going up. Uh,
they just put up the concrete
walls, uh, once they do that,
the building goes pretty
quickly. This is 116,000 square
foot spec. I'm already getting
um uh interest in that building,
uh, on behalf of the brokers
representing their clients that
need industrial space. Next
please.
I keep mentioning the name Paul
Foster. He's aggregated more
than 200 acres right next to the
Santa Teresa jet port, and he
plans to build his own
industrial park. He's already
got the signs up on the dirt.
Next please.
We have with this, uh, Terry
McLaughlin, he is in the
audience today, been a good
partner and, and he is investing
his money in Santa Teresa, uh,
what you see there is his, um,
rendering of his own industrial
park, more than 200 acres there
on the Pete Dominici Highway.
Next, please.
Right across the street from
that industrial park, he is
building about 1200 acre
residential project that'll have
residential commercial retail
and institutional. I mean,
where's, where's Terry? I want
to thank you for investing in
New Mexico. This is
multi-million dollar investment.
Next please.
Also, uh, the company that
manages the private rail park is
adding another 3300 ft of rail.
Uh, the demand for rail is so
good and we have the best rail
served land in the region. And
if you notice there to the left
of that picture were also
shipping out the wind blades by
rail. I, I know that some of you
might may have been caught
behind some of those big, uh,
blades and you might hate us
because they come out of Santa
Teresa. We're trying to ship
more by rail.
Next please.
Just launched the groundbreaking
construction of a 1200 acre
solar farm. The Milagro solar
farm, that'll be the 2nd solar
farm we have in the santa Teresa
industrial base. About 150
megawatts of power.
Next please.
On the other side of the border,
His son had on him.
I had mentioned that Foxconn
already has 1.5 million square
feet of space, they're adding
1.2 million to that space, so
they're going to have 2.7
million square feet of space.
They're moving some EV
production from China to
Sanhedonimo, that's called near
shoring. When that happens,
we're getting a piece in Santa
Teresa, that 425,000 square foot
building is related to that
Foxconn expansion. If you ever
go to that campus, it's a city.
They have 9000 workers.
Right now, that's without even
adding the expansion. And the
lower, um, left-hand corner,
that's our second gummy bear
factory. The first was 220,000
square feet. The second was
280,000 square feet. And then we
also have an East Indian group
that is doing a paper mill right
across the border. The first
phase is 55,000 square feet.
Next please. So if you add up
the projects under construction
or about to be constructed in
Santa Teresa. That's about 1.7
million
square feet of construction
space. Next please.
On the other side of the border,
you've got about 1.5 million
square feet. You take both
sides, uh, and add them together
and you got 3.2 million square
feet of construction. I, I'm,
I'm not certain, but I would bet
you some money that that's more
industrial space under
construction and then the entire
state of New Mexico.
Next, please.
Thank you to the legislature,
um.
For helping us secure $200
million to invest in our
airport, and thank you to our
congressional delegation for
getting another 2.5 million
square feet we are expanding the
runway we're, we're widening the
runway to 150 ft and reinforcing
it when this is done in
December, we can land 767 cargo
jets here. Foxconn is already
expressed interest in, in using
the jet port for shipments out
of Asia.
Uh, the next step then there at
the top you'll see that green
line, that's the uh cross
runway. Once we get some cargo
traffic generated, we can go to
the FAA and say now we need to
cross runway. Once we have the
cross runway, we can land any
class of cargo jet.
Next please.
We've been working with NMSU for
about the last 6 years on a
desalinization project. We are
literally sitting on an ocean of
brackish water that sits on top
of the sweet water. Um, we don't
take water use lightly. It's
very serious to us because not
only with all the industrial
development that I'm talking to
you about, there's a tremendous
amount of residential going in.
We're finally getting
apartments, um, which I, I
prayed for because a lot
our entry level workers are not
going to qualify for a, uh, you
know, a mortgage on a house.
We're getting apartments, we're
getting 4 plexes, of course,
we're getting the $250,000
dollar houses, what have you.
And all these people moving into
Sunland Park, which is one of
the fastest growing cities uh in
New Mexico, uh, we're
experiencing a boom. So where
does the water come from? Well,
we're working with, with uh the
communal real regional Utility
Authority, which is uh a great
partner with, with us in the at
the border industri.
Association, but we see the
brackish water as an asset going
down the road. So NMSU has
conducted a six-year study. They
just published the study. I'm
going through it and it's, it's
just so detailed. They did such
a great job in terms of
estimating the cost of a plant
in phases estimating the cost of
water, how we go out and get
funding for that.
So kudos to NSU. This might not
be feasible now, but maybe in 10
years it's going to be feasible.
To have this plant. Next please.
We've got 38 million for a rail
overpass, um, which requires 7
million state match. We got 4.5
million in the last session, so
we still need a little chunk. We
have an at-grade crossing
between two of our industrial
parks, which is very dangerous,
uh, cause I've seen people try
to beat the train, and then it
separates the two parks when the
train is crossing, so we need to
take care of that. We've got 8.5
million. Thank you, uh,
especially, uh, a representative
Lata for, for carrying
Water on the water tank for us,
um, that's gonna help
tremendously. Uh, our number one
need out of the legislative
session that's coming up in
January is, is water, wastewater
funding, all of this growth is
going to stop when you can't
flush the toilets and
I've always said since I started
my career and I've been involved
in the Santa Teresa industrial
base 33 years, 33 years.
We have to invest in our
infrastructure. We have to keep
the infrastructure ahead of
development and the Santa Teresa
industrial base in my opinion,
and I'm kind of biased, is the
best way for New Mexico to
diversify its economy.
Down at the bottom of that list.
GSA just conducted a feasibility
study to expand and modernize
the sanitary uh port of entry.
Let me give you a couple of, um,
highlights of that, uh, study.
We have 3 northbound commercial
lanes coming from Mexico for
commercial traffic. They're
recommending we go from 3 lanes
to 14. We have 4 lanes for
private vehicle traffic. They're
recommending we go from 4 to 12
lanes. I hope that kind of
impresses upon you the, the
future growth.
Development they see at the
sanitary support of entry. Um,
the next step is to get
environmental monies to try to
do the environmental impact
study and then a design phase,
We need money for that and then
working with the congressional
delegation to get the full
blown, um, budget for that. We
estimate it's going to be
between $1700 million and $200
million to expand the port of
entry.
Next week.
can't talk about infrastructure,
uh, in a void. We also need new
schools, um.
With what Mr. McLaughlin's going
to do with the residential
there. Uh, I know he's working
with the Gadston Independent
School District to plan the
future need for schools. We need
housing, uh, which is being
built, uh, but we need also
affordable housing. Uh, it's so
tough to get anybody that wants
to do affordable housing anymore
because lot development is so
expensive anymore, so if you're,
you're putting down a chunk of
land to develop a lot, put the
infra
Structure there, you're not
going to put $150,000 house on
there. You need to get more from
your money. That's an issue. And
then, um, I guess not
surprisingly, daycare. We know
in our area that let's say a
spouse goes off to work, the
other spouse sends the kid to
school. That's about the, the
second spouse could go to work,
but maybe they don't have a
second vehicle. So we're working
with Enterprise, Vanpool, and
we're working with the South
Central Regional Transportation.
District to to come up with
plans to bus people into the
industrial base. We figure that
that's another source of
employment,
um
Employment is, uh, the, the
availability of employees is so
critical. We compete with El
Paso for them. Uh, we recently,
um.
have started partnering and it's
Dan Lopez of the Mesa Valley
Economic Development Alliance
and our border industrial
association. We've partnered
with uh El Paso law firm that
specializes in immigration
issues and what we're doing with
them, um, under the, under the
NAFTA when it was um implemented
in 1994, uh, a TN visa was
created. That's called the NAFTA
visa. It's for Canadians and
Mexicans to more easily get a
work permit to work in a
multitude of fields in the
United States.
It's an easier visa visa to get
than the H series visas, um, it
doesn't qualify for citizenship.
It's good for 4 years. It's
renewable. Um, there's a lot of
people in Juarez, Mexico, that
would work on this side of the
border that are technical people
that we need, but that don't
have that visa. The visa doesn't
cost that much and we're using
that to try to tap into labor
and talent on the other side of
the border. We've already
started doing that, um, Admiral
Cable actually has some people.
On board with that visa. So a
multitude of issues and one last
thing.
We are trying to involve the
rest of New Mexico in the
industrial base. I, I think
we're guilty in Santa Teresa of
being an island unto ourselves
and about 6 years ago we had a
eureka moment where we said,
we're supplier base to Mexico's
production base. We're a
supplier base. So who supplies
us? So, about every 2 years we
interview the um the industrial
base members, and we asked them
a simple question. Every day
that you open your doors, what
do you consuming?
Well, shrink wrap, pallets,
inert gasses, lubricants.
Whatever landscape services and
we create a database and then we
send that database of what we're
buying to every economic
development association in the
state of New Mexico, uh, and we
call that program the supply the
supplier program. And in the six
years that we've done that and I
wish I had Ilsa of my office
here because she keeps the, the
tabs. We've done about $62
million worth of contracts.
in New Mexico supporting the
Santa Teresa industrial base.
OSHA, um, people that come in
and, and, and, and do their
ocean thing in in the industrial
base. We've got uh remediation
companies out of Las Cruces. We
got a big electrical company
that we get involved. We got
construction companies, we've
got landscape companies from New
Mexico that were trying to tie
to the industrial base. I want
to say we want to spread the
wealth throughout the rest of
the state. Uh, I think it's,
it's
Human nature that when a company
comes in, we're so close to El
Paso they automatically default
to El Paso. I don't have
anything against El Paso, but
that's not, Texas is not my
state.
Uh, I want my state to benefit
from what's happening in Santa
Teresa. So Madam Chair, um, I
went as fast as I could to make
up a little time, so that's my
presentation. Thank you.
Well, I appreciate that and I
think you have us right on time,
so you don't need to rush too
much, uh, first we've got
Representative Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you Mr. Pacheco. It's
always, it's always a pleasure
hearing your presentations
because I think, uh, Santa
Teresa is, is a jewel that the
rest of New Mexico has no idea
about, and I think you're
correct that.
Investing in
Affordable housing
infrastructure, um, all the
needs of Santa Teresa has is is
one of the most important things
that we need to look at in the
next few years. Um, I do, I do
have a kind of a historical
question. Santa Teresa, is it,
is it?
I know that Sunland Park tried
to annex it at one point that
didn't happen, so was.
How is it governed? Is there?
Is there a mayor, is it a is it
a village, is it a city?
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee were unincorporated
part where an unincorporated,
uh, we're not an incorporated
municipality. We're part of the
greater county. So our
government is the Donana County
Commission. And in Southland
Park has annexed part of of the
what would be considered Santa
Teresa for development purposes.
Uh, a lot of the housing that's
going in, um, is now Sunland
Park, and that has a governance.
They have a mayor and a city
council, but Santa Teresa, uh,
is not doesn't have an
incorporation as a municipality.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and Mr.
Pacheco, so my next question is,
is it
the expansion, is it private
property? Is it public property?
How, how?
How is that worked out? Almost
all private investment, almost,
I mean, if you consider the
airport, that's the county. The
state land office has chunks of
land also at the border, um, but
almost all of the development
that I'm talking about is
private sector, uh, money.
And most of it is from out of
state. If you believe that we
have about 80 companies in the
industrial base, only 2 are
native New Mexican companies.
The rest are from out of state
or out of country.
And have you, Madam Chair, Mr.
Pacheco, have you run into
I know during the election year
there was a lot of talks about
raising tariffs on the Chinese
companies, both sides have a
plan. How is that gonna affect
the industrial park, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
good and bad, and I'll tell you,
I'll tell you the bad and I'll
tell you the good. Uh, we have a
company called Steel
Technologies that was importing
a certain types of steel and
aluminum from China before we
got into this trade war. Now,
now it's costing 25% more to buy
that steel from China.
Well
A lot of the business went to
Mexico because in Mexico they
have a competitor over there
that also imports that same type
of product. Mexico doesn't have
that 25% tariff, so our New
Mexico company is losing on the
good side.
Nearhore it and reshore it we
got those 3 Taiwanese companies
because they're getting whacked
with 25% tariffs. So, uh, in
that sense, I think that's our
happy hunting ground going into
the future that we can pick up a
lot more of that business. If
you go to Juna, there's no less
than 4 major Taiwanese companies
that are not not building
buildings or building campuses,
uh, to accommodate the stuff
they're moving from Asia.
Foxconn that 1.2 million
expansion on top
Of its 1.5 million existing
space, all of that's coming from
China because of the tariff war.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Mr. C.
one last question, what's the,
what's the size of the footprint
of Santa Teresa.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, the industrial
base is about 22,000 acres, uh,
the little bedroom community of
Santa Teresa, I don't know the
acreage per se, but there's
about 4500 people that live in,
uh, the Santa Teresa community.
Thank you, Madam Chair, for the
time. I appreciate it and once
again, Mr. Pacheco, you, you are
building a jewel that the rest
of New Mexico needs to hear
about. Thank you very much,
Madam Chair, 111 kind of point
of here. One of the New Mexico's
population base is in the Santa
Santa Fe Albuquerque area.
That's where most of our
residents live. One of the
reasons a lot of people as, as
you mentioned, representative,
don't know about sanitary
He says we're in a different
media shed. We're in the El Paso
media shed, so whenever we
recruit a company whenever
something good happens, you see
it in El Paso. We're we're
covered. You don't see it very
much, uh, other than maybe
Albuquerque Journal and thank
God Albuquerque Business First
is now focusing on southern New
Mexico, um, but we need that
exposure legislators need that
exposure to know what we're
doing. The, the community up
there needs to know. So
hopefully that'll change in the
future.
Thank you, Madam Chair, I
appreciate the time.
Thank you. uh, Representative
Lara.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Jerry, for the
presentation. You know, you've
pretty much taken up all my
questions. You've already pretty
much answered all my questions.
Uh, I do, uh, I know you, you
spoke about uh you you are
you're constantly you and your
team and Josh who do an
excellent job every day. You're
constantly advocating, you're
constantly recruiting, you're
out there all the time, but.
You know, there's what there's
10 of us here today. There's 10
legislators here today. I, I'm
here as a guest, uh.
Because what has happening now,
what you're talking about and
what the other presenters are
gonna talk about are very
important to me and it's
something that I really work
really hard to get as much
exposure out there, but one of
the things that I wanted to ask
you, Jerry, was, you know,
Yeah, is your about your
advocacy, Madam Chair and
What do you, what is the border
industrial association. What are
you doing, you and your team
doing on a yearly basis or even
even uh sooner than that to
spread the word not only in the
media markets, but amongst our
colleagues as well because we
have Border industrial day
and up in the legislature, and I
think that we can have many,
many more legislators show up to
the border industrial Day
events.
That really don't take advantage
of that and I wanted to ask you
how we could improve that
outreach and and get more
interest from our, from our,
from my colleagues in the house
and for my colleagues in the
Senate to really learn what's
going on in Santa Teresa.
Madam Chair, Representative
Lata, we, um, uh, constantly
advocate, um, this month alone,
um.
We have 2 events in Juarez, one
with the Juarez Maquiladora
Association, which is called
Index, we're doing another with
one with Canacintra and Juarez,
which is the Mexican national uh
uh industrial chamber. I'm
speaking at the Albuquerque
Business first event that's
occurring here in Las Cruces.
Uh, we're constantly out there
trying to advocate for the, the
border, um, we have teamed with
Sunland Park this year.
Representative Lata, uh, and
what represented a lotta is
referring to is we have a
Border economic development day
in Santa Fe. We take our
membership up. We have a
reception for the legislators,
all of you, of course, are
invited, um, we have food and
drink, um, it's a good
opportunity for us to meet every
legislator who attends one on
one. We even bring up, um, a
married couple who are an opera
who are operatic singers. They
have the most beautiful voices,
and they sit there and play
guitar and sing. We paid them to
come up from Juarez, so we have
that.
Legislative reception. We have a
breakfast the next day and then
we generally go to the
roundhouse to meet with the
governor or her chief of staff.
Uh, you'll all get an invitation
to go to that, but it's
difficult, um
it's a curse that we're so far
away from Santa Fe sometimes
it's a blessing, you know, um
it's, it's often difficult to
advocate from the border to the
population base in the
Albuquerque Santa Fe area where
most of our legislators come
from.
Because there's, you know,
greater population base, but
we're constantly out there
advocating, uh, we're always, we
have a great um um relationship
with the business writers
throughout the state and in El
Paso and on the other side of
the border. And again, I, I, I,
I'll repeat, I mean, down at the
border, everybody wants going
down to Santa Teresa. It's just
getting past truth or
consequences and advocating up
north is what uh is, is
difficult. These hearings like
this are
for us to get the word out about
what's happening at the border.
Uh, thank you for that. I, I, I
appreciate that question and um
Madam Chair, um,
I have a, I have a question
about the imports from from
Asia.
So and I think you have
mentioned in the past, uh,
Jerry, Madam Chair, that uh
that.
The, the, the, I the.
The cargo that comes from Asia
doesn't go through the port of
Los Angeles.
To get to Santa Teresa I goes,
where does it go to? Does it go,
does, does it come in through
Mexico? Does it come in, where,
where does it come to to to get
to, to Salta Teresa Madam Chair
represent a lot of it it does
come in through the ports of
Long Beach and Los Angeles. Now
those containers that I showed
you there, um,
a huge portion are coming in
from Asia through those two
ports of entry, but we also get
a lot of um imports through the
sanitary support of entry from
Mexico,
um, the sanitary industrial base
about 5.
50% production, 50% warehousing
distribution, so a lot of our
businesses in Santa Teresa are
receiving finished product out
of Mexico that they stage and
distribute out of Santa Teresa.
So we're major.
Logistics piece in that sense,
um, we get stuff from El Paso
because we have suppliers from
El Paso supplying some of our
production plants. So from all
over the place, I mean, it's,
it's, it's truly a global, um,
production base, Santa Teresa is
truly a global production base
and uh I'll give you an anecdote
here, a couple of anecdotes
during the um pandemic, we were
the only part of New Mexico's
economy that did not shut down.
I mean, we saw what happened to
tourism, hospitality, what
happened to oil and gas,
negative futures in in in oil
and gas. We're at home
sequestered ordering off of
Amazon. We order an electronics
product.
This has copper wire in it, has
plastic injection. It goes in a
box to get to us. Our industrial
base actually expanded during
the pandemic. And then the
second thing is we track as, as,
as I, I, I showed here we
tracked New Mexico's exports to
the world. We just got the June
figures.
The June figures, the June
figures are the highest month
for exports we've ever had in
New Mexico's history. Almost $2
billion of exports in one month
alone.
By August, I predict by by if we
get the figures through August,
I predict that August, January
through August will break the
record of any top exports we've
ever had out in New Mexico. It's
the way we diversify our
economy.
Thank you for that, Jerry. Thank
you, Madam Chair, and uh I'd
like to mention or even ask you,
Jerry, uh, next week, she's
putting on the border
legislative conference here in
Las Cruces. I don't know if
you're gonna be, if you or any
of any of anyone from your staff
is gonna participate, but I
think it's important that uh
that that that you do consider
it if you haven't already
because, uh, you know, we're
gonna have border legislators
from the United States and
Mexico here next week and it's
a, it's, it's a pretty big deal
and uh I, I encourage you to to
attend.
If, if you haven't already made
arrangements to do so. Madam
Chair, Representative Lana, not
only am I attending, I'm hosting
uh Senator Sol's because he's
the chair of the committee. I'm
hosting the legislators down in
Santa Teresa. Can you give him
this presentation? We're going
to put them in a bus and, and
take them around the industrial
base. Thank you for that and I,
I, I plan to be there even
though I, I see it regularly and
I know what's going on, but
there's always something new.
Thank you, Jerry. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, uh, representative
Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Jerry for the presentation.
So on the, on the desal plant,
do you have any kind of a
ballpark figure, uh, what it's
gonna cost and what kind of
water it's gonna produce. Madam
Chair, Representative Simona,
uh, yeah, we do. Um, it's a
little difficult to answer
because it's, it's kind of a
modular kind of plan, you know,
you can start at a smaller level
like at 70 million, uh, the top
end, if we want to go full blast
is about 1700 million and you're
talking.
to build it. Yes, OK.
So how close are you to doing
something like that, Madam
Chair, Representative, um
I think it's on me because I've
been trying to read the the
report's pretty extensive, and
I'm not a technical person, you
know, they, they have all this
stuff about, you know, um, I, I
need to get through that report
and I need to get together with
the main scientist at NMSU that
did that to sit down and say,
OK, what's the next step? What
are we gonna do here? Is it
feasible now?
We have to get together with the
Camino Real Regional Utility
Authority, which I'm assuming is
gonna be in charge of the desal
plant because they are our water
provider. So the next step is
kind of on me. I need to get
together with uh Pei, who was
the scientist that did the the
study.
And uh Madam Chair, and maybe
some of the legislators in here
can help me.
Did we not uh fund some money
this possession for a desal
plant in the state of New
Mexico?
And then we were trying to
decide where we go, where we
were gonna put it.
No, it's a study. It's just a
study.
OK, I was thinking that we had
so much money set aside to start
a desal plant and trying to
decide where to put it, but
that's anyway, that's kind of
interesting how the state of New
Mexico was uh looking at.
Desalinating water and and
having water for the future, uh,
Madam Chair, my next question is
how much livestock goes south,
and do we see a lot of horses
going south, uh.
To kill plants in Mexico, Madam
Chair, representative, uh, most
of the crossings are northbound.
They bring in the, the kind of
the medium sized cows, and they,
they take them to places in
Lubbock and Amarillo to feed
them and what have you. Uh, you
can go there and you can see
horses that go to processing
plants, uh, but you also see
amazing thoroughbred horses
crossing that border. Uh, you,
I, I've been to the uh cattle
yards I've seen buffalo going
south, exotic animals. When the
Uh pro bull riding association
had to stop in Chihuahua before
the pandemic. I used to get a
kick out of going and looking at
the Brahma bulls that they would
ship south. Those things are the
scariest things you ever see in
your life. But there are, I
mean, I would say about 80% of
what crosses at that uh
livestock crossing crosses north
about 2, 20% south. OK, thank
you for that. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Capiero Royal Caviero.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I'm
always so very happy and proud
to sit here with my friend, our
our paths are crossed since the
late 80s, early 90s when I was
doing uh work in the colonias
and community economic
development and we never saw
each other as competitors, but
um,
As future developers of the area
and you have uh excelled and I
just, every single time I have a
chance to to see you and, and be
in this area. I, I highly
commend you and thank you,
actually, thank you, because
what we envisioned then.
In terms of employment in terms
of um economic development
ventures that would improve the
socioeconomic conditions of the
area you are.
In the midst actually beyond our
wildest dreams and plans then,
so thank you and I'm my first
question is, um, because I think
it's relates and thank you to
Representative Lada for bringing
up the, the advocacy because I
do see you and hear about you
all over the place making
presentations and, and, uh,
hosting tours, and I remember
our last visit here, remember
you hosted our tour, which was
extremely helpful for the
legislators to be able to see
not just what
You're laying out in a
PowerPoint, but
Personally, uh, in person, uh,
do you still have your weekly
column? Uh, Madam Chair,
representative, it, it comes out
every two weeks, the Albuquerque
Journal and I syndicate it to
the El Paso papers also. I was
about to ask you if you
syndicated it also, so that's
another way to keep up with um,
not just what is going on, but I
think what's helpful in the
column is that you provide
opinions, suggestions for what
we need to do.
In terms of policy.
But also, um, you bring in all
of the partners, um, that you're
working with cross border. So I
think that's if we could follow
if, if our legislators could
follow that column, it's very,
very helpful and um and falls in
line with representative Lara.
On page on the on page 15 or uh
yeah, slight 15, you mentioned
the Millaro solar solar farm.
Can you tell me what I know the
capacity is 150 megawatt, but
what um area will that be uh
serving?
Madam Chair, representative,
that'll be the, the power
generated by that solar farm
will go into El Paso Electric
system, and that'll serve um uh
West Texas and southern New
Mexico.
Thank you. However, it's located
in New Mexico, so it's going to
be subject to all of the New
Mexico, um um statutes and uh
under the jurisdiction of the
um.
Um.
PRC Madam Chair representative,
that is correct and also under
construction industries
division, all the statues that
they have for constructing
anything. That's good. I just
wanted to make sure that we were
clear, um, and I think that with
the expansion once they
Get off and go through the whole
total regulatory process. Um,
there's the, uh, it's an anchor,
so it's the beginning of
operating additional megawatts
uh and expanding, which will
then serve a greater area and
hopefully our utilities will
pick it up. Uh, thank you for
that. And then, um,
Uh so the other question that
came up, uh, had to do with
Chinese and the tariffs and.
Um, the, the pluses and minuses
um around the tariffs. I, I'd
like to just inform our
colleagues also that we have in
the legislature, both in the
Senate and Senator Pope is my um
colleague in the Senate, and I
sponsor uh the Taiwan Friendship
Caucus.
And uh we invite legislators in
the House and the Senate to join
the caucus and the point
Over the years has been because
Taiwan is part of our big um
sister city. We've had sister
City with Taiwan, Taipei for
many, many years, but we wanted
to extend that into um a caucus,
and this is a caucus that is
across the country. We're not
the only state, but we are seen
by the Taiwanese as a key
partner and it's because of how
um your
Work
Has been very positive and
responsible for their presence,
uh, industry-wise, industry wise
in our state. So I just wanted
to mention to our colleagues
that that's another way for us
to stay connected, um, with what
is happening in this area, but I
also understand from the um uh
consulate in Los Angeles. They
were here recently and I think
they're going to come back in
October. They're gonna be here,
you're gonna host them here and
uh let's
they um
are looking to.
Further expand their
relationships south of the
border as well, which will
continue to strengthen us in
this area. So Representative
Martinez mentioned, uh I'm not
quite sure his wording, but a
best kept secret, you really
aren't. I mean, you're, are, um,
a shining star, and um I just
want to say thank you because in
so many ways this has an impact
on all of our districts, but
particularly in this southern
district.
In the in the colonias and then
providing the infrastructure
needs and I want my colleagues
to for all of us to pay very
close attention because with any
kind of um investment in
economic development, we have to
invest in our schools in
affordable housing and in child
care, those are absolutes, not,
not selection, they're
absolutes. So my last question
has to do with um the affordable
housing aspect.
Of it because as you know, that
was what I was organizing in
this area with the colonials all
three are in those areas, but
particularly housing and
childcare, um, who is currently
the um community based.
Or CDC that's providing
affordable housing in this area.
Is that still Tierra del Sol or
Madam Chairpresentative, yes,
uh, in fact, just behind my
office they've acquired a chunk
of land that they intend to put
some affordable housing on
there. We, we have new apartment
complexes that are being
erected, uh, and at least at
leased out, uh, that's
affordable housing, then we have
another developer, uh, building
4 plexes that'll be for rent.
So that's gonna help. I mean, we
have a lot of upper class or I
don't, I should say upper class,
but 250 $300,000 houses at the
interest rates that we have now,
you know, if you're a young
person and you're starting out
your career, you're not going to
qualify to go into that house.
So it's an issue for us. Um, we
also want to have um an
opportunity for our
our employees in the Santa
Teresa industrial base to live
close to where they work. Uh,
there's a lot of
Family housing in El Paso and a
lot of our employees are coming
from those apartments to their
job. I think we uh we're missing
an opportunity to to create more
New Mexicans and to create more
wealth in in the southern part
of the county.
I thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Jerry. I absolutely agree
with you. Um, this is one area
that, um, you, there's no way
that, um, the workforce.
At the rate that we're paying?
Uh, is going to be able to
afford the prices that I see
going up and so that I think we
have an obligation. So I know
Tiro del Sol has a relationship
with a mortgage finance
authority, and I think I, you
know, they, they are a great
training, um, model for other.
Community-based community
development, um, and housing
development entities to pattern
after because they've been so
successful, but the
affordability, yeah, I can't
stress enough, uh, is needed and
then raising the, um, that I, I
did say this was my final
question, but
related to housing
affordability, what is the
minimum salary at the level that
entry level of the workforce
that comes into your industrial
park, Madam Chair,
Representative, it's more than
minimum wage. Let me tell you
that much because companies are
so competitive and I call it
intramurals whenever we recruit
a new company into the
industrial base, I get a bunch
of companies saying, hey, how
much are they paying over there?
Because even at 50 cents more
per hour, a company is at risk
of losing a few employees to the
new employer, so 1516 $17 an
hour is pretty standard.
anymore.
Thank you and I want, I, I want
us to break that image, the
stereotype that we have of
attracting industry because
we're a cheap labor market. We
need to stop that. And the only
way that we can stop that is by
uh offering living wages. Living
wages are not 15 $16.17 dollars
anymore and especially in, and
they may be more affordable in
this area, uh, and certain other
pockets, but they're.
No longer living, I mean,
they're not, we, we're looking
at in order in just in
Albuquerque in order to afford a
two bedroom for 4 family member
family, uh, I think the latest
was uh 2799 is minimum wage in
order for a family to afford
that rental in Albuquerque,
which is outrageous because
we're our minimum wage is only
$12 at this point at the state,
so the two, all three, the
schools
Housing and daycare are an
integral part of any type of
economic development venture. So
I commend you and I strongly
suggest that our colleagues look
at investing uh increased
funding and financing in this
area in order to ensure that we
continue to protect our
workforce as we are attracting
more industry. Thank you, Jerry,
for everything you do. Thank
you, madam.
Thank you. Um, I don't think we
have anybody else on the list,
um, but I had just a couple
questions for you. Um, you
talked on page 9 of your slides.
Um, you talked about the blue
line being uh exports from
Donana County.
Madam Chair, uh, yes, that, that
is correct. And is that pecans,
chili, what, what are those
exports, Madam Chair, that's
almost all the manufacturing
that's going on in Santa Teresa
because man I'm sure.
Mexico is about 63% of our total
exports. We're not really
shipping pecans to Mexico. We
bring those in, uh, so those are
manufactured goods coming out of
the the southern part of the
county. OK, so you're talking
about the, the wiring and the
plastic type of things, Madam
Chair, if you consider that CN
wire does about 700 pounds of
copper. The production plant is
3 football fields long and one
football field wide, full of um
the wire production machines.
7 million pounds of copper. If
you just look at the raw, uh,
price of copper, and then you
add maybe a a factor of 4 to 5
above that once you, you do the
value added, that's a lot of
money, right? And you know, um,
I think a couple of years ago I
did that tour down there and and
saw the the big spools of copper
and uh and I know that
unfortunately people are trying
to steal copper and so I, I know
that it is in in high demand,
um, you also uh talk
About um.
Just the amount of workers that
are on the complex, um, the
expanding complex and I can you
ballpark how many, um, are, are
New Mexicans that are employed?
Madam Chair, um,
right before and we got, we
gotta do this again, but uh and
we're doing it right, well we're
doing it right now actually, but
just before the pandemic, we,
um, we did our industrial survey
of of our members and uh let me
tell you, like in the past it
was a split of about 60% Texan
40% New Mexican. Uh, the last
survey we did, it was uh 53%
Texan 47% New Mexican, and I, I
know we want.
100% New Mexicans here, but when
you consider that Donana County
has maybe 220,000 people. The El
Paso metro area has 800,000
people and we're almost at
50/50. That's not, that's not
too bad. No, it's not a bad
average, um,
you mentioned, uh, problems
with, you know, infrastructure
and being able to to get
especially uh water coming in.
Have you, does, did the colonial
funds?
Um, can you tap into those funds
to help with some of that
infrastructure. Uh, Madam Chair,
I'm not sure, but JC Crosby,
I'm gonna, if you don't mind,
Matt, I'm sure we have the head
of the Camino Real Regional
Utility Authority, um, could you
help me with that, JC? The
question was, uh, could, uh, for
water infrastructure purposes,
could we tap into the colonius
fund.
We, we are currently.
OK, I think that's good. And do
you know about how much um uh
funding we'll get from that?
Good. OK. Um, and, and the
reason I asked that is I think
so many times, uh, we're
underutilizing that colonial
fund, and I think people don't
really understand, um.
That so much of this area is
colonial and so if there's any
way we can tap into it, I think,
I think we should be doing that,
um, because I think we're
missing some dollars there, so,
um, I appreciate your, I think
that was all my questions. Um, I
appreciate all your um
presentation today and for you
being here, so thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
it's been a pleasure. Thank you
for inviting me. Thanks, Sherry.
Bye bye.
I feel like I should applaud,
like, meat and potatoes guy,
yeah.
Alrighty, if we can get our next
uh panel up. We have um.
Improving infrastructure to
attract and keep businesses.
Thank you
I'm gonna get you don't even eat
all the burrito.
Do we have everybody up here? I
think I have 4 people let's see.
Are we missing anybody?
No, just 3. OK.
Um, if you all would introduce
yourself, uh, say who what
organization you're with and
begin your presentation.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Davin
Lopez. I'm president and CEO of
Massa Valley Economic
Development Alliance. We're
based here in Las Cruces. Uh,
but we represent economic
development interests throughout
the entire Donana County region
which we brand as the New Mexico
borderplex region. Uh, so in
that respect, I do, we work with
my colleagues both Sunland Park,
uh, City of Las Cruces was
behind me, Donana County, trying
to implement strategic
initiatives to attract and
recruit companies here today.
Um, did you want other
introductions or should I
OK.
Thank you for having me.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the council. My name
is Mario Juarez Infantes, city
of Southern Park uh manager, um,
glad to be here and a privileged
to be invited, and as Davin said
and Jerry pointed out earlier,
the collaboration is very, very
important to all of us, so thank
you for being here today.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you very much
for having me here. My name is
JC, everybody knows me as Juan
Carlos, uh, with Crua. I've been
serving here as a director since
January.
And
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you again. So
Massi Valley Economic
Development Alliance were often
called Mavita has an acronym. So
I'll be referring to that. But
we are primarily responsible for
trying to recruit new industry
to Donana County region. Uh, so
in that respect, my presentation
today is going to be really on
what we're seeing taking place
across really internationally
amongst industry that's causing
really the reason why we're
seeing such a new demand for
infrastructure in the first
place.
And I'll tell you a little bit
about myself. I've been doing
economic development in New
Mexico for 20 years, uh, 5 years
at the state level with the New
Mexico Economic Development
Partnership, 15 years here with
Mavida. And I, I can honestly
say the alignment of
Uh, things that are taking place
across the industry is never
we've never seen a better
situation for recruitment of new
industry to New Mexico, so it's
an exciting time, and I think
it's really a generational
opportunity for us. So my
presentation is up, so I'll just
go to the next page and I'll try
to be very quick on this because
I know you have the presentation
in front of you, but that's just
a little bit about our um our
about Mavida and what we do, and
I already mentioned a little bit
about that. So let me just go to
the next page, which is really
What we're seeing for industry
trends taking place. Since the
pandemic.
With all the supply chains that
supply chain disruptions that
have taken place, it has hurt
industry across all aspects. And
it's created a unique
opportunity for us here. Let me
talk a little bit about this. I
know Jerry just mentioned this a
little bit ago. Uh, but one of
the biggest things we're seeing
in new projects is from
onshoring and near shoring and
production, primarily out of
Asian companies looking to move
their production to the United
States, mainly consumer goods,
uh, and really with the the goal
of reaching that US consumer
having prox.
to the US consumer.
And that was because again, of
all the supply chain disruptions
taking place, but, but also
because of costs rising in Asia
as well. It just needs for them
to be closer to their US
consumer or buyer. Uh, food
logistics has been another area
where the, the, the changing
scope of how product gets to the
end consumer has changed
drastically since the pandemic.
Uh, there's a new distribution
models that have taken place.
The best way I can describe it
is much like an Amazon model
whereby you need many more
facilities to have
bulk storage, but then getting,
getting down to the distribution
and last mile delivery of those
goods to the end consumer. Uh,
the other thing that's happening
with cold storage and food and
food processing all over is
they're sitting on facilities
that have not been upgraded in
40, 50 years, so now with new
technology coming into those
facilities. There's a big push
to establish new, new places
where and they're looking more
drastically across the United
States for new locations. We are
a great market for it down here
just because of our logistics,
interstate 10, you know,
Interstate 25 through here our
port of entry with Mexico. A lot
of the raw material supply goods
coming up from Mexico coming up
north to the US consumer.
Just puts us in a very unique
position and because of that
we're seeing more projects
overall food processing and in
cold storage. Uh, and then
because of the onshoring and
near shoring again, I'm sorry,
Mexico has been a primary
beneficiary of near shoring to
North America. In fact, this
past year, they surpassed China
as the US number one trading
partner with that basically
means it makes our port of
entries from Mexico into the US
that much more important, a much
more flow of goods we're going
to see coming through.
But we're also going to be
seeing the need for advanced
logistics of these that which
means more equipment.
more machinery going into these
plants that then we've ever seen
before in the past. So in short
measure, we're seeing rising
demand for projects that we're
trying to service and answer
their questions and trying to
land them here in New Mexico,
usually during a presidential
year we see projects of decline.
Everything comes at a standstill
because of uncertainty. It's
quite the opposite right now.
If you go to the next page.
The other thing we're saying
because of advanced
manufacturing processes,
robotics, AI companies across
all types of industries, whether
it's uh uh electrical vehicle
components, um, data centers,
uh, even to food processing as
an example, they're requiring
more automation, more robotics,
and that is causing what we're
we're calling these rise of mega
projects. We define mega
projects as a company that's
bringing 1000 employees,
5,500,000 square foot of
facility
And $250 million in new capital
investment. Uh, but what's
that's causing is really a
strain on the infrastructure we
have available, uh, 5 years ago,
if a company came in and they
needed 5 megawatts of power.
That was a huge project. Right
now we're seeing minimum
requirements of 15 megawatts and
often we're seeing 50 megawatt
and 100 megawatt projects, um,
as, as a, as a norm nowadays,
and we just cannot respond to
those sides of projects. And
again,
It's not just the really
advanced technology industries,
it's across everything from um
uh cold storage, food
processing, and even logistics
as well. Uh, so because of that,
we're seeing an escalation and a
need and a need for site
readiness and specifically
infrastructure site readiness
specifically.
Uh, next page, please.
Simultaneously we're seeing that
there is a low supply of
industrial space all around the
country. Uh, as Jerry Pacheco
mentioned a little bit earlier,
uh, the need for spec space has
been really a saving grace for,
you know, the santare area, but
I know this is a predicament
across all of New Mexico as
well, uh, really in across the
US, um, industrial space was at
an all-time low in terms of its
availability. It is starting to
pick up a little bit now as
developers start to get
More aggressive to service the
demand. The only challenge is
they're going to the markets
where they feel more secure in
building that industrial space,
you know, the larger markets
like Houston, uh, Dallas, uh,
Austin, Phoenix, etc. and we're
having a little bit of a gap in
terms of filling that finding
that opportunity to create more
spec space not only down here in
New Mexic southern New Mexico,
but it, but through
conversations with my
colleagues, it's really
throughout New Mexico as a
whole.
So in essence, we're seeing a
lot more projects, more project
demand, but a lot less supply.
Now there's an opportunity that
creates for us because as Jerry
mentioned earlier, when we do
not have existing facility
space, uh, companies will go to
where it actually exists. But if
the entire US right now we're
we're in the same position. We
have an opportunity to track
these companies because they're
going to have to build wherever
they go, but as more spec space
comes online and other markets,
we that win of opportunity.
starts to close for us.
Next page.
The other thing that I'm seeing
happening because of onshoring
and near shoring, um, again, a
lot of it's going to Mexico, but
it has a common denominator
where it's all going to a US
buyer, US consumer, and that
creates some advantages for us
where we can talk about some
binational manufacturing
strategies that a company can
implement should they locate in
the Borderplex region as a
whole, where a portion of their
production can take place in uh
in Juarez, another portion of
the production can take place in
Donana County.
And the benefit of that, if you
do that, then they don't not
have to have production in
central Mexico, another portion
of production in Michigan per
se. They can all do it from one
location, cutting that supply
chain down, making that supply
chain more efficient and
predictable, and that has been
again going back to the
beginning of my presentation,
the challenge that industry has
dealt with in terms of the post
pandemic uh opportunity to
service the US client.
Next page, please. So what does
this all mean, um, in terms of
projects we've serviced this
past year, we looked at 58 of 99
of our projects, we took out
things that were not
manufacturing related, uh, you
know, things that we knew we
could address infrastructure
with, and we looked at what,
what are the causes of why we
lost these opportunities or why
we could not even respond to
these opportunities in the first
place.
And you'll see across the list
from advanced manufacturing all
the way to onshoring trends.
The types of projects we worked
with and the, the top percentage
is what that made up of our
entire portfolio, so 24% of our
portfolio is advanced
manufacturing and so on all the
way to 13.8% was onshoring. If
you look at the yellow boxes at
the bottom. These are projects
we had to basically turn away or
we cannot respond to because we
do not have the uh the uh needed
site infrastructure that they
required in order for them to
move forward. So you'll see an
advanced manufacturing 5.
7% of the projects we had to
turn away from. Fortunately in
value added agriculture, food
processing, and cold storage we
were able to satisfy most of the
requirements requests for those
projects.
For the mega project 66.7%, we
had to turn away 100% of all
data center projects and 60% of
all the onshoring projects that
we've seen, uh, as Jerry Pacheco
mentioned, we have been courting
Taiwanese companies quite a bit,
putting a lot of effort into
that. There's still a lot of
opportunity to to see that
shifting of production take
place and hopefully in New
Mexico, but right now we're
turning away 60% of the request.
In essence, that led to 10,190.
Potential jobs.
That looked at New Mexico, but
we couldn't even answer their
basic questions to begin with in
terms of infrastructure.
The next page, please. If you
look at those same projects, but
we look at it by what is, what
is the infrastructure
deficiency, 55% of those
projects were power related. We
cannot service the power related
needs. 40% had to do with water
demand.
And that's usually for the the
the larger scale mega projects,
and 25% had to deal with
wastewater. Next page, please.
So, in all this, there's some
good news, uh, I think, as I
mentioned at the beginning,
we've never been better
positioned uh for industrial
attraction. Uh, right now we
have some level of parity
against other states and
communities in terms of we're
not the only ones struggling
with this challenge. This has
hit the US in a way where where
most of the US is not ready.
It's just that other states and
communities are a little bit
better equipped to respond to
the challenge that's that's come
about. Um, the good news also is
The challenge is not that we're
turning away projects because we
do not, we cannot get the
infrastructure in place. The
problem usually is, is that we
can't deliver the infrastructure
in the timeline of their
construction because we do not
have a budget set for them
anyway.
If we had a budget for
infrastructure already in place,
usually what we've heard from
our partners at Crua or or El
Paso Electric or at the city of
Las Cruces, is that they can,
they can put a delivery timeline
on that infrastructure that
coincides with new construction
by that company, usually about 2
years.
Uh, I think the wind of
opportunity we have here, um,
because of all these trends
taking place, it's about 7 to 10
years. Um, the window will be
closing, especially on the
supply of industrial real estate
that's now popping up. But I was
at a supply chain trade show in
Long Beach yesterday and they
kind of said we're in we're in
the 3rd inning of the game right
now. So we still kind of,
whether it's 55 to 7 years or
whether that means it's 10
years. We do see a win of
opportunity, but everyone
expects it will close fairly
quickly.
But the bad news is we do not
necessarily have an
infrastructure funding, um, uh,
readiness plan, and so we are
falling behind already. I would
say the peak was about a year
ago when we saw the height of
our projects, and we also saw
many other states and
communities starting to put
infrastructure funds together to
anticipate the readiness that
they would see coming their way.
Basically, the states that are
going to address site readiness
infrastructure, insect
development, the fastest I think
will be the ones who will be the
winners at job creation. And
when we're talking about
especially advanced
manufacturing, robotics and AI,
those are the high paying jobs
that we all want to see take
place. Those are with the
technical skill sets that will
pay those higher wages.
Uh, next page plays a little bit
about the competition. So 36
states already have formal site
readiness programs that came
from a study that came from area
up in Albuquerque. I'm listing
just about uh just 4 of them
here. You can see they're very
different based on their needs,
but it's just to give you a
flavor or an idea of what other
states are doing to address the
challenges, uh, but you see, you
see funding available
everywhere, everywhere from 500
million in Ohio to over 100
million in Virginia area.
Closer to home on the next page
that we compete against down
here are all the uh communities
across Texas and through their
type A and Type B Economic
development funding. I'm just
showing you a list of some of
the levels of funding that these
individual communities have on
an annual basis for economic
development. Uh, they're very
flexible on how these funds can
be used, and they can be used
for uh infrastrustructure site
readiness as well. So I'm only
showing you this to give you a
flavor for what we're competing
with out there.
And under the timeline I
mentioned that we're kind of
stranded or to try to uh compete
at a at a at a at an equal level
with them.
So, one of the things my
colleagues and I, we've been
talking about across the state,
and part of it is through New
Mexico ID and I see Jason
Espinosa is here and, and you'll
be hearing more about uh these
thoughts and ideas from New
Mexico idea going forward, but
we really need to consider New
Mexico having an infra
infrastructure site readiness
fund much like some of these
other states we can compete for
these projects and deliver the
infrastructure infrastructure to
them as they are considering a
location here in New Mexico.
And let me just say, um,
These trends I mentioned, I
think are beneficiary to the
entire state. It's not just a
border element. We've seen
opportunities in Albuquerque
come up from onshoring and near
shoring and food processing as
well. This is beneficial to the
state, not just an element
that's uh that that we're facing
here in Donana County. But, um,
I won't read through all the
elements that I've listed for a
site rating is fun. I just will
say that any site readiness fund
should be flexible, transparent
and predictable to the end user.
That's that's
That's the main thing. I think
Leda is a strong tool that does
provide some of those elements
of flexibility, transparency,
and predictability. But if we're
able to have something like that
so we can talk to companies at
the time, they're they're making
their site decisions and we can
guarantee that there might be
funding to deliver
infrastructure in the timeline
that they're committed to
delivering a facility and jobs,
then I think that creates a
great opportunity for New Mexico
as a whole.
I also want to mention that
let's not forget about
developers, ground developers
and vertical developers, they
play a key role in
infrastructure delivery as well.
The challenges in New Mexico,
although we do have incentives
for the end user. We do not have
incentives that extend to the
developer themselves to
encourage them to bring their
capital to New Mexico and take a
risk on putting uh spec space in
the ground and taking that risk
on, you know, the potential
That that building could sit
vacant for 123 years. In other
markets, they have more
confidence that they'll fill it
up much quicker than they do in
New Mexico at this time, so I
think uh not forgetting that
they play a huge role in this,
uh, and in delivering the end
user consideration of incentives
to them might be something we
need to consider and I think can
be easily be done.
I think if you look at Lita,
industrial revenue bonds, and
even the new New Mexico
Enterprise Opportunity Fund
that's being managed by the
NMSA. I think little tweaks to
those programs can go a long way
to attracting that risk capital
to come into our state. Uh, so
with that, I will, uh, leave it
to any questions or to
presentations by my colleagues
and questions afterwards. So
thank you. I think we'll go on
to the next presentation and
save the questions till the end
of after everybody has has.
Completed their presentation, so
thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
council, I believe we, let's
see, we're getting the
presentation up on, on the
screen there, but you should
have a a handout, um, so I, I
appreciate Jerry and, and Davin,
who are the, you know, the key
economic development experts in
recruiting industry here, the
workforce development that's
necessary.
All of these, all of these uh
companies, right, whether
they're domestic or
international, they are looking
to move here. Um, one of the
many questions that they'll have
is what kind of schools do we
have, right? What kind of
infrastructure, what kind of
quality of life.
What kind of programs to this
new area that I'm moving into
and so I'm going to talk a
little bit about developing a
border community for the future.
I'll touch on what our future
looks like is, is uh Sunland
Park.
What we're doing in terms of
quality of life investments.
Planning, uh, often, we lose
the, uh,
Uh, you know, our sight on the
ball because we, we do all this
planning and then we shelve it
and and we don't create the
policy to enforce the planning
that's necessary.
To move in the direction that we
want to move in. Housing, we've
heard a lot about housing today.
How you're going to see some of
the staggering numbers, so the
shortfalls, right across the
state, public safety is always
important. People want to be in
a community where they can um go
outside for a run and feel safe,
right? Um and building capacity.
You heard earlier and Jerry
pointed out the Sunland Park is
growing very quickly and it is.
And so we've got to be able to
keep up with that growth. So
defining our future, there's uh
there's no
Secret, you know, the city's,
uh, the mayor would have to
correct me 41 or 42 years old,
right? Um, incorporated 1983,
when we start to look at um
Some of the history, there's,
there is baggage that we've got
to fix, right? That we've got to
get beyond and and this council,
uh, in, in this, uh this new uh
today is a new day, right? And
we're defining that future. So
how are we doing that? Next
slide. We're starting by
redefining who we are, right?
Um, in 2022, a strategic plan
was developed by the city, uh,
that really sets the the
priorities in the next short
term next year and in the next
upcoming 5 years.
We recently updated that plan.
Uh we actually had Mr. JC Crosby
at at those same meetings, it
was a very productive meeting
where we had all of our
directors and our council
engaged, uh, to set those
priorities, and that's important
because now as we set those, and
we, we have a roadmap in which
everyone can roll in the same
direction, right, when we bring
items into council in terms of
where investments are going to
be made and, and what we, what
we need in order to um function
every day.
The council has already
determined is this in alignment
with our strategic plan.
Um, and in doing that, you know,
we're looking at also updating
our comprehensive master plan.
Why is that important? Well,
it's important because we're,
we're setting future land use,
future land use impacts water
and sewer. We've got to know the
land use, otherwise, our utility
partner doesn't know what the
future water demands domestic
fire, um, is, as well as uh
effluent discharge for, for
sanitary sewer. Those are all
very important. How are we going
to treat it, right? So we heard
earlier about desalinization.
Well, that's all driven by land
use planning.
So we're updating that. We're
recognizing and probably one of
the only ones working across the
four border states in our
comprehensive master plan,
developing that binationally.
We're working with our Mexican
partners on the other side, and
that's important. We have a lot
of input from our development
industry, as Dan pointed out,
also very important, right?
Developing that mindset that the
private sector is a good
partner. Uh, we, we need their
input so that we're moving
planning and policy to support
their investments, their
endeavors.
We're bringing in executive
coaching. We're investing in
that in our directors. Why are
we doing that? Because we're
looking to change the culture.
We want to be more professional.
But we also want to be more
servant in the way we conduct
ourselves with our constituents,
with our businesses with our
leaders.
Next slide.
Again, branding, uh, changing,
changing the course this council
adopted this year a new seal
which is in the upper left hand
corner. Why is that important?
Every new building that the city
is investing in today is, is
very intentional in the
branding, every color, every
texture, the architecture, we
recently opened up a new uh just
under 90,000 square foot
multigenerational facility, and
you'll notice from the moment
you walk in what the colors are,
what the textures are, uh, and
they're all tied to the seal
because we want to develop
Experience we want to have that
paradigm shift of how Suland
Park is viewed. We want people
to know that this is a good
place to conduct business, a
great place to live and to raise
a family.
Um, you see a, a photo of that
multi-generational there on on
the upper right-hand corner and
then the bottom photo is showing
a new uh MBD. We're relocating
our motor vehicle division and
those colors.
They're resonating what's
adopted in the seal, right? So
everything again is intentional.
Infrastructure, we heard a lot,
so important. Next slide.
Without proper infrastructure
you have no economic development
that if, if anything is taken
away uh today and yesterday, I
would say the message is
infrastructure funding,
otherwise economic development
doesn't happen, right? So, uh,
this slide is really talking
about a number of investments in
infrastructure, not just at a
local residential street level,
but the quality of life with the
multi-generational that we're
talking about that's attractive
when families are looking to
relocate. We're also looking at
developing a new uh.
City Hall, uh, thank you,
Representative Lata and others
who have uh contributed to uh
capital funding towards the
planning and design of that. Uh,
so the, the photo on the right
is a rendering of the location
where the new City Hall would be
situated, uh, we're in the
process of transferring over 10
acres from the developer to to
be able to develop that.
Next slide.
So, all these great visions,
right, these big picture ideas,
they're important, but we can't
forget about the little things
for the community. We've got to
take care of the local drainage
issues. Uh, Sunland Park's a
little unique. When it rains,
unlike areas like Albuquerque or
Rio Rancho or uh other areas. We
have watersheds that are
binational in nature. We have
watersheds that when it rains,
uh, the sewer systems, the
collection systems on in Annara,
Mexico.
Our super are they they are
pressurized flows. So what, what
that does is the manholes will
actually overflow so we get
combined sewer, surface
drainage, all of that goes into
Rio Grande, by the way. So this,
this should be important to us.
And so when we're thinking about
investing in infrastructure, uh,
we're thinking about, you know,
uh, the, the needs along the
border are a little more
challenging, a little more
complex, but equally important.
If we don't have proper
drainage.
It it impacts our
transportation, our quality of
life, it impacts businesses.
Going into quality of life, uh,
next slide, please.
Next, there you go. So one of
the things when we're talking
about this this branding, this
uh new, new direction that the
city is charting, we've
invested, and thank you,
legislators. This field is here
because of, um, uh, you as a
legislator setting uh a focus on
quality of life and recreational
facilities. This is in an
artificial turf field with um
State of the art muscle
lighting. You can see the field
is intentional. It's got the
city, the new city seal at the
center, where we just recently
negotiated a lease agreement uh
for one year with the
locomotives. Why the
locomotives? Because the
locomotives bring a level of
professionalism.
They bring credibility.
Right? Uh, we, we, at one point
or another, we were all told,
uh, you know, tell me who your
friends are and I'll tell you
who you are and that and that's
what we're doing here. We're
being intentional about picking
our friends. And so we're happy
to announce here on their 2nd
week, they love it. Uh, I'm
going to show you a master plan
here what we're looking to do
and expanding our recreational
um economy in this area, right?
Because those do bring in uh
revenue dollars as well.
Next slide.
This is a uh master plan of the
overall multi-generational
center, the, the center there in
gray towards the bottom is, is
the skate park. So if you've
been out to the municipal
complex in Sunland Park, that
would be the, uh, Tony Hawk
skate park to just directly to
the right is the new facility we
just constructed, and then
you'll see a number of soccer
fields and baseball fields. We
recognize that we have an
opportunity to create binational
tournaments that are
competitive. So if you're
playing for the locomotives, you
The recreational program, but
you also have an academy
setting. These athletes are
going to play Division 1,
Division 2, beyond that.
Uh, the USL feeds into the Major
League Soccer, so it's a
business. That's what we're
looking to develop.
Uh, we've had, uh, some initial
conversations with the executive
team there. Uh, we have another
conversation coming up in
October where mayor and our
mayor Proton will be in
attendance as well as one,
our local representative to talk
about how do we develop a
complex that's attractive,
that's supportive of the
locomotive business model, for
example, and that's just one
opportunity for the outdoor
recreational economy.
Uh, similarly, uh, we also work
with Seed, uh, Doctor Erickson,
one binational.
Tournament
On a weekend.
Very conservative.
U12 to U19 is the age group for
soccer, because that's what I
know.
is over $10,000 of direct and
indirect spending everything
from fuel to hotels to
restaurants, to entertainment,
watching a movie, uh, buying
souvenirs, it's a significant,
and we've got the economic
impact study for that as well
that we can share with you.
That's how important this is for
the city of Sunland Park, not
only for its residents, not only
to attract new industry because
when they come here, they can
say we've got a place to go, but
we're also wanting to attract
the, the, the, the
opportunities, the teams.
That are competing in New York,
the teams that are competing in
Southern Cal. We want them to
come here and ultimately we want
to recruit the academies that
are competing from the Mexican
side, which is different than
one Montana can do, right?
Because we're actually at the
border. Next slide.
Uh, we're along with the uh
continuing on the, on the
outdoor recreational economy and
uh quality of life. This is just
a map that illustrates the
trail.
This, this is important because
you all as legislators in 2015
created the Rio Grande
Commission in 2017, you adopted
the 500 mile master plan. C
Sland Park is the first to
construct just over 1 mile of
that master plan approved trail
and so we continue to build on
that. And by the way, your
outdoor recreational division
has been tremendously
supportive. Uh, we will be in in
the moderating in their ORD
meeting in Las Cruces here in a
couple of weeks. Uh,
We really value and respect
their support because without
you, without them, uh, City of
Sunland Park could not be ruined
in the direction that we're
heading.
Next slide.
Uh, 273. Most of you that have
lived down here on the border or
have frequented at the border,
you know, Sunland Park 273, it's
10 miles of Gotham City.
Nothing but asphalt and
concrete.
Nothing attractive about it,
right?
Now we're master planning the
corridor. Uh, you can see some
of the renderings, the photo to
the right, if you frequent
Mexico that probably says, hey,
that kind of looks like when I
go to Juarez, I see the colorful
letters. That's intentional.
We're we're showing respect to
our border cities across, right?
If, if I go to Acapulco, if I go
to Cancun, similarly, so we're
looking at developing a corridor
that's green, that has
aesthetics, 10 mile corridor
from uh Texas over to the north
end of the city limits on 136,
and those are just some
depictions of some of the uh
master planning elements that
will be adopted, that will
become policy and will be
enforceable as new development
comes in along the uh New Mexico
273 corridor.
planning with policy, uh, as we
pointed out earlier, the comp
plan is scheduled to be
completed this, uh, this
December. We're updating our
land development code.
It's a combination of our
zoning, as well as subdivision
regulations. The biggest
complaints and Dan touched on it
a little bit earlier, we gotta
be customer friendly, we gotta
be easy to get through the
building process and so we're
eliminating as much of the
confusion for new developers as
they come in.
We're working on a development
impact f fee that kicked off in
July. It's about a 9 month
process. We've got to capture
revenues with new developments
that we can put into sewer,
water. We're doing that because
we want to demonstrate to our
leaders that it's not just about
a handout. It's about wise state
investment, but at the same time
that we're holding our community
development,
uh, our development community,
excuse me, also responsible for
their share of the
Impacts to the infrastructure.
Housing.
Uh, next slide, please.
Next, there you go. So this is
just a quick illustration of
some of the pits, the public
investment districts that the
City of Saland Park currently
has approved.
To, to, uh, give you some sort
of comparison only Albuquerque
and Roancho have uh a greater
number of ps, um, Sunland Park
would come 3rd right behind
them. The graphic on the right
stolen. I stole it from the
state 40,000.
Uh, units, shortfall in units in
housing today, right? That's,
that's the problem with housing
in New Mexico.
Next slide.
So what are we doing?
Uh, the mayor, uh, and I
actually are taking off right
after this meeting. We have a
meeting in Santa Fe tomorrow to
meet with uh Daniel, the new uh
gentleman that's been appointed
to the governor's office for
administering the $200 million
in new housing funding that's,
that's come in through this last
session.
is they're preparing, they're
rulemaking, we want to
understand what some of those
challenges are gonna be.
As legislators, what, what I, I
hear today uh hopefully
resonates as this, this is the
bright spot for the state. If
Southern New Mexico is
successful, the state is
successful. If we invest in
housing, if we invest in
infrastructure,
Then we can attract the industry
straight. We can and we can
develop our workforce and so
we're, we'll be meeting up with
them to understand what the the
rulemaking might be. And I would
ask, uh, as legislators to also
encourage as, as we're thinking
about how the the funding is uh
disseminated into the future is
is uh we're going after there
there should be some recognition
that again, at the border, we,
we have a a different
complexities and so I would hope
that some of the money
Um, of the $200 million would,
would go to uh to the colonials
and that would be intentional to
support economic development.
The next slide shows a uh to the
left,
on the very bottom, it's
difficult to see, but on the
very bottom of the screen
there's a faint sort of uh red
line that showed about 30 some
odd acres.
Um, those 30 some odd acres are
the city owned. They're right at
the floodplain. This is the
discussion we'll be having
tomorrow morning with the state
of New Mexico to talk about uh
the technical dollars that will
come out of the Housing Act, uh,
so that we can move some of
those dollars for the planning
and design on the city side.
We'd like to put up the
property, but we'd like to look
at some mixed-use development.
We'd like to be able to provide
commercial and retail at the
bottom, tied into the Rio Grande
what an opportunity.
500 miles of Rio Grande and
Sunland Park has an opportunity
to showcase it, write it at it's
downtown.
Commercial and retail activity
at the bottom, tie it to the Rio
Grande amenities, to the trails,
to the water, and then
affordable housing on top.
Next slide.
In public safety.
The city is investing in quite a
bit in public safety in terms of
capacity building.
Also want to just reinforce the
fact that this legislator too
over the last couple of years
has funded the augmentation
dollars for PD and and fire is
so important because it the city
of Sunland Park has been a
beneficiary of that, as well as
other border communities. We're
investing in drones, we should
have that up and running before
the end of the year. That's
gonna help us to, uh, with our
partners, Border Patrol, as well
as the schools because we're
very cognizant we've got to have
safe schools, so we work very
closely with cats in schools.
And so we'll be able to utilize
this technology which then
bridges a gap in some of the
lack of manpower.
Next slide, um, again, uh, even
in fire, water is so important.
Crew is so important for us
because it has an impact on on
our insurance service office
rating, right, or ISO rating,
um,
it, it, it has a direct impact
on our premiums. You can see
there just by lowering uh by 1
point on our ISO rating, we're
saving the, the uh average home
uh owner 3 to 7% in annual
savings. So that's important and
it's, it's also an incentive
when people
are looking to relocate. So when
we're talking about what's
what's the benefit, for example,
between Texas and New Mexico and
housing? Well, the ISO has an
impact on, on their mortgage,
and so does their property mill
levy, right? We're about 1/5 of
what Texas Texas pays in in
property taxes at the end, the
end of every year.
Um, next slide.
And then lastly, police
department where, you know,
we're always thinking any ideas
you might have to make Sunland
Park better and we're not proud.
Give us, give us your ideas.
We're working right now very
closely, providing SRO officers
at the schools within the, the,
uh, school district or within
the city limits. We've offered
to provide police officers even
in those schools that are not
within the the city limits. Uh,
so, so our PD department works
really closely. We want to keep
our students safe.
It's difficult to compete.
With El Paso, Donana County, El
Paso County, and others in terms
of compensation and and our
council has been very aggressive
the last couple of years, um,
giving significant raises to try
to catch or bridge that gap. So
now we're creating our own
farming system. We're proud to
announce we're several weeks
into the, the program we've got
two high school kids that are on
the law enforcement program with
GAs in schools. They're interns
with the city. We're gonna raise
them up.
We're gonna
Infuse that that that culture
early. We want to capture them.
We've got money set aside to
sponsor these, uh, the program
to send them to the police
academy, we'll tie him up with
contracts 2 or 3 years, bring
them in either through a PSA
program, which is also new, it's
never existed. Uh, so we get
more, more people out on the
streets, more cars out on the
streets, and hopefully these
kids are local, so that they've
already got trust coming into
the PD system from the
community, right? because their
families, their uncles, their
brothers.
They're sisters, they all know
each other and they'll they'll
that'll bring a mutual respect
in into the program and into the
community. Madam Chair, members
of the uh council, thank you for
your time appreciate it.
Thank you for your presentation.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you so much for
having a crew here to present,
um, today's presentation is
mainly going to be focusing
amongst business development and
how the infrastructure or the
utility system impacts that. Of
course I know that there's other
areas that we can discuss, but
for the sake of time I'm going
to be addressing my focus and
time in that area and I wanted
to uh go over in the first
slide. I wanted to go over just
what I was going to be
presenting and first and
foremost, I'm, I'm gonna go over
the statistics, the vital
statistics is like.
Call it, and the reason why
that's important is because it's
not every day that we present in
front of you and I know that
Representative Martinez was
asking uh where Santa Teresa was
and where, uh, and also how uh.
How we play into that. Well,
Crewe was formed in 2009 through
a joint powers agreement between
the city of Sunland Park and
Donana County, so we've taken
over their utility
infrastructure.
And with that said, we're
looking at the population that
we're currently serving, uh,
right now we're over 20,000 and
what that means in terms for a
utility system, anything over
20,000 is going to now be moved
into a medium sized utility
system.
And with that comes new
challenges and I'll be
discussing that in the further
uh slides.
In terms of where we're going
and where what is being
projected, uh, we're looking at
an additional 7900
approximately, uh, we have
approximately 7900 connections
as I, as we speak today.
Now, majority of that's going to
be residential.
And what we're looking at for by
the end of 2025, an additional
1000 connections. And then
within the next 5 years an
additional 6500 connections.
Each connection is approximately
3.5 uh people living per house.
So the population is going to
grow significantly. Now when
we're looking at our actual
infrastructure on the ground. We
have a total of 3 wastewater
treatment plants.
For arsenic treatment facilities
and 7 water tanks. Now, the
arctic treatment facilities is
unique to our area, reason being
is that the majority of our
water is from the Messa Bolson.
Our levels are typically around
the in certain areas at the
highest is around 33 parts per
billion what is acceptable by
the EPA is anything uh maximum
contamination level cannot be
higher than 10 parts per
billion.
And one other vital statistics I
wanted to point out is that one
of the limiting factors that we
were facing previously, and this
goes back to uh uh
Representative Gallegos' uh
comment regarding where we,
where we at with coloniass one
of the things that was limiting
us was our joint powers
agreement. It just got renewed
this past year and, uh, what
that does, it opens us up to
many other funding mechanisms
and what I mean by that is going
to be, uh, for example,
colonias.
If we have to pay back a certain
percentage of that funding and
we only have 4 years left.
Then
We can't receive any funding and
that was, and we went down to
the bottom line. I like to, I'd
like to thank uh Representative
Lara. Uh, we did have to go
through an appeal process to
claw back that funding and
thankfully the the uh colonial
committee did see our case and
did respect it, so we were back
in the game with that funding.
Going over to the next slide,
uh, this is where I really
wanted the the members of the
committee, uh, to kind of focus
in on where my discussion points
are going to be. If you look at
that green area that's along
Pete Domenicci, that green area
is your bulk of the industrial
or what I call the Jerry is at
with the border industrial area.
Now there's another growing area
which is on the 2nd largest
circle at the very bottom.
That's right at the border of
Mexico and uh New Mexico.
That is the, the border
industrial area.
And then to the smallest circle,
um, is going to be the emphasis
of Sunland Park where their
business development is going,
we're looking at two different
businesses on the left hand side
we're looking at industrial
growth and on the right hand
side we we are looking at more
commercial growth. Now,
The topic comes as well, how are
you guys making your decisions?
What's going based by, by where
the, where the infrastructure is
coming and that infrastructure
is coming head on full steam
ahead, as you've heard from, uh,
Mr. Devin and Mario and Jerry is
there is a shortfall in
infrastructure. It's not just
here but it's also across the
entire United States, but that
doesn't mean that we can't meet
those challenges. We can if we
stick together and I'll go into
some of those areas, but just to
talk a little bit about some of
the challenges that we're facing
right now as as
As I stated earlier that in 2009
is when we were formed, so a lot
of this infrastructure.
Before we got here is.
This was never anticipated to
grow, to grow at this scale and
how fast it's moving and I'll
give you an example right now of
how pressing it is right now. If
you look at that brown area.
We only have one tank at 270,000
gallons. So when new
infrastructure wants to come in.
Our new development wants to
come in. It's very hard because
now all of a sudden.
This development is left with,
OK, well you don't have impact
fees in place. So, you know, now
what, what is it that we're
gonna have to put in and, and,
and typically when we deal with
when we're dealing with
infrastructure growth, we're
putting in new, new, uh,
infrastructure. We're not just
gonna build to the size of of
the of the capacity that the
developments coming in. We have
to build for future growth.
Well, right here where we speak
right now, I only have crew only
has uh one well, if that one
well goes down that provides to
that tank, uh, right now we're
going through extraordinary
efforts to try to find a way to
re-engineer from the green area
to bring water back down. Could
it be done? Yes. Was it designed
to do that? No. Um, so right now
we're trying to find ways
because we understand that the
growth is coming in this area
and that's why we're very
cognizant of new development
coming in and what it's gonna
take. And so we've
Already gone with Mr. Jerry
Pacheco just this past week we
actually had an electrical issue
with the pump. So that tank went
down all the way dry, um, so we
were thankfully we were able to
get it fixed, but these are just
some of the unique challenges
that we are facing in terms of
the growth that's growing in an
area where infrastructure was
not there previously. And we can
go to the next slide. I wanted
to move over to in terms of the
infrastructure items that we had
that we're looking at. It's very
simple, but unfortunately it's
also the most expensive, um,
when we're looking at.
Wastewater treatment.
Uh, in our areas, I, I had
mentioned earlier that we have a
total of 3 wastewater treatment
plants.
But I'm gonna speak speak
specifically to the industrial
area, and if you can go back to
the one slide so you can see the
the map of the area.
OK, right below that large red
circle we have our wastewater
treatment plant.
And right now we do the previous
development agreements in place,
a lot of the, the capacities are
spoken for because uh the
development agreements
developers had put money to
build the infrastructure that
was there. So we have to honor
that development agreement. What
does that leave for the rest of
the industrial area? It leaves
us needing an additional
wastewater plant.
And the second item is, and this
is I've said this is the
elephant in the room right now.
Typically when uh wastewater
entities or
Our other two and our other two
wastewater plants. Our water
goes back into the Rio Grande,
and that's for a return flow
credits with the Office of the
State of the Engineer.
This particular plant, uh, when
it was designed, uh, obviously
there was no need to build a
huge infrastructure to to after
our after our wastewater is
processed to send it back to the
Rio Grande.
But it doesn't, it does no
benefit to us to build another
we would call them pivot or it's
like a large crop circle where
the water goes down into the
ground, but we don't, the
utility does not get any return
flow credits uh for that. So
that's a very vital point to us
and as development is going to
be moving in this area and I
haven't, I haven't even begun to
discuss where the Santa Teresa
where the state economic
development department is moving
as well. They're also planning
uh to have a growth in this area
be outside of these regions and
as well as NMDOT. So that means
other infrastructure that has to
be has to be coming in. And so
the elephant in the room for us
right now is to find a plan and
start planning right now to
build an effluent channel to uh
over to the Rio Grande.
So that's one of the big areas
that's that we're gonna be
looking at in the future.
Water holding capacity.
Right now, uh, we thank you
Representative Lata for helping
and be in the forefront
regarding uh our, our elevated
tank. Uh, we did have some
challenges. There was a little
hold up regarding the inter
intergovernmental agreement that
we had with the, with the border
authority that has now passed
and we are now moving forward,
uh, and in the finals, uh,
sorry, we're now moving forward
to build that tank right now,
the phase that we're in, it's
before enemyD go and review for
the planning of the elevated
tank which will be located along
the corridor right there on Pete
Domenenci, uh, right.
Below the big circle is where
that new elevated tank is going
to be. What that's gonna do is
gonna do a tremendous amount of
growth for that area, both
residential and industrial,
we're hitting both sides of this
area and the reason that that
elevated tank is so crucial to,
to this region is because of
the, of the industries that are
there right now we're relying on
fire booster pumps to provide
that uh uh how would you call
it, that fire suppression that
is needed in the area and so
when whenever a fire booster
pumps goes.
They've been built over, you
know, several years. And so
what's happening is that the
new, the new fire suppression
systems that are coming in, some
of these industries are barely
passing their test in that
industrial area because we're
relying on those fire booster
pumps, the elevated tank,
thankfully assist in in
alleviating that issue.
Even though we are building the
1 million gallon elevated tank,
our 2024 water master plan is
showing based on the trends that
are coming in, is that another
10 to 2 million gallon tank is
going to be needed in that area.
So that's gonna be where
emphasis is is heading.
And then last and most
importantly we can have the
wastewater, we can have the
water tanks, but if we don't
have enough water, and what I
mean by that is the wells, um,
that's the other component that
we're gonna need to function as
a system.
Um,
In the industrial area, we only
have 3 primary wells that supply
that area and once again, every
summer when we go to this, if
one of those wells is down, we
have to send out the message to
the border industrial area to
start conserving water. Uh,
luckily we got them all fixed.
Uh, we did have to spend our
resources and some coming from
our reserves. We did get them
fixed and all three of them are
running so thank goodness
everything is functioning well
now, but if we're gonna
anticipate growth in this
region, more additional wells
are going to be needed. And to
that we've already approach
watched it if if anyone looks at
our infrastructural capital
improvement plan, those are the
specific target areas that we're
also looking at to making sure
that we have enough water
capacity and we also have enough
well pumping capacity as well as
wastewater capacity.
Go on to the next slide.
And you can go to the next one.
OK, I'll briefly touch up. I'm
only touching on those, uh,
capital improvements and funding
that we received uh for
development, of course there's
other areas that we've we've
touched out to that are not on
here, but just to list a couple
of them, we have the tank, as I
mentioned, we had just finished
building a new $4 million port
of entry arsenic treatment
facility.
Well, AA, this is going to be in
the Santa Terese area. We do
have, uh, we do have an
application in for this, uh,
through, I believe it's gonna be
through congressional direct
spending with CP conditional
with Representative Vasquez and
our grant application is going
is in it right now, so we're
waiting to see on that portion,
and this is going to serve the
senate, the Santare area we're
looking at the wastewater
capital improvements, $5 million
along the McNutt corridor, which
is the main vein of the city of
Sunland Park.
We're expanding our our uh our
wastewater collection system,
and that is going to provide
more opportunity for businesses
to uh to develop in that area.
Once again this is coming part
of the clean water drinking SRF
fund and then when we look at
the.
Our wastewater plant, all three
of our wastewater plants are
going to need growth to
expansion due to growth and uh
this past year through House
Bill 2, thank you,
Representative Lata regarding
the $5 million that we received.
There was some confusion over
the on the legislative wording
on there, so we're going through
that, um, we're troubleshooting
to that right now.
And then a big, I, I don't think
that it's mentioned enough, but
EPA does fund a lot of money
through Nedbank and that way if
you representative have other
areas that are on the border
region within the 1st 11 miles
of the border, uh, NAB is a huge
funding source for, for, uh,
utility companies.
And then I wanted to kind of
just break down the before and
after. If you looked to the
right of the of the slide is
these are the 4 funding
mechanisms that we typically use
younger uh utility companies
predominantly rely on
development agreements, grants,
and loans.
We don't have that luxury
anymore, as you can tell we're
facing the challenges of not
having these other funding
mechanism tools in place and
those two funding mechanism
tools is going to be with impact
fees and with going out for
bonding, but as I mentioned
earlier in the presentation,
those some of those are not
available to us. um, thankfully
we've been working with the city
of Suland Park. uh, we're gonna
be moving forward to include
crew as jurisdictional area uh
to make sure that we're having
impact fees so we can.
Do is what Jerry had stated is
that we need to be ahead of
development so that we can be
ready because the biggest and
the hardest conversations that
we have is when development
comes in and.
The infrastructure is not there.
And, and that's and that and
they just go, they can just go
right across to the border to El
Paso, and we need to be able to
retain um the chances and the
opportunities while Mr. Den it
says we're looking at the next 4
or 5 years. So infrastructure
investment is gonna be crucial,
uh, for us. And so I asked that
when you're, when the
opportunity comes for you to
make those decisions that you
look at this area, yes, it is
going to be a costly, but it is
going to yield.
The most returning profit for
the community, not just in homes
but also in business
development.
Kids and tits, um, as Mario was
saying is that those public
improvement districts, they are
opportunities if written
correctly, they are
opportunities for infrastructure
to to capitalize on
infrastructure improvements. One
thing that we have not done that
we're looking forward to is
actually gonna be on the tax
areas, tax improvement areas.
Um, that is one area that we're
looking to, uh, I think we've
only had one conversation with
uh Jerry regarding that area and
regarding that funding
mechanism, it's we still haven't
used it, but that's one and I
think it's a little still
premature, but we're looking at
it.
Bonding, as I stated, is that
what's also another area that
we're looking at to fix a lot of
our items and that's going to be
critical for us, uh, being that,
uh, being that there is deferred
maintenance that has been there
in, in our, in our area.
And then briefly on the next
slide I'm just going to briefly
just go through collaboration
and just to give the members,
uh, just an example of what
collaboration does, uh, and
where we need to continue that
collaboration, um, most
recently, uh, there's an area,
uh, in one of the oldest
subdivisions in Sunland Park
called Annara, where there's a
lot of flooding that goes in
that area and this area was left
behind regarding uh regarding
fire security and that has to do
a lot with with the time that
the subdivision was built.
Um,
This past, uh, what, 2 years ago
2 past 2 years ago we worked on
the community development block
grant, and we worked in
conjunction with CRA at that
time I was at the city and uh
it's nice to see a full fruition
is that when we're coming back
and building now that we're
building back in three ways.
We're building back by providing
safety for the community by
providing lights there we're
also putting uh um we're also
fixing the streets that are in
the area, but last and most
importantly, that area now has
fire protection where there was
no fire hydrants before, and we
don't have to go back and cut up
the streets. How many
Time too often do you see, well,
why did they build that street
and then all of a sudden they
cut it up. I mean, that's where
planning comes in and that's
where savings comes in. So we
need to continue. That's just an
example of what we need to
continue to strengthen it, but
this time for business
development and with that that
concludes my presentation and
I'll stand ready for any
questions.
Thank you. I appreciate all of
the presentations today. Um,
I've got only a couple of people
on the list, so if you need to
get on the list, please let me
know. Um, we're gonna start off
with Representative Lata.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for the presentations. Yeah,
this is all really good
information and I'm really happy
to see the movement forward.
And the progress that's
happening, um.
Madam Chair, I'd like to uh
start with Dan. Dan, thank you
for, for all that you do and
that your team does. I think
you, you are, are a critical
asset to what's what what's what
trying to be accomplished and I
want to personally thank you for
all the work that you do. Thank
you. Um, so in your
presentation.
And one of the slides where it
says that Texas Type A and Type
B corp local state tax, uh,
local state sales tax de
dedicated to economic
development. I was going down
the list and I see Banhorn,
Texas there.
Van Horn, Texas is a little town
of 2000 people, and they're
putting money into invest into
economic development.
And I'm thinking, why can't we
do that? You know, I think this
is really important, so I think
Mr. uh, Madam Chair, and, and
Dan is, is, you know, uh I would
love to pick your brains to see
how we can come up with these
type of things for New Mexico.
Because as you know here in the
border we have to compete with
El Paso.
Uh, yesterday I met with a
representative from Amazon, and
they were talking about their
not only their fulfillment
centers, which I believe that we
missed out on in Santa Teresa.
But also their data centers and
uh the, the, the lady had
mentioned to me that um.
New Mexico is on the list for an
Amazon data center.
Uh, and the reason being is that
we're uh our water situation.
And we don't have the
infrastructure and we don't have
the capacity to provide water
for their data center.
And so, you know, you, you had,
you had some, you had one on
here where it said the data
centers, you know, coming to New
Mexico, and I don't know if you
can say who, who, which company
or who was thinking of building
a data center, but I think those
type of jobs are very well
paying jobs.
That people can advance in, they
can build their homes and their
families with, and so do you
know of or is there any future
speculation for additional data
centers in the in in the state,
particularly in our region.
Madam Chair,
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you for the, um, the kind
of words. I appreciate that
first and foremost, but uh yes,
we've actually seen a number of
data centers looking at the
area. Now in some cases, um, I
would say that the water usage
of some of these are not
probably in the best interest of
Donana County. Um, however, with
some of these new hyperscale,
um, data centers that are being
driven by AI, uh, many of them
are starting to implement
different types of technologies
that are recycling more of the
water that's coming into it. So
the water usage is is much less.
The challenge becomes the power
and the ability for El Paso
Electric to provide the power to
those sites. Um, in the
presentation, I didn't get into
detail on it, uh, but one of the
suggestions I had made in terms
of the infrastructure readiness
fund is making sure those funds
could be adaptable for some
on-site solutions. So for
example, um,
Microgrid technology is really
taking off where you can start
providing either redundant power
or or or power for the facility
on site, and I know more data
centers are starting to look at
that because again, uh, power is
in short supply kind of across
the country right now, so
they're looking at these new
models and I think we need to
be, uh, looking at those as
well. So and to finally answer
your question is, we are on the
short list for a couple of data
centers looking at Donana
County.
I can't say very specifically
where they're at, but you'd be
surprised, and this is where it
opens up, where where
infrastructure opens up
opportunities for rural areas
that 5 years ago, we never had
any company looking at these
areas, but it opens up these
opportunities for rural areas
here in Duane County, and that's
what we're seeing. So the the
possibility is there we are on
the, on the final list of a
couple, but we're just trying to
figure out how we make sure to
solve the on-site issues that
they're dealing with. Thank you
for that, Dylan, I really
appreciate that and, and please.
Uh, keep up the good work and
consider me an ally in, in, in
what you're doing, you know,
it's, it's just really
important, uh, not only to
Donana County and my legislative
district but to the state as
well. Thank you. Uh, Madam
Chair, I also have a question
for for Mario. So Mr. Infante,
the
I Sunland Park is in the top 5
safest cities in New Mexico.
And I appreciate, I really
appreciate the collaboration
that you're doing with the, with
the CTE program at Santa Teresa
High School and the law
enforcement because as we've
talked about before, you know,
we're building from within we're
growing our own and doing that
and I think, and I want to thank
you for that. That's that's
critical to the to Sunland Park.
Uh,
I also want to thank you for uh
looking into how the city can be
more proactive partner in the
affordable housing.
Um, I know you, you mentioned it
in your, in your presentation,
but what is miniature? What's
the hope that you're wanting to
gain from this meeting that
you're you're going to for, for
the affordable housing.
Uh, Madam Chair and a
representative line and members
of the council. So we want to
bring the message to um to the
roundhouse, uh, through, through
Daniel there that, uh,
we one since it's early in the
process, we, we want to really
have an opportunity to inform
and educate as to what how
important this region is. And,
and Sunland Park's role in terms
of providing housing, um, and
infrastructure to support that
house.
And the fact that uh we, we are
in a position as as a
municipality to provide real
estate and so we want to really
capitalize on the new funding
that's coming in with new
rulemaking that hopefully will
recognize that um colonials,
even though we do have the
colonial infrastructure funding,
right? That, that, um, the, the
example I gave you there, uh, to
do a mixed housing development
along the road and there's a
reason it hasn't been done. It's
very complex, it's very costly.
It requires a binational
approval. They probably
Don't recognize that to even be
able to develop what we're
pointing out we've got to go
through a process with IBWC and
SA on the Mexican side, as well
as other federal and state
agencies, um, before we can even
make it a viable plan, but we
can do that. We also understand
the technicalities of what it
takes to actually prove that,
um, most developers aren't going
to put that kind of investment
up front because it does take a
little bit of time, uh, just to
get through that exercise and so
it's a big investment, but as a
municipality, we can do that.
And it'll create a very unique,
frankly, I, I believe, truly
believe that done right it it it
it would be unique across the
nation. And so that's, that's
our hope is to, can we get
through the role make maybe a
little bit of uh a sort of set
aside, if you will, uh focused
on, on sort of the binational
border communities that we can
take advantage of that because
we do bring a different
opportunity and perspective to
what we're looking to develop
here.
At the same time bridging that
affordable housing, which we
know we're we're one of the, I
mean, we're well below the uh
LMI across the state, so from
that perspective, I know that
we, we stand to really show well
on that. Uh, thank you for that,
Mario. I appreciate that,
Madam Chair, you know, um,
One of the, one of the, the
things that I've seen an issue
and you know, props to Sunland
Park PD and Sunland Park Fire,
outstanding people, good people
working there.
But there's a lot of stress on
them with the border crossings
that are happening.
And the city is starting to has
to use city resources.
To help or assist border patrol
with some of these people who
are hurt or are missing or for
whatever reason, you know, the,
uh, think of maybe a couple of
weeks ago there was a a news
story where some of this, the
fire department is utilizing new
strategies to keep people, uh,
uh, from overheating.
Uh, from, uh, from having heat
stroke, the, so one of the
things that I wanted to ask you
was if you know off the top of
your head, Madam Chair, and, and
Mario is what's the cost of the
city?
Or these assists for Border
Patrol for these folks coming
over.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative,
a lot of members of the council.
I don't have the number in front
of me. I can tell you that in
visiting with the chief this
year alone, uh, calendar year,
we've had over 60 incidents on
A migrant unfortunately who fell
off the train was on the train,
fell off the train, caught his
legs cut underneath and had them
severed. And so these are areas
that are very difficult to get
to when we're looking first to
find the people, so we work very
closely with Border Patrol, um,
and, and so I don't have the
number, but I can tell you, and
I showed some of that we're
investing in in drones to help
assist both PD and fire. We're
we're investing in um what I
would call side by side on
cannas on steroids. I mean,
these are
equipped vehicles so that we can
move in, um, be able to rescue
because our, our regular 4x4
vehicles aren't able to get back
there to be able to assist. We
work very closely with Border
Patrol, um, and you're right,
extremely stressed. I, I can't
even imagine some of the things
that they see and they have to
take with them those are and and
we're continuously looking um
expanding our, our employee
assistance program, uh, and
hopefully in the near future we
start investing in in just
mental health and wellness so we
can provide some
Intervention and and some um
assistance there to to keep our
people there working cause
they're, they're certainly
running into some very intense
scenarios. Thank you for that.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for that, Mario, you know,
this is, this is important and I
believe that the city needs
help.
You know, uh, mayor, city
council doing great, great work.
Uh, but it, it is providing, uh,
a stress, I believe, on the city
of financial stress.
That I, I believe maybe the, the
state can help, we can look at
helping that, but especially our
federal delegation and, and, uh,
getting that, uh, getting some
resources or funding to to help
offset those costs that the city
is taking on for dealing with uh
uh federal federal issue.
So I, I think that's, that's, I
think I, I, I, it was important,
Madam Chair, that I, that I
mention that because the city of
Sunland Park and, and they're
outstanding fire and police are
taking on this additional burden
that I believe they should, you
know, at least have some
financial compensation for us
since they're they're the ones
that are taking on the brunt of
this.
Uh, Madam Chair, one more, uh,
uh, this is for GC, uh, I know
you, you talked a lot about the
infrastructure and everything
that's going on, but how
important is connectivity?
Between these systems between,
you know, the elevated water
tank to, for example, the, the
development that's happening at
the bottom of the escarpment,
you know, how important is this
connectivity is how important is
connectivity to, to, to Crua and
and servicing the the the
customers.
Are you seeing connectivity in
the sense of the system or
connectivity in the sense of
the, the, the region, I'm sorry,
the madam,
I apologize to give you as far
as the system is concerned.
Uh, connectivity is gonna be
very crucial, um, one of those
things that we look at,
especially when we had our water
advisory that took place back in
November, is being able to move
water from one area to another
area. Right now, uh, we can
shift water around uh around the
region, but it's not fully, uh,
it's not a fully blended system
is what we call it is where we
can move water from one side of
the city to the other side, and
that's why we're going to that
unique challenge that we're
discussing or gave the
presentation along the
Pete Dominici corridor, uh, is
that we're trying to re-engineer
a way to move water from the top
part of the Santa Teresa area
down to the border, so
connectivity is going to be very
critical, but it comes along
with the funding portion to be
able to do it.
OK, thank you, thank you, thank
you for that, Madam Chair, and
uh, so 11 other thing that I'd
like to ask that I don't think,
uh, I, I don't think you
mentioned it, but uh there we
have the port of entry in Santa
Teresa.
And uh we have thousands of
vehicles coming through there be
commercial and private vehicles.
And so how important it is to
the how important is it to the
expansion of the board of the
port of entry, the access or the
availability of of water for
that port of entry and for uh
for us to be able to expand
that.
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair members of the
committee, thank you very much
for that question. It's gonna be
crucial. I do know right now
that there are plans. I think
they, they're wanting to expand.
I think the last item that I
heard is that the port of entry
they wanted to expand by over 30
acres for their facility and uh
there was another project that
was coming along the way to
expand in that area as well. Uh,
unfortunately, the
infrastructure was not in place
to accommodate one of those
items and uh and the reason why,
reason being is that there is
only 1 270,000.
tank in that area and only one
well supplying water to that
entire southern portion of the
port of entry area.
Um, we do have the grants in
place right now we actually
shifted our ICAP at the last
minute to make sure that we
included wells for the port of
entry area to accommodate that
region with the water supply.
Uh, thank you for that. Thank
you, Madam Chair, just, uh, you
know, I really appreciate your,
your approach and the, the
approach of, of the new crea
border directors and their
comprehensive uh way of of
looking at the infrastructure
and what's needed, what your
priorities are. I really
appreciate that. I also
appreciate that Crua and the
board are yourself and the board
are, are looking at diversifying
the different uh uh funding
options that you have. You
mentioned Nedbank Colonial
Infrastructure, obviously
anything.
That the capital outlay, and so
I really appreciate that you're
really looking at all the
options when it comes to this.
And I just want to, uh, thank
you and, and, uh, the board for,
for really expanding that and
opening that up. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. We'll
go to Senator Hamlin. Thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you, panel
for your presentation today. I
think, you know, one of the
themes is that we have to be
really smart when it comes down
to looking at our planning and
how we're going to develop and
continue to thrive, uh,
especially when it comes down to
bringing economic development to
our region which we often get
ignored uh in the rest of the
state, so I'm really grateful,
uh, for the work that, that is
being done. Um, my questions are
specifically for Mr. Crosby, and
this is about Crua, um, you
know, I,
I actually think the elephant in
the room is, is really more of
the issues that you're dealing
with right now. Um, and so I, I
do have some questions on that,
um, and, you know, there's the,
uh, checklist that the New
Mexico Environment Department
issued to you that had um 58, I
believe, um, concerns on there
and you've got 56% of it is
completed as of March. Um, I'm
wondering where you are, uh, in
completing that checklist
because there are a couple of
things that, uh, are still
concerning to me about
The process of control
monitoring and record keeping
based on the recommendations and
how you're ensuring all
operators are trained and and
there are several things that
are still in progress, but also
to your credit, there are
several things that have been
completed. Um, so I'm just kind
of wondering where you are on
that and, and when do you
expect, uh, to be able to
complete that checklist.
Thank you very much, uh,
regarding the items that you had
discussed, Representative
Hamlin, oh sorry, Senator,
Senator Helmand.
There there's 58 deficiencies
that were.
That were provided and that was
due to the sanitary survey. So
sanitary survey is done once
every 3 years and the majority
of those deficiencies I believe
were at 70% that we are
completed now with the most
recent being completed were the
top 3, and that goes to some of
the items that you had
addressed, one of them being,
uh.
One of them that you had
mentioned was operator training.
We've increased our operator
training significantly and not
only that, but we also just
hired a new uh operations
manager who's a level 4
certified operator and he is
also an instructor at the New
Mexico school as well, so, uh,
it's a great benefit because
we'll be able to start uh
instructing from in-house, which
is gonna be a great benefit, but
one of the things that continues
to be a challenge for us is
going.
To be two items, number 1, are,
are the salaries that we're
paying for our operators were,
uh, we're almost at a
disadvantage because we're right
on the border, our closest
school to us was in Cruises, so
we may train some operators for
a month or two. they get
certified and then they'll end
up leaving to Las Cruces, and
it's understandable that a lot
of them live over there, so
it's, it's, um, it's
understandable. Uh, the second
item that was on there is gonna
do due to funding we've
invested.
I would say in back in March, we
pulled around a little over
$200.
Uh, from our reserves to be able
to address some of these
challenges, not just these 58
deficiencies that you're that
that we're looking at, but also
challenges to our Sunland Park,
uh, wastewater treatment
facility, which is under an EPA
administrative order and that's
because of it's, it's an old
plant, uh, and we're putting
money into that plant and, and
we.
Spent a lot of money from our
reserves, but there's only so
much that we can do before
funding begins to run out and
one of the areas that we looked
at was our, our rate schedule,
um, and to give you an example
of where we were, our rates were
not appropriately uh in the
correct location to give you
just an example is that through
NED and their study, the average
water utility bill is $41. The
city of Sunland Park at that
time was at 15.
and this includes your 1st 3000
gallons.
Another thing that uh that we
noticed in the study when I came
in was that.
The federal government can
provide funding for
infrastructure, for example, in
this case I'm specifically
talking about the
arsenatetrument facilities.
So in 2008 is when the mandate
had come in where we had to be
below from 50 parts per billion
down to 10 parts per billion.
Well, there's been 4 Arsenate
treatment facilities added.
Since 2009 with 2011 being the
the very first one. The last
time we had a rate increase was
back in 2009. So you've added a
total of approximately $16
million of infrastructure
without the appropriate fees to
pay for the long and short-term
maintenance of those facilities.
So when we're looking at these
challenges, we are also looking
at appropriate rates and of
course nobody in the public
likes to see increased rates,
but the simple matter of fact is
after NMED study where they came
down.
And did uh an independent study
that's one of the items that
they quickly pointed out is that
our rates were not appropriately
set.
So, uh, beginning in July, we
commissioned our on-call
engineers to do a rate study of
cost of cost of service rate
study and it's, it's a bit more
invasive. It's a little bit more
costly, but at the end of the
day we're getting the
appropriate rates based on the
type of consumer that's using
the water and also what it costs
for each consumer.
Um, so it's gonna come down to
funding. Our rates have to be
appropriate to be able to take
care of our infrastructure and
that's those are the things that
we're doing, um, we finished off
the last, uh, we knocked off the
last 3 items we haven't updated.
We'll be updating it here within
this week. Uh, we knocked off
the last 3 items, uh, for having
the correct uh operational
procedures that were in place.
That's what they wanted. They
wanted a a special operating
procedures in place for our
staff. They wanted staff trained
and they wanted appropriate uh
monitoring
our system. The monitoring of
the system is going to be
expensive. um, so right now I, I
don't have the funding of the
complete funding to to
completely monitor it, so we're
finding other ways and means to
be able to do it where we can
still provide monitoring for our
training facilities, uh, and
that's going to be used through
the SCATA system. OK, thank you
for that. I appreciate that.
When you were talking about the
rates.
Um, I'm wondering, you know,
just because of considering.
The folks who are depending on
your water, um, to be able to
wash their clothes and have
drinking water and cook their
meals and.
Um, how are you, if folks are um
delinquent on those fees, how
are you going to collect those
and, and how are you gonna
inform?
The customers that there is
gonna be a rate increase, which
it seems like that's where
you're going.
Yes, in terms of delinquency,
the way we have it is based on
our ordinance. If somebody is is
later or behind on on their uh
their water utility bill.
Unfortunately, we they do get a
shut off notice and after that
shut off notice is not listened
to, we go and shut off the. How
long is that shut off notice
for? What what's the, the time
from they get the notice to the
time that the water is actually
shut off. They get the notice
during the mid portion of the
month, so your utility bill goes
out within I would say the first
week it gets sent out.
And then if they're still behind
the mid month they'll get a
notice. So then we give them a
total to the end of that month
to go ahead and to get caught up
so they got roughly 15 days,
roughly 15 days.
Now what had taken place and why
we had been behind on delinquent
uh on delinquent taxpayers is
because during the season, uh, I
would say from 2020 all the way
to March of 2023.
Oh it's almost 3 years.
Um, there is a no shutdown
policy.
Uh, due to the COVID and
that put a significant hurt on
the utility system because many
people unfortunately due to some
uh uh experiencing hardships and
others just ignoring the fact
that they had the utility bill,
it put us in an extreme bad
situation to be able to collect
and then what ends up happening
is that over time people move.
So once they move, trying to
collect is gonna be is gonna be
difficult.
Um, so that that is one thing
that hamstrung us as a utility
system and also the shortage of
operators that we have is that
yes, you may get shut down, but
we, our approach to doing the
shutdowns was those with the
highest amount we had uh folks
who had bills up in the $5000
for water utility bills. So
those are the first ones that we
started approaching. We started
working our way down. Could we
get everybody shut off that
didn't pay no, we just don't
have the, the personnel for it
at this time, but we do our best
to get a certain amount based on
what's available.
to do those shutdowns because
we're often left with a time is
do I take care of infrastructure
or do I go shut down and
typically we only have enough to
take care of infrastructure and
that's what we take care of. Are
you aware if there are any
programs to help people prevent
their utilities from getting
shut off. I know the city of Las
Cruces has that.
Yes, we, we, we did, we actually
applied to two, so one was we
aligned with Donana County and
it was on our website as well as
a lot of people took advantage
of um Health and Human Services
had another grant and we took,
uh, I would say I don't have the
numbers off the top of my head,
but a significant funding amount
up to I think it was, it was up
to $11,000 per person uh who
could apply and we did help a
lot of residents get caught up
in that, and I mean, off the top
of my head, I don't know, but
it.
was a significant amount of
money that came into Health and
Human Services grant that we
apply for for those two. And
thank you for that. And would
you, if somebody was showing a
good faith effort to try and,
and, you know, pare down their.
Their bill.
Would you still shut it off or
would you give them grace?
Um, what we did with that, uh,
Senator Hamlin was we set up a
payment arrangement plan and
that payment arrangement plan we
did and we've, we've had that
payment plan and it's still in
place. Uh, however, uh, with,
with everything that happens,
uh, there is a time frame and a
timeline, uh, if somebody
doesn't come in to set up a
payment arrangement when we put
it out through letters, we put
it out through circulation of
the local newspaper that we have
in the area.
Um, if they don't come in and
and we get they get caught now,
unfortunately they, they would
need to pay everything upfront
because so much time has gone
that we've allowed allowed for a
payment arrangement plan to take
place and even today we, the
hardest part that we face is
especially during summer months,
uh, especially when kids are
involved, uh, it's a very tough
decision and, and there has to
be a grace looked at at that
point too and find a pathway
forward. So they're showing good
effort and faith and then you
you show good effort and faith,
but
It all depends on a case by case
basis. OK, I appreciate that.
Um,
so where are we in terms of, uh,
the, the folks getting drinkable
water and safe water.
Well, um, thank you for bringing
that up. It's very important
that we bring out is that we've
had 12 tests, uh, 12 consecutive
tests, and one thing that we
that we do the way that the
state does their recording is
that they do their arsenic uh
testing once every quarter and
it's based off of a rolling
average.
And so I think a lot of people
are uh not aware of how the the
grading is done, but because of
last year's numbers there was a
high number that was on there,
so they may say, hey, you're
still not you're still not in
compliance, which we technically
are still not in compliance
because it's going based off of
the year rolling average, once
we roll off last year's high
number, uh, I think it was at 33
parts per billion, then we'll be
back in compliance, but if you
look at our testing that have
been done in the past two
quarters, they have all been
below the maximum contamination
level at all.
4 plants and, and I'm very proud
of the team that we have and the
effort that they put into
getting this done,
uh, these operators have put a
lot of time, effort, late nights
to get this because we're short
of having, you need a level 4
certified train operator to be
working on those arsenic plants
and right now we have a
consultant that's one and then
we have our lead uh operator,
which is the second one, and we
have a total of 4 and that
that's not including the rest of
the work that they have to go
through, but aside from that.
To reassure the public, we are
also doing
by uh biweekly monitoring of our
arsenic to an independent lab
certified by NMED and the past
12 tests, we have been passing
and we have been below the
maximum contamination level.
There has been members of the
public who are concerned
regarding the calls that we have
been receiving regarding that
their water is not drinkable
because the total dissolved
solids are high.
And, and I wanted to bring this
up to the members of the
committee because that is a
secondary item, not regulated by
the EPA, not regulated by NMED
unfortunately, the water that we
do have.
Um, the total dissolved solids
are going up and that's all
because we are drilling deeper
for our water.
And typically and, and this is
coming from the US Geological
Survey, uh,
um.
government entity is that their
data is showing that the total
dissolved solves are going to
continue to increase because
we're we're we're we're drilling
deeper and deeper for our water.
But once again,
It is not an item that is
overseen by it's not an item
that is regulated by EPA and by
MED.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair, just
two more questions, I believe,
um, and so how are people able
to get their water? Are they
drinking water out of the tap or
are they getting it elsewhere?
Madam Chair, Senator Hamlin, uh,
right now, uh, members of the
community are drinking water out
of their tap if there's concerns
about it, they do come in to
crea to ask us to test their
water. Unfortunately, there's
been times where they haven't
been asking in this case a group
has been asking to test for
arsenic.
out of their tap is not one item
that we approach because it is a
hazardous chemical when they're
doing the testing, it's not one
thing that we can do or we can
give the public test uh test
samples to test oursnick, uh,
but the water uh is safe to
consume, uh, the best way to
look at that is through the
consumer confidence report. That
one just came out and we
published it in June of this
year, so it's done every year so
people can see uh what, what,
what, how the great is of their
water.
And that is on our website as
well, OK, and I, I appreciate
you, your answering these
questions, uh, Madam Chair, I
just have one other question.
Um, what are your protocols, uh,
in place to inform the customers
of problems with the water in in
the future.
Madam Chair, and Senator Hamlin,
the protocols that we follow,
uh, one thing that we've added
is when there is an issue that
takes place in this case a major
line break we post it up we do
have a uncontracted public
information officer, Mr. Yel
Vihel, who's come in to assist
us.
And we we notify the public
right away and we also notify uh
the we have an email thread
where we can notify the school
district as well when there's
something that's pertaining to
them.
Uh, and also the border
industrial region when there's a
major line break. Um, the other
thing that is important to
recognize is when there is line
breaks, we'll typically start
getting calls of discolored
water, and that is just because
uh
When there is a line break,
there's a high rush of water
coming through, which will score
the pipes and cause and mix up
the mineral deposits that are
naturally occurring and uh we'd
like to notify the public in
advance as well so that they're
aware that there may be a
temporary shortage of of water
due to the time that it takes to
get it fixed. OK, I do
appreciate other efforts just
because, uh, not everybody has
access to, uh, the Internet and
it's not gonna be able to check
your sites, um, also I would
encourage maybe robocalls um to
to your
Customs that is a really, um,
has a high impact area and is
low maintenance for you, um,
just because I think uh urgency
in these cases is actually the
most important thing of letting
people know and then, um, being
able to provide logical,
practical, uh, resources for
them to get healthy water
because I think there were water
bottles that were given out. Am
I correct on that? Just plastic
water bottles that were given
when we first had that issue.
Madam Chair, and uh Senator
Hamlin, uh, during the water
advisory back in November, um.
Being at the entity that we were
and small, and what I mean by
small, there's 3 of us in the
office for the back end and then
2 in the front counter facing
and at that time we had about 8
operators.
Um,
We were not ready for an
outbreak like that and our
entity of size could not take it
on. Uh, we were very grateful
that there was members of the
community.
Uh, who, who are well off that
were able to provide water to
us, and secondly, the city of
Sunland Park along with all
their departments who were able
to come in along with Donana
County, uh, whoever to provide
those resources, so it put us
through a drill to be able to,
in the event that this were to
occur again, to put us in a
situation to where we're able to
respond and initially I think
what you were mentioning is that
there was water bottles that
were given out and, and, uh, we
increased the amount of water as
we supply came.
In so towards the end, everybody
was getting about 1 to 2 to 3
cases depending on what they
needed, but initially since we
weren't set up, yes, we were
having to um maybe give out half
a case just for that day to get
us through until more water
supply came in, but uh no, those
are uh critical moments to just
show how critical uh our
infrastructure is and can be
if um
if.
The personnel are not in place
to manage it.
Sure, sure,
um, Mr. Crosby, thank you very
much for answering my questions.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Um, we've got 2 more
people on the list, and I want
to remind
members that we still have, uh,
we're running, we're starting to
get behind schedule. Uh, we've
got uh several other
presentations. So if you would
be, um,
Very directed with your
questions. Thank you.
Representative Roybacaviero.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um, do
my best. It always happens when
uh we get lengthy uh and deep
into.
The subject matters, so thank
you. Along the same line, I'm
going to start. I wasn't
intending to, um, but with
Senator Hamlin's questions, it
occurred to me, I'm not quite
sure if Juan Carlos answered
this or not, but I want, I, I'm
also very concerned about, um,
what we've been talking about in
terms of water quality and what
occurred and communication, so.
Are your um notices.
Uh, bilingual.
They go out, uh, when someone's
behind or just in general.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
uh, Representative Caballero,
uh, when we send out our
notifications we do every effort
to provide a bilingual
translation in this case when we
were having the water advisory
we did put it out in Spanish.
Now, a lot of times when we're
trying to find translators on
the heat of the moment, um,
sometimes we're left with
resources like Google Translate
which are not always the best to
use, but we make every effort to
Be able to provide uh uh
translation services, even in
our meetings that we have that
are publicly held, we have a
translator who is able to
translate for the public if they
need a translation.
This is, uh, thank you, uh,
Madam Chair. This is extremely
important because we're talking
about public health and other
types of, of, um,
Concerns related to
Not just this situation, but
just in general, and I think
it's important that all
communications, um, that we
undertake, especially in this
area because we know that
Spanish is the primary language
for most of the residents. And,
um, there are a lot of
resources. There's the
university. There's just a lot
of of resources that could
provide, um, bilingual
interpretation or translation.
So I just suggest that and also.
listing things on the website as
the senator mentioned, is not
always the best because we know
that internet access is not
available, uh,
To many of our households. So
just looking for alternative,
and it's always best to take
notices to where we know our
residents congregate, um,
popular.
Places of, of, you know, just,
just where they congregate. And
I think that's an important
point also. So I thank you for
that. Now I do have um
A question or state, yeah,
comments related to um
Mr. Lopez's presentation.
Many of you know or do not know
that my career was community
economic development. As such, I
spent a lot of time that was
what I did for, for my career.
And one of the things that in
our
to attract
And to recruit businesses and
industry into tour areas. We
always look to incentivize.
Uh, as much as possible and in
the state of New Mexico we use
what we
provide as incentives. However,
we're very
Um, we don't do a good job of
asking in return.
Um, once we recruit or we're
working towards site uh
development and recruitment. I
think it's important to ask the
businesses and industry in this
case big industry that you're,
uh, referring to in your report,
what are they going to give back
to the community? What are they
going to do besides setting up
shop, we know that's a huge uh
plus, but what about wages,
living wages. What about um
adopting schools to help improve
the school quality of, of
schools. And then what about
childcare? That's a critical
point. Uh, we, we forget to ask
in return for the quality of
life, the one common thing,
Madam Chair, that all of you
presented was quality of life.
You all accentuated quality of
life. So did Jerry in his
presentation. So these are
quality of life issues that we
don't want to just provide the
land and incentivize their.
In different ways, but they're
gonna be here for the long term
and so are our residents and our
workforce, they're going to be
here for the long term. So I
think it's an important
component to ask.
In return,
What they're going to, how their
investments or what their
investments are going to be in
these three areas. That's really
important, uh, because we want
to provide our workforce with um
sustainability and, uh, to be
here long term and to provide
career paths as opposed to just
a job. If you look at it from a
point of view, and economic
development is we're just
providing jobs, then you're
going to look at everything from
the minimum.
Perspective and not from what's
the maximum. And so we want to,
I think, uh, start changing our
language and look more career
pathways for our workforce. So
that was a suggestion. The
question I have is.
How have you tapped into New
Mexico Finance Authority, um.
Go ahead.
Madam Chair Representative,
we've worked with the NMFA on
various programs that they have
that are specific to um industry
attraction and those needs. Um,
so it just depends on the
availability of them and
sometimes many of the times
they're, uh, they have
competitive application windows,
so not all companies number one
will fit into those windows of
timeline, uh, or second
secondarily, not all of these
companies will
require the financing instrument
that they may be offering. The
good news is with these
companies of this size that come
in usually have their own
financing mechanism mechanisms
already in place, so they're not
reliant upon that. However, uh,
we have in the past year spent
quite a bit of time on the new
program that they've uh offered
up the Enterprise Opportunity
Fund, uh, and specifically to
try to, uh, um.
Understand the program from
attracting speculative
development which has been
talked about earlier today. Uh,
so we continue to work with
them. I believe they're in phase
two of of the um, the
application period. They've
they've they've changed it a
little bit and I think it's good
news. Part of the uh
application, they've carved out
some dollars that are for
housing as well because that is
part of the uh growth of
economic development is
workforce housing. Um, I think
the one instrument we'd like to
see.
improve with the program is, uh,
some tweaks to really make it
more available for attracting
new fresh capital coming into
the state. Uh, I think sometimes
these programs are built on the
fact that it it's assuming that
a developer needs, um.
Needs a lower cost financing,
let's say, to get over the
hurdle.
And so in that case we're not
dealing with developers who need
that. We're just trying to
assure that we can lower the
risk of putting their capital
into New Mexico. The last thing
a spec developer wants to do is
test the new market out, build a
300,000 square foot facility and
then sit with that building
being empty for three years.
That's, that's the.
That's, you know, the dagger in
the heart. Um, so I think a
little tweaks to that program
and we still are working with
the director Marquita Russell on
that and, and, uh, hopefully we
can make those tweaks to be more
inviting for risk capital coming
into the state. That'd be my
only.
Discussion on that on that
program. Thank you, Madam Chair,
and that is important, and
please continue because she's
opening up a lot of new avenues
also. The final thing is on the,
um, she also the New Mexico
Finance Authority can also be um
instrumental in what you were
talking about that the fact that
we don't have incentives for
developers. So this development
and develop bs, um, can be
Um, incentivized through some
of, of her um
Funding financing and funding
mechanisms, so I would look at
that as well, besides us being
able to do something as a
legislature. And the final
question was really for Mario,
but he just left, so, um, maybe
you can convey this, um,
whoever, but um I was interested
in knowing how he had tapped or
how he is tapping into mortgage
finance authority for the, the
housing plan that he proposed.
Um, in his report, which was
under, under housing. So, uh,
someone can just, um,
Ask that question and make sure
that he's tapping, they're
tapping into the mortgage
finance authority for assistance
in, um, in the housing.
Madam Chair Representative
Representative, I'd be happy to
convey that to him. OK. Thank
you very much. Thank you, madam.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'll try
to be quick. My, my question is,
do you guys have any PFOS
problems here with your water?
That discussion, Madam Chair,
uh, representatives and
senators, uh, regarding P FIFAs,
um, the majority of our water is
received from the Messia Bolsin,
so the concern of PFAS is not
going to be too high, uh,
according to what our engineers
are looking at right now, we
still need to conduct tests, but
the good thing is since we're
getting our our source of water
from the from the, I guess from
aquifers versus being a surface
level, um, that's.
Uh
Knocking on wood until we see
the results, but FIFA should not
be a high concern for us at this
point. There is only one area
that we'd probably be looking at
if there if we have our wells
that are around that we have one
landfill that's located in uh
within the city of Lasulland
Park, we would have to pay
special attention to the wells
that are near that area for
PFAs, um, that is another area
that we have to be complying
with, I believe, within the next
5 to 10 years from EPA, um,
that's gonna be an extraordinary
expense to go through for
utility.
Companies, uh, one thing that
crew has been doing is that
we're already incorporating uh
initial research cost with our
cost of service study that's
coming in this year, uh, to
start incorporating 4 PFAS so
that we can start the testing
for it.
Thank you for that. And then my
next question, uh, that I really
want to ask, I had a bunch more,
but.
I'll cut it short on this as one
more is.
How much federal monies are
being how much support are we
getting from the federal
government?
For this project means that it's
a project that affects the whole
country, not just New Mexico,
where this is for the betterment
of the whole country importing
products and exporting, so how
much?
Support are we getting from the
federal side of this.
Madam Chair, Representative,
when you refer to this project,
and money is like for for the
housing, the infrastructure, the
water.
Utilities roads.
Madam Chair Representative, I'm
not sure the entire amount. I
know that's usually with the,
uh, we work through the county
or through the city in terms of
some of the requirements they
have, and I know they, they,
there, there's dollars that they
ask from the state and as well
as they ask from the federal
government, and I know that the
economic development department
does the same, so I don't know
what the entire amount is. I can
tell you on one specific project
we have been working on
specifically is we're calling
the New Mexico trade port, um,
we
Actually received some planning
dollars through the county and
through request to the county
and through a, uh, original, um,
consultant financing that came
from New Mexico DOT uh to help
us, uh, to help us with that,
but we received about $1.1
million from the US DOT, which
helps us outlay kind of a supply
chain plan and an understanding
of how Santa Teresa Donana
County can be part of the supply
chain solution on, on, on a
national basis. And right now.
I know the county is looking at
about a 2nd round of planning
dollars for that, which could
then lead to other
infrastructure funding dollars
for logistics for that program
going forward, but unfortunately
I don't have the exact amount
the all that's been invested by
the federal government in this
area in the amount of money that
we're, we're talking about on
the readiness fund.
What, what kind of number do you
guys have put together that you
need for your project, so Madam
Chair, Representative, I think
there's going to be a lot more
coming out of that discussion.
Um, I hate to just throw a
blanket number on there. Um, I
threw out some, um, some, um,
some examples of what other
states are doing, everything
from 50 to $130 million. Uh, I
do think we need to be a think
accordingly in terms of some
number between 7500 and 100,
that is just what I'm thinking.
Out loud, but I know New Mexico
idea, um, which is the
association of Economic
Developers for New Mexico. Uh,
we are working jointly together
to try to come up with a more
uh.
Uh, clear plan to represent or
choose to uh to discuss with you
before the legislative session.
OK, thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you. Thank you, and
I appreciate you, uh, curbing
all the questions. If you have
more questions and want to talk
offline or if you want to give,
uh, questions to Erin, we can
make sure to forward those on to
presenters. Um, I just wanted to
add one or two more things. Um,
a couple of years ago, um,
Representative Herera and I did
a um bill and it passed the
House and the Senate, and this
is actually for Cura, um, and it
was basically going to add, um,
maybe a penny or two to to
constituents or pass that on,
but it was to do a water
testing, and it included, uh,
arsenic testing. And uh it was
pocket vetoed and this is the
exact kind of situation that we
were trying to prevent and so
given the
situation, I think that we'll
run that bill again, um,
probably get vetoed again, but I
think it's important that we
make sure that we have clean
water. Um, I'm, I'm concerned
that if you all are doing
testing and you're not testing
for arsenic, how do we know that
it's safe?
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, um.
I don't know if I maybe uh
didn't speak uh to the question,
but in regards to arsenic
testing, I think we're the
confusion laid is that we're not
giving arsenic testing uh
samples or strips to the members
that are in the residences that
are living there. We are testing
for arsenic every day at our
facilities, uh, but the test
strips that we are using,
they're non-certifiable. It's
basically a gauge of where uh
these everyday chemicals,
there's 3 main chemicals that
are mixed and.
Arch Truman facility. So every
day you take those sample, those
samples now they can be off plus
or minus a couple percentage,
but it's a very good indication
of what your chemicals are doing
to treat for arsenic. And so we,
our operators use that on a
daily basis at our arsenic
trimming facilities, um, now to
strengthen and to reassure the
public because of the event that
occurred in November, uh, what
we did is we took it a step
further. The enemy D will sample
once a quarter, but we know
that's not enough for the
public.
And so that's why we're doing
biweekly uh monitoring, sending
it off to a certified lab to NBD
and so far the past two, I'm
sorry, the past 12, uh, test
results have been below the
maximum contamination level of
10 parts per billion to reassure
the public that we are treating
for arsenic and that they're
able to see the scores published
on our website. I do know that
we're looking at other avenues
right now. We're going through
the procurement process as we
speak to look at the best cost
benefit.
For us to be able to reach out
to the public uh through mass
texting because it is cheaper,
uh, uh, is it a cheap component
to do, however, um, being that
our rates are not at the
appropriate level, we're we're
counting every, every, every
fund that we have to make sure
it's utilized the most to impact
health, safety and welfare.
I appreciate the clarification
and I, I did misunderstand that.
So that put me on alarm, so that
probably eliminates 3 or 4 more
other questions that I had, um,
and on that, I'm gonna go ahead
and, uh, thank you all for the
presentation. Um, thank you for
being here. I know that, uh,
those were, there was probably
some uneasiness, but I think,
uh, I know I feel a little bit
better, but, and we would like
to be kept, um, informed,
especially with what's going on
uh with that, and if there's
problems, um, to know ahead of
time how we
can help, um, so we don't get to
that crisis, uh, place again.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, one thing that we
2 or 2 items that we that we
along with the city have formed
is that we're looking at with
the crew board is that there's
an advisory committee that is
held with members of the uh of
the public as well as, uh, uh,
community groups that are in
Sunland Park, uh, to be able to
address those questions so we're
incorporating them so that they
can be a part of the solution, a
part of communication with us,
so I think that's gonna be an
important step in the.
Right direction because this
advisory uh committee will be
made up of members of the uh of
the public and also groups of
the public. But the second item
is, as you, as you all go and
look at funding for resources,
one thing I cannot stress enough
is that we're, we are in a crash
course with the amount of
retirement that's going to be
coming soon. Uh, our level 4
operators will be retiring and
there's very few of them, and so
I don't know if there's any
mechanisms that are available or
tools are available to to put up
an accelerated
A program for trainings, of
course we are doing our job at
the utilities, but utilities our
size are not equipped to train
in-house at least not at our
size right now. I know bigger
utility companies do train from
in-house and that's the first
thing that they do. Uh, we just
don't have that luxury, so
anything that can help out small
and medium sized water utility
companies to accelerate
operational education uh would
be a tremendous help to us.
Um, I hear you and I, um, I
think that that's it's a much
bigger conversation and if we
could get with, uh, you offline,
um, definitely would like to put
something together for that, so
I appreciate that. Thank you.
Thank you, Devin, for your
presentation. I appreciate you
both being here and Mr. Infante,
of course, he had to skip out a
little early, um, which, um, I
appreciate that he was here as
long as he was. So thank you so
much. We can get our next group
of presenters up.
Um, while we're doing that, I
also want to acknowledge, uh, we
had, um, the Sunland Park City,
um, Mayor Javier Pereira, he was
here yesterday, um, and he was
here today. He did have to leave
with Mr. Infante. Uh, we have
Sunland Park, uh, City
Councilwoman Daisy Leda here and
we have Micaela Laracadena, who
is in our audience today as
well. Appreciate that,
appreciate, uh, her being here
as well. And of course if she
wants to sit, of course, up at
the das we would love to have
you.
Well, I appreciate you all
waiting. I know we're running a
little late, so I'm hoping that
we can keep us, keep the, the
train moving, um, I, I'm, I'm
looking at my, my, uh, committee
members to, to stay succinct.
Um, I'm gonna ask you all to
make your introduction, say who
you're with, and uh then then
once everybody's been
introduced, then, um, decide who
starts with the presentation. So
thank you all for being here
today.
Thank you, Madam Chair. My name
is Kate Noble. I am the
president and CEO of Growing Up
New Mexico.
I am Daisy Lea and I am the
executive director for the
Higher Education.
Um, Angela Garcia. I own, uh,
the toy Box Early Learning
Centers here in Las Cruces, and
I'm the president of Full Circle
advocacy group and community
services.
And my name is Barbara Luna
Tedro. I am a provider in
Farmington and I am the policy
chair for the New Mexico Child
Care and Education Association.
And unfortunately, Ray
Jaramillo, who is the owner of
Alpha Schools here in Las Cruces
who was supposed to present fell
sick and ended up at urgent care
last night, so I'm filling in
for him. We wanted somebody
local. I'm sorry about that.
Well, we appreciate that you
were able to get here so
quickly, and we hope that he's
feeling better soon.
All right, thanks, Kate.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, I'll go ahead
and start us off on our
presentation about the business
of early childhood education.
As I mentioned, my name is Kate
Noble. I am the president and
CEO of Growing Up New Mexico,
um, a tiny bit about me, my, my
first career was as um a
reporter and producer and anchor
for BBC World in in business and
economic news. Uh, my second
career as I talk about it was,
um, for the next 10 years as a
community economic development
person for the city of Santa Fe,
um, where I found myself
starting in business
development.
And thinking more and more
inclusively about community
development as economic
development. Um, and so I really
appreciate being here and what
you all do. Um, that also led me
to run for the Board of
Education where I where I still
serve in Santa Fe as a member of
our school board. Um, and then
it led me to early childhood,
which I feel like a, a kid in a
toy store because it is economic
development for multiple
generations as I hope we can,
um, hear about.
and think about today.
Um, growing up in New Mexico has
pre-K, childcare, home visiting,
family coaching, an array of
services there. Uh, we also have
our first statewide program,
which is really to support
home-based childcare throughout
the state of New Mexico and to
support those businesses to be,
um, both high quality care and
strong businesses. Um, we've
also moved into business
development for licensed centers
with a project called Crissair.
That we will, um, I will touch
upon a little bit more in a
moment.
And today really I hope to make
the case that early childhood
and childcare are foundational
economic development. We heard a
lot in the previous panel about
infrastructure and the
importance of infrastructure to
economic development. Um, I hope
that you will all buy into the
idea that this is human
infrastructure that is
completely necessary in the same
way physical infrastructure is
for us to have, um, healthy
communities and healthy
economies.
In, um,
There's $122 billion in lost
earnings, productivity, and
revenue every year in the US,
according to a recent study by
Ready Nation, um, because of
lack of childcare. In New
Mexico, the bipartisan Policy
Center looked at it and said
there was a 26% gap in childcare
versus the potential need in New
Mexico.
Um,
I can also say I was born and
raised in Santa Fe, New Mexico,
um, and having worked a lot with
our business community there,
um, we've seen in our chamber of
Commerce. We can go ahead and
move to the next slide, as well
as many statewide, um,
identifying the need for child
care because local businesses
are coming forward and saying,
uh, they can't hire people
because of childcare. We
partnered with the Santa Fe
Chamber of Commerce and did a
survey, um, and we had 60
of the families who responded
say that they needed more or a
lot more childcare in order to
make ends meet. So in a time
when we're looking at a
workforce shortage. We also
heard about that plenty in the
past panel, um, childcare is a
foundational answer, uh, to how
we get more folks, particularly
women, into the workforce.
Next slide please.
Of course, New Mexico and
through the leadership of this
legislature has made big
investments in early childhood,
and they do depend primarily on
strong women and minority owned
businesses. I also am here to
say what we need is a model of
business development to support
these businesses that is unique
and tailored to the industry's
needs.
And again, as sort of we focus
on the human infrastructure to
think about how we support this,
um, childcare is unique because
children always have to be the
priority. A business owner
cannot get distracted with doing
their cash flow or looking at
their revenue when they have a
child who will need care melts
down, um, and, and need that
supervision. So this is an
industry that needs a different
model. It also has
Layers of regulation that are
kind of unprecedented in a lot
of other industries. As a quick
example, we have a classroom of
one year olds and a classroom of
two year olds that growing up in
New Mexico there are 41 year
olds who will not turn 2 years,
6 months, until some time this
fall or the last one, the
youngest one turns 2 years, 6
months in January. Now, in a
moment where our fire marshal
rules
Conflict with the early
childhood licensing rules, um,
in the instance of that child,
uh, we are keeping a slot in our
2 year old classroom open 6
months, um, and this has to do
with the doors, the fire marshal
won't let kids in our 2 year old
classroom be any younger than 2
years, 6 months, um, because
there is not an outside door in
that classroom. So in that case,
we are holding a slot open doing
what's right for the family
until January, until this child
turns 2 years, 6 months.
Um, and that's because of the
fire marshal regulation, not the
early childhood regulation. And
this is why, as we look at this,
as those of us in economic
development used to sort of
modeling how these things go. We
don't actually understand this
business model that well because
of the layers of regulation that
vary widely throughout our state
because of different fire and
local zoning codes as well.
Next slide please.
Um, a few examples of
initiatives that are happening
in New Mexico and and that are
working now because we really
are leading the way on this as
well as many other things in
early childhood. Um, we have an
accelerator called the
accelerator, which stands for
Training Home Educators. Uh, we
have had 3 years and are now
accepting applications for our
4th 4th cohort. There are more
than 200 home-based caregivers
who have graduated from the
accelerator in the past 3.
Y. 51% of them say they've seen
increased revenue as a result of
this accelerator and 36% say
they are caring for more kids.
Uh, we also have a recent
initiative called Crissa, um,
which was funded by the Early
Childhood Education and Care
Department with um some of the
last of stimulus funds. It
kicked off in the spring and
offered business development
training tools, as well as
coaching for these businesses,
coupled with grants, $10,000
grants per classroom or per home
for various improvements with
the focus on infant and toddler
slots and quality.
Force also includes community
collaboratives, which is a key
piece of again what I hope to
get across today that we need
community development and
economic development to wrap
around these businesses in the
same way we do for
economic-based businesses for
manufacturing businesses for
businesses that are more
traditionally seen as economic
development, a key part of the
approach needs to be to wrap
around these businesses. I also
want to mention one other
program called
Escalonis, which offers cash
incentives because many of these
businesses need to bootstrap
themselves. Um, they're along
two tracks in increasing quality
and increasing business
strength. So for example, if you
open a separate business bank
account, which is one of the big
things we've identified a lot of
home-based caregivers don't do.
They have their finances
intermingled. Um, we'll pay $100
as a reward for opening that
business bank account, or, um,
as a quality measure, if someone
gets CPR or first aid certified
For their childcare, um, we'll
pay $150 for that quality
achievement.
Next slide, please. And going
back to Crissair as I mentioned,
it kicked off in the spring. Um,
there was a lot of sort of
urgency around the timing of
this, but 103 grants have been
approved totalling $2.7 million
that is still flowing into the
community. 57% of that has gone
to childcare centers, 43% to
homes. Um, the estimate is that
803 new childcare slots have
been supported by this funding
and 400.
12 jobs have been created or
supported.
So as I've touched upon and just
wrapping up, um, I'm really here
to advocate for a two-pronged
approach that we as a state
think about this infrastructure
and provide robust business
development support with tools,
training, coaching, as well as
funding, and again this needs to
be a unique model that really
does consider the crucial thing
of childcare, of children in
these businesses being the most
important priority.
Um, the other prong is the
wraparound and community
economic development support. So
as we think about housing as we
think about chambers of commerce
as we think about funding as we
think about expansion projects
to think about childcare as the
industry that is the foundation
for so many workers to be able
to go to work, um, and
everything we do, including
reducing regulation
We passed a childcare by right
zoning ordinance in Santa Fe,
uh, Riodoso is now considering
that, um, and we are happy to
work with any local government
or group on ways to connect
resources which can include
health infrastructure, it can
include libraries. There's lots
of ways to think about this, but
ultimately, um, we need to think
about early childhood as
economic development and treat
it as such. Thank you very.
much, Madam Chair, members of
the committee.
Good evening, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. So,
um, the 1st 3 slides are, um,
just a little bit of, of, of my
background story so I'm just
gonna skip them and I'm gonna go
because I'm sure that you guys
are hungry as I am.
um, but I'll give you a short,
um, I started as.
The daughter of a home care
provider in the 90s and um I
first opened my first dinner in
2007 due to high demand in the
community, now 17 years later,
La Colmen Academy will be my 5th
learning center, thus providing
high quality services to the
community and helping fill the
gap to those non-traditional
hours and lack of high quality
spaces for infant and toddlers.
So in early 2023, Stampee
Culinary Partners in Sunland
Park
meet uh processing company
expressed a need for child care.
In a very early morning and late
night hours as some other
employees were experiencing
childcare challenges, um, also
the border border industrial
association, um, Mr. Pacheco,
um, I had many meetings with him
as well and they were struggling
the same uh for the same, the
same thing, um, I met Ms.
Patricia Villa Lobos, who is the
um RPN liaison and
representative for the USDA.
And she began collaborating with
Stampee, um, the City of
Southern Park, the Community
Foundation of Southern New
Mexico and the high of education
to explore the idea of child
care facilities that could
accommodate stampedes staff and
other surrounding businesses. So
currently, um, I am actually,
um, with the help of the USDA
making those connections and the
SBDC helping with the creation
of the business plan and
projection, the terrible
Foundation wanting to help with
staff development.
The SBA and local banks such as
First Sight, willing to look my
way to get this project going, I
was able to start the process to
createla Colmena Academy, which
is um 11,100 square feet
building designed to be a high
quality early child care
facility, uh, where we would be
offering not only
non-traditional hours but mainly
infant toddler care.
Uh, with a place for nursing
mothers, a large space for
family engagement gatherings
where parents can receive
trainings and resources and uh
comfortable beautiful designed
staff lounges, classrooms that
are designed with the child in
mind to bring out the best in
their academic success and a
kitchen that any chef will dream
of to create nutritious meals.
So as you can see so far, it's
been great. However, the
facility is quoted um at over $4
million and I have some quotes
here from um different um.
Contractors and they really
detailed what it is in regards
to the design overhead um taxes,
etc. but it is a little, it's
actually $4,146,388.38 which is
a lot of money and that would
put me into debt, not only
myself, my kids and my grandkids
for a really long time, um,
they're resulting in maybe
reduction of the building,
sacrificing spaces such as a
nursing areas for moms.
Or um individuality of
playgrounds maybe spaces for the
families to have family
engagements and etc.
We wanted to highlight this
amazing, um, out of the box
thinking that um our community
providers are, are doing to
provide this access, working
with local businesses, working
with other organizations in the
community to show you that we
are ready, um, to, to start
closing those gaps. We have
knowledge and we have the
business expertise to put a lot
of these things into place.
Where we're lacking is the
capital.
Brastructure. Um, I don't know
anybody in this room. If if you
do, maybe come talk to us that
could afford $4.3 million today.
Um, so it's creating a huge
barrier in our ability to help
close these gaps. We want to,
we're ready, um, but
unfortunately, there's not a lot
of funding and capital for
childcare businesses like
ourselves. Um, we know that you
guys as a legislative body have
made incredible investments in
early childhood. So I'm not
going to sit here and tell you
how important it is because the
thing
You guys already know, but
unfortunately, um, the key piece
that we feel is missing is the
fact that we are left out of the
conversation in these meetings
and in these conversations
around economic development. So
we were very thankful when
Representative, um, Chair
Gallegos reached out to us and
brought us into this space to
have conversations with you guys
because we are trying to do um
innovative thinking and we're
really trying to partner with
businesses, um, chambers of
commerce, right? We all really
trying
To work cohesively in filling
these gaps. But even when we
come up with these amazing
initiatives like Miss Daisy has,
we get that sticker and it seems
just so unattainable. So
whenever we speak to you guys
and and we want to come with
some some solutions too, right?
We want you to know that we're
trying to partner and understand
the issues, but we're also
trying to come with solutions.
Um, one of the biggest things
with this is, um, how does the
state help invest in
infrastructure, um, for
community partners like
ourselves.
Um, whether that be, um,
supporting in, um, loans that
have very low interest rates
that we qualify based on um our
understood revenues, right?
Because that's part of it too. A
provider like myself, I have to
have a certain amount that these
banks are going to say, yeah,
we'll give you $4.3 million
whereas the state understands
where our revenue streams come
from. Um, they understand what
that would look like for our
community, um, and how that
could boost the economy in in
New Mexico and in our
communities, so.
Um, you know, we also talked
about, um, possible loan
forgiveness, like she said, we
don't necessarily want our
grandchildren's grandchildren,
grandchildren to be, um, paying
for this, um, when, when we're
helping build the economy, maybe
trying to find ways to have loan
forgiveness on these loans at
some point. Um, many of us,
especially in, in our
communities down here, we're
serving, um, mus 100% subsidize
my programs, right? So we're
serving the most at-risk
children in these programs, um,
giving high quality.
Looking at non-traditional hours
and all of these aspects. So
again, we thank you for
listening to um Miss Daisy's
amazing project and, um,
understanding where the gaps are
and um bringing us in the
conversation. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Barbara Luna Tedro, and
I am a provider in Farmington.
Um, first I would like to, Madam
Chair, um, express the deep
gratitude to the legislature,
the governor, for your steadfast
support support in early
childhood education and a
special thanks to you, Madam
Chair, for supporting and
sponsoring the early Childhood
Trust Fund.
Um, through the gross receipts
tax exemption that you all
passed, it has only been 2
months. However, we as the
Childcare Association have
talked to our members.
And we've seen some great things
coming from it, so I did want to
share here in Las Cruces, for
example, Lupe Navarro, the owner
of a children's garden has
already started a very much
wanted 401k retirement plan for
her employees. That is only
because of the GRT exemption
exemption. So thank you. We'll
have more data, of course,
things come about and we would
be happy to come and share that
with you. Um, at the close of
2023, Madam Chair, the Early
Childhood Trust Fund had a
balance of 5.5 billion and it is
expected to
at the end of the year. Um,
It's been instrumental in
supporting our industry that has
long been overlooked. However,
significant challenges remain,
including the need for
infrastructure investments for
providers, raising wages for
educators and providing
healthcare and retirement
benefits. It is critical that we
preserve the original intent of
the Early Childhood Trust Fund
as we move forward. Despite
these achievements, our industry
continues to face substantial
challenges that must be
addressed.
So if you go to the next slide,
Madam Chair, if you would allow
me to take a moment to provide
some context with a brief
history of child care education
in New Mexico. In 2004, New
Mexico transitioned to full day
kindergarten, the five year olds
out of pre-K and licensed
childcare centers.
In 2004 with the New Mexico
Pre-K Act. It allowed the public
schools to offer education to
four year olds, taking them out
of licensed childcare centers.
In 2019, we established the
Early Childhood and Education
and Care department and that
expanded public access to
include now 3 year olds.
And in 2024 with before and
aftercare programs, public
schools are now introducing
before and aftercare programs
for 3 and 4 year olds.
Child care is dwindling,
licensed high-quality childcare
is dwindling. With these
developments represent progress
private childcare providers
continue to face numerous
challenges. If we have high
operating costs. Public schools
receive state funding for
operational expenses through
their budgets with private
businesses must cover these
costs independently. For
example, Farmington Municipal
Schools was allocated 2 years
ago $44 million for a brand new
pre-K building.
I built a brand new center and I
had to go take loans for $2.5
million. Public versus private.
We're both providing free pre-K
for the state of New Mexico, but
we didn't get the same access to
capital outlay dollars.
Staffing shortages. Although
ECDCCD is collaborating with
private providers on a new
career lattice. Many staff
members still leave the private
childcare industry for public
educated education
attracted by better pay,
benefits, and of course the
opportunity to have summers off.
Regulatory and compliance
challenges, providers continue
to grapple with increasing
licensing standards and
compliance issues, which have
made operating increasingly
increasingly complex, especially
when we're accessing business
insurance, which I'm going to
get to in a second, and increase
competition. Let me say unfair
competition. Public school
districts like Aztec are now
offering before and after care
for 3 and 4 year olds directly
competing with private
providers. It's happening.
Furthermore, the pre-K grant
process is often based on a
grant writer writer's
capabilities, giving school
districts the advantages over
women minority owned small
businesses like ourselves who
are teachers, we're not grant
writers, but we must submit
these grants and on a point
system, they're weighed and
you're funded based off of your
ability to write a grant.
If you go to the next slide,
please.
Strategies for overcoming
challenges. What we can
streamline our regulatory
process. It's essential to
simplify and reduce
administrative burdens, allowing
providers to focus more on
delivering the quality care
rather than navigating the
complex regulatory hurdles.
Fostering collaboration, we must
strengthen our partnerships
between government, businesses,
and communities to find
sustainable solutions for a
long-term success of early
childhood education.
We do have proposed solutions
for you.
Infrastructure funding. We urge
the allocation of more resources
to help providers invest safe
and modern facilities.
Affordable healthcare, ensuring
that business owners and
employees have access to
affordable healthcare options,
will help promote promote
workforce stability.
Licensing parody.
We must establish equal
licensing standards for both
private and public providers.
Currently, private providers
have stricter licensing
requirements than public
providers. As I stated with
Aztec Municipal schools, they're
allowed to open after school
programming till 6 o'clock in
the evening, which is in
essence, childcare, unregulated
and unlicensed. They have no
oversight.
Increased wages for educators.
Raising wages for early
childhood educators is essential
to retaining the talent and
improving the quality.
We need to revamp our pre-K
award system. Consider adopting
a model where community-based
providers are prioritized for
pre-K funding with public
schools stepping in only when
these providers are fully
utilized. This model is
successful and is being utilized
in other states.
Lower insurance premiums,
collaborating with the office of
the Superintendent and insurance
providers to reduce premium
costs is vital for keeping early
childhood businesses affordable.
If you go to the next slide.
In conclusion, it's crucial to
understand that private
childcare is economic
development.
And I just want to say that
again. We are economic
development.
Private childcare centers
operate as small businesses,
creating jobs, stimulating local
economies and allowing parents
to return to the workforce to
pursue further education by
supporting us private providers,
we foster a business model that
serves families at all levels
from infants to school-age
children, ensuring
sustainability and success for
these businesses.
Government-funded public
education, while essential for
its own purpose, does not
function as economic development
in the same way. It lacks the
entrepreneurial flexibility and
the local economic impact that
private childcare providers
offer.
Particularly in serving diverse
needs of working families and
businesses across New Mexico.
We need to ensure that private
child care providers have the
ability to thrive by accessing
all levels of care, including
infant care, pre-K, and before
and aftercare. Without this, the
economic landscape becomes
unbalanced, threatening the
success of the essential
businesses. This is where your
support, Madam Chair, and this
committee, it becomes pivotal.
The New Mexico Childcare and
Education Association is
advocating for two cases of
legislation that directly
support
Our small businesses, many of
which are owned by women, and my
minorities in your communities.
Everyday New Mexicans who
started as family providers such
as Daisy's mom, or classroom
teachers and are now dedicated.
And I'm sorry, my notes just
went away. Um,
Uh, dedicated to making a
difference in your communities.
We are sponsoring, or we did
sponsor House Bill 290 last
year, which is loan forgiveness
for capital outlay or
improvements for licensed child
care centers and homes. This
bill is crucial for providing
financial relief to our
providers, allowing them to
invest in their businesses,
upgrade their facilities, and
ensure safe, high-quality
environments for children
without the burden of
overwhelming debt. We are
looking at this as basically an
equivalent of PED Capital Alley.
High quality license the next
piece of legislation that we
would like you all to think
about, Madam Chair and members
of this committee is that all
high-quality licensed care for
all facilities caring for 3 and
4 year olds, ensuring that they
are all licensed and follow the
same rules and regulations. This
will level the playing field for
the private providers and ensure
that every child in New Mexico,
no matter where they are
enrolled, receives the same high
quality care and education.
By championing this legislation,
this committee is not only
supporting childcare providers,
but also strengthening New
Mexico's small business economy.
These centers are often led by
women and minorities, local
entrepreneurs who want to make a
meaningful impact in your
communities. With your support,
we can ensure that these private
businesses continue to thrive,
providing these essential
services to families. Private
childcare, in conclusion,
private childcare is a
cornerstone of economic
development. And with your help,
we can ensure these providers
receive the support they need to
continue serving.
Families and strengthening our
New Mexico economy. Thank you.
Does that conclude the
presentation? Um, just one more
thing I just wanted to highlight
that this particular project, La
Cormena Academy, was highlighted
in Washington DC at the Rural
Childcare Forum, um, and
presented by um.
Ms. Patricia Villalos from the
USDA last week.
Very good, thank you. All
righty, we're gonna go right
into questions. Senator
Brantley.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you ladies for the presentation.
First, thank you for what you've
dedicated yourselves to doing
investing in like the next
generation of New Mexicans. It's
such a vulnerable age and so I
know you do it from heart, your
heart of services. I am, I'm a
bit ignorant on, on early
childhood and, and, and daycare
facilities. So bear with me on
some of these questions because
I'm a little bit confused. If I
go to 16, slide 16, we tout some
of New Mexico's accomplishments
and I would say that on there
those legislators should
Be proud of, of that in the
creation of the ECED department,
the trust fund, uh, the money
that we're allocating towards
this or our land land grant
permanent fund are tax
exemptions. This, this is how we
think that we are investing and
giving back into such an
important industry in the roles
you do, but when we turn the
page, I have some concerns when
you outlined the challenges with
The competition of K-12 public
schools.
Because the reality is, is the
government should not be
competing with your business.
And so what it sounds like is we
did all of this with the
intention of really investing in
your childcare facilities and
then we turned around and
competed.
With everything we were just
handed you, we said, well, now
on this side we're going to come
in and take, take all of the
investments that we just made
into this. And so this this
confuses me a little bit, and
I'd like to dig into that just a
little bit.
Or the ECED funded grants that
you talk about how you run your
facilities, which are intended
to keep these private facilities
open. Are they eligible for
application from public schools
or is the PED budget funding
those. What I'm asking, are we,
are we, you know, Peter Robbing
Paul here.
Is PED coming in and taking ECEC
dollars that would have
otherwise gone to your private.
Establishments.
Um, Madam Chair, uh, Senator,
uh, the answer to your question
is yes, when it comes to pre-K.
So pre-K grants is open to
anyone that wants to serve
pre-K. That includes PED. It's
the same grant across the board.
So a private provider like
myself or or even growing up in
New Mexico will apply for this
grant, um, and PED will also
apply the exact same grant. I
think that's kind of what Barb
was alluding to earlier that
it's also a little difficult
because
Um, private providers like
ourselves, I don't write grants.
I mean, I do, but I don't,
right? I write them because I
have to, but I'm not a grant
writer, um, so whenever the
funding process PED does have
professional grant writers that
write theirs, um, versus a
private provider like ourselves
typically are writing our own,
um, but yes, ma'am, it is the
same grant, um, with the same
funding that comes out of ECECD
that goes to PED if they qualify
through that grant. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and I think that's
where I have some concerns, is
that we
Create and put allocated, set
aside funds to help your
businesses, and you do not have
the resources to compete with
these schools to get the
resources that our intent was to
go directly to you. I don't know
if any of you may have an answer
to this question, but do we know
roughly about how many schools,
public schools are open to 3
year olds now, or intend to be?
Madam Chair, and Senator
Branntly, um, to give you an
example, this last round of
funding that went through, um,
it opened up the application
process for 3 year olds in the
public ed system.
And I did a number request and
when the, um, answers came back
to me on who was funded. APS was
number one. They got a score of
94 out of 100, and they asked
for 1,0243 year olds, and they
were granted 1,0243 year olds.
They took approximately 72% of
the budget themselves because
they had the highest score. The
way the process works right now
is it's a score. I my request.
It was not in the 90s. And so it
simply goes the department.
When I asked for, um,
explanations on it. They said
they go by cycles. So APS was
number one and then it went down
to another school district, then
it went down to another school
district, then a private
provider finally broke the,
broke the seal and came in 4,
but they went down. But when you
take that large of a chunk where
APS asked for 1,024 children,
and they gave it all to them
instead of assessing the whole
state, how many dollars do we
have available, um, that, that's
where we're looking at this
process and
Saying how, how can we take a
look at reworking the process
because people like ourselves
cannot compete with professional
grant writers from UNM and APS,
um, when we're competing for
these grants. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, ladies, for
that answer, and I think it
perhaps it was Miss Daisy or,
or, or someone had mentioned
that there's a license
disparency disparency
disparity disparity, thank you.
Um
So I'm going to ask this
question because I think you
didn't really elaborate on that.
So of those pre, those three
year olds in public school, 3 to
5 now. Are they having to go by
the same licensing, and I think
earlier you kind of alluded to
some crazy regulations of, of
what are they having to abide by
the same standards then because
essentially what they just
became is a daycare provider,
right? So are they, are they
being held at the same standards
and licensing requirements in
those classrooms.
Madam Chair, and Senator
Brantley, no, and this came into
question when Aztec schools now
is offering aftercare, not just
pre-K, but aftercare, I, um,
questioned the secretary, um,
went to licensing, and they told
me that public ed in the
regulations is exempt from
licensing,
um, they are not overseen. So
they can buy a portable, put it
in, and put as many children in
that room if that's what they
choose to do, they can take,
they aren't held to the same
standards of score.
Footage, natural light, um,
playgrounds, um, bathrooms, and
number of sinks that we have to
have, um, they're exempt from
all of that.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
yesterday and CCJ, I think that
if we all watched the clip
notes, they had a a very
detailed conversation about
child child welfare, and it
we're just reminded that it's
the most dangerous state to be a
child in, right? It's the most
dangerous state. And it's funny
that here we are, the most
dangerous state and here saying
we don't even have regulations
and what we're doing now with
these children, you know, with
licensing of children here now.
What I can't understand then is
why PED would want to take and
assume the role.
Of a child care center, when we
have done some of our greatest
work in creating this ECCECD.
Agency
That goes up to 5. Why would PED
then want to come in and compete
with the intent of what this
very successful, and I should
say that I think that we just
passed an $800 million budget.
For ECCD.
And arguably it's a very
successful agency. One of we
don't have a lot in New Mexico
to be proud of. That's one of
the agencies in Korea and we
really do have a lot to be proud
of. Why in the world would we
then allow PED.
Certainly not a shining example
of government, worst in
education.
Failing our kids from 5.
From now 3
From K through 12, failing our
kids to make national headlines
on our inability to take care of
the kids that we have. Why in
the world would we let them come
in and now take
Take over at 3 year olds and
then I would say this, I'd ask,
ask you guys private, uh,
providers, if the intent and
when we heard earlier today how
important it is to have these
daycare facilities so that we
can grow business and economic
development. I would assume that
your business model can't
sustain by only providing for 0
to 3. And if that's the reality,
we are then running you out of
business because we say, well,
governments come in to do your
job.
And we've created a void.
For, for single moms.
To have a place to take or any
parent for that matter, to to to
provide for kids from 0 to 3.
So what we've done with all this
good work then is almost created
a greater hardship on those who
need childcare the most. Am I,
am I way off base in listening
to this presentation here?
Hm
Madam Chair, um, Senator, uh,
you are exactly right, um, we
have created a climate for
providers like us that is making
it very difficult to um.
Stay within our business model
as it functions. Um, I'll give
you some examples. So, for
instance, my program, I used to
have um some of the largest
infant and toddler slots
available in, in, in our area,
um, within my space within the
two programs that I offer,
because I had most programs can
only afford within their
business model to have one
infant and, and one toddler
room, um, because
The way that the ratios work for
those age groups, as they
should, um smaller children in
infants and toddlers have lower
ratios than older children. So
that's how we typically balance
our budgets is by having more
classrooms of the older children
so that we can have classrooms
of the younger children. Well,
whenever um we moved into a
a really robust pre-K, which is
beautiful, a very funded pre-K,
um,
I was able to open a few more
infants and toddler classes in
my program because those 3 and 4
year old children were being
funded at a higher rate.
But unfortunately, um, because
I'm having difficulty now
because, um, PED has taken most
of those, um, pre-K funded
slots. So just to be clear, I
have the same amount of
children, 3 and 4. But what
happened was I only got funded
pre-K dollars for um uh.
I'll be just give numbers. 48
slots is what I asked for. I
asked for 48 slots at one of my
programs. I was only funded
pre-K dollars for $32. I still
serve 48, but the other 16
children are on childcare
contracts, which is
significantly lower than the
pre-K grant and as Ms Tedro
mentioned, um, the reason I
didn't get funded for all the
slots was because the public
schools were funded ahead of me
because of the scoring system.
So now I had to adjust my
business model, um.
Because that one classroom of 16
kiddos is not being fully funded
like I thought it would be by
pre-K. It's being funded by the
subsidy program. And so I had to
now only have um one toddler
class at both of my programs,
um, eliminating, um, what, 30
kids, 30 toddlers in my in my my
program. So it does affect our
business model and our ability
to provide access for those
lower age groups as well. Thank
you, Madam Chair. I would argue
to say that wasn't the intent of
the legislator. I think it was
in good faith that the
legislators.
To create a department that was
going to invest in kids from 0
to 5 before we handed it over to
our school system.
And I'm disappointed to see, I
almost feel like PED has tricked
us by coming in and hijacking
what we've done so well with
ECECD and if I go over to your
suggested outcomes or
challenges, you, you mentioned a
couple pieces of legislation,
forgivable loans for childcare
providers, licensed parity, yes,
yes, absolutely, whatever it
takes. But the reality is,
wouldn't the best way that we
could help you is to
Allow ECECD to do what they were
designed and created to do and
well funded to do.
And allow you to do your job.
By just getting PED.
The black eye of New Mexico out
of this formula.
Isn't that an easier solution?
Madam Chair and Senator
Branntly, I, I agree with the
concept, and when you talk to
Secretary Groginski, and you
look at the um, the, the scope
of services within her
department is prenatal to 5 and
PED.
Pre-K does fall underneath her
realm. It falls under the
umbrella of ECCD. However, when
you look at the true oversight,
PED secretary has his own
administrator that does what
they want with their budget, and
when you ask the secretary,
well, how can we do this, she
says she can't because of
regulation.
Which is why we really want to
push regulation because it seems
without regulation and putting
things into place. Now when we
pushed for the pre-K Act in
2004. There were some of us that
are old-timers. We were at the
table in 2004 and we said we
must protect private providers
and we ask for a mixed delivery
system. We put it into statute
that that New Mexico must fund a
mixed delivery system of 50 to
50, a 50-50 split between
community providers and PED.
providers. And that was with a,
a definition of 4 year olds.
That changed in 2019 when Senate
Bill 22 came into play. They
added 3 roles. So now the
department is looking at a
fifty-fifty split of 3 and 4
year olds. So with PED coming in
and they have a majority of 4
year olds they're saying, but
Barbara, you have 3 year olds,
don't worry, that 50 5 50 split
is not there, it's still there.
That was not the intention when
we sat at the table with
legislators. There should be a
fifty-fifty split between four
year.
Old, we were trying to protect
ourselves from PED taking three
year olds. We saw the writing on
the wall. They told us we were
crazy and said, Barbon, no PED
doesn't want your three year
olds don't worry about it. Well,
we're here today, and they're
taking our 3 year olds. So Ms.
Tedro to go back, Madam Chair,
you said that, that the
secretary said that we'd have to
change regulation or statute.
The statute now allows for 3 and
4 year olds.
Regulation leads to the talks
that we're talking about in
regulating and the parity
between
site to site and how the
programs are run. Um, when you
talk, when you look at the
private providers and all of the
licensing regulations that we
have to adhere to, um, and PED
providers don't for another
example is this paid sick leave
law.
This is killing childcare
providers because we have to
maintain ratios at all times.
And when you have an employee
who is allowed up to 2 hours to
call in sick. You have a
director at 9 o'clock looking at
her watch, not knowing if that
teacher is going to show up, so
she's having to step into a
room, wait for an employee to
call her to tell her she's not
going to show up. Well, if that
is a pre-K classroom, that still
doesn't matter. We must maintain
a ratio of 1 to 8 for our early
pre-K. When you talk to the PED
side.
You don't have to maintain
ratios. When we asked them, what
what do you do if somebody calls
out sick? They said the one
teacher just takes care of them.
They don't have to maintain
ratios. Well, thank you, Madam
Chair. I think at a minimum, we
need to change the regulations.
I would argue that we should go
in there and consider changing
statute. I, I'm kind of appalled
hearing this presentation that
we've even let PED come in and
compete with your, you and your
centers to take those, those 3
to 5 year olds. When we leave
you at such a disadvantage when
we talk about economic.
development, I don't even know.
Uh, how your business model is
sustainable.
Once we take that. And in rural
areas,
It would be impossible. The most
disappointing when we look
through this is, is we've, we
did such a good job, right, or
our intent was such a good job
with a major investments that we
did, and then we're letting PED
come in here by lowering that
age gap.
And not only hurt her businesses
that are, you know, 23
generations old, but ultimately,
I think we're going to see, have
a negative impact on the child
themselves. I'd like to see in
10 or 20 years the data that
shows those kids that were
raised in, you know, healthy,
licensed, you know, environments
from 0 to 5 compared to when PED
took them on at 3.
Because if it looks anything
like the data that's coming out.
When they're graduating,
We've created something that's
just, just, you know.
Creating results in more
problems. So thank you, ladies
again for all you do. I would
say I don't know a lot about
this, but you've clearly, um,
you've clearly shown all of us
that we have a lot of work to
still to still do and we have
some holes in there. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Uh, Representative Roy Bar
Caviero.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you all. This is a um.
Something that's very close to
my heart because for 30 years I
ran the um.
I was there
Executive director and CEO of
Trinity Chicano Coalition in El
Paso which pioneered.
The in-home childcare delivery
system in the state of Texas,
way back in the 60s and then I
took over in the 80s a lot, a
little bit older as a career
path.
And I want to talk about that
because it is a community-based
model.
And it took, um, we took the
grandmas.
And the mamas that were staying,
staying home, Madam Chair.
56.
of these women.
And, um, we partnered with the
community college, El Paso
Community College.
And we got them all certified as
child care.
Specialists.
We got them all certified as
nutritionists under the USDA
program.
And we got them all certified as
small businesses.
Because that's what they are.
And they operate, we changed the
regulations in the state of
Texas.
To, um, qualify them as either
taking care of 6 children or 12
children. If you look at the
regs and the state of Texas,
they've since been amended, uh,
positively, but this program was
the pioneer program of that
in-home childcare delivery
system, child development, uh,
delivery system. I bring this up
because.
Being a proud founder of that
program.
Um, as a student.
In social work, I began this
project in the 60s.
And then I came back 20 years
later to take over the program
and to actually implement it.
So it can be done, Senator. We
can have.
The proper regulations in place
which need to ensure the safety
of our children.
And um we can in fact, um, as a
state.
Um,
Work out statutorily.
Um,
the intent and purposes to serve
each one. So we do need to
clarify the role of PED
obviously, and I don't know how
to best to do that. I agree with
you we need to to do that
because it serves a purpose
after school care and before
school care is very important
and often times the school is
the center.
In the small rural communities
is a center for everything, the
families, everything, all
activity.
At the same time we need to
partner with our community.
And we have, again, the mamas
and the grandmas are the most um
experienced in taking care of
children.
And we need to empower them.
And we need to do so in all the
ways that I just described,
so I agree with you so um I
can't remember who presented the
fact that we need to have
uniform licensing, um, standards
in place because again we're
dealing with.
Children and their care.
And those key point here is what
Ms. Noble brought up earlier at
the very beginning, and that is
that uh is the foundation for
economic development. It really
is because in order for our
children, our families to work
they need.
They need um the child care to
fall back on.
And then at the same time, we
need these big businesses to
invest because they need the
workforce.
So there is a great.
Uh, opportunity.
To cross sector.
All of this work.
And I'm so glad that you're here
today, Madam Chair, to make this
case.
Um, for.
Child care.
and I wanna say child
development because we we
certified our childcare
providers for a reason.
We want them to be early
childhood.
Child care.
Developers
Uh, because they're taking our
children from 0, from infancy.
Um, 23 and often times 5, and so
there are the, they have to
prepare, uh, be equipped to
prepare them to go into school
and to be successful.
But at the same time in the
arena of the schools, um, we
need to clarify the roles. And
you're absolutely right that
they should not, they should be
under the same uniform, um,
standards and held under that
because again the liability of
caring for our children before
school and after school is great
if we don't have those same
uniform standards in place.
So, Senator, yes, we have a, a,
a lot of work, but we have great
models and great partners that
can actually come to the table
and, um, and, and work all of
this out because there's a room,
there's a place for everything.
We just have been
Piecemealing everything we've
never done this in a holistic
way.
And so in a comprehensive way.
This is our opportunity today,
Madam Chair, to do so in a
comprehensive manner and fix the
systems that we know already are
not working.
And showcase the models, the
community-based models.
We need to showcase our models
because they are working.
And um we need to make sure that
everything that we do and you
made reference to paid family
medical leave. Well, where do
the children go?
If family members are ill and
they need a space. This is where
our mamas and grandmas came in
perfectly in El Paso under this
program and the rest of Texas
actually because that's became
the model for Texas.
They need some place to take
their children while they take
care of their health.
While they're off of work.
So there is a place for
everything. We can't just be
naysayers in one arena and yes
Sayers and the other without
connecting because we're talking
about families and communities
and in families and communities,
Madam Chair, we're all
connected.
So we all have to serve each
other's needs.
In a positive way and not get
caught up in this uh
These endless debates.
That for the most part are
partisan driven or self-centered
driven or whatever driven, um,
look at how it's gonna pay me
over here as a business if I
have to provide this.
Or how it's gonna pay me as an
institution if I have to provide
this. So I, I just wanted to
elaborate a little bit on how it
can work.
If we have the the will.
The resources and the commitment
and the models and um this is
again uh Senator, a great segue
from our earlier presentations
because this model.
Uh, that they presented to us
today, um, is, is we can work
within the, the, the constraints
that we put in ourselves. You're
right, we created the mess.
So now we need to rely on you
all?
To help us undo this in a way in
which that can work with
everybody and not get caught up
into um all these little
Side debates unnecessary. So
thank you, Madam Chair, that I
didn't have a question. I just
needed to highlight the
successes and the models that
work and these women are perfect
examples of that. Thank you,
thank you. Representative, uh,
Lata.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, thank you for the
presentation. It's good to see
familiar faces advocating and I,
I think it was maybe last year
we were over here at the Fulton
Center and we were talking about
the tax,
I think you know
and uh so, Madam Chair, I'm kind
of confused here when
When
It's being said that PED is
applying.
I don't understand how a state
agency can apply for a grant
from another state agency.
That doesn't make sense to me,
so is it PED that's applying for
this, or is it the school
districts that are applying for
this, mentor.
Madam Chair, and representative
Lara, it is school districts,
each individual school district
is entitled if they would like
to offer a pre-K, the
opportunity. OK, so then, uh,
Madam Chair, the technically
it's not PED that's applying for
this money. OK, so I, I just, I
was kind of confused as this,
I've never seen that before and
I don't know if that would work.
So, so then, but PED I'm sure I,
and I'm I'm assuming, Madam
Chair, that PED encourages the
school districts to apply for
this money. I hear the silences
telling.
Madam Chair, and Representative
Lata, um, last year high school,
I served on the school board for
Farmington Municipal schools.
And I did have this in-depth
conversation and the previous
superintendent, um, actually
said that he did receive word
from the school district or PED
themselves to apply. They needed
to apply, apply, apply, and when
Farmington school said we're
saturated, we don't need to
apply for anymore because we
have a great working
relationship and they talk to
the providers. We said we're
full, we're saturated.
They said he, he said he still
got word coming down saying,
apply for more funding, and he
said, no, I'm not going to. So
our superintendent actually took
a stance and said, I'm not going
to my community doesn't need it,
but he was getting pressure.
I think, um, thank you for that,
uh, thank you for that because
that's very, very clarifying to
me because I, I, I needed to
make sure that uh I had it clear
in my head I'm trying to put it
in the boxes.
And so, um.
What's happening and Madam
Chair, and, and I've had
conversations with with Angela
and with Daisy about this many,
many times.
And I'm wondering.
Sometimes it feels like we're
self-sabotaging ourselves.
Because you know we're giving
the advantage to the government
institution that is public
education.
Uh, that is our school
districts.
Even though our school districts
are locally governed by the
school boards, uh, I believe the
school boards, the members may
not necessarily know.
Or understand that process and
they see it as, wow, you know,
there's gonna be additional
revenue coming into the district
if we do this, we'll be able to
hire more people.
Uh, we'll be able to do all
these other things, build new
spaces.
And so I think it's very
important that uh that we, uh,
look at that because I don't, I
don't know, Madam Chair, if it's
necessary thing, you know, I'm,
I'm still when, when.
It was mentioned Tedro about
Regulation
Versus law.
And I'm thinking, is this
regulation rule?
Is this rulemaking that they
that would that that that took
place that they that this they
determined to do it this way.
Because Madam Chair, as many of
my colleagues know at at here at
this meeting, you know, we know,
we know that there's a lot of
things that are done. It's in,
uh, despite of law and what we
have, we have passed and it gets
changed or modified in
rulemaking.
So we may have had the intention
to provide the space for the
private providers to do what
they need to do, but during the
rulemaking process, this might
have been snuck in. Madam Chair,
and we didn't notice until, you
know, you're, you're here today.
And so that's, that's very
concerning to me.
Uh, we've caught him once.
And I don't to me it seems seems
to me that this has happened
before and we didn't catch it.
So I think we as the
legislature, my colleagues and
I, we need to be more aware of
these things and that's why I'm
so happy that you're telling us
about this. Uh, so I do have
some questions, some some
clarifying questions that I that
I that I that I need please,
Madam Chair. So here are the key
challenges, it's this high
operating costs, facility cost
utilities, and equipment.
So what is the ask? Are you
asking the state to to do this?
Madam Chair,
Madam Chair and Representative
Lata, know that bullet was to
show that private businesses in
general are operating, um, the,
the,
In in losses, um, the costs are
skyrocketing. One thing that I
didn't get as much into that I
would have liked to is the
insurance crisis that we are
now, um, running into. We were
warned, um, I was an insurance
agent for 5 years. I was an
Allstate insurance agent. I held
all of my licenses, so I
insurance is still very
important to me. So I've been
sitting on the national calls.
We have been warned that last
year there were more.
Childcare claims in last year
than there was in the past
decade, and we have been warned
that our premiums are going to
double and triple for childcare
licenses. In New Mexico, we only
have 55 providers anyway. I, um,
and we have Church Mutual is so
stringent, they're actually
looking at just leaving New
Mexico. It's one of the states
that's on the, the little box
that they don't even know if
they're going to say to, um,
insurance is a necessary.
we need it. However, with the
high cost of it, um, because the
sad fact is that due to our
regulatory standards, if parents
find that something is wrong.
The child gets, um, there's an
example they they gave us two
children ran into each other on
the playground. The parents sued
the childcare center because she
said that it was improper
supervision and improper
training, and they settled a
claim for $250,000 because two
children ran into each other. In
this day and age,
We all know this, it's a very
litigious, um, society. All you
have to do is find an attorney
that will take it on a
contingency basis and they can
sue your business. Well, that is
what happened with childcare
last year and we had more claims
than ever. So we have to be
prepared for the insurance rates
that are going to come up. How
do we cover these rates? Private
businesses have very small
margins anyway, so we're wanting
to bring it to the forefront and
to warn all of the legislators
that the costs of childcare are
going to skyrocket because of
the cost model that we use.
In New Mexico, which is great,
but it takes into account a true
cost, and we're trying to get
meetings with the secretary and
the superintendent of the Office
of Insurance to try to get ahead
of the game because, um,
My insurance rate is $65,000 a
year. That's what I pay for my,
my insurance and my, um, my
insurance agent came and told me
she goes, Barbara, don't be
surprised if it gets into the
100,000 next year.
Thank you for that, Madam Chair,
so that, that just I'm, I'm
thinking about, so you, you said
there was uh um.
Already a system in place for
insurance for the for the
providers, correct?
No, there is not. That is, I'm
sorry, Madam Chair, um
Representative Lata, one of the
things that we are going to talk
with the Office of Insurance is
if we can check other, other
states are talking nationally
about, um, doing pools. So that,
um, they can get to, they can go
through the state and that is
something that we are meeting
with her next week about.
Thank you for that, mentor.
Thank you for that because
that's what I was thinking
because uh.
Uh, entities already do that.
The school districts already do
that, you know, the state does
that, you know, we have, we have
the pools where everybody
pitches in and, you know, it's,
it's the, the cost is spread out
through through more through
more through more uh entities.
And so I, I think that's really
important because, you know,
it's, it's not only is it the
reality of doing of doing
business for you as a as a
childcare provider.
As uh early childhood educator,
but you know, this, if you think
about it in a larger scale,
Madam Chair, you know, it's,
it's it's business in general,
you know, that's what, that's
what you have to, that's, that's
the cost of doing business.
And so I'm, that's why I'm
trying to process the request
because I was, Madam Chair, I
was kind of like, well, wow, I
get all these requests and I,
you know, I haven't thought
about these things and what's
happening obviously we know
about staffing orders. I'm very,
very much aware of the
competition.
Uh, Daisy and I have had very
serious conversations about the
the competition.
And what happens, Madam Chair,
is it puts you obviously at a
disadvantage.
The the providers that are
disadvantaged because the
district has more.
More resources, more, more
muscle, more pull, more flex.
And they're able to, they're
able to implement things or move
people around to to or utilize
empty spaces because they don't
want charter schools to move in,
so they, they do all these
things so they can, so they can
do that. And so, uh, I, I just
want you to know, uh, all four
of you, Madam Chair, is that,
you know, this is something
really, really important because
as Senator Brantley has
mentioned, you know, we've
invested a lot in this. A lot of
this was done in good faith on
our part.
Thanks to, to, to the chairwoman
and the efforts of uh of the
speaker and, and many others.
To educate our our youngest New
Mexicans in the proper way in a
way where that we know they will
get full advantage of their
education, but then these little
monkey wrenches get thrown in
all this bureaucracy gets thrown
in.
And so I'm looking forward to
more conversation about this
because I'm very, very
interested in this because what
I wanna do is, you know, I don't
want to pick winners and losers.
I want to make sure that all of
our kids win regardless if
they're in public schools or in
the with the private providers
or in charter schools.
Or private schools for that
matter we need our children to
succeed if we wanna get out of
the slump that we're in, and
that's very important. So thank
you for your efforts. I really
appreciate this and I really,
really look forward to talking
to you more in detail about
this. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you and thank you for the
presentation today and as you
know, I'm very invested invested
in you, this process, and, uh,
early childhood. And so I hope
that we can continue these
conversations. Um, I would like
to get more information on the,
the bills that you're looking
at, um, the legislation you want
to do this year, um, and to see
where I could plug in and help,
um, definitely want to know the
outcome of the discussions with
the
Superintendent. I think those
are all really important pieces.
Um, I think, uh, well, I know
that the committee was very
happy, um, to get the
information, uh, not necessarily
happy with the information was
on some of this stuff, but I
think having that information,
um, and I think that some of it
is also um part of how the rule
was put in.
And so I think we need to go
back and start looking at some
of that. Uh, we see that happen
often as is representative, a
lot of, uh, mentioned and so if,
if those are tweaks that we've
got to make, um, I think that
we're committed to do that, so I
appreciate your presentation
today and I appreciate you all
being here. Thank you.
Um,
we are running about an hour
behind. And so I want to make
sure that the committee is very
aware of that, uh, we are gonna
take, uh, a 15 minute break, so
committee members can get lunch.
I am not letting you leave
because I'm asking you to come
back and we will continue with,
uh, the committee that try to
get us out of here. Um, I know
that people are here, you know,
they've taken time off work to
be here. Uh, I appreciate you
being here, so I apologize that
we are running so far behind.
Uh, so I am gonna keep going and
making sure that, uh, I'd like
to make sure that everybody
stays very focused on questions,
uh, for future panels that we've
got here, uh, so we can keep,
keep everybody at least, uh, out
of here at a reasonable time. So
thank you.
This will be then.
5, 150. You can eat here or eat
out there, but be back here in
15 minutes.
Well, we are 2 minutes after I
said we were going to start, so
we wanna get us going again. I
hope everybody had time to get a
little something to eat, um.
to ask for our next group of
presenters to come on up to the
table. Actually, we've got our
actually our, our, yes, our our
welcome from Borrell.
We will start there. Thank you.
And before we go on, I wanted to
think, of course, um, NMSU and
Marco Gonzalez, um, again for
feeding us today. You've done a
great job. I think everybody
feels very well fed and taken
care of. So thank you for doing
that.
All righty.
Go ahead. Good morning, Madam
Chair. Senators,
representatives, staff, and
guests, um, on behalf of
President John Hummer and our
Dean Bill Pratt, I'd like to
welcome you to the Borough
College of Osteopathic Medicine.
Um, of course, President Hummer
senses his regrets and not being
able to be here. Um, my name is
Nina Nunez. I'm the vice
president of Institutional
effectiveness and chief of staff
for the college. Um, and I also
have student doctor Nelly Fisher
with me today. Um, she is in her
2nd year in medical school, and
it's truly an honor to welcome
you to.
Our facility. Um, student Doctor
Fisher has another commitment,
so I'm gonna let her give her a
little spiel, and then, um,
we'll turn it over.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair, um,
representatives, senators, sorry
if I did that out of order.
Thank you for the opportunity to
address you today. My name is
Nelly Fisher. I'm a 2nd year
medical student here at Borough
College of Osteopathic Medicine.
I'm a wife, a mother, and former
practicing physical therapist.
When I made my decision to
pursue a career in medicine. It
came with a great deal of prayer
that I should be where I can be
the best physician, serve my
community, and just become a
better person overall.
When I found Borrell, I had the
strongest conviction. This is
where I'm supposed to be.
Borrell is a place where you
feel accepted and supported,
regardless of who you are or
where you come from. The sense
of community and support that I
felt was unparalleled.
Sorry, I lost my place.
As for the city of Las Cruces,
my family immediately fell in
love with the city and its
residents and the whole state of
New Mexico actually. After
enrolling into school, I quickly
became involved in our student
government association and other
campus clubs. Our students love
and care for our Las Cruces
community.
And through our club's academic
interest groups and
individually, we definitely show
it. We participate in health
education efforts such as
providing free health screens in
the community hold fundraisers
and donation drives to benefit
local nonprofits. We have we
have built gardens for the boys
and girls club to foster a sense
of responsibility and
productivity in our youth.
And we have several mentorship
programs for elementary, middle,
high school, school, and New
Mexico's um NMSU students.
Instilling a love for the
medicine and guiding students on
the path to pursuing a career in
medicine. These are just a few
examples, but last academic
year, the Burrell students as a
whole locked over 12,000 service
hours in our Las Cruces
community.
Very.
Well, thank you, Nelly, and I'm
gonna let her run. She probably
has some studying to do and
So yes, yes.
All right. And so, um,
Representative Zamora,
Representative Roy Ball
Caballeros. I know we had a
presentation last week, so some
of this might be a little bit
overlapping, um, but as you may
be aware, Burrell is a private
college that has a mission to
educate a diverse osteopathic
physician workforce. Um, we just
opened our doors in 2016 and we
just graduated our 5th class of
students. Um, so since
inception, um, we have, uh,
matriculated over 15
students to the college, 120
about have been from New Mexico.
Um, we employ 160 faculty and
staff, but this isn't inclusive
of our network of contractor of
physicians that help teach our
students in 3rd and 4th years.
We have students throughout New
Mexico. Um, we have a very
diverse student population. We
have 734 students currently
enrolled, um, and on average,
25% of Borrell's students um are
from underrepresentative, uh,
minority.
Students.
And this is
we rank actually number 2 in the
nation out of all osteopathic
colleges for our amount of
diversity that we have here at
this school. So our degree
program, it's a 4-year degree
program.
Um,
so students spend the 1st 2
years here at the college campus
completing courses in biomedical
sciences. Uh, they navigate
through systems-based courses.
So for an example like the renal
system, respiratory system,
cardiovascular system, but they
also engage in clinical skills,
osteopathic manipulative
medicine, gross anatomy, and
mission medicine. And just to
highlight a little bit about
mission medicine because mission
medicine is really um a
community impact initiative. Um,
it was the brainchild of our
dean, Dr. Bill.
Bill Pratt, and he wanted to
develop um early clinical
experiences for our students in
the first two years. And so, uh,
it's really important to us to
ensure that our future
physicians understand that
providing healthcare is teamwork
and often relies on community
partnerships that can support
the continuity of care.
And so there's a growing need
for physicians and future
physicians to understand the
types of disparities that exist,
whether that be geographical,
socioeconomic, education,
physical environment
disparities. And so the mission
medicine course aims to address
those.
Um, they, the students develop
competencies to address those um
throughout that course. And so
the college has partnered with
various community organizations,
um, some of those include the
Amadora Health Center, Aron
Demos, intervention team.
the Border Servant Corps, the
boys and Girls Club, Donana
County Health and Human Services
Empowerment Congress of Donana
County, La Casa, La Pinion, the
Gospel Rescue mission and the
Las Cruces Public schools. And
so a huge thank you to all the
community venues who have
assisted us in launching our
mission medicine course.
Um, during the last two years of
the degree program, students are
in affiliated hospitals and
clinics under the supervision of
physician faculty throughout the
state of New Mexico we have
established regional academic
centers here in Las Cruces, in
Albuquerque, and the Four
Corners region which includes
Gallup, Farmington, Shiprock,
the Zuni Pueblo. We also have,
um, one in eastern New Mexico
serving Roswell, Artesia,
Loving, and Carlsbad areas. Um,
students who are assigned to the
Corners or to eastern New Mexico
have an opportunity to to earn
what's called a distinction in
rural medicine.
Um, that involves completing a
healthcare related project that
serves the needs of the area.
So today we have graduated 711
students. 10 of those have
placed into residency programs.
So once you graduate medical
school after your 4 years, you
go into a residency program,
which can be additional training
anywhere from 3 to 7 years
depending on the specialty. And
so we have a 99.9% employment
rate, um, once students
graduate,
uh, students have placed into
many primary care residencies,
so we have family medicine,
internal medicine, obstetrics,
gynecology,
and psychiatry. Others have
placed in their residencies in
emergency med, anesthesia,
neurology, the list goes on. But
what's extremely exciting to
know is that 52 graduates have
been placed into residency
programs in New Mexico. This
includes the University of New
Mexico Health Science Center
Memorial Medical Center, and
Mountain View Regional Medical
Center.
So according to IQVIA's National
Impact of Physician reports on
the American Medical
Association, the average
physician supports 17 jobs in
the economy, including their
own, and each physician supports
an average of approximately $1.4
million of annual wages and
benefits. So for every 100
doctors who graduate and remain
in our region to practice the
annual economic contribution
would be 141 million.
This does not include the value
in an increase of our community
health and cost savings from
reduced emergency room visits
and hospitalizations due to an
increased access to physicians
and preventative care.
So the college determined early
on that graduate medical
education, which is really
residency programs post
graduating from medical school
were extremely, extremely
important.
Um, today, to the college has,
uh, helped assist with 7 new
residency programs, um, for the
capacity of 230 students.
Establishing and maintaining
residency programs is vital. For
the most recent data from WAMC
State Physician Workforce
report. We know that 38% of
medical students who attended.
Medical school in our state
we're actively practicing in our
state. That number is even
higher, 68% if they attended
medical school and did their
residency in the state. So we
all have to really work together
to try to retain our physicians
in the region. Um.
We have new alumni who are just
now finishing residencies who
are trickling back into the
state of New Mexico. Uh, we
continue to track them. And so
we have about 20 so far, which
is fantastic. Uh, so we're
really anxious to see this grow
over the next few years because
that really is our, our mission.
And so again, I just like to
welcome you all. Thank you for
attending. If you have any
questions, I'd be happy to
answer. Thank you.
Well, we appreciate your
hospitality. You, um, every time
we hold meetings here, um, you
always make sure that we're well
taken care of and I appreciate
that. Uh, also appreciate just
the partnership of being able to
get information and, um, what
you do with the community. So I
appreciate you being here today.
Thank you. Thank you. I don't
think we've got any questions.
Hm
That might be a first for this
committee.
Let's see, OK, we can get
started for the afternoon. Once
again, let me see what time it
is. We are one hour.
Of guys, so if we can keep
things moving, I really
appreciate it, uh, serving
patients, operations, and
sustainability of hospitals, if
that, uh, group would come up?
You
Thank you
So I started with dessert and I
think that was a wise choice. It
was really good. Appreciate the
lunch once again.
Everybody ready?
All righty, if we can get you
all to, um, introduce
yourselves, um, give you what's
your title is or what capacity
you're here today for. Um, I
know that you all have been
given a packet as to the
guidelines of what to stay with.
And so we ask that you try to
stay as much on topic, and I
will ask that the panel or the
committee also tried to keep
their questions also on topic.
So with that, um, who wants to
start?
Nobody on the agenda.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair.
Members of the committee, thank
you for having us here today to
be able to speak on these
important matters. My name is
Sandy Emanuel. I'm the CEO of
Peak Behavioral Health and Santa
Teresa, New Mexico.
Um, our hospital has a wide
variety of psychiatric services
that serves all of Donana County
as well as the whole state of
New Mexico.
Um, our comprehensive range of
services include inpatient
psychiatric care, outpatient
psychiatric care, medical detox
services, partial
hospitalization programs for
adults and adolescents.
Adolescent residential
treatment, assertive community
treatment, which is ACT for
rural and urban communities in
Donana County, as well as
substance abuse treatment.
Um, we focus on short term
crisis intervention as well as
long term mental health care.
Mental health and substance
abuse care.
Um, some of the challenges we
broke it down and I'm going to
be super quick so everybody will
be really happy with me.
Is in 3 categories, and we'll,
we'll breeze through them pretty
quickly. Um, those three
categories are navigating the
complex, uh, state processes
that we have, uh, low rates and
high operational costs as well
as workforce recruitment.
So regarding the challenges and
navigating complex state
process.
Um, I, I wanna say as complex as
it can be, there's always
support, and we're always
grateful for that. There's
always somebody that we can find
that will help us navigate the
system. But the system itself is
complex. Licensing and
certification initially and then
those annual maintenance of that
is, is complicated. Medicaid
credentialing is complicated
with entities like Conduit,
which is
The beginning of the Medicaid
certification process. So if
you're looking at expanding
programs into outlying rural
area communities, which we did
last year, you could face a
9-month lag in getting approved
for Medicaid. So you're
incurring operational costs,
you're securing an address,
you're securing a lease, you're
securing hiring staff, and then
the nine-month process to get
the Medicaid credentialing is a
challenge and we learned a lot
from that through this endeavor,
opening up into the spanol.
the market, being able to serve
that community. Um, is, is, it's
going well, um, again, it just,
um, it's a challenge.
challenge.
Um, our hospital is located in
Santa Teresa, a community of
about 5000, I want to say.
And, uh, we are classified by
health care authority as an
urban hospital. And that has a
financial impact on the peak and
puts us at a slight disadvantage
where when we do have
legislative sessions where rate
increases are, um,
Our graciously given for
behavioral health and the
support that the state has for
behavioral health. There's 50%
less goes to urban versus rural.
So, again, geographically
located in a rural setting,
serving all of the rural
communities in New Mexico, we
are classified as an urban
hospital.
I'm gonna touch on education
requirements for residential
treatment. Residential treatment
is one program of many one
service line of many service
lines that we have, um, so this
is for adolescents, 12 to 17,
who stay typically about 90
days. Um, we provide education
services for them. That is a
requirement. There, there are,
there are kids we are their
guardians while they're in our
care. Um, if you live in and
work in a district, a school
district where the district
won't partner.
With you or there isn't a
partnership there established.
We are responsible for their
educational needs, the
individuals re the residents'
educational needs. And so that
incurs great cost to find an
accredited online program.
So all of these things are
challenges and barriers that
we've identified.
Behavioral health,
transportation is another
concern that we have. Um, the
location of Peak, um, being in
Santa Teresa and the FARC, uh,
corner of the state receiving
referrals from the whole entire
state, every med surge hospital
in the state of New Mexico
refers to all of the psychiatric
hospitals, um, then there's the
barrier of the transportation of
we've received the patient,
we've accepted the patient, then
the patient has to get to us via
ambulance. So ambulance transfer
and distance.
is a, is a disadvantage as well.
Um.
Then we'll move into, I'm sorry,
I'm flipping ahead and your
presentation page 5.
Um, operational costs and our
rates regarding the residential
treatment program. Again, this
is, we have, this is one service
line of many or other service
lines kind of offset the cost of
what it takes to run the
residential treatment program
because the state very much
needs these beds for these kids,
um,
But the, the rates do not offset
the costs. And that has an
impact. So it's a specialized
program requires the education,
it requires very high level
licensed individual, um, very
difficult to come by, uh, the
regula is heavily regulated and
very labor intensive for a lower
level of care.
Um,
And that's just, that's just a
factor and something in our cost
of doing business that we, we
deal with.
Then moving into workforce
recruitment. Real briefly, I'll
touch on our rural recruitment
challenges. It takes us
significantly well over 90 days
to fill open positions in the
rural communities. There is a
shortage of licensed staff
willing to work in the smaller,
more rural communities. Um, the,
the salary and wages in that
market in our rural markets
we're paying about 20% more.
Um, for attracting talent into
those areas.
Um, higher labor costs, um,
again, the 20% increase on what
we're paying in the rural
markets, turnover is higher,
resulting in higher costs for
training, onboarding, retention
bonuses, recruitment bonuses.
Um, we hired an FTE just to be a
full-time dedicated recruiter.
For the whole system, which is
something I've never had to do
before.
And then our salary and wages
have gone up about $12 in the
last four years. Um, and this
is, I use post-COVID as a
benchmark. I didn't do a
pre-COVID comparison,
post-COVID.
So significant impact.
Lastly, I'm just gonna finish
with, um, some of the things
that we do here in Donanaan
County that I'm really proud to
be a part of this community for,
um, we have a huge collaborative
of providers that really truly
work together and all have the
same mission to serve the
residents of our community who
need psychiatric care,
behavioral healthcare, substance
abuse treatment, and we all
figure out how to work together
and navigate the systems and,
and figure out ways to make
things easier, figure out ways.
To collaborate, partner, um,
for, for the ultimate mission,
which is taking care of our
residents who need these levels
of care.
And with that I will close and
ask if there's any questions for
me or if they'll be held till
later, I'm not sure.
So
Um, what I've been doing is
having questions at the end, but
my understanding is you might
have to leave early is that good
for one hour? You're good for an
hour, OK, if we start getting
close, let me know, um, but
we'll go on to the next
presenter.
Who is that me? All right.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. I'm Linda
Siegel and I represent and have
represented for many years the
all the nursing groups in New
Mexico than nursing association,
nurse practitioners, nurse
midwives, and the school nurses
and just as an aside, I worked
for years with Senator
Brantley's mother, who was a
nurse, uh, down here in in this
part of town, in this part of
the state, so I want to talk to
you about the nursing crisis.
Um, it's.
Nothing new. I know you've heard
about it before. Um, it's a
nationwide and actually an
international crisis and the,
the, the largest healthcare
provider group in the world are
nurses and we just don't have
enough of them. The, uh, her uh
report uh recently indicates
that nationally in in the US we
have uh RN shortage of about
3380.
000 people and also an an LPN
shortage of about 99,000 our our
New Mexico, the latest New
Mexico workforce report and
there have been problems over
recently about the workforce
reports because of the data
crash at RLD, but the nursing
board was separate from RLD, so
they're their dad is a little
better, but the workforce report
from UNM indicate
at the end of 23, that there
were about 6100 actual shortage
of nurses. We don't really know
what the shortage is for nurses
in our state or throughout the
country. Now, one of the things
I've been doing for the last
year is looking at the uh
workforce solutions report of
posted jobs and they, they uh
post deduplicated.
jobs for every single healthcare
category. And so when I looked
at those numbers for RNs in
April, there were 6000 and 17 uh
RN jobs posted, and that doesn't
even break out the categories if
they're looking for a critical
care nurse or some really
specialized nurse in July that
number had jumped almost 3000 to
8,858.
He duplicated are in job
postings and when I saw that
number I contacted Workforce and
I said this has got to be a
typo. How could we increase over
2000 in just a couple of months,
and she came back and said nope,
this is the right number. Now
that doesn't mean we're short
that many, but that means that
hospitals, practices, clinics,
nursing homes are looking for
nurses that there are vacancies.
Um,
I I contacted the nursing
director at Pres and the nursing
director at Loveless and said,
Have you suddenly started
advertising for our nurses, and
they said, well, no, not any
more than usual, and but they
had some ideas that maybe it was
you and him because UNM is gonna
open a whole new wing, but
that's at least 6 months away, I
think, so uh we don't know what
that jump is, but it's, it's
very concerning.
So let's talk about why briefly,
um, the whole in 2017, the
nursing workforce over um half
or over the age of 50.
And 30% are over the age of 60,
so a lot of people are getting
close to retirement and quite
honestly, COVID pushed people
in, into retirement after it was
over. But in 2021, and this has
been true of the schools of
nursing in our state, they, uh,
nationally schools turned away
90,000 qualified candidates and
in New Mexico, uh, public
school.
Of nursing. Most of them have
for years had waiting lists to
get into the program, but
unfortunately that is changing.
So from 21 to 20 from 20 to 21,
the, the RM workforce decreased
by 100,000. That's the first
time in 40 years to have that
dramatic of decrease nationwide
and this is the worst part of
that, a large percent of those
nurses were.
Under the age of 35 and working
in hospitals and we probably
know why that happened, that,
that was COVID.
So schools of nursing, as I said
in New Mexico, don't have
waiting lists anymore. We know
that the impact of COVID on the
nursing workforce, um, was
great.
And apparently.
COVID has really discouraged
young people from going thinking
about going into the field and
and applying to, um, nursing
schools. The LFC report just
recently indicated that um
applications were down in our
public schools of nursing by 19%
over the last five years. So we
are not getting enough people
wanting to, to, uh, become
nurses. The work
For violence has become an issue
that was particularly acute also
during COVID in hospitals where
patients were freaking out and
families were, um, we know that
the demand for healthcare is
greater in our country because a
lot of us baby boomers are
getting close to retirement and,
and older people sometimes have
more health issues and also we
know that we in the world when
almost 52% of our population has
one chronic disease.
So here we are, the country in
the world that spends the most
on healthcare, and yet our
outcomes for health are are much
lower than many other countries.
Now this is an interesting
figure. The board of nursing
right now indicates that they
have 33,800 RNs, just RN's
licensed in New Mexico.
But we don't know where they're
working. We don't know if
they're working. There is
actually years ago when we
passed the law to create the
Health Policy commission and to
do these workforce reports, we,
uh, the law said that every
licensed healthcare provider had
to when they applied to get
their new license or the renewal
that they had to say where they
worked.
But of course that that can
change in a heartbeat. You can
quit and go work somewhere,
somewhere else, so we and that
data is not really as
extractable as we like. So here
we have all these nurses in New
Mexico licensed and we really
don't have a good idea of where
they work and how many of them
are retired keeping their
license part time working or um,
uh,
They may not even live here and
have a New Mexico license and
part of that.
Not knowing how many nurses
really are working right now has
to do with the RN compact. You
know, you all hear a lot about
the healthcare compacts, and we
only have one healthcare compact
in New Mexico, and that's the
registered nurse compact.
And what a compact for
health care does is that anybody
who joins the compact by passing
a law saying they want to join
the compact with all the rules
of the compact. If you're a
compact state, a nurse from
another compact state can come
here and work.
But you don't have to tell
anybody you work here. You don't
have to report to the board of
nursing and say I'm a nurse, I'm
here working. You, of course,
you have to bring your license
and, you know, show it to
whoever your employer is, but
the employer doesn't report it
to the board of nursing. So we
don't know how many nurses are
here on a compact, um, during
COVID, we suspended the the law
that says you have to have a
nursing license or be in the
compact so that we could get
traveler nurses in here and
have, have our hospital
staffed with nurses.
So we don't have a system that
really allows us to analyze our
our true nursing shortage.
And what are we doing to address
the shortage? Well, we know that
the board of Nursing has
currently approved 25 nursing
programs that are operating
right now. They're about 2 or
they have approved, uh, another
proprietary school, Grand
Canyon, to come in and, and
provide nursing education. So we
do have LPN programs licensed
practical nurse programs in New
Mexico high schools. We have one
in Santa Fe that collaborates
with San.
A community college. Then we
have 16 associate degree nursing
programs. So just a quick, um,
uh, explanation of how nursing
categories work you can get an
associate degree in nursing and
get your nurse's license, you
can get a BSN, a bachelor of
Science in nursing and get your
nursing license and of course
there's the advanced practice.
So one of the creative things
that's happened in New Mexico is
the schools of nursing have
collaborated.
So that if a person gets an
associate degree at a community
college or a branch university
or college, then they can with
an agreement with UNM New Mexico
State, and Western go spend
another year mostly online since
they've already done their
clinicals and get their BSN. So
we've really improved the number
of nurses that have BSNs.
Now let's look at the schools of
nursing briefly and, uh, and,
uh.
The fiscal year ending 2023, all
the schools of nursing graduated
almost 1500 nurses.
That could once they pass the in
clicks, go out there and get a
job and work.
The, um, and the schools that
had the highest graduations were
numbers of graduations where
Brookline, which is a
proprietary school, uh, Central
New Mexico and New Mexico State
University and UNM and those
accounted for, um, like 600 or
700 or about 800 actually of all
the nursing graduates in, in the
state.
Then we, when we look at the
graduates from 2022 and 2021 and
19 and 18, we can see that
gradually, very gradually,
there's been an increase from
the number in, in 2018 when we
graduated 1,056 nurses to the,
the current, the amount of
almost 1500 in, um,
In 23 and I don't have the most
current numbers for 24 because
they're not yet available.
So we're graduating, um, nurses,
the, the proprietary schools are
contributing greatly to the
number of nurses coming out,
ready to go.
But we've been working over the
last few years because of this
crisis with the legislature to
try and increase the, the number
of nurses and in uh 22 and 23,
there was $100 given to 4
different schools so that they
could use that money to support
in any way they needed to, um,
nurses.
The legislature gave $30 million
to nursing faculty endowments,
so that could be used to get
more faculty to pay faculty
more.
We got money, uh, 15 million to
do expansion of the state
schools of nursing, that, and
that money went to to the higher
education department and then
they took our they sent out an
RFP and schools responded.
And what some of the schools did
was use it for some capital like
being but like purchasing the,
the computerized mannequins that
uh.
have all the symptoms of many,
many diseases and uh and also to
expand the slots and that money
allegedly was supposed to expand
to about 400 new slots in 17
schools of nursing.
Then in 23 we got another 10
million for faculty endowments
to help with getting more
faculty and in 2013, 9 million
of that 15 million became
recurring to the schools of
nursing.
We requested money, uh, last
year, uh, to continue that
expansion with the schools of
nursing and it was in the
governor's budget, but I, we
couldn't persuade, um, the
legislature to include it.
Well, what are hospitals and
others doing to help with this
nursing crisis and I talked to
both the director of nursing at
Presbyterian and at Loveless,
and they are directly
collaborating with proprietary
schools, Presbyterian with
Brookline, they're helping pay
the tuition. They are providing
the clinical placements and all
the kinds of support that those
students need and then they come
and work for.
For Presbyterian, for 10 number
of years. Loveless is doing, uh,
working on a similar
collaboration with Grand Canyon
University, where they'll be
their sites for clinical
rotation, their staff will be
the preceptors for clinicals and
they will be assisting with
tuition for, um, for these
students to, to become nurses
and then come and work for for
Loveless.
Now, what we have seen over the
last years is a
Uh, over the last 10 years, a
dramatic increase in the
salaries of nurses in New
Mexico, the average salary in a
hospital for an RN who's got
experience, not your person
right out of school is in the 83
to $85,000 range. These are
great jobs. These are jobs that
are meaningful, that you can
support a family on that, uh, I
think that a lot of people
don't, um, don't know, um.
But actually, um, younger people
don't necessarily know the the
joys of becoming a nurse. I
found I didn't know this and I
found it in my search for
different um information on the
shortage that Blue Cross Blue
Shield of New Mexico gave UNM
$1.6 million to provide
scholarships for their nurses
and their nurses to become nurse
practitioners and nurse
midwives, those kinds of
collaborations are, are very
important and we know that other
schools are
Working with their local
hospitals. Uh, I'm on the board
of the Santa Fe Community
College, and we work closely
with Christa Saint Vincent's and
trying to get their, their aides
or people who are interested in
nursing into our nursing
program. So what can we do to um
solve the problems of the
nationwide, the international
problems of not having enough
nurses. Nurses are not moving
here. In fact, no one is moving
to New Mexico.
If we look at the 2010 census
compared to 2020 census, a net
of 50,000 people moved to New
Mexico.
And unfortunately there weren't
50,000 nurses, so we're, we're
not going to solve our problem
by getting people to move here.
We have got to educate more of
our own, and that is the only
way to solve the problem. Now
hospitals are using technology
and they're and they're changing
so that nurses are, are, are
doing what clinically they need
to do and maybe somebody else is
doing something else and, um,
some of the technology will
with that
But we, we really need to
attract more people into the
profession. Years ago, uh,
Johnson and Johnson did a did a
yearlong advertising campaign
for nurses. Of course this was
on television, which I guess
young people don't watch
anymore, but and so we would
need to do something that that
got into their media venues and
social media and all, but it was
a whole series about being a
nurse, here's all the great
things nurse.
I do. Here's how you know you
feel when you, when you, when
you do this, so that is one
thing we need to commit some
resources to attracting more
people uh in loveless, they are
actually sending out their
nurses to the schools and doing
presentations to try to let them
know, to let them know what's
happening and that this is a
good career to go in.
We need to expand the capacity
of our state schools of nursing,
so and that happens with the
state investing money, investing
money into those schools so that
they can provide uh more slots,
increasing faculty salaries and
clinical sites. Every hospital
in this state is because they
need nurses, they are willing
and able to provide clinical
sites and it's all a matter of
coordination. Um, we also need
to provide
More academic support and
support when some a student is
interested in becoming a nurse,
but maybe they haven't quite got
the academic qualifications.
Let's, these schools can help,
um, with getting them ready so
that they can uh go into the
nursing program, but that also
costs money and then, of course,
obviously loans, more
scholarships, loans for service,
loan repayment money. We've
invested.
much more in those recently, but
we have got to do more because
we are not going to solve this
crisis without money and without
investing in our schools who are
the entities that train our
nurses.
Thanks.
Thank you.
Good.
Madam Chair, Nathaniel Royb, I'm
a retina physician, owner of
Retina Consultants of New
Mexico, um, I'm see 60 patients
a day, so I'm really used to
talking in 22 minute sections,
so I really will keep my
comments extra short. Um, I am
a, uh, New Mexico born and
raised kid, grew up in Mo, New
Mexico, graduated in the
smallest school in New Mexico,
Mosquero, and then came here
with Senator Brantley to NMSU
where we were.
At the A College together, but I
do want to note to the committee
that she's at least 10 years
younger than I am.
And I do want to thank everybody
for taking time. I think when
you get a group of legislators
together, a group of healthcare
professionals together. It's
hard to find anybody who works
harder for New Mexicans and
cares more for New Mexicans and,
and when we hear about the
amount of money that we're
pouring into medicine. Thank you
for all of your continued
support in that area.
I think what we, what I want to
help us do in some very brief
comments is just recharacterize
uh the health crisis and, and
what we have and what I really
would like to say is what we
really have is a timely care
crisis. The quality of New
Mexico care and the quality of
the physicians here that I know
and have worked with, uh, my
entire career are incredibly
good, but how many of you have
had trouble getting in to see a
doctor or one of your loved ones
when they give you a diagnosis
and
Need to see a rheumatologist or
an ENT doctor or a retina
doctor, and, and it takes a
little bit longer than you'd
like. All of us would love to
hear what are you doing
tomorrow?
Uh, that's just not the case in
this state though, typically we
uh delayed out, uh, several.
Months and so in in 2020 when I
started retina Consultants of
New Mexico, uh, many warned me
that it was going to be a major
financial blunder on my part. It
was the middle of a pandemic,
and here I was going to start a,
a retina practice and uh 6
months later, 3 retina.
Physicians left Albuquerque and
all of a sudden business was
booming.
I was going to be OK. And now,
uh Retina Consultants, we look
forward to adding our third
retina specialist very soon and
take care of well over 10,000
patient visits a year, uh, were
incredibly busy. And so then for
the committee, the question
becomes, why then, if we have
this unlimited.
Number of patients, which is
where we get our revenue. Why
are doctors not?
Knocking down the door to come
to New Mexico. It seems like a
great economic opportunity and
it it seems like that would make
sense, and I think that part of
it is we have obviously a
perception issue amongst the
medical community. We heard
statistics of our medical
schools and how many physicians
are staying, you would think
we'd be approaching 100%. That
would be our goal, but it's
falls well short of that, and,
and I'd like to talk about the.
Perception of what are the
challenges in New Mexico from a
physician's standpoint. And the
problem when you have
Untimely care, untimely care
creates sicker patients if you
have to wait several months to
deal with an issue in front of
your doctor. You're going to be
sicker when you arrive and um
those doctors who see you
ultimately want to be part of a
broader community of medicine,
and that's what we worked
through with our medical
associations to try to create a
community of medi medicine, but
also a community requires
providers and, and that's where
we're starting to.
Uh, hurt because a shrinking
community obviously makes
patient care difficult. New
Mexico is the only state in the
entire country that lost
providers in 2023. That's a
problem, and it wasn't a small
percentage. It was 8% of our
workforce that we lost.
From a retina standpoint, for
instance, if you come in to me
with a diabetic issue, chances
are you're in a specialist
office with a retinal disease
from diabetes because your
diabetes is incredibly poorly
controlled.
And I need the help of a whole
group of specialists to get that
patient back on track. And if
those specialists are not
available, all of a sudden I
start to feel like an island to
take care of this catastrophe
that's shown up on my door. And
I think that's the big thing
about creating a community and
and having uh strength in
numbers and, and maybe it's more
like misery loves company sort
of thing, but you know, we all
want to be there in there
together and make sure that we
have the
Support that we need a lot, we
spend a lot of time talking
about.
Money and reimbursement rates
and the other thing to remember
with a very sick population is
sicker patients actually pay
less than healthy patients to
take care of. It doesn't make
any sense, but it's the way our
billing codes work. I did 23
hour surgeries last week, which
were very incredibly complicated
and I got paid for each of those
surgeries the same amount if I
had done a 20 minute surgery so
you can understand the
reluctance to care for a very
sick patients in this state, yet
we're creating a
A lot of them
by our on timely care. One of
the perceptions that we have in
the community is the litigious
environment uh where top 10 for
the number of suits per
physician we're 3 for the value
of those suits and it's, it's
more complex and that's why I
wanted to talk about it in a
perception sort of way. It's
more complex than the stuff that
we talk about in insurances, all
that sort of stuff. These are
perceptions and that we got to
think about it from the
standpoint of our residents.
Our students and attracting them
is just the fear of, is there a
fear amongst them of losing
their homes and their cars and
their 401ks and their college
for their kids for taking care
and so I think that's where
we've got to make sure that
we're not penalizing our doctors
for being bold and taking care
of those sick patients. Um, one
of the other things that we'll
spend, I'll talk briefly about
is just the prior authorization
process. I think it's crazy that
I have 2.
5 people FTEs just to help me
get the authorizations that I
need to take care of patients.
It's it's costly and, and it's,
it's hard on patients because it
means that instead of me being
able to provide your care right
when you're in my clinic that I
have to say, hey, can you come
back next week and if you're
from Gallup and you used your
last $20 on gas, that's not
cool. Um, and, um.
And so our, uh, I, I do want to
talk though, and like I say.
When we talk about these
problems, I think we got to then
start talking about solutions
and we have to change this
perception and the way we change
the perception is how we start
talking about New Mexico being
an amazing opportunity for
Madison, and I believe that
independent practices will save
medicine in New Mexico because
it allows doctors to be owners
and when you have an owner in a
community, guess what they have,
they are committed. They're not
just going to fly and run with
every single
challenge that we have. And so
that takes owners and small
practices are really good for
patients. If you're a patient,
what do you want? You want a
relationship with your doctor.
You want the same doctor in the
same place, preferably for a lot
of years of your life. And I
think that's what small
practices will do, and those
relationships are really
important. The efficiency of a
practice, the one thing I think
that we don't spend enough time
talking about is that if we have
a nursing shortage and a doctor
shortage
It sounds overbearing, but we
have to make every single one of
those providers as efficient as
they can be to see as many
patients as they can be and when
you're streamlined in a small
business, that's really the best
way to do that, and doctors love
the autonomy and so hopefully
I've put a bug in your ear that
small practices are really
important and because if you
ultimately want a structure
where health care dollars stay
in New Mexico, Guess what the
best way to do it is, make those
doctors, owners in their
community, have them invest in
this.
Dollars and those dollars all
stay in that community in the
form of, of course, employment,
but homes and cars and all of
the other stuff that doctors uh
would eventually, um,
Invest in
So what are the challenges then
you say, so why doesn't
everybody have, uh, a small
business and can we make small
medicine, a thing in New Mexico,
and I think that some of the
things that we have to talk
about at this level are money
and equity. When I went to get
uh SBA loan to start my
practice, uh, two banks laughed
me out, and the 3rd 1 said no,
and it wasn't until I really
twisted some arms that I got
some money, and now that bank is
laughing all the way to the
bank. It was a really
investment to invest in a small
business and um.
But the other thing that we need
to talk about when we're talking
about small businesses and most
doctors like me, I was an animal
science major here at NMSU, know
nothing about.
Business and dollars and uh
we're experts on a lot of things
and that is not one of them. And
I think that it is something
that we need to hold our
teaching institutions to the
fire and say at least half a
day, spend some time talking
about the business side of
medicine. Let's educate our
doctors. There's not this fear,
this barrier of them jumping out
on their own. Let's tap into
those entrepreneurial roots that
we should be able to activate in
some of them. Um, the other
thing I think.
When we're talking and you all
have invested heavily in
in rural New Mexico medicine and
rural New Mexico grants, but I
think one of the worries that we
have as a doctor, as I alluded
to earlier, no doctor wants to
be an island. If you go to
practice general surgery in Las
Vegas, New Mexico, which if
anybody here wants to do that,
they're in great need, um, it's
a problem because you feel like
you're on 24/7 call. You can
never leave. You can never take
your family on a vacation.
to wherever it is you want to
go, uh, you're constantly called
away from your kid's basketball
games and so we need to get
better at getting doctors into
these places on short term
basis, like just flying a doctor
in a rural community for uh for
a day of clinic can relieve a
tremendous amount of stress and
return that sense of community
to our rural doctors. So we got
to do better at flying patients
and doctors back and forth to
our hub, which is really uh our
our bigger city.
Which is Albuquerque and and Las
Cruces is actually might fall
into that as well.
Um, and then finally, I think
when we talk about starting a
practice and barriers to care, I
think one of the biggest
absurdities in New Mexico and
immoralities in all of medicine
is when a patient who
Faithfully pays into an
insurance and then has a problem
and comes to me as a retina
specialist, and I'm not allowed
to see them because there's some
insurance barrier, and I think
that's one thing that we need to
work at legislatively is to
make.
Give patients the opportunity to
see all doctors in this state.
It seems crazy to me that
there's population, whole
populations of patients that
can't come see me and we're the
only retina only specialty in
the entire state, you'd think
that that we'd have access to
everybody, but it's unfortunate
how often a patient comes in and
the insurance companies will not
cover the cost of their in their
care because they will not
credential us and so I think
those are
Things opening up patient
populations to all doctors is
good for patients, ultimately
it's good for doctors. And so,
um, I think those are the things
that I wanted to talk about,
give doctors access to patients,
improved medical transport.
Typically we think of it as in
moving patients, but let's move
doctors more efficiently around
the state through through
flight. And, um, and then
ultimately, when, uh, we
obviously want to support our
medical schools.
Let's support the end product.
If you want to go to medical
school somewhere else in the
country and come back here,
let's figure out ways to
To help with tuition for those
students and, um, and then
ultimately, I think the big
thing that our doctors in rural
New Mexico really want is access
to residents, residents who
spend time in rural New Mexico,
fall in love with it, but
they're not getting that
opportunity. And this is
something that could be done
incredibly inexpensive. It's a
very low hanging fruit that we
could do it with a, with a quick
bill to provide money for
residents from our university to
go.
out to the community and spend
time with rural doctors. So, uh,
thank you everybody for allowing
me, Madam Chair, uh, committee.
Thank you for engaging in such
an important topic.
Go ahead.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, my
name is Frank Corcoran and I'm
the CEO at Sierra Vista Hospital
and Truth or Consequences. I
wanna thank you guys for letting
us speak today uh Sierra Vista,
if you're not familiar, is an 11
bed critical access hospital.
Uh, we have about 200 employees
and we serve all of the citizens
in the community of Sierra
County, about 11,000 residents.
Uh, our hospitals, you know,
face financial stresses every
day, um, just some of my
predecessors are here talking
about this, you know, getting
patients in, you know, we are
surviving based on how much
revenue we have less our
expenses and that's the nature
of health care today. How do we
keep our expenses less than our
revenue so we can survive?
What we're seeing is a cost of
supplies, the cost of doing
business, the inflation has
really gone up since 2020. Um,
and those are costs we cannot
pass on to the the patients we
have contracts with payer groups
and they pay us the contract so
I could in theory raise my
prices, but my contracts are
only going to pay me a certain
amount, so we have to incur that
to survive and keep going.
Um, I can tell you just a story
about our hospital, um, we were
built the 2nd rendition of the
hospital was built in 1955.
There was an earlier rendition.
It was more like a house than a
hospital. Um, it was built in 55
and since then that hospital has
deteriorated uh we added in
addition to the hospital in
2019, so we have our 11 beds,
uh, the majority of our patient
care is in the new facility. If
any of you have ever been, um,
you, you've seen it. If you want
to come, I'm
gladly give you a tour anytime
uh and show you around. Uh, the
other part of our hospital, the
older part the 2000 I mean 1955
rendition is on what I call life
support.
Plumbing HVAC issues, uh,
asbestos issues, the best thing
to do is to, to tear it down
and, and add on to that. Um, so
that's kind of where we are with
our little hospital, um.
We are
Always looking for resources.
We're trying to manage what we
have and increase access. The
goal of our hospitals increased
access to patients in our
community, uh, the closest
hospital 75 miles in either
direction and for some of our
patients, uh, with the average
age about county is like 65+.
They don't have transportation,
uh, we're kind of the stopgap
for providing essential uh
hospital and critical services,
um, we do have, we have added
some new things here to.
Family practitioner, um, two
family practice physicians. We
added a psychiatrist recently.
behavioral health nurse
practitioners. We brought in a
surgeon, a cardiology
cardiologist one day a week and
we opened up our walk-in clinic
here in our county. And that's
just in the last 3 years since
I've been here.
I started out with one physician
and 2 nurse practitioners. And
so we've added on to meet the
needs of the community. We also
have an active telemedicine
program with a neurology,
nephrology, and internal
medicine, uh, so some of the
things we need to do is, again,
work on survival, adding more
revenue than the expenses again,
you probably hear that theme
throughout, uh, from my
discussions, but that's how we
survive in in hospitals today.
Um,
One of the big things we've done
is, how can we prepare for the
future with our hospital again,
I have an old building I need to
tear down. We just did a master
facility plan which looks at
Structurally tearing down the
old building and adding on a new
phases and new places so we can
add more services to the
community and the master plan
has it phased out. Step 1, step
2, step 3 between now and 2032,
we think we can get it done one
piece at a time, um, with that
we want to expand our behavioral
health services. Our community
needs assessment has behavioral
health, substance abuse disorder
is the number one need in the
community, hence that's when we
started looking for
Nurse practitioners and
behavioral health. Since then
we've made a dent in that
population. We are my three
nurse practitioners or solid
book for 3 weeks, uh, just this
past week I had two patients
come in from Las Cruces that
couldn't get an appointment
here, but we had some room on
our our uh calendars to get them
in and get them scheduled. So
we're happy about that.
We do need to expand our EMS
capabilities. We, our EMS team
covers the entire county plus,
uh, it's not unlike us to come
out here to Las Cruces, Donana
and help with transport here
I'll go up to Albuquerque or
Almo Gorda. We've done a lot of
transports. Uh, we do need to
expand that service line. Our
rehab department is still in the
old building. It's in the old
chapel.
And I had to put 5 mini splits
in there to cool it off because
the chapel is about 30 ft
ceiling height, and it gets warm
in there and that's not a great
place for patients to do their
physical rehab and and uh work
out what I say. So we need to
expand that and within our
master facility plan we have
plans to add a separate rehab
building to move that out and
also find a place for our EMS
team. They're in the old convent
of the hospital and uh they're
on 24 hour shifts they have a
sleep room.
And so we need to find an
adequate place for them with as
well as tearing down the old
building and adding places for
more behavioral health services.
The issues we face in our
community, our county, or, or,
you know, providing education
and healthcare, um, counties,
communities would not survive if
they didn't have a hospital.
Ours is one of them, and
educational resources we have a
a great school system uh we need
to utilize that system to start
bringing those students into the
hospital setting. So we've
started a program, uh, it's a
paid internship where we take
about 10 high school students
twice a year, bring them in.
About 8 to 10 weeks to do roles
and work in our hospital. Uh, we
have them in different areas. We
rotate them around we just
finished our first program and
of the, I think we had 8
students then, 3 of them have
stayed on with the hospital, 1
in a full-time capacity to have
gone on to school at New Mexico
State and have come back to work
with us, PRN to help out and
registration and and in
radiology scheduling so we find
that investing in the youth now.
will help provide us services
and and clinicians later, uh.
Definitely investing
Hospitals are an economic driver
system, rural communities, uh,
hospitals about 12% of the GDP
in our community, 2 years ago we
did economic impact study from
our little small hospital had a
$70 impact uh throughout our
county, uh, so hospitals are
definitely a piece of the
community if you look at the
biggest.
A position in the state
hospitals about $12 billion
impact to the state of New
Mexico, uh, just some of these
as these predecessors talk, we
got to keep health care going,
bring in clinicians, bring in
providers, uh, to help us grow.
HDAA, um, I want to thank all of
you personally for coming
together with the HDAA um, as we
talked about my hospital and
several of the small rural
hospitals in the state are on
thin financial lines, thin
margins, struggling to survive
in the HDAA will help supply us
with a lifeline to keep
hospitals going, providing
services and keep us viable.
Again, revenue, less expenses
equals survival when your
expenses cost more than you
make, then you have to.
Shut the doors. The HDAA is
going to help us tremendously.
Um, when you look at it from a
state level, uh, it's going to
bring in about $1.5 billion to
the state through the HDAA
thanks to your efforts uh if you
look at our hospital in
particular to kind of give you
the, our story, uh, there's an
assessment fee or a tax fee that
goes into a federal matching
program for Sierra Vista it's
about $9,900,000 we invest into
these assessment fees based on
inpatient and outpatient
revenues that goes into a
federal matching fund which will
come back to.
around $11 million. That's huge.
Uh, that's the lifeline small
hospitals need to survive again,
and we thank you for that. Uh,
if you look at
How much we're paying in uh
versus bigger hospitals, the
small rural hospitals have less
of a contribution in a larger
hospitals because that's gonna
help the smaller hospitals
survive, um.
We're definitely proud of that.
There's some other hospitals
listed in here. I know Roosevelt
general who's on a thin margin,
it's about a $10,000 impact to
that hospital. Rehobeth is about
$18 million down in Gallup. So
again, we can't thank you enough
for the HDAA, uh.
And we're looking forward to
getting that started. That is
going to be a lifeline to help
us.
Um, so with the ACAA 75% of
these funds need to be
reinvested in the state, you
know, a particular plans are
operational costs, recruitment.
I've brought in physicians and
nurse practitioners, but there's
a cost and we have to pay them
and pay them reasonably well to
get them to come to a little
small place like truth or
consequences. So recruitment and
retention is part of it.
Nursing, we have about 40% of
our nurses.
staff his agency and another 10%
of our clinical staff is agency
that we have to bring in, so we
try to retain and these folks,
we've converted about about 6
agency nurses who come here,
they like it. We've converted
them into full-time staff, so
some of those some of those
funds would go into there again,
the students that we're bringing
in from the high school, uh,
doing that paid internship
program, some of the funds will
go into that scholarships we try
to put play uh some of our
staff.
Grow them. I have a phlebotomist
who wants to go to nursing
school, so we're helping them
with that, that program, uh.
Uh, preceptors and, and just
helping to pay our providers
more and our staff more
inflation as I talked about
earlier, has really hit
hospitals, but it's, it's hit
the clinicians, the staff at the
hospital, and so we need to help
them survive and be able to
afford to feed themselves and
feed their families. So part of
these funds will go into staff
retention and salaries and
community benefit, uh, again,
our community EMS we need some
another truck, those things are
about $300,000 new equipment,
new.
Service lines we're we're
looking at adding pulmonology,
uh, pain management, orthopedics
to our hospital, so those those
things require funding and
that's where these funds will go
to.
Mm
And let's see, so we're hoping
for a brighter future. The HDAA
has a clause which could end in
2030 and we hope that we can
keep it going because it's
really essential to the small
hospitals in this county, I mean
in the state as well as our
county, um, and I will pause
there for any questions or
questions at a later time, but
thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair.
Members of the committee, my
name is Doctor Karen Carson, and
I'm a pediatrician from Roswell,
New Mexico, and I'm a native New
Mexican also and I just want to
share that right now where we're
sitting was the land that my
grand, my great grandfather
Concepcion Montoya used to run
his cattle on. And so he would
be amazed to see this all today.
So I am going to talk about
independent practice and why
it's such a critical component,
um, to the success of the
healthcare system in our state.
And so on.
A handout on page 2 we know that
there's a shortage of health
A handout on page 2 we know that
there's a shortage of healthcare
providers in the United States
and as you can see, the minimum
projected shortage of physicians
is nearly 40,000 by 2034.
And New Mexico's competing
against every other state. So
it's really challenging for us
because we have a very rural
state. We have a lot of social
struggles and so it's hard for
us to compete with states to get
physicians to come here.
We already faced this severe
shortage and we have 2200 posted
job openings, uh, when we looked
at those numbers in April of
2024.
The next page is a handout with
uh or in the handout is a graph
and it shows the trends of
independent physicians in the
United States and New Mexico
from 2019 to 2024.
And the physician advocacy
Institute reported that New
Mexico was the only state that
experienced the trend from 2018
to 2020 where more physicians
were transitioning into
independent practice, and then
the trend reversed at the end of
2021. And now we're close to the
national average for percentage
of physicians employed by
hospital health systems or
corporate entities. As of
January 2024, only 25% of New
Mexican
Mexico physicians are an
independent practice.
So moving on to further examine
employment transitions. There
was data collected using billing
information to examine how many
physicians are actively billing
for patients in every state. So
this gives you a better window
and into truly active practice.
And as you can see New Mexico
was the only state in the
country that experienced a loss
of physicians from 2019 to 2024.
And so a lot of people question,
why is it so hard to run a
medical practice. And this is
because we're really the only
industry in which the business
cannot control the price of the
services or the goods we
provide. Our Medicare
reimbursements continue to
decline.
And in New Mexico, about 70% of
patients are covered by
governmental insurance, so any
change in these payments rates
really has a huge impact.
So really the only way to truly
increase revenue for us is to
see more patients, and this
isn't good quality of care and
A lot of independent
practitioners have moved into
what we call concierge medicine,
uh, where it's private pay only,
and we know that most New
Mexicans cannot afford to do
this.
On the next page, on page 6, you
can see that physicians have
experienced no notable increase
in Medicare in 20 years and in
2025, there's a plan cut to
physician reimbursement by 2.8%.
So when you look at how
physician payment is adjusted
for inflation in practice costs,
our payment actually declined
about 29% from 2001 to 2024.
And we know that the federal
action on Medicare has a much
larger impact on New Mexico
physicians and other states
because of our reliance on that
system for direct patient care
and payment for all of our
services.
On the next page, we look at
Medicaid revenue, and that's
also very important because
that's the cornerstone of most
practices in New Mexico.
And it currently covers 43% of
New Mexicans and 60% of all New
Mexico children. And it's the
biggest payer in the New Mexico
health care system.
With every state dollar spent,
the federal government
reimburses us $3.45.
And so our overall goal is to
provide access to the care that
is needed. We want to provide
care for our patients and really
increasing these Medicaid
payments is the most direct way
to to reach that goal. If we
have better revenue, we can
spend more time with our
patients. We can offer more
competitive pay to our staff, to
our nurses, to our other
practitioners, we can hire
critical patient care team
staff, administrative support
staff, and we can modernize our
practice tools.
On the next page, there's a
statement that says no margin,
no mission, and this is really
important because what this
means so that even with the best
of intentions to provide
excellent health care to those
in need without the ability to
adequately pay practitioners and
support staff, the mission is
going to fail.
And so other professions are
paid for their expertise, but in
medicine, much of our payment is
linked to the quality of the
result. And so for many of our
outcomes, we as practitioners
only have mild to moderate
control over the result because
patients can be assigned to our
panels and then they can choose
not to participate in quality
recommendations so they can
refuse vaccines. They don't show
up for specialty care
appointments
They'll go to the emergency room
without calling us first to see
if there's an opening at our
office. Um, they refused
nutrition consults. And so these
measures are all measures that
we are graded on practitioners
are graded on by insurance
companies. And if we don't
receive passing scores, then our
payments are decreased.
And finally, insurance companies
can cut codes so they can deny
payment, they can state this is
patient responsibility. They can
say certain things aren't
covered. They'll bundle fees
altogether. And so it's very
difficult to have that
responsibility for patient care.
We're trying to take care of
patients, but you can't do it if
you're not paid.
So we're going to talk a little
bit about a long-standing New
Mexico independent practice,
which is my practice and on
page.
10
BCA Medical Associates and so
we're a pediatric practice. We
were founded in 1968. And when I
started, there were 4 of us, 4
pediatric practitioners in
Rosville, New Mexico. And now in
2024, we have 18 practitioners.
And so we have MDs, DOs, nurse
practitioners and PAs, and we
have 5 clinics in Roswell,
Artesia, Carlsbad, Dexter, and
Riodoso.
We have 19,236 enrolled
patients. They're all
pediatrics, and we have
approximately 60,000 patient
visits a year, where 70%
Medicaid, 29% commercial
insurance, and then 1% private
pay. We have a 107 staff
members, and that includes our
clinicians, but also our
management, nursing, lab
technicians, front office
people, referrals, prior
authorization staff, triage
staff, uh, other insurance
staff.
And we are very active partners
and we all have administrative
roles, so partners that are in
charge of immunizations or
coding practice management,
advocacy, staff management, lab
management.
When I asked the leadership, why
are we doing so well? Why is BCA
able to stay in practice and
really it's because of
relationships. And in New
Mexico, that's how it works.
Relationships are really
critical to success. And we're
able to access our specialty
care practitioners. A lot of us
went to UNM medical school. We
know the people at UNM. We can
call them up and say, hey, I
remember when you were an intern
with me, but I need
Help with this kit. We know our
CSA workers are CYFD workers
that are in town. We can call
them up and say I'm worried
about this child. Our
school-based health clinics,
we've done pilot programs with
them, and most of our school
nurses were nurses at BCA that
moved on to work at the schools.
And so we're friends. We talk
with them and, and if they have
a concern or if, uh, vaccines
are changing, requirements are
changing, we're able to talk
with them.
We have representation on the
pediatric council so we can talk
with our uh managed care
organizations and leadership
that way. We're friends with our
legislative representatives and
so we appreciate all of that
because when we have problems,
we can come to all of you and
say, hey, we need help here and
that relationship is very
important. And also finally with
state government employees, we
can email people in health
departments and other
areas we have phone numbers and
we can say, hey, I need help,
and we get help. And so that's
very important in a small town
and in all of New Mexico, I
think we're a big state and a
very small state.
We are major employers in our
communities and so.
I'm gonna move on here.
Sorry, I'm losing my spot here
and um our clinical staff really
works hard to make sure that we
have plenty of people working
for us and that our clinicians
are supported through we follow
standards of care. Um, we have
various internal networks that
make sure everybody's practicing
along the same guidelines. One
thing that we do that I'm very
proud of is that we have a
policy that
we add preventative care visits
to sick care visits if they're
needed. And so if a child comes
in and has a a sick visit, um,
and you know, they're really
sick, we're not going to do
this, but if they're coming in
for a runny nose or they need
their um allergy medicine, um,
refilled or changed, we add on a
preventative care visit and we
add those screenings on, so
we'll do screenings for anemia,
hearing, vision, dental.
varnish application will update
their vaccines. We'll do a
complete exam. And this way we
can catch disease at earlier and
easier to treat stages. So we
could catch developmental delay
issues, autism concerns,
scoliosis, uh growth
abnormalities. So that's a
really important thing that we
do. And one reason we can do
that is because we have a really
high medical assistant or nurse
to clinician ratio. We have 2 to
3 medical assistants for.
Every practitioner. I have 3 to
4 because I'm busy and those are
our right hands. They room our
patience. They obtained some
histories, they'll administer
vaccines. They bolster
education. They'll give
handouts, they'll get records
together and so the really
important to our practice. They
also follow up for us, so
they'll follow up on social
concerns, so maybe we had a drug
exposed infant that came to our
office for their first visit but
then didn't show up again.
They're looking for them. They,
they noticed that, hey, that kid
didn't come back. We need to
find them. And if we can't, we
can call CYFD because we know
the person over there at the
department.
We also have phone triage, so we
have two highly trained medical
staff nurses that are just phone
nurses. They answer the phones
all day. They talk to parents,
they talk to pharmacists, they
talk to insurance companies, um,
and they help out in, in that
manner. And so we have a really
large staff that can help. And
finally, we have more support
staff that isn't medical, but
support staff that deal with the
red tape of insurance.
They stay on the phone, they
stay on hold, they email, they
do messages, um, we have
referral and authorization
specialists, same thing, we have
to do prior offs. They're a
thorn, um, and so we have to
have somebody that's doing prior
offs day in, day out. We also
need IT staff because we have
electronic medical records in
patient portals and sometimes
the system goes down or the data
can't be found and so we have to
employ IT staff and then of
course we have our
Front office staff that does
scheduling that helps patients
with forms and insurance
verification helps them apply
for Medicaid if they need that
helps them get records. And
almost all our staff is
bilingual because most of our
patient or many of our patients
I should say, about 50% speak
only Spanish.
And we really work hard on
retention and ongoing training,
and so we work hard on letting
our staff know this is how we do
our bonus structure. This is how
you're going to get a year-end
bonus. This is what we do for
pay raises and how we follow
cost of living increases. We do
ongoing training skills. We pay
for CEs and licensure. We've
paid for 3 of our nurses to go
to nurse practitioner school,
and they've all started to work
with us. And
Our medical, uh, students and um
nursing students that have
rotated through, have also,
we've all of our nurse
practitioner hires in the recent
years and our newest doctor was
a student with us. And so we, we
do this training and that can
really help. And I think, um,
We alluded to this a little bit,
but that independent practice
can really be an answer to moral
injury and burnout of physicians
because when we practice in a
place where we, we feel like we
have no autonomy, then you have
that moral injury. And we
provide more opportunities for
people to practice in an
environment where they want to
practice, where they don't have
to deal with the bureaucracy of
some of the other.
the large system practices. And
so it's just a better place to
work for some people.
Now that said, I'm gonna move on
to struggles to recruit because
it's not all just a bed of
roses. And so rural medicine
requires different skills and
these skills are not taught in
standard residency programs and
there are also lifestyle
concerns. There can be a lack of
support or employment for your
spouse. There is perceived poor
educational opportunities for
children. There can be lack of
cultural diversity.
And then social interactions and
dating can be really difficult.
It's a little easier if you're a
pediatrician, but if you're a
psy a psychiatrist or internal
medicine, you know, you don't
want to find out that the woman
that you're dating that you're
taking care of her mother for a
psychiatric issue, you know, and
because there are ethical and
moral issues with that and so it
can be very hard to be a new
single doctor in a small town,
there's a difficulty with that
interaction.
So we do have costs, and they're
not always recognized in our
payment structures and our
medical malpractice at BCA,
which is pediatrics, so it's low
risk is 170,000 per year.
Our electronic health records
cost us $270,000,270 a year.
Our our phone triage calls are
usually not paid, are night
triage calls. So when we have a
baby who has a fever and the
parent is panicked in the middle
of the night. We have, we pay
for a system to contact us. Um,
those are not paid and
We also have to continuously
monitor our patient, our, our
payments, um, staff and
practitioners, we spend a lot of
time emailing, we're on the
phone requesting, we need our
payments. Uh, it's really
difficult to do prior
authorization appeals. Sometimes
the prior authorization is just
automatically denied. You have
to make an appointment. It takes
4 to 5 days to get the
appointment. The appointment is
at one o'clock, and sometimes
it's not with a peer, it's with
a pharmacist or a PA.
Or I think the last time my peer
was a physical therapist. Um,
and so it can be really
difficult. It can take time and
you're not, you're taken away
from patients for that. Um, we
had our gross receipt tax
repayments held once for over 9
months while they were reviewing
it and one of the ways that we
have managed to continue to get
paid and worked is threats of
reports to the office of the
Superintendent of Insurance. Um,
we've
Had to make all the time,
personal calls and emails to the
medical director of the MCO and
at one time, we actually, um, we
threatened to, to stop our
contract just to, you know, we,
we basically said we're, we're
not going to contract with you
as a, um, Medicaid anymore
because of the payment issues.
And we don't want to do that. We
don't want to not serve our
patients.
And so when we look at
independent practices versus
health systems.
We studies, it shows that
there's a really small.
Difference in quality, but the
savings is very large. That
system-based hospital services
cost 31% more on average
compared with care delivered by
by,
um, independent hospitals and
independent practices. And I
think that's really important.
It's not the, the hospitals are
bad because hospital care is
necessary, but hospitals are
seeing sick patients and we want
to see our patients in their
medical home.
And we want to improve the
quality of care in the system
overall.
And so
we're asking you to make
proactive decisions to support
independent practice.
And on page 22, this talks about
growing uh Medicaid, stabilizing
Medicaid payments in the future
fiscal years. And so thank you
for making a significant
investment in Medicaid.
We really appreciated that and
we need to continue to
prioritize the funding in the
budget, not only for primary
care physicians, but also
specialists, the, um, HDAA was
really monumental and
stabilizing revenue for
hospitals, but it didn't
increase Medicaid rates for
independent practice positions
and the fee for service schedule
and facility fees still needs
investments from the
legislature.
And finally, on page 23, other
considerations where we think
you can look at continued
funding to help out with
healthcare. Professional loan
repayment to the point where
awards can meet demand is really
important. Um, one of the
reasons I'm in Roswell is I had
a three-year commitment to the
state because they paid for my
medical school and I was a
single woman. I would not have
gone to a small rural town.
But I paid my 3 years and I met
my husband and I never left. And
so it's a success story and
that's what we need to remember
that these investments, it does
bring people to these small
communities, and it can really
help.
We also have practitioners that
are, are having to jump through
hoops to get prior
authorizations and if you have
historically high approval
rates, if we know you're not
just trying to get a prior off
for all kinds of crazy things.
You should be given like a gold
card. You should be given a pass
and so you don't have to do
those anymore and and that
should be something that should
happen. We also need to look at
our electronic health record
infrastructure because we're
going to be required to meet up
with the.
The New Mexico Health
Information Exchange and to do
that efficiently, we have to, we
have to spend money for these
platforms and that could be
really difficult for some of
the, for some of the smaller
practices. And we talked about
integrated medical trainees in
our community, so we need
programs in high schools. We
need colleges with healthcare
components. We need to provide
some kind of incentive to health
care clinicians or their
practices.
And they provide healthcare
student training. So whether
that's tax incentives or a
Medicaid differential, um, um,
in, in Oklahoma, there's a
program where, depending on if
you see a certain amount of
students, your Medicaid rates
are increased and so you get
improved payment that way from
seeing students and when you
train students in these rural
areas, they learn about rural
medicine and they're much more
comfortable and they also learn
that
an independent practice is
possible and actually quite a
lot of fun, so.
That's all I have to say. Thank
you very much, Madam Chair.
Thank you. All righty. If we can
start with representative on
Nor.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you all for coming out and
presenting to us today. There's
like a lot of really good
information. Um, I actually had
a couple questions for Linda.
Um, and I loved what I've heard
from all of you about um growing
our own in the state. I think
that's, that's really important.
Um, but Linda, you mentioned
kind of like a, I don't know
what to call it, like a baby
boomer cliff of um of service
providers that they all kind of,
you know, aged out and went into
retirement at once. And then,
but then on the flip side, it
occurs to me that
As they're all aging into
retirement, they're also aging
into being a greater slice of
the, um, patients that need to
be seen, um, and it kind of
strikes me, I mean, that's like
gonna be a pretty inevitable
thing, right? I mean, time comes
for us all, but it seems like
the AMA has been warning for
about 30 years that that was
going to happen as we saw them,
you know, reach this retirement
age. So, and this would be a
nationwide problem, of course,
so my question.
is like why nationally have we
not like been preparing like
ramping up for this
shortage gap cliff that we knew
was coming. Thank you. Thank
you, Madam Chair, and thank you
for that question and that is a
really good question. The
federal government has been
putting funding into healthcare
schools and in fact UNM just uh
last year got a a big federal
grant to
expand their nurse midwifery
program and to provide
scholarships and all that. So
there has been investment by the
feds, but you know, it's just.
It's one of them, a myriad of
things that the that the federal
government has and hasn't done
and um that's, that's one issue
that hopefully next year we'll
be able to work with our
delegation, um, our federal
delegation and look at expanding
some funding for nursing.
Everybody knows there's a crisis
in all healthcare providers and
it's just whether it's important
enough for us as a country and
The state to really invest in
the solutions.
Great, thank you, thank you for
that answer, Madam Chair and
Linda, um, and I had a second
question, but this is just me
being curious. Uh, I heard you
use a term a couple of times
called deduplicated in terms of
job posting. What, what is that?
Yes, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative. That's what
Workforce Solutions calls it
duplicated, and that means they,
I, I asked them, are you sure
you're not like counting um a
job position twice and they said
we
Go through it and we take out
any duplication and so they call
that deduplication.
Great. Thank you very much,
Madam Chair. That's all I had.
Thank you, Senator Brantley.
Thank you, Madam Chair. This has
been a very good panel and the
reality is that each of you guys
probably deserve an entire day,
maybe arguably the crisis facing
our healthcare system, uh, a
special session. I mean, we're
we're headed to such, uh, a
place of crisis here, um, Ms.
Emanuel's on yours when it comes
to public, um,
You know, health when it comes
to mental health and behavioral
health here. I just think that
that is, you know, a crisis was
plaguing New Mexico. It's the
root source of our, our child
abuse, uh, the state of our,
our, uh, education system, our
crime, everything, it could be
an entire, uh, session or
conversation.
Right there. Um, I'm gonna start
with Linda and, um, Frank,
because one of the proposed
pieces of legislation that we
can expect to see or there's
been conversation the legislator
is, um, mandating nursing
staffing ratios. And so I'm
curious to know you guys have a
united front here representing
the healthcare industry, but
would you guys be united where
the impacts, but the nursing
perspective and very quickly to
the hospitals, uh, perspective
of that.
OK, Madam Chair, Senator, I'll,
I'll try that. It's, you know,
the nurses association, the New
Mexico Nurses Association,
obviously wants the best patient
care, as do the hospitals and
every physician in the hospital
and everybody. The question is
how, how can you implement a
ratio when you clearly don't
have enough nurses, how can you.
Implement a nursing ratio when
you cannot hire a sufficient
number of nurses we have
hospital beds, clothes today
because we don't have enough
nurses, so what would we do with
a ratio bill? I mean, it's, it's
a difficult position for the
association who wants to see,
you know, the environment where
nurses work to be the best for
the patient and for them and all
the other providers, but.
How realistic is that?
And you know, you've heard my
numbers. I didn't make them up.
They're all, they're all out
there and it's not a crisis in
New Mexico. It's a crisis in the
country and the world.
Yes, Madam Chair and, uh,
Senator Brantley, uh, from the
hospital side, a nurse patient
ratio dictates you can only have
a certain amount of patients per
nurse. Well, the ebb and flow of
the day, you may start out with
in a particular unit 40 patients
and you may get 15 patients in
and 10 patients out at the end
of the day, you maybe have a
pl5. Uh, if you try to mandate,
OK, when you get that added, uh,
amount of this extra 15.
Patient coming in, where do you
get the nurses to bring in to
meet that ratio, you know, you
have patience going out, so
it's, it's more efficient for us
in the hospital to manage the
discharges. Let's get patients
moving out so we can bring in
more patients safely.
It's always been an issue in
nursing. I'm a nurse by
background. I've been doing this
for 33 years. Um, and if you
have a hospital that has uh
abusing nurses with really,
really high ratios, the nurse is
gonna leave and go to another
hospital that they feel
comfortable with. I don't see an
issue in the state with
hospitals abusing nurses or
having way too many patients. I,
I don't see that because the
nurses would leave, um, in my
small hospital, we're we're
contained, we're small.
We can manage the nurse patient
ratio, but the larger hospitals
who can't will shut down beds
and then I'm a critical excess
if I need to transport a patient
out and I do probably 3 or 4
transports a day for services we
can't provide in a small
hospital and if they close beds,
then I have to go out of state.
It's not unusual for us to have
to go to El Paso or Colorado,
Arizona, we've gone to Texas,
different places just to get
patients to another level of
care that we can't provide
because they don't have staff.
Beds in New Mexico already
hope that answers the question.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I, I
appreciate that honest answer.
The reality is sometimes the
legislator cuts her nose to
spite the face, and the worst
thing we could do right there
would be to mandate a ratio and
then turn patients away.
Right, because by law that nurse
can't see more than that number
of patients, I think that's a
really brave position for you to
take, represent nurses because
it's real. It's the reality of
what we're facing in New Mexico.
It's not something we can
support because we're just not
even there yet. And no one wants
to see nurses overworked, but
that wouldn't be the way to go
about that. Um, I know we're
really pressed on time here, but
I want to pick on insurance
providers for a little bit
because Dr. Nate, you kind of
hit on it briefly with, um, you
know, having to turn away
patients. I think that's
absolutely wrong. What you just
said is
absurd, right? And, and I,
Frank, maybe you can also hit on
this too is expand perhaps as
providers and hospitals on the
impact of denials because I just
sat through a presentation last
month that was very disturbing
that there's a number, an
increasing number of denials. I
think Medicare Advantage was the
number one in New Mexico right
now of, of pre-auth visits, so
they had received
pre-authorization to go there
and then they were denied. Can
you expand on on the benefit
I mean on the impacts of that
and really what we can do as a
legislator, I think in some
cases it's almost criminal what
we're doing to patients.
Madam Chair and Senator
Brannley, thank you, um, denials
are a real thing, um, the way
hospitals are reimbursed, we
have gross charges, so we have
gross revenue and then we have
contracts with all the payers
and then we get less our
contractuals, which is some of
them pays 60%, some 50%, some
40%, uh, some less than that
from those contractuals we net
about.
45% of gross. And then, so we're
already 45% or 60% less of our
our gross and then we get
denials, um, for example, I have
some data here. Medicare
Advantage nationwide is about
20% denial rate. That means,
yeah, you've had a prior off and
we submit a claim to be
reimbursed and you get kicked
back and said, well, you didn't
meet this, that or the other,
and there's lots of reasons for
denial, but in my hospital.
The last 6 months, the Medicare
Advantage uh denial rate is 34%.
And to me, what is that? That's
like $300 over the last 6 months
and we have to go through hoops
and jump through hoops, and I
think this lady right here was
just saying the things they have
to do in their clinic practice
to try and get paid and we have
to do the same thing. It's we
have to go through peer reviews.
I have to have my providers call
them. I have to submit
documentation again. It's, it's
an ongoing issue and that's just
the beginning of it. I mean, we
have denials from everybody.
Medicare Advantage leads to
And that's nationwide, um, and
Medicare Advantage is
misleading. It's not part of
Medicare. It's an independent uh
payer sources. They, they kind
of bait you in the coming away
from Medicare from traditional,
and then they promise you all
these things, but then they
don't pay the providers and I'm
not sure about you guys, but
we're not getting paid in
denials or $3 million in the
last six months.
Madam Chair, Senator Brantley,
so really great. I think the
insurance companies, I think,
empowering our offices,
superintendent of insurance is
incredibly important. Um,
there's one hospital in the
entire state of New Mexico where
I can do an emergency retina.
Surgery one.
And one of the major insurance
carriers, which I can mention
their name maybe outside of the
committee if you want me to, uh,
they, uh,
they're at odds with this and,
and, and they're unable to come
up with a contract with this,
uh, hospital. So what does that
mean for the patient? So you
come in with a retinal
detachment, you need immediate
surgery. It's going to cost you
$10,000 out of pocket, not my
feet. I'm
To do that surgery for free, not
that happy, but I will do it.
And, um, and but that is just
incredibly unfair to New
Mexicans when we have them doing
that and, and I've spoken to,
uh, superintendent of insurance
on this issue. We have to do
better, but somehow this, I
think we need more better global
policies to allow access to
care. This can't happen in a
state like this when you're able
to exclude entire populations
for the only institute capable
of providing certain levels of
care.
And that just can't happen. I
agree with you. It's, it's
absurd and um I, I'm on a, on a
mission to help fix that and
would love to, to work with.
This committee, uh, to make that
happen. On the prior
authorization side, there's
another issue and, and that's,
uh, getting prior authorization,
uh, in retina, you'd need
expensive medicines injected
into your eye, which will save
your vision, um, uh, one of
those drugs, the entry drug is
called Avastin, and it has just
a $8 margin for us to put in and
has literally 100% approval
rate. They would never deny you
getting a vast and mostly
because if, if they needed to
use another.
It's 20 times more expensive,
but also it just would be a a
complete breach on their part.
But you know what, they make you
come back.
A week later to get it and they
make me pay somebody to call and
get the prior authorization for
that drug on a 100% approval
drug, and it's a complete waste
of time. It's a delay of care,
but it's also you could see from
the, from the doctor's
standpoint, we just lost money
on that as soon as we had, I had
to pay somebody $30 an hour to
uh give a $8 drug, uh, that's a
problem. The math doesn't work
and so, um.
I know there's the gold card
idea and I think prior
authorization is some of the
things we need to do, but there
should be a list of procedures
that if you're insurer in New
Mexico, we demand that you give
these and do not require a prior
authorization, nor do you get to
review the need for prior
authorization, which is the new
term. So prior authorization is
kind of dated now. Now they're
just going to say, please fax us
all your notes so we can review
the need for prior
authorization. And so, um, I
think those are the things that
we can do.
Yeah,
I totally agree, Madam Chair. I
was disgusted to see that they
were allowing this health
insurance companies to determine
health care needs, right? They
don't have their opinion doesn't
matter,
right? Our our healthcare
providers have deemed them. And
in fact, when it came to just up
until last month, we were
talking about that Medicare
Advantage in that presentation.
I thought it was supplemental
insurance to, to Medicare,
right? And I was texting my mom,
who has it because William
Shatner told her to go get it to
come to find out that they're
not covering anything, you know,
at the end of this, there was
Really eye opening for, for me,
um, Doctor Nate, very briefly on
here you mentioned medical
malpractice if the providers and
also the hospital could, I know
we're very short on time, could
briefly talk to the impacts that
Med Mal is having on retention
and recruitment of healthcare
providers.
So MedMal is that sort of black
box, right?
No one, no one talk about it and
actually I think it's again, I
and that's why I chose to talk
about it in the idea of a
perception, uh, from a
healthcare provider, this
perception for a healthcare
provider that, uh,
I think
The last thing I want to do in
my clinic is hurt someone. Uh,
it'd be, it's just
fortunately never been sued.
Hopefully that stays that way,
but that is just like the worst
thing that could happen to me
from an emotional standpoint in
terms of the population that I
care for. That's my goal is to
never be there.
But I think so that's the fear,
I think.
Everything
Driving this conversation is
fear, and you have a medical
community that's fearful and how
do we address those fears, and
I, I think we get caught up in
the minutia of.
Insurance and cost and and
numbers and I don't think
doctors, I'm not that as
sophisticated that I have a
spreadsheet for every state in
the country and what the medical
malpractice insurance costs and
what is, how it's gonna relate
into my bottom line. That's not
how it works. It's a perception
and there's a fear. And so what
can we do from a legislative
standpoint to assure doctors
that you're safe.
To provide care here. And I
think that
That's the simple overriding
question to the entire bugaboo
that's become this and realizing
that we're all on the same page
and we all want the same thing.
We all want our families to see
great doctors and have access to
that, but I think we got to
address the fear issue and how
do we make them safe?
Yeah, Madam Chair, Senator
Brantley, I, I can really just
speak to my hospital, um, I know
my cost from Med Mal over the
last two years has gone from
$600,000 to $1.6 million and I'm
a small hospital. Um, I would
defer to Troy Clark, I think
it's still back here uh from
from the hospital association to
he can really expand on how
bedms affecting the larger
hospitals in most of the
hospitals in the state, but for
me it's been that impact and
To find a carrier to insure us.
We went through 25 companies to
get one to go to insure us this
year and it was like kind of
right at the last minute as our
our insurance policy was expired
so it's been really hard to find
a company to insure us and not
to mention the costs.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and it
really seems like
This industry is kind of
weighted by greed, really, in
that case with Med Mall, I'd
argue that there's, you know,
trial attorneys have a large
influence over policy changes
that we're going to ever see
there. We have insurance
companies who aren't allowing
doctors and hospitals to just
provide the healthcare because
it all comes down to money if we
boil it down somewhere,
someone's more concerned about
making money than getting people
healthy. And that's kind of,
that's really sad, actually, uh,
Doctor Carson in your
presentation, you really kind of
summarize this by
Saying that you guys are because
of the Medicaid reimbursement
rates, which we know need to
change, that your price takers,
not price makers. Yesterday we
had a lot of the farmers and
ranchers who were who were
saying the same thing. The
difference is they're stuck here
and tied to the land, and our
healthcare providers aren't. And
at some point, they just say,
I'm going to leave. Like this is
such a burdensome state to do
business in. And, and if we can
summarize all the asks that you
have.
We can provide on every one of
the apps on these presentations.
There are solutions exist. And
in fact, in many cases those
solutions have been introduced
before this legislator. And
maybe they're not got in
committee hearings are not
coming out and, and moving
through the legislative process
to provide instant.
Relief to this industry and
allow people to just, you know,
sick people to just see a
doctor. And, and I hope that we
consider the band-aid that we
put on Med Mal is just that, and
it hasn't been reformed. I hope
that our Medicaid reimbursement
rates that we realize that we're
still seeing a crisis and we're
not sufficiently, uh, you know,
funding our, our healthcare
providers, um, something as
simple as just renewing a sunset
clause shouldn't require debate,
right? That, so all of this
stuff is the
exist and I just want to thank
you guys for not giving up on
New Mexico because when you
started this presentation,
there's a number of doctors that
have. And the reality is this
legislator has the ability to
change and to meet many of your
ass today, and I hope that we
recognize that this is a crisis
that it is and that we come to
the table and actually do our
job in the next 60 days. Thank
you all.
Uh, representatives on water.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I think the irony in the room
today is.
You're talking to the people.
That are putting the crunch on
you.
We as a legis legislature.
Created policy.
That is putting the crunch on
you.
And you're sitting here asking
us for mercy.
And, and there's some irony in
that.
And we've gone back and tried to
And I echo Senator Bran
Brantley's.
Words we've gone back and put a
band-aid on it. It's not enough.
We, we.
Put it bluntly, we screwed up.
A system that we had.
We need to go back and fix it as
a legislature.
It's sad.
It's, it's reality, it's.
There's a lot of lawyers that
are happy about the legislation
that we passed.
That hurts you.
Because there's money being
made.
And health isn't being taken
care of of the citizens of the
state of New Mexico.
It's pretty sad.
The
Madam Chair, my, my question.
I kind of lost my place cause I
get carried away sometimes.
My question is, uh, to Linda.
Is one of the statements that
you made was, was how much?
Pay
Uh, a good RN with experience.
Makes
In the state of New Mexico.
One of the things that you
didn't address and, and I really
liked your presentation. You did
a great job with it.
But one of the things you didn't
address was how many educators
do we have in the nursing
programs?
I have 2 daughters that are
registered nurses, very proud of
them.
Graduated out of CCC.
One of them went back and is now
an instructor at CCC. She's
working on getting her, her
doctorate in psych medicine.
She's happy to be a teacher.
She's a great teacher. She loves
doing what she's doing.
There's benefits to being a
teacher because she gets to take
off in the summer with her kids
and stuff.
But the reality of it is.
That money
Talks
And when we make money as
humans, we're happier, we can,
we can afford more stuff for our
families. We can feed them
better, we can educate them
better. We can do a lot of
things with money.
As an instructor at CCC and
she's probably gonna shoot me
for this, but she makes
$65,000713 a year.
We know she can go out and work
for this $85,000 fee, uh,
amount.
And probably more than that
because she's a good nurse. She
was, she was delivering babies
when the doctors weren't there
with she was doing things that
it takes a doctor to do.
But we need to address the issue
in the state of New Mexico about
our instructors. We're short
instructors right now at CCC.
We had a, we had a change of the
presidency in the in the
college, and that was part of
it. People, somebody leaves and
people go because
they're, I don't know, it's just
human nature that that if the,
the leader leaves, some people
leave with them.
But we need, we need to count
our our amount of instructors.
We need to know what we're
paying them, and we as a
legislature have to help.
Get those pays back up.
And I might be criticized for
trying to get my daughter
raised, but she won't be there
much longer. I'll guarantee you
because she's gonna move on to
something else.
And they're going to lose a good
instructor.
Because the pain is not there.
And even if she got her
doctorate, it just make her a
better instructor.
But that's not gonna hold her
there. That, that $65,000 pay
isn't going to hold her there.
I was making that working on a
farm
before I quit, quit doing that,
but just another issue that we
need to look at that, that I
think you'd be a great person
to.
Uh
Promote those those instructors
and and what we need to do. And,
and there's probably more people
that would like to instruct if,
if we could.
If we could make it worth their
while. And, and I'll cut it
short, Madam Chair, uh.
for respective time. Thank you.
Thank you, thank you,
presenters, you did a great job
on, on all sides of it. May I
just make, Madam Chair, one
statement. Representative,
you're absolutely right, and
that's why and when we infuse
more money into the colleges,
it's got to go to the faculty, a
lot of that has to go to the
faculty, and that's also what
that 400 million I mean that 40
million over a couple of years,
giving money to the endowments
at the
just for nursing faculty and and
other and other needs, but it
was primarily for nursing
faculty to increase their
salaries, and you're absolutely
right.
Thank you, Representative
Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I just
have one.
Question for Dr. Carson.
On
On page number 3.
You talk about the trend, um, on
physician employment.
Um, when you talk about the
trend between 2018 and 2000.
And then it was reversed in
2021. What happened?
Madam Chair and representative
members of the committee. So I
believe that when the medical
malpractice laws changed that
many of the independent
practitioners found that their
costs were just unattainable,
and so they either joined
hospital systems or they left
the state. And so I know we've
talked a little bit of medical
malpractice, and it's really not
our focus here today, but it's a
problem and it's a problem for
us when we try
recruit and um like Doctor
Royball talked about, it's a
perception that New Mexico is
not a good safe place to
practice. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Dr. Carson.
If, if
We don't show a little bit of
courage and fix that problem.
We're really gonna be in trouble
because we are losing.
Independent physicians, in fact,
my
Personal doctor.
been my doctor for close to 30
years is already told me he's
Packing it up, so if we don't do
something, we're going to be in
a lot of trouble.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Senator Hamlin, thank you, Madam
Chairman and thank you panel for
this. Um, you know, more of
comments and and a commitment.
Um, but I'd like to start first
with Linda because my mother was
a nurse, my wife's mother was a
nurse, um, grew up understanding
that when I go to a doctor's
office if I don't get the
questions answered that I ask, I
don't leave until I do. Um and I
feel very, very lucky to have
that skill set that my mom
taught me so that I can be very
much my own advocate for my own
healthcare. Um, and we know
because we have to
Uh good doctors who understand
that there aren't people who
always have those skills in
their tool chest. Um, but you
know, when you, when you start
talking about the shortage of
it, um, you know, I'm thinking
about what's happening in New
Mexico State University right
now. Um, and I'd like to give a
shout out to Professor Beth
Hendrix, who her job is to train
nursing students in the nelex
and uh her pass rates increased
from 60 from high 60% to high
90% uh for first time pass rates
for NMS use.
students. And so when you talk
about investing in those
resources, um, I absolutely
think that because the nicklex
is a, is a, it's a hard exam to
take for nurses. My niece is
also a nurse. My mom's sister is
also a nurse. So, um, you know,
really grateful for that and
also just for the success that
NMSU is having, uh, in that, but
I think also, you know, we're
talking about that there are
programs throughout the state
that you've cited that are
successful in increasing nursing
programs, and we need to
continue funding those, um.
Because no offense to our
doctors, but our nurses are the
first people to have contact
with our patients and typically
can either take care of the
issues so that you can work on
more serious issues, um, you
know, like giving a, you know,
temperature or threatening to
take a temperature if you can't
put it in your mouth, you know
where else it goes, um, that's
very old school, I realized,
because you all have, y'all
have, y'all have technology now
to do that. But man, I still
remember my
Mom threatening me, you either
hold this in your mouth or you
know where it's going, um, not
the same thermometer, obviously.
But um I'm really grateful for
that and so, um, uh, it's been a
long day and so we're all
starting to get a little slap
happy. So yes, Senator Hamblin
talking about rectal
thermometers in committee.
Expect nothing less. Um, the
other thing is, is that, you
know, the theme that we've had
is that, um, insurance is a
major barrier to medical care in
this state. And, you know, we
start talking about the wagon
wheel of issues and you know you
had mentioned, so you've got the
phone triage is not paid. Night
triage calls are not paid for.
We're talking about Medicare
reimbursements insurance not
willing to cover care. I had a
friend have to pay for her.
ect om y because of cancer,
because of the, uh, you know,
insurance company who shall not
be named, yes, um, she had to go
and pay out of her pocket for
that care at the Mayo Clinic
because they wouldn't authorize
her care until November.
Um, my minor health insurance
issue and thank goodness I have
health insurance. I tore my
meniscus two years ago in the
opening night of session and
when I got the MRI, the
insurance company said, oh, you
need an X-ray first. When we
knew damn well I didn't break
anything.
And so, you know, I'm very
frustrated with the insurance
companies, and I can hear that
frustration, you know, when you
talk about your electronic
health records costing 275,000
or is that 2 million?
275,000 and then your medical
malpractice at 170,000, so your
electronic health records are
more than that. But we're
looking at this wagon wheel of
all these different issues that
make it challenging for you to
do the work that you're doing
for us to recruit people and for
people to stay here. So it's,
it's, it's not just one thing,
and I think we have to really
look at that if we're going to
solve this issue and make it so
that you're not afraid to
practice in this state.
We can't just look at one issue.
We have to look at all of the
different things, because if we
fix one of these things on here,
you've still got a whole list of
other things that make it
challenging for you to do your
job.
And so, you know, I think, you
know, we're on the same page
when we're talking about the
insurance and just the
bureaucracy that patients who
pay into that pool every month
have to go through to get the
care they deserve.
Then we've got a problem here
and I commit to working on
making sure that the insurance
companies are held accountable
so that your hands aren't tied
to do the work that you need to
do and this is not just medical
malpractice. This is about
having these, um, you know, the,
the prior approval. What BS is
that?
I mean, it's, it's ridiculous
and so, you know, there.
The common denominator is the
insurance companies.
In all honesty, I mean, it's and
and this is something I've said
this entire time as the entire
we are being held hostage by the
insurance companies needing to
make a profit. We've got these
small urgent cares that are
taken over by corporations
for-profit hospitals that put
small practices like yours out
of business. And so we've got
multiple things that we, I
think, as a legislature are, are
responsible for addressing and
if we don't, then um we are
doing a disservice to the
medical industry that we say is
saying that they can't, they
can't practice here when
ultimately it's so many
different things that you have
to juggle on your plate. And I
think, uh, it is our obligation
as a Senate as a legislature to
address all of those issues, not
just one in particular, because
standalone.
It's, it's not one thing that
makes your job difficult,
especially according to that
list that you've got here and
what you've all talked about
today. And so thank you for
that. Um, that is a commitment
for me. I hope my colleagues
will help me, uh, in that
commitment of holding the
insurance companies accountable
and making sure that their rates
are not about making a profit,
but about serving the
communities that continue to pay
in to this industry that is
really just about making money.
So I thank you and thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Roya
Capierro.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I'm
really happy to follow Senator
Hamlin because
I am personal testament right
now to the nightmare.
Of the insurance going through
insurance pre-authorization
process that I began in June.
And
Up to right now, I have 4
appeals.
And I have been denied on every
one of those appeals.
My doctor who requested.
That I get care on my beach.
She's representing my interests.
I need to get major surgery.
It has to be done with uh full
uh help with my recovery.
Many of you know my husband had
a heart attack. He's fighting
cancer for the 3rd time. He
looks great, actually. He's more
worried about me than himself.
Um, but he cannot care for me.
So the prior authorization was
requested so that I could have
this surgery in Los Angeles
where I have an older son.
A daughter-in-law and two older
grandsons who could help me.
Through the grueling 8 to 12
weeks, whatever is going to be
required, recovery because I not
only have the major surgery on
the table, but I have potential
for other problems, and I'm
revealing all of this.
Because your panel presentation
today and what Senator just
stated.
About the insurance companies
and then yes, we have a lot of
components to all of the issues
that you addressed, but if you
look at the common threads in
all of your presentations about
payments, no payments, all of
these uh things that we have to
go through. The insurance
companies.
are holding us hostage.
Because now,
Since I can't wait any longer, I
either have to have this done.
Or I continue in severe pain for
who knows how much longer.
Now, this doesn't make any
sense so now by staying here and
finally getting the care, maybe
I I I think I have good care
coming.
I know my costs are going to
increase because now I'm gonna
need visiting nurses. I'm going
to need home health care.
Does that make any sense
whatsoever when I could cut back
on all those costs?
By getting my care
pre-authorized.
And approved through a Medicare
Advantage plan, which I thought
was one of the best plans. I
spent months researching.
My doctor has spent 45 minutes
to an hour at a time.
On hold
Being passed on to 5 different
person, not persons, but
Whoever
And never getting an answer.
So I offer this as personal
testament to the fact that we
need to prioritize.
Um, as soon as possible for our
populations because I'm
You know, I think I know what
I'm doing when I go through
these processes, Madam Chair,
Can you imagine?
The number of
Aging and our aging population
that are language compromised or
not compromised but don't have
the language abilities or or
just.
Unable to navigate through these
processes on their own?
I
The vast majority and Dr. Carson
put a good presentation with
statistics on it. Most of our
population is in that aging
category.
Um, and very ill equipped, so I
have two questions, uh, because
I think Medicare.
is a huge problem, and you're
right, the advantage plans was a
scam, in my opinion. I think had
we stuck with Medicare and just
ask for additional coverages,
um, and and, and continue the
pathway towards Medicare for
all, whatever that, whatever you
want to call it in our for our
age 65 and up, I think we'd be
in a much better position than
having to go through a third
party payer because that's all
they are. They're making
decisions, medical decisions.
And they're just pairers. I
shouldn't say just that, you
know, but there are pairs.
They're they're medically
equipped and the peer to peer
reviews that my doctor has gone
through. She's even written
letters, submitted them to the
ozone probably, who knows.
Uh, but we're still waiting. So
anyway, what is, what is the um
How are you how are you tapping
in on behalf of New Mexico at
the national level and to our
federal legislative,
um representatives.
To address
What
What you outlined here because
it's not just the state. In
fact, it's not the state for the
most part that's imposing this.
It's Medicare, it's Medicaid,
it's the federal government
who's imposing or probably lack
of insight oversight, all of
these.
Restrictions that are preventing
healthcare, filtering to our
most vulnerable and most needy
populations. So that's one
question and I just have one
another.
Madam Chair and representative
members of the committee, I, I
am not personally lobbying the
federal government, but I do
know that our societies, I'm a
member of the American Academy
of Pediatrics and so our society
is lobbying very hard for
Medicaid payment improvement
because most children are
covered under Medicaid, um, and
for Medicare, I know that the
American Medical Association is
lobbying very strongly for
improved payment in that area.
Thank you for that. Did anyone
else want to answer? Go ahead.
I, I can answer and Madam Chair,
representative, my heart goes
out to you, and I think that
this is something that we see on
a daily basis and, uh, in, in
all of our, our clinics, um, I
think though when it comes to
the national, you know, we do
need to engage all of you have a
bigger voice than I do with our
US delegation, but we need them
to be incredibly active,
particularly when it comes to
New Mexico because we're
reimbursed for Medicare Medicare
and Medicaid is based on it and
all of our commercial plans by
the Medicare rates New Mexico
gets paid less because
supposedly this is a cheap place
to provide medicine, supposedly
it's cheaper here to buy a CT
scan or MRI or a protam beam
accelerator which is just not
true, and so we got to really
push our US delegation to fix
the GPCI and, and, and not let
New Mexico be one of the poor.
Why should the federal
government perpetuate poverty in
New Mexico, put us on parity
with everybody else, and we are
talking to them about that, but
when it comes to the insurance
and what can we do in New
Mexico, and this is where we
have to really get very
innovative, and we have to carry
the stick that we have because
we do have the Medicaid stick in
this state, and there's provider
carriers who want to to access
to those dollars and how they're
coming out in their patient
populations, we need it.
Forcefully engage that stick
with those insurance carriers to
say, this is not acceptable in
New Mexico and and uh we won't
accept you as one of our, our
MCOs if, if that happens,
I think you're absolutely right,
and you have to remember that in
the state of New Mexico, even
though we have a large aging
population, which is now going
to become the largest
population. We also, they also
are combined age and poverty.
So the Medicare Medicaid, both
are, are hand in hand in most
cases, if not all, and so, and I
got that information, um, I
forget where, but anyway, um, I
think we have generally a fear
because they've held us like
this for so long to tackle the
insurance companies, and you're
absolutely right. If we all we
all have to get in this together
because we're all going to be
facing the same situation at one
time or another, hopefully not.
I shouldn't say all, but
hopefully we will not. This has
been the stress that has been
associated with what I have gone
through has been more
debilitating in times.
Combined with the pain, then the
pain sometimes. And that is
horrible.
And I say that because it the
stress is adding now other
medical problems.
Related to my overall conditions
and further delaying.
My surgery, so it's, it's
ridiculous. I started off with
one thing and then just gone
through, so the last question I
had was just to the next point,
and that is on um and again to
Doctor Carson's is the um
Non-payment for phone triage.
And night triage. So how
Are those two things?
Being reported or is there a way
to report those two things and
retrieve payment if I don't know
how that works, but I, I'm
concerned about that because a
lot of the population are using
those two vehicles for um
triaging.
Madam Chair Representative,
members of the committee, we
actually bill for those, but um
they are considered non-billable
or non-payable codes. And so we
try and build for them, but
they're not covered. And so,
It's one of those things that
you just can't do much about,
but it's, it is a code that we
use and we do bill for it, but
that doesn't mean that Medicaid
or the insurance company will
pay for it. Thank you. Thank you
so, so then you lose the money,
but is that something that can
be changed?
B by again advocating for a
change, Madam Chair, members of
the committee, Representative,
yes, and so we have um advocated
and actually during um COVID,
some of the telephone payments
were paid for and then it's
slowly kind of trickled away,
and there are, there are still
some payments in certain areas
and so one of the things that
our practice does is we bill for
everything that we do.
And sometimes we get paid.
So it's a good thing, um, and we
are also able to show the
insurance companies that, hey,
we're doing this, we're
answering the phones 20 times a
day, and we should get paid for
this. We're providing service to
your clients, our patients, and
they're your clients and we're
keeping your, your client out of
the emergency room, we're saving
everybody money by doing this,
and so maybe it cost $18.
But we saved $1000 visit. So
it's, it's money well spent, um,
but that's not always something
that they're willing to look at.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you and thank you for that and
thank you, Madam Chair and Vice
Chair for indulging me. It's
deeply, uh, personal, but I
think it's an important story
that reflects um.
What many of us are going
through. So thank you for
letting me. Thank you.
I appreciate that and I am, I, I
had actually several questions
here, but I'm only going to ask
a couple because of time, um.
The one I wanted to bring up was
a rock star Stefani and I
she's got her glasses on,
we passed um the HDAA bill last
year, and you know there was a
conflicting report with LFC and
when that came out, I, I, I
started making some phone calls,
um, because when we,
what we were told was that
basically LFC.
said that the small hospitals
were doing fine.
And when we were passing the
bill, are looking to pass the
bill, um, that didn't seem to
line up financially and so we
talked about all the reasons
that we needed this extra
funding and what the funding
would be used for. And so if you
could touch on that, I would
just like to make sure that that
is out there, that information
is out there.
Uh, thank you, uh, Madam Chair,
uh, to answer your question, uh,
the HDAA is
is going to provide lifelines to
the small hospitals, um, I'm
part of the rural Health
Network, which is 11 independent
hospitals in the state, and half
of them are on 5 days cash or
less, um, and so they have been
treading water.
Anticipating something from the
legislature is going to help out
in the HDAA is part of that.
Again, we have provided a life
fund. What are we going to do
with it, um, add new services,
uh, and, uh, providers, provider
recruitment retention, uh,
nurses, I'm I'm paying uh agency
nurses about $85 an hour. That's
down from 200, but we still need
to recruit and retain those
folks. So part of the money is
gonna go into staffing.
Providers, salaries for the
staff that work in the
hospitals, not just nurses and
doctors. I have registration
staff. I have EVS, uh, not one
surgery can happen without EVS
or sterile processing cleaning
the room. So part of it's going
to salaries, Part of it's going
to go into infrastructure. I
have an old building that is on
life support, I call it, so
we're going to build reserves up
to start phasing out that old
building one piece at a time and
then adding behavioral health
services to what we already
have we're looking at partial
hospitalization and intensive
outpatient similar to what she
was doing up there at the peak,
uh, problem is we're 75 miles
away from the peak, the patients
don't want to drive up there 5
days a week for partial
hospitalization so we can add
those services. I need a
building to house it in, uh, and
I can't use my old building
because it doesn't meet the
codes. It's half of it's not
sprinkled. It's not appropriate
and it's the sewers aren't
working in half the building. So
part of it's gonna go there.
But and then the rest is going
to go to, you know, just staying
in the hospital, uh, the normal
everyday countering the losses
we have like I said, my gross
charges about $6 million a month
and I get about 2.7 million so
we have a thin line of margins,
so this can help sustain what we
do have and then add to what we
already doing telemedicine, pain
medicine, pulmonology,
orthopedics, that's where we're
going with ours. I can't speak.
All the other hospitals, but
that's what we're doing.
I appreciate that answer. So
it's what I'm hearing is that
the people that are actually
providing the services are gonna
be getting uh or being able to
tap into that funding. OK, I
just wanted to double check
that. Thank you. Um, thank you
all for your presentation. I
appreciate you all being here.
Like I said, I had lots of
little notes here and I, I'm
sure if you're around tonight,
I'll catch you tonight. Um, very
informative presentation. Thank
you so much for taking time.
Alright, you've got one more
presentation, folks.
So it's fine
Alrighty
Well, I appreciate you waiting
and for us we know we're, we're
running late, but I
I, I, uh, I think this is, this,
um, presentation is just as
important as the rest, so I'm
glad you stick around.
Go ahead and start, introduce
yourselves, uh, tell me your
titles, who you're with, and
then we'll go with the
presentation after that.
All right, good afternoon, Madam
Chair, Madam Vice Chair, members
of the committee. Uh, my name is
Cassie Audius Ward. I am the
economic development director
for the Demming Luna County
Economic Development, uh, which
is an EDO down in Deming and I
think I stood before you in the
wine tour last year, and today I
sit between you and the
reception, so we'll try to give
you as much value as possible.
Thank you.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
Madam Vice Chair and committee
members. My name is John Munoz.
I'm with Electronic Caregiver.
I'm the chief experience
officer. We are a technology and
healthcare company.
When I started this, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
my name is Ernesto Robles. I am
the area practice manager with
La Clinica de Familia.
Yeah
Go ahead and start where
wherever you want.
Alright, Madam Chair, thank you.
So my piece is pretty brief
today. Um, I'm gonna be speaking
to you just about how, um, from
an EDO's perspective, uh,
healthcare has really been an
economic driver in our
community, um, so to start off
with, I think everybody's pretty
familiar with with our
community, but we've got about
14,000 within the city, about
26,000 within the county. Um,
and our median household income
is 33,000. So, uh in the late
90s, our county.
had owned and operated our
hospital. Um, they were no
longer able to sustain the
operations and so the hospital
was acquired by a third party
entity. Uh, whenever the third
party entity acquired this
hospital.
They made it a point to do some
active recruitment for
physicians. Um, they recruited
one in particular that I'm going
to be talking about is our case
study today, um, who came into
the community, completed, after
he completed his residency. He
was given an incentive to come
here or to come to Demming and
income guarantee for opening up
his private practice to serve,
um, rural Southwestern New
Mexico, which is, as you well
know, an underserved population.
A year later, he relocated his
practice to our downtown
Um, so if you're unfamiliar with
the landscape of our main
street, we do have some
vacancies, um, but there are
about 86 uh build uh building
spaces there and he went in and
occupied one of the prime
locations. Um, fast forward 28
years, he is now, um, he's still
there serving people out of his
serving clients out of his, his
practice. Um, it's interesting
because I went and sat in one of
our plazas that is across the
street from him.
And he, uh, I would watch people
go into his office, uh, go
across the street, grab a cup of
coffee, walk over to the
accountant's office, um, so he's
really serving as an anchor
tenant in our downtown. He's
revitalized and redeveloped a
property that would otherwise be
vacant, um, or, or have some
turnover like many of our other
buildings.
Um, this, this, this project
supports the foundation of local
healthcare through a primary
care clinic um offering these
urgent care services, inpatient
care at the hospital, nursing
home, and assisted living
center. Um, he obviously is
creating quality jobs down there
as well as brought his family.
They live and work there, um,
coaches some youth teams, so
he's very involved in the
community.
And then at a broader level
level, our hospital, um, has
roughly a $27 million payroll.
Um, creating 2288 jobs on
average, uh, we are getting
again those quality jobs that
that the healthcare can give to
us. And so what, um,
I would like to close with is
just that this project and this
healthcare is an industry in our
community has really helped with
some of our traditional economic
standards and has really layered
across different um elements of
success in our community and
really transformed and helped
with growth in our downtown area
supporting many businesses. Um,
I think that as through that
economic development lens again,
not just that social economic of
of people having access to
quality health care. Um, this
broader
of being able to use and
leverage healthcare in our
community. Um, we can't go out
and recruit and retain
population without having access
to this kind of care and quality
care. And I, I say that from
personal experience. I birthed
both my children there in
Deming, and I often got the
question, I can't believe you
had your kids in Demming, and
I'm like, yeah, and I would do
it time and time again because
he saved my son's life, my
doctor, I had that quality care,
um, and so without that quality
care, you wouldn't have a
certified economic developer in
the community. Um
I would take my family,
everybody would be gone. So I
think that that plays that
critical role that we typically
look at, um, and I, I love this
story because he, he really kind
of shows again the layers that
he plays, um.
In the economic development
world within our community.
Um, in addition to that, with,
with retention and recruitment,
um.
People are comparing businesses
and employers are comparing New
Mexico to everybody else and we
want to make sure that we're
checking all the boxes that we
can and so access to quality
healthcare, um, is really
important and and we're
fortunate in our community that
it's, it's been so, um,
proactive in in that sense of
being able to recruit some of
these different providers that
have really um had long-term
investments in the community.
Um, and so with that, I think
that was my main piece was just
to give you this case study of
a, a good example of healthcare
as an industry and an economic
driver. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
committee members, I also want
to mention uh Virgil Medina, the
CEO from La Clinica. He wanted
to be here but could not be
here. So you have Ernesto, who's
just as handsome and just as
talented. So, um, he'll be
sharing some, some insights. One
of the things that that you
heard from the previous panel
and you know already is that we
have a significant healthcare
need in our country. It's more
prominent in New Mexico and even
more pronounced with with
students.
Um,
Even with that though, I think
that New Mexicans are are hardy
people and we look for
solutions. Uh, as I tell my
team, we are New Mexicans, not
New Mexicans. And that's more
like of a dad joke, but, but
that's, that's who we are,
right? We, we make things
happen. And we worked with
likeinnica the Familia who's an
outstanding um organization in
southern New Mexico who cares so
much for, for, uh, people in
their charge. Uh, they have,
they're very passionate and so
We came up with a solution from
a private business perspective,
which is, which is electronic
caregiver, and then we work with
providers to establish um a
method where they will use our
technology to provide for
students uh at their home base
um or school-based clinics.
The, uh, the thing about the
home-based clinics or or
school-based clinics is that
One, you know, the, the, it's an
emergency, emerging industry,
and they've been around for a
while. However, uh, one of the
things that's very new is the
technology that we are
utilizing. Uh, I
Grew up, maybe not like most of
you. Uh, I grew up with.
A typewriter and a landline.
Long ago, long ago, um.
I know some people in the back
are trying to Google what a
typewriter is. It's an ancient,
it's an ancient writing, uh.
Or dial-up modem, right? Uh,
exactly, exactly. But the laptop
and the cell phone modernized
our lives. And that's what we
want to do with healthcare, with
our technology, and, and that's
what.
What I'm super excited about
because we're, we are seeing
some excellent results. We're
going to see more, um, and we
will use responsible AI to
assist the providers to give the
students the health care they
deserve and need and when they
need it.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, La Clinica de
Familia has, um, currently, um 6
school-based health centers and
we're expanding into 11 new
school-based health centers
within Dona Ana. Um, and one of
the things that we noticed after
the pandemic is that the, the
kids were having more anxiety,
they were having more depression
and as we were.
Planning on this expansion of
school-based health centers. We
asked ourselves, how can the
kids have access to services
when they most need it when
they're about to have that
anxiety attack when they might
have an episode there in in a
social setting, they're in a
class and they just need that
help. Um, so we started talking
to electronic caregivers to
provide that solution for us. So
currently what the what the
Um, program that we're piloting
currently is going to do, we're
gonna provide devices and and
we'll show you the devices um in
in a bit, um, to the students
that need it the most when they
are in class, they will be able
to press a button and one of our
staff members, one of our
clinicians, the social worker or
a licensed counselor will be
able to pull that kid from that
classroom or that situation,
bring them to a school-based
health center and provide those
services for them.
So, um,
I believe it was Linda, the
presenter before us mentioned
that there were, there was a
need of nurses, 6100, um, in my
research, the New Mexico
Hospital Association, uh, stated
that they needed 6200. She
mentioned 8000 postings. I don't
know what the number is. It's
somewhere around there, whether
it's 60,000 or 8000, it's, it's
a lot. So there is, there is a
gap. I call it a um barren
lands. I don't like to use
desert because I think that
deserts are beautiful, uh, so.
There, there is a gap, um, and
in our technology is not meant
to replace people. Um, the
health providers, uh, the
clinicians that we have, our
tools are meant to, to help and
assist and augment so they can
provide care for more people,
um, again, like a cell phone,
like a a a laptop or a microwave
which my grandmother did not
refuse for many years to put in
her kitchen until we snuck it
in. Um, that new technology, um,
well,
Help us serve more people. So
what I'd like to do is I have
some members of our team here,
Marjorie Webb, Matthew Yates,
uh, and Christopher Silva.
Marjorie, would you just show,
uh, show us, just quickly, some
of the pendants we have, um,
Ernesto mentioned a pendant that
we have at the touch this
button, you can ask for help.
Or, um, if it is an emergency,
there's also emergency response
unit. Do you have, did you bring
him?
OK, that's fine. We can show
with Addison. Thank you team.
All right. All right. So let's
get uh Chris up here. Um, Chris,
would you show us the the
Addison unit. So this is our um
part of our company, we do a
chronic care management and
remote patient monitoring, uh,
in and assist clinics that way,
OK. Uh, and so you see some of
the tools that we have up here.
This, the second part of our or
the other half of our company,
we have a 3D avatar, um, that
you can talk.
very easy to use, very user
friendly, um, so whether you're
11, 7, or 70 or 90, it's very
easy to use, um.
Chris, come on, come on up. Uh,
this is Chris Silva with our
team and so we'll show you
briefly take about 3 to 5
minutes to show you who we call
Addison.
So in the future, um, we want to
To um have our students use this
because they do have the
propensity to use technology
more so than some of someone
like me. on the microphone.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee.
This is Addison.
She's a virtual caregiver, uh,
she does voice command. She does
vitals on demand, medication
reminders. I'm gonna do a brief.
Vital summary real quick.
Addison
Addison
Hey, Addison.
Sorry
Pulse ox.
Paul sucks.
Yeah
Hey Addison.
Back, take vital.
Pulse socks.
Pulse oxygen.
Take now
So as she's doing that, I don't
know if you all can see it's so
Chris will pass her around. I'm
sorry, it looks like I was
unable to detect your pulse
oximeter.
Please wait for it to relax,
Chris. Relax's gonna be OK
Yeah.
Fortunately this, uh, yeah.
But one of the, one of the
things as as Chris is one of the
things is, is Chris is working
on that, uh, Christopher.
Uh.
So there's proof I'm breathing.
You.
So one of the things with the
units, and Chris, you can talk a
little bit more about this, but
um, so when we go see a doctor,
whether it's a student or, or
one of us, um, the nurse or the
CNA will take vitals right there
and then with our technology,
um, you have the, the access or
liberty to, to take vitals, um.
Throughout
The week throughout the month,
so that the provider then has a
trend. They know, um, if it's
dropped, if it's improving, uh,
if there's something urgent, if
there's something urgent, then
we reach out to the patient and
say, uh, you are out of
threshold and, and then we do
observations at that point in
time, we then recommend that
they either go to the clinic or
go to the urgent care or
emergency room. So, um.
Again, I think that this is a,
you know, smarter, more
proactive way to
Handle um health conditions, and
it's, it, it also relates to to
the schools, right? You know,
if, since students have access
there rather than a parent who
might have one car or or a
single parent who has one job
trying to take time off, um, the
student can go directly to the
clinic and, you know, have his
her or their issue taken care of
versus waiting days or it
becoming more of an emergency
room visit or somewhere where
they
sick and then and then they
develop um a lot of uh expenses.
If I can add John, so one of the
things that we're working, um,
we have a pilot at Centennial
High School right now of a teen
wellness program where we're um.
helping students with weight
management, healthy, um,
lifestyle, um, healthy eating,
exercising, so I, one of the
things that we plan on utilizing
here in the in the near future
is Addison and some of this
technology so that the students
can take vitals or, you know,
after the exercise at home and
so that the provider can have
that information when they're
coming into their wellness
appointments.
And that's super, that that is
just super helpful in
In um patients or students
managing their own health care
as well and being aware. Uh, in
addition to that, um, you know,
the patient has the ability to
share that information, um, with
other folks within their, their
circle.
Um, Chris, other, other
Items you want to cover with
with Addison.
Um,
What we, what we have with
Addison is Addison helps improve
adherence day by day as it
impacts the treatment plan and
walks the client or child
through the acquired steps of
self-care, medication, vital
monitoring, other uh care
routines. We have, we all have
busy schedule, cleaning,
shopping, holiday, holidays,
personal events, phone calls,
and other activities can make it
uh distracting to focus on
self care and health. So one of
the things is.
It can keep them busy as far as.
Uh, interacting, uh, you can
play games.
Uh
Has chat uh GP4.
GPT 4, you can ask questions,
chat with her, um.
I mean, I'll show you a little
bit right now. She can go as far
as.
Telling you how to bake a
cookie.
Hey Addison.
Let's chat
Hello, how can I help you today?
Can you give me a recipe? Hey
Addison.
Can you give me a recipe to bake
a cookie?
Of course, Christopher, here's a
simple chocolate chip cookie
recipe for you to try.
Ingredients, 1 cup of softened
butter, 1 cup of white sugar, 1
cup of packed brown sugar, 2
eggs, 1 teaspoon of vanilla
extract, 3 cups of all-purpose
flour, 1 teaspoon of baking
Addison.
See, you see there, the inner,
you know, interacting with her,
she goes as far as playing
games. Hey, Addison.
Game mode
We have uh certain games here,
solitary, Puzzle Rama. I mean,
everything's interacting to
where it keeps them entertained
to taking vitals, medication
reminders, uh, calendar, uh,
reminders as well. So I mean,
there's so many.
Virtual caregiving things that
takes the place of a caregiver,
but not taking the full
responsibility of that caregiver
as well.
So, um, one of the reasons for
the gamification, uh, and just
the, the 3Ds to keep the patient
engaged at whatever age, uh,
whether they're playing
solitaire or whether it's a hide
and seek, you know, you want the
patient to, to be attracted to,
to the unit so that he or she or
they are taking their vitals,
they're tracking their
information. Um, she dances as
well, obviously, so she's, she,
she can get her jiggy on, so.
Um, so see.
So, um, it's a, it's there
there's there's a lot that she
can do, um, but again, the, the
important piece with the
artificial intelligence is that,
you know, things like, you know,
if it's the the the student or
if it's um grandma who's been
sitting on the sofa for 4 hours,
Edison will observe that with
her artificial intelligence and
say, hey, uh, John, are you OK?
Are you, you've been sitting at
your sofa for 4 hours. Oh, yeah,
I just fell asleep. OK, how
about let's do
exercises. So there's a, there's
a significant amount of features
we're very proud of of the unit.
We want to integrate this with
the school-based programs, uh,
and we, um, as well want to help
with behavioral health
integration, where, for example,
a student could say uh either if
they use a pendant and they they
want to talk to one of the
clinic clinicians, uh, say I'm,
I'm, I'm being bullied or
whether they talk to Addison
and, and again, the technology
is different now. I mean, we, we
talked to our phones so, so they
could text somebody. Um, we
don't necessarily talk to each
other more and that I don't know
that there's, it's different.
It's not necessarily wrong, it's
just we're we're in a different
era. Um, but if a child can
reach out to an Addison or or or
press a button and say I'm I'm
being bullied and then get help
right away and say, look, um, we
have some strategies for that.
Let's, let's talk about it. Um.
So we're, we're, we'll continue
our work. We want to expand and
grow this program with
school-based um
uh clinics with La Clinica
again, just an amazing group and
they're doing amazing work, and
we're very fortunate to partner
with uh Virgil Medina, Ernesto,
and their team to uh make a
significant difference um in
some of the areas that need the
most care.
In 2 weeks, uh, Madam Chair, in
2 weeks we will be deploying the
pendants to Chaparral High
School and we hope that this
will decrease the amount of
anxiety attacks where we have to
actually de-escalate because we
can prevent that we can bring
them in and and and do the help
the student before they get to
that point where they're very
worked up, sometimes it, it
could decrease the amount of
times we call law enforcement or
when we have to transport those
children.
To an in uh in hospital um
setting. So we're, we're very
excited for this partnership and
thank you, John, for all your
work. Thank you.
Very good. All righty, um,
Senator Hamlin.
Thank you, Madam chair, and mine
is really just to talk about,
um, I'm so grateful, you know,
representative and vice chair
Gallegos and I, um, very much
support the work of Lalinica de
Familia. I'm very happy about uh
the facility that will be
starting down in Bao, um, to
serve those rural communities
because I think as Cassie knows,
it's just like if there's a
major emergency.
Uh, if you don't have access to
a full blown hospital, it could
be a matter of life or death,
and in rural parts, you know,
it's, it's 20 minute drive into
Las Cruces, and that's, that's
critical. So, um, very grateful
for the work that you're doing.
Uh, John, I always love, um,
what we're able to do, um, and
thank you for making the gay bar
joke, uh, letting me make the
gay bar joke with the music that
Addison apparently likes to
dance to. Now she's just walking
around the room looking bored,
um,
she's just pacing.
She's doing some stretches.
She's doing some stretches now.
Um, but I, I'm, I'm really
grateful because, and also
Cassie just in terms of
understanding like the
importance of having these, you
know, in essence, I mean, that
means a small town with a big
heart, you know, and it's a lot
of activity that's going on
there, but you need.
Those that personal care and
people that you know, um, are,
are going to genuinely take care
of you and it's not about the
dollar that we heard, you know,
and not that our panel
beforehand was really practicing
on the basis of the dollar, but
understanding the constraints
that, uh, those, those financial
burdens put on, so I'm really
grateful that you had that care,
um, as well. And so, uh, thank
you for that and I look forward
to, you know, the continuing
partnerships. So mine was more
of just a commentary than it was
a question, but you're welcome
to respond if you'd like.
Uh, Madam Chair, um,
Vice chair
Um,
I, I appreciate the support that
you all have given us in the
Familia.
Another reason that I want to
stress for um school-based
clinics is that, you know,
studies have found that, that,
um, chronic conditions started
at a very early age, young
adults, uh, even younger, um, as
as as a lescence or toddlers,
you know, uh, individuals
develop these. And part of it,
the um the home-based school
clinics, uh, is the mission is
to educate, um.
Educate um to get students in
control of their health and and
it's, it's I I believe that this
is gonna be a huge impact to our
communities. Um, secondly, I
would say that uh I also um
Want to mention that these are
two New Mexican companies, 2
companies that started in New
Mexico, um, two companies that
are run by New Mexicans, and we
hire New Mexicans. I have the
privilege and the honor to lead
um uh hundreds of employees who
do amazing work every day, and
then I also have the privileges
to see um the professionals at
La Clinica do their magic. And
so, um, if we're talking about,
you know, shopping local, uh,
being local.
And supporting New Mexican
companies, you're looking at two
new Mexican companies right now.
Thank you.
And Madam Chair, um, Vice Chair,
thank you. I'm glad that you
mentioned that because that was
one thing I was gonna mention
also. I, I'm also standing
between myself and the wine, so
I apologize, but I'd be remiss
if I didn't talk about that
leakage and you know, you heard
a lot about the access to the
healthcare,
um, we're seeing people saving
money by going and getting um
some of this preliminary care so
that they don't have those big
ticket items that they're not
calling for a $30,000 ambulance
ride to Las Cruces. So, um, I
just wanted to add that also
and, and the New Mexico-based
companies, I mean.
That this is economic
development as well. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you. Any other questions
from the committee?
Um, I just had a couple of
comments myself, um,
You know, I think, especially
when we talk about the
school-based healthcare. Um,
Is there a point that there's a
warm handoff if there needs to
be with, could you kind of walk
us through what, what that looks
like.
So all of our students, uh,
Madam Chair, all of our students
come into the school-based
health center. They do need to
see the nurse practitioner. Um,
from there we do screeners, um,
and we do a warm hand off to the
behavioral health provider
there. Um, now the behavioral
health provider will offer the
services, will tell the student,
uh, the, the patient at that
point of what to expect in those
sessions. Um, it could be uh a
family session. It could be an
individual session and then
From there, once we finished the
assessment with the student,
we're gonna link them to other
specialty uh behavioral health
services if they need to that
will also be a warm hand off to
specialty programs. If there is
a um.
We have to send them inpatient.
We will call the hospital and we
will inform them of of the
situation and that will be a
sort of of a a warm hand off as
well.
And you mentioned um having, uh,
giving the students at Inchero,
did you say, um, what was the
term used? A pendant, madam. And
what is that? What does that do?
So Madam Chair, if once we
assign the pendant to the
student, they can press the
button, it will send a signal to
ECG, ECG will communicate to the
clinica. We will be able to see
in a map.
Uh, where the student is located
in the school, and then our
staff members will be able to go
and retrieve that student and
bring them into the health
center and then de-escalate the
situation.
And while all students get that
or just those that have gone
through the assessment and who
have requested services.
Madam Chair, it will be those
students that are patients of La
Clinica, um, that have an
assessment and, and it will be
the clinician's discretion,
right? Because we don't want to
give this, uh, buttons to
someone that is very acute and
has um.
Uh, suicide ideation because
that that puts the kid at danger
because they can press leave the
the device somewhere and then
run off. So we want to be very
careful with with who we're
giving the devices to.
OK, um.
So, you know, I think especially
with with our students, it's so
easy. I think they through
pandemic, through, I mean they,
I know with my son anyway, he
would rather be on his device
and have a conversation. And so
I think this is a way to keep
them engaged. Um, but I think on
the flip side, with the, maybe
say the, the aging population.
Um, and, you know, John, you
haven't moved for 4 hours. I
mean, is there gonna be some, is
there, you know, kind of a a
warm hand off there as well.
Madam Chair, committee members,
yes, this, there's also a warm
hand off as well. So, um, as, as
Addison is detecting that, uh,
Addison will contact depending
on how the, the call is set up
circle either a, a relative, uh
our team or the clinician,
depending on how it's set up.
But there, there is a, um, the
whole purpose of this really is
to provide independence for our
more mature.
Patients. And I guess, um, you
know, with this being the
economic and rural development
Committee, um, let's talk about
payment. How is that, how is
that happening? Is it through
insurance? Is it self-pay? Um,
how do you, how do you get paid?
Madam Chair, committee members,
yes, some of it is covered
through insurance and some of it
is self-paid. It really depends
on uh what the patient has in
our CPT codes
and our, um, I mean we just
heard how insurances are wanting
pre-authorization for
Things, are you all having to go
through those types of processes
to get
the payment, that is a process
that, um, we go through in our
providers go through our
clinicians go through as well.
And, and it is, um, it does take
some, some maneuvering, um.
But um one of the things that,
that is helping out like Clinica
is it it's they have received
some, some monies and these are,
uh, again, I appreciate the work
that you all are doing and that
the governor's doing, um, some
of the monies that have been
provided to the clinic uh uh
have given us the ability to
launch this project as well.
Well, I appreciate um the work
that you're doing. I think
especially with, well, with all
the populations, but, um, you
know, I think that it just
demonstrates when partnerships
happen and work within
communities, how it can really
benefit the whole community. And
when we're talking about
students to, to our elderly
population, it seems to be
covering the gamut, and so I
think that's so important,
especially when we're talking
healthcare community-based, um,
and, you know, I think we
understand that if we can keep
it community based and it keeps
costs down.
And so, uh, I commend you for
that. I appreciate, uh, the
demonstration. I think we got to
work on your dance moves over
there,
but I think you did really well.
So thank you for stretching
stretches, yeah.
Madam, I made a comment. Yes,
please, sorry, with the, with
the expansion that we're having
at the clinic of one because you
mentioned community with the new
school-based health centers um
here in Las Cruces, they, we are
doing it with the community
school with the community
schools, which will open new
access points for the community,
not just for the students, but
parents, grandparents will be
able to access um those hubs,
um, that will be closer to them.
Then coming to either a Ben
Archer clinic, a clinica familia
clinic. So we're very excited
for that.
Well, and, um.
How about it is triggered with
me, um, do we have a bilingual
Addison?
Yes we do.
Madam Chair, Vice Chair,
committee members, uh, yes, we
do. So Addison, uh, speaks
Spanish a espanol, uh, in
Kleinchen speaks a lot of
German. Uh, we're working on the
Italian, um, that's a little
personal, um, since my wife, I'm
sorry, we're working on it. My
wife is Italian and she always
gives me that feedback. So, uh
yes, I know, I know, I know.
But, um, so yes, we are working
on Addison so that she can speak
various different languages, um,
Addison.
You see right there is Latina
Addison. So, um, there are
different, sorry, Addison, uh,
stop.
Um, so we have
uh, see, she listens very well.
Um, so we do have uh different
genders, um, with Addison, uh,
different ethnicities, and we
are working on our languages.
Italian is on the list.
Well, I think especially a
school-based health, uh, care,
you'll need to learn teenage
language, so which is a whole
different thing, right? All
righty, well, very much
appreciate your presentation. I
don't know how we got on, we got
back on track and I think we're
going to actually end on time.
I'm very proud of you,
committee. You got, you all did
it, um, tomorrow we start at 9
o'clock. Um, we'll have
breakfast and lunch and we will
try to keep us on track so we
can get everybody on the road
safe.
tomorrow at a reasonable time.
Uh, I appreciate the hard work
that the committee has put in. I
know that they've been some long
days, but I think some really
important information and uh
your participation has been, um,
very greatly appreciated. So
thank you all for coming today
and we will hopefully, um, see
