I want to be respectful of
everybody's time, so with that
I'm gonna go ahead and turn it
over to our presenters. If you
all will introduce yourselves
and why and what capacity you're
here and get on with your
presentation, um, thank you for
being here.
Um, good morning, Chairwoman
Gallegos. Thank you, um, and
members of the committee. My
name is Kyle Lee. I'm the chief
executive for CNM Ingenuity.
Um, I represent CNN's executive
team, and I lead CNN Ingenuity.
CNN's Research Park and economic
development entity, um, and I'm
really pleased today to speak to
you about a number of topics,
um, and I'm here with a couple
of my colleagues who I let them
introduce themselves.
Good morning. I'm Andrea
Cisneros Wichman. I'm a senior
director of programs here at
CNM.
Good Morning. I'm Jeff Bargell.
I am the senior director of our
entrepreneurship programs at CNM
Ingenuity.
Um, thank you all so much for
your time. I am, I got a chest
cold over the weekend that
settled into a little bit of
laryngitis. Um, I'm certain you
won't confuse me with Sam
Elliott or Morgan Freeman.
It's far more likely my voice
will break and finally change in
my mid-50s, um.
Um, we have a number of topics
to talk about and, and I'll just
start into this and really if
you need to interject or
interrupt, please do. um, there
should be plenty of time at the
end also for questions, um,
we're going to cover a broad
range of activities. Um, it's
really my pleasure and honor to
welcome you to this 2nd day of
the economic and rural
Development Policy Committee at
CNM. Um, I'd like to start by
saying thank you for the
workforce funding across the
state and your support of CNM's
Enterprise itself. Um,
Includes a whole number of
members, um.
I'll name a few, but it's not
limited to just this number, so
if I've left somebody out, you
can, you can corner me in an
alley some other time.
Uh, Si Huminos, Representative
Brego, Senator Tollman,
Representative Garrett,
Representative Herndon,
Representative Martinez, and
Representative Little, um, just
to name a few, and we're deeply
appreciative of your support of
CNM and your outstanding public
service to New Mexico.
Um, this is a really fun
committee to spend some time on
because New Mexico is in a
really diverse and emergent area
for economic development.
Uh, certainly the opportunity
for traditional trades work to
core energy and agricultural
sectors. It's almost some
science fiction level emerging
technologies and quantum
computing space, aerospace,
blockchain, the internet of
things, data science and
artificial intelligence and at
CNN we're excited to be
supporting our state in
achieving New Mexico's economic
development goals in all of
those areas.
CNN is a large acre institution,
is able to participate and
support economic development
across the breadth of these
activities.
It includes non-traditional
areas of leadership, such as
venture capital. Um, we run
Venture Capital One, ingenuity
Venture Capital One, which has a
number of really exciting New
Mexico companies that has
invested in, including Crossbow,
a company that does the majority
of its work in Socorro, but it's
building 3D printed rocket
engines, simplest way to put it,
um, in their latest valuation
puts them at a little over â‚¬400
million. Extremely exciting
company for New Mexico. Um,
right now we're in the process
of working with the NMF.
and others for ingenuity venture
fund too, um, it is a unique
thing for community college to
have such expertise in venture
funding, but the legislature
made that possible and we're
extremely appreciative of it.
All this work across the state,
always in economic development
requires 3 things from my
perspective. It needs a place in
New Mexico is an amazing
location for reshoring
manufacturing, which you'll see
later, very high tech company
formation, which certainly the
venture capital funding
provides, um, energy, ag,
tourism.
The second is it needs
resources, and we've seen that
increasingly provided by the
legislature, whether it's
venture capital fund or whether
it's the workforce funding that
we've seen in the last couple of
years.
Um, and third and perhaps most
importantly is workforce.
And New Mexico has the ability
to put to work um tremendous
number of the state, um.
That's made available by those
resources and those amazing
emerging technologies. Um,
We'll talk a little bit more
about that, but I think this is
a really nice time to transition
to some of those populations and
some of those activities we've
been undertaking and uh I'll
pick up after Andrea and Jeff.
All right, uh, Madam Chair,
committee members, I'm here
today to share information about
two of our statewide programs
and we are seeking legislative
support for both initiatives
this year.
The first is, uh, for Skills
USA, Skills USA, if you're not
aware, is a national career and
technical student organization.
I'm gonna interrupt you for just
a minute. Can you pull the
microphone closer to you. We're
having a little trouble hearing
you.
OK, thank you. Skills USA, uh,
national career Student
technical organization which
prepares the workforce in
trades, technical and service
occupations. CNM has managed the
State office for Skills USA
since 2019 through an
intergovernmental agreement with
the public ed department, uh,
and we have been hosting the
state competition. I'm trying to
make sure this is accurate
because we're going deep in the
history books here, but at least
since 1982.
Um, participation in the annual
conference has grown 400% since
we returned.
From COVID. Last year at our
state conference, we had over
800 high schools and
post-secondary students from all
over the state. This included
over 300 women for the first
time ever, which we were very
proud of.
80% of the Skills USA
participants are from rural New
Mexico, Hobbs in particular is
known at the national level for
being a chapter of excellence
with their many participants.
And so we're seeking resources
to sustain this growth and to
increase participation just
yesterday presented an RPSP
request to the higher ed
department, um, we know that
there's more opportunity to grow
with underrepresented
populations and women in the
skilled trades, uh, leading the
state office is a lot of work,
but it's incredibly rewarding
and also a great way to show
case the facilities here at CNM
and to facilitate recruitment
opportunities for us as well.
So I'll transition from that
with the program that mostly
serves, uh, our youth to, uh,
the opposite population,
um, and talk about our New
Mexico New Elder world program.
So for new elders, which we
define as those over the age of
50, and I know that shocks
everybody. um, this program
helps connect older adults with
resources to support their
connections to jobs,
volunteering, mentoring, job
training, or social connections
and events.
It's imperative that we focus on
older adults as a workforce
strategy. By 2030, 30% of New
Mexico's population is projected
to be over the age of 60 in
Bernillio County. That's closer
to 40%. And according to AARP
25% of our older adults retire
into poverty and that's higher
here in New Mexico.
So with these statistics, we
need to prepare and provide our
older adults with resources that
will help them remain healthy
and productive citizens, and we
need their expertise in the
workforce.
Workforce gaps can't be filled
by the young population alone.
It's just too small and
currently those over the age of
55 are the fastest growing
segment in the workforce. So
this is why we're leading an
intentional emphasis on engaging
older adults in all of our
programs.
We received grow funding last
year. Thank you all, uh, some
accomplishments from that time
have included that we have
developed what we were calling
the engagement connection
Center, which is a digital
platform that helps connect
older adults to
Uh, work and volunteer
opportunities. We're currently
in a soft launch phase as we try
to bring in, uh, more people to,
to test the platform. We've
piloted a mentorship program. We
have developed a 50 plus job
seeker guide. Uh, we've created
new internal processes, engaged
all departments within CNM on
how they're supporting older
adults. Um, we've made new
employer connections and we
hired a program manager to
oversee the logistics of this
work.
Our new request will help us
maintain momentum and grow the
program supporting outreach,
employment advisement and more
learning events for the new
elders.
Uh, and finally we'll continue
to support older entrepreneurs,
so, um, the last statistic I'll
share is that a 50 year old
entrepreneur is 1.8 times more
likely to be successful than a
entrepreneur in their 30s. So to
share more about what we're
doing with entrepreneurs, pass
it on to Jeff.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. Um, if
you recall, I was here two
months ago in San Juan talking
about two of our programs
Adventure Pitch and our
activator outdoor recreation
growth accelerator. So now I'm
here to fill you in on a little
bit more of, of all of the other
programs that we offer at
Ingenuity, um, for
entrepreneurship.
We cover a lot of programs for
both uh events, guidance and
resources at various levels,
sometimes focusing on the
locals, sometimes the state, and
we have a few federal programs
as well.
I'll start off a little bit with
our Activate andM program. It's
our flagship program. Our
tagline is ideas ignited,
Business activated. Um, we
provide guided, delivered
guidance and resources primarily
for entrepreneurs in New Mexico.
We have a whole pile of
programs. I'll I'll list some of
them off and then we'll go into
a little bit of detail about
each one of them. So in the
guidance category, we provide
founder fundamentals. This is a
free online curriculum and
interactive tools for
entrepreneurs.
Or entrepreneurs that are people
that are wanting to become
entrepreneurs, um, to plan their
business idea.
Anyone from New Mexico could
access it and it's free.
Speed mentoring is one of our
public events, and again,
anybody that wants to come can,
uh, participate in that is in
person it's like speed dating
for mentorship and
entrepreneurs, so we match you
up and every few minutes you
rotate around and get to meet
new mentors, toss your ideas. We
do that every quarter. Our next
one is coming up, uh, here on
the 15 November 15th.
Activator or alter recreation
growth accelerator or um talk a
little bit more on that in a
bit.
Entrepreneur and development.
It's one of our new programs
that we're piloting. It was
funded via via a junior
appropriation, um, and I'll,
again, I'll talk about a little
bit about that, but is it paid 6
month internship program to
teach young people about
entrepreneurship and
specifically to scout and
validate unmet needs for startup
potential.
In our events category, we have
startup Fiesta and Space Fiesta.
If you've not been to one of
those, I encourage you to come,
uh, our last space fiesta we
held at rail yards, so we had uh
uh well over 500 people attend
and that was the first time we
ever ran one of those, so we're
looking to uh expand that. These
are free and public events
celebrating and bringing
awareness to our burgeoning
startup ecosystem and space
industry, um.
I mentioned Space F is
particularly focused on showing
the public the opportunity that
space represents for New Mexico.
And then, uh, adventure pitch
and ski lift pitch. So adventure
pitch we just had, uh, and, um,
we had 4 companies competing for
$15,000 in prizes. Those
competitors were BClean,
Apavera, Suli and Orctech.
And be clean was our winner, so
they walked away with $10,000 in
prizes and Ortech was our second
place winner and Aleve was our
3rd place winner.
Ski lift pitch
Uh, this is our 10th anniversary
coming up. So we're super
excited about that. This is an
opportunity where we, we do this
in Taos, uh, ski valley every
year and we leverage the
resources that we have here in
New Mexico to attract investors
from across the country to see
the types of companies that
we're putting forward in New
Mexico, so they get to both see
amazing, hear about amazing
companies and some world-class
skiing.
In this case, the our
entrepreneurs pitch one on one
up the ski lift.
Something that unique that we
offer and I've never met another
pitch competition that does
something as exciting,
interesting as that.
Um,
Uh, quick update on our
activator, uh as a, as a
reminder, this is, uh, funded by
the New Mexico Outdoor
Recreation Division, uh, via a
one-time funding from ARPA. We
will be running it for 3 years.
So this is our first year as a
pilot, and we had 18 small
businesses in the outdoor
recreation space from across New
Mexico participating 8 of those
were rural.
Um, participants since we have
concluded this year's cohort,
the feedback was pretty
fantastic. The number one thing
that people really enjoyed was
just getting to meet other
outdoor recreation companies.
They some reason they don't get
the opportunity to do that so
often. They're working on their
companies and they don't reach
out and meet others, especially
from all the way across the
state. So they love the
workshops, especially with the
guest instructors, the stories
and lessons from successful
outdoor recreation entrepreneurs
and the expert mentoring, uh, in
addition to all
the um peer mentoring that they
provided to each other.
So we would ask that in a couple
of years, so this is our first
year, we're funded for 3 years,
but because this was federal
funding at some point this will
tail off and it was a one-time
funding. So sometime in the next
couple of years we'll start
looking for funding to sustain
that beyond um beyond 2026.
Switching gears a little bit and
going national and
international, one of the
programs that we run is the
Hyperspace Challenge.
This is a space tech accelerator
that is funded by the Air Force
Research Lab and the US Space
Force.
We have been, um, the goal of
hyperspace is to forge valuable
relationships between the
government, industry, and
academia to accelerate
innovation for the space domain.
Uh, it has been funded for 7
years and we've, we're actually
still on contract for a couple
more and then we'll seek to
renew.
Um, hyperspace runs accelerators
to scout solutions for the
government's space-related
challenges from small businesses
and universities.
We also creatively engineer
events to spur innovation with
the federal government and
realizing that government
employees are humans too, and
sometimes we need to tease a
little innovation out of them.
Um,
And we also operate as an
overall demand signal amplifier
for uh to the public for the
space domain. So part of what we
do is things like outreach like
Space Fiesta and other programs
like that.
In the last 7 years that we've
been running this program. Um,
our 67 alumni, two-thirds of
them have gone on to win a
government contract.
Uh, worth over $600 million in
addition to $200 million in
private investment in New Mexico
that has represented about $250
million going directly to
companies, space companies in
New Mexico, so very significant
portion of that.
Finally, I'd like to talk about
our newest program.
Our entrepreneur and development
program also called EID.
This is a pilot. Um, it is a 6
month paid internship to scout
and validate unmet needs for
startup potential.
It is current, um, we are
seeking the funding for future
cohorts, um, while we are
operating the current um pilot.
The need here and what we're
targeting is realizing that
startups drive most.
Economic growth and that starts
in New Mexico are currently
stunted by the shortage of
growth-minded workforce and that
young adults, um, young adult
New Mexicans tend to leave for
more developed startup
ecosystems.
So our solution here that we're
piloting is to make young people
sticky.
Train young people with high
potential but limited experience
on the most critical components
of a successful business, namely
finding those unmet needs.
From customers and validating
those needs for startup
potential.
Um, not validating or not
knowing your customer very well
tends to be the number one
killer of most startups. Too
many people go out and try a
solution, build something, try
to release into the market and
then realize, oops, I don't have
a customer.
So we're reversing that. We want
to focus explicitly on the uh
customer and their needs. We're
also paying them. We're
realizing that the access to
entrepreneurship, um, and
competes with the need to have
an income and pay.
So we chose to pay our interns,
um, pretty healthy salary that's
commensurate with being an
intern at Sandia or other high
paying internships.
So they don't have to sacrifice
away from conventional jobs or
leave New Mexico for those
opportunities.
The output of this program is
that we expect to have about 100
or so unmet needs that are in
our hypothesis pipeline, we
train these EID interns on how
to evaluate them.
Over the 6 months of this
internship, they will evaluate
about 60 of these and 20 of them
20 we expect 25 or so of them to
be validated to go on to the
next stage.
The output and the outcome, um,
is that we expect to have a
public demo day.
Where we have an event and a
report that goes along with
this, where the EIDs can report
out to all of New Mexico saying,
hey, these are validated
customer needs and something
should be done with them. These
should become part of economic
development.
Several possible pathways for
this, and EID or a group of EIDs
themselves could go out and
start a company based on one of
the ideas that they have
validated.
Uh, another entrepreneur could
pick up the idea and start a
company for themselves.
We expect um some venture
studios or other venture firms
in New Mexico to start companies
around some of these ideas.
Or uh an existing company could
hear these ideas and pursue it
for themselves to develop new
products and services.
In our current pilot, we are
employing 6 EID interns in
Albuquerque, uh.
and targeting unmet needs for
small and medium businesses in 4
areas. Those are construction
and trades, film and media,
energy and water, and health and
wellness.
Uh, and specifically targeting
ideas that could be solved with
software as a service. Again,
this is a pilot, but we are for
the future of this program, we
are looking at other industries
and other types of solutions.
For example, they could be more
deep tech associated, um,
especially if we're to look at
energy and water.
Um,
I'd also like to mention that
one of our EIDs was just
mentioned this week as a
Albuquerque Business first in
025 under 25. Most of our
students, most of our EID
interns are from UNM or um UN
alumni, um, and a few from CNM
as well.
But for the future of this
program, and if we can find
funding to keep it going, our
objective is to expand to these
other areas and to offer it
across the state.
Uh, it's currently funded as a
reminder from $315,000 junior
appropriation from Hickey Dixon
and Serato. Um, I know that I
understand the Northense
committee, but I just want to
mention them, um.
I, I am very passionate about
this program in particular,
personally, uh.
I realized that I myself am an
entrepreneur in remission
currently as I'm sitting here on
this, uh, um, as a senior
director here and
Uh, this one, if I had had this
one when I was starting out, boy
would have saved me a lot of
time and frustration. So, um.
I am happy now to pass off that
those learnings to our up and
coming young people and giving
them a reason to stay here and
develop in the startup ecosystem
in New Mexico.
So what that is to say thank you
to all of our sponsors and um
looking forward to any
questions. Thank you.
Uh, thank you, Jeff. Thank you,
Andrea. So, Madam Chair and
members, um, I'll bring this
home on just a couple more items
that I'd like to share.
Um, first and foremost, on
behalf of CNM, CNN of Ingenuity,
and the college and university
system. I want to thank the
legislature for its support of
workforce training. 2023, it
passed $20 million into
workforce training, um, in 2024
it passed 60 million. This puts
New Mexico in a really unique
position to develop um
skills-based training work, um,
in addition to the money that's
made available for
academic-based learning. It's a
recognition that it's an and
statement. Some people.
The training and some people
need um academic learning and
the two things can coexist
really successfully. That
funding is extremely important
to build the economic
development opportunities in New
Mexico.
Um, the original 20 million uh
final rules from HED came
through about a week ago. Um, it
is expected to be expended, um,
the soft expenditure by the end
of December, but really by um.
June 30th of 2025 with the new
rules, um, certainly CNM will be
successful with its allotment,
um.
And, and we're really
appreciative of that, that is
allowing us to move towards the
60 million appropriation that
was provided, um, that MOU was
just provided and signed last
week. The money is not yet
delivered. I think we'll see a
conversations about spreading
that not as 20 million a year,
but really is a 60 million over
the three years in order to best
to play it to support economic
development in the state.
Um.
So one thing I'll share about
CNM um that we recognize, uh,
several years ago, um, from
former President Winograd and
more significantly with
President Tracy Hartzler, is
that um learners come in and out
of their education and training
lives. Um, it's not simply this
linear output where you finish
high school and then you go and
do your college work and then
you go to work. It's, it's, it
is never that. It is a million
other things. Some people might
do that, but many go to work and
then realize they need new
skills.
Some go to school, don't quite
finish, get a job, and then come
back again, um.
The college and recognizing that
developed a system where it
really built strong platforms,
uh, based on what industry has
asked us to do and these
platforms, um, one of the
strongest platforms that I will
talk about the college is built,
is this technology platform to
support advanced manufacturing
in some of the emergent
industry. Um, this allows the
development of individuals from
manufacturing technician at the
entry level all the way through
pre-engineering. And while there
are some similarities, there are
definite paths that are more
appealing to some than others.
Um, and that work is done in
coordination with
workforce-based training, which
is really a skills-based
training where you come in and
learn the specific skill, and
then you can take that
immediately back to work and use
it really productively to
advance your career, um, if you
do enough of that, um, you'll
wake up and find yourself with a
degree at one point. Um, it is
really an important attribute of
the college. It is an extremely
efficient use of resources, and
it brings the entire breath of
the learner into focus, um, as
the principal.
Um, is the principal focus of
the college.
Um, what's really so important
about these foundations, they
create a skills-based training
opportunity, um, and it now has
that state supported funding.
Often rapidly successfully
support the growth of a company
and meet a critical needs,
specific skills are needed and
on a very quick timeline, the
money provided by the
legislature makes that happen.
How significant industries are
growing and need a quicker and
larger pipeline of skilled
workers. And for example, we see
that with Blue Halo, Rocket
Labs, or in solar with such
companies such as Maxion or
Eben, um.
And there are many more than
that, um, as the funding is
provided across the whole state.
CNN will be looking for a
capital appropriation as a part
of this, um, to support our
center for technical innovation
and Entrepreneurial Development,
um.
It's, it's unfortunately picked
up the acronym TID. I'm I'm at
fault for that, um, it often
connects with what used to be
our fuse maker space, but much
more than just the fuse maker
space.
Um, the idea of this is to build
a new building about 25,000
square feet designed to
accommodate the unique needs of
not only the academic folks
coming through things such as
our new skilled trades program,
but the entrepreneurs that Jeff
is talking about the many
different individuals that
Andrea is talking about, um, the
industry requirements that
people are hearing, um, are
needed, um, our partners across
the street with UNM they can all
convene and meet um at the Tide
building,
Our first ask will be for 2.5
million on a, on the planning
and design phase for $35 million
project. It will be managed by
CNM as a state of the art
facility for innovation,
education, and collaboration.
It currently operates downtown.
Um, in a smaller facility at
about 13,000 square feet, um, on
a personal note, I will tell you
when I took this job 9 years
ago, we had a very small fuse
maker space and all I could do
is look at it and go, this is a
terrible idea.
Um, and I was immediately
corrected when I saw um a really
budding entrepreneur working
with a doctor from the labs to
develop a new lighting system,
um.
For what it's worth, it was in
the cannabis industry, but um
they went on to Colorado and
developed a really successful
business, but it was one of
many, uh, when you go around
Albuquerque, uh, for example,
when you come in through the
airport and you come down the
last escalators before you
collect your bags.
Um, there's a.
Um, there's a construct there
that's got a lot of monitors in
it that are showing all the
things you can do in
Albuquerque. that was built at
Fuse. There's about 50 or 60 of
those across Albuquerque where
companies come in and have
access to high and advanced um
tools that would be very
expensive and difficult to get
access to, and they learn how to
use them in order to do the
work, um, to do amazing exciting
things with their businesses.
Um, so thank you all for your
future support of that endeavor.
Um,
I'll just finish off by skating
across a couple a couple of
really high-end workforce
programs.
Across the tops of some of our
workforce programs and excited
to share more if you have
questions.
When the college several years
ago, picked up the line worker
school. This is in partnership
with the rural co-ops across the
state of New Mexico currently
runs out of Rio Rancho. We've
been doing this for several
years. We run 3 codes of our own
and the royal rural co-ops from
one, an underground and above
ground where they climb the
poles. If you're ever in
Albuquerque at 6 o'clock in the
morning when it's running, it's
fantastic because they climb the
poles, they do the Pledge of
allegiance.
It's um it's really a fantastic
experience.
Um, we have been a part of the
energized Watershed program,
formerly known as Rally West.
Um, for the workforce lead with
San Juan.
Lead on a San Juan grant.
Um, for the
Energized watershed engines
grant led by UNM and it aims to
train the local workforce and
grow regional innovations and
ecosystems on water and energy.
Um, we have been in the paper
recently as the workforce lead
for quantum computing, we will
build what we believe is the
very first immersive training
program in quantum technician
training.
Um, quantum computing is, um.
Truly one of the most emergent
future space race elements of
supercomputing, um, in the world
and New Mexico stands poised to
be a leader in that. We have
partners from Colorado through
Sandia and we feel very honored
to be the workforce lead in that
work.
Um, and as we move forward into,
um will ultimately be a
fantastic tour for you at the
end of the day. I will, I will
go across. We've been a big
player in film and film is a
really important industry in New
Mexico.
Uh, we are a big partner in the
film and digital Media Center.
Um, we're proud to be partnered
with the state's economic
development department and the
City of Albuquerque in
developing the Media Arts Center
at the rail yards downtown.
The new facility will allow us
to expand our capacity and
provide more students with state
of the art film production
tools. We're proud to be
supporting the city of
Albuquerque's downtown revival
work and we're always seeking
more power, um, more powerful
partnerships like this to
maximize the public's
investment.
Um, the whole facility itself,
CNM's contributed 25 million,
the state 23 in the city 15. The
total project's budget is $63
million and it will be amazing.
I will say we have been in the
film industry for quite a while.
We run the largest prop house in
the southwestern United States,
um, and we've done over 30s and
location agreements in the last
3 years, um, with 34 different
companies with more than 1600
props in different um
productions, including the
latest spin out from Better Call
Saul, so keep your eye out for
that one.
And then last, um, excited to
say that um you all will have a
tour of our RPM facility on
winemaking and we opened up the
winemaking boot camp 14
companies have joined, including
uh from out of state.
Um, this is in response to the
workforce demand for state
wineries. It launched this um
program with certificate and
associate degree programs in
January. This fall, we included
a two-week immersive red
wine-making boot camp, which is
designed as an accelerated
option for those seeking to
increase their skills in a short
amount of time.
They'll gain hand on experience
and CNN world-class winemaking
and beverage production
facilities, which you all get to
see.
And I hope you get to try
something fantastic.
Um,
Seeing them and CNM ingenuity
partners with Mexico Wine for
all of these programs ensuring
quality programming and skills
being taught.
For those workforce needs.
And really looking forward to
you all having that tour later
today.
Um, and Netflix tomorrow on
film.
So thank you all.
Uh, for the time, um, Madam
Chair, those are our comments
and look forward to any
questions.
Thank you and thank you for your
presentation. First on the list
is Representative Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for your presentation.
Um, my husband and I have
something that we were diagnosed
with called entrepreneurism and
Yeah, so, uh, excited about
that. I wanted to make sure that
you all know how lucky you are
to have so many representatives
and senators that touch the CNM
campuses across, uh, Albuquerque
because uh there's other higher
education.
places that don't have that.
Uh, New Mexico Tech is one of
them. They have about 4.
And so I, I'm, I'm happy for you
all and sad for others, but I, I
know that you appreciate that as
you have well stated.
I wanted to talk a little bit
about Activate New Mexico.
Um, and how you choose.
Um, you said something about
small and medium businesses.
To participate in something that
um.
and I just wanted to get a
little more information about
the Activate New Mexico and then
the the other part of the
question is the outdoor
recreation,
um.
A specific question to that is,
are hunting and fishing included
in your, in any of the entities
that show up to in your maker
spaces.
Um
Madam Chair, uh,
representatives, uh, so thank
you for the question. So, um,
for Activate New Mexico, the
reference there to small and
medium businesses was under our
entrepreneur and development
program. The objective here is
that at least for this pilot for
the entrepreneur development
program that we would be
targeting unmet needs from small
and medium businesses that we
could perhaps develop solutions
for. Again, as a pilot and
because we're.
tend to be training, um.
Young and a little bit
inexperienced, uh, entrepreneurs
that want to be again
entrepreneurs in development
that we chose to target small
business business problems
because they would be more
accessible and easier for us to
as a both training tools and as
uh potentials for spin out in
this pilot.
The if the pilot is successful
in these areas, we would be
looking to expand to other
industries, unmet needs and
other areas, not just for small
and medium businesses, but
perhaps for consumers, for
communities and for large
businesses or other areas.
Um,
Your second question was about
the activator and adventure
pitch, so.
Uh, activator as long as the
qualification there is that you
must be a small business, um,
and either, uh, have a
headquartered in New Mexico or
providing impact to New Mexico.
Um, pretty directly providing
jobs, I think was the explicit
um qualification there in New
Mexico and of the 18 companies
that we selected, I think we had
36 applications this year and 18
were accepted, um, the objective
was to do 15, but, but we had
severals that.
Met the qualifications, so, uh,
the answer are hunting and
fishing outfitters included in
this, yes.
Um, they can. It is up to them
to apply, and there was a lot of
uh marketing that went out to
attract companies to apply, um,
I don't have the list.
In front of me of all 18, but
there were, uh, the house
flashho was one of them and a
few other um out they, they are
qualified, yes.
Thank you for that. I, I
appreciate that. I keep asking,
um.
You know, economic, well, the
outdoor recreation department of
hunting and fishing is included
in a lot of their information
that's given out and no one can
answer that question. And so
I'm, I was just curious about
that. Um, my, my next, um, kudos
to Skills USA. I, I really
appreciate that, um.
Uh, and 80% from rural New
Mexico, uh, a lot of those, uh,
young men and women, um, we'll
go straight into the trades, uh,
and then, you know, through
apprenticeship programs or other
things, um, have well paying
jobs and.
And so one of the
Um,
Other questions I have is how do
you how do you measure your
success in the entrepreneurism
or entrepreneurship, um.
With when you're trying to build
the businesses, do you, do you
have people that have started
What kind of data do you have on
that?
Yes, um, so thank you for the
question. In the 3 years that
I've been in this position, the
activate them and their other
programs have turned over
several times, so, uh.
We have had all sorts of
companies and entrepreneurs at
every stage come through in the
case of Activator, uh,
We, we targeted this as a growth
accelerator, so we let the
companies decide for themselves
to define growth.
They could define it as we're
looking to grow customers or
revenue, but we also accepted
companies that were.
Uh, they were taking over an
existing company.
And so growth for them was the
growth as a leader in their, in
the new role. Um, one of these
was like, for example, Jack's
plastic welding, it's they've
been they're in Aztec. They've
been around for 40 years. The
founder and CEO was retiring and
he had a deputy that he had been
preparing to take over and he
just recently took over. So he
came through the activator to
learn that side for himself. And
then we also accepted companies
that were preparing for
succession. We have a big
problem that the um the
generations.
That are in their 60s and 70s
that started these companies, do
not have a succession plan. Most
of them do not. I think only
like 30% of them have a
succession plan. And so a lot of
these companies will start
closing over the next few years,
so we had a few of them come
through that were specifically
looking to prepare themselves
for succession, um.
Other, other metrics, so in
hyperspace challenge, we are
able to follow those companies
year after year, we, we have
alerts out to tell us whenever
they find new funding either
through investment or through
grants that are uh publicly, um,
disclosed.
And for our other companies in
activating them, uh, they're
very fluid. They're a lot harder
to, to, to nail down. So I will
say, uh, admittedly our, our
metrics on that are difficult to
follow, but we've been, we've
been trying to get more
disciplined, um, as we develop
these programs, especially EID,
uh, the entreprene development
program, now these, they as a
requirement of the program, they
are going to be answering
surveys at a conclusion, 6
months, 12 months, and 24
months.
Uh, after the end of the program
so we can follow their career
trajectory, see if they start,
if they stay here in New Mexico,
see if they found a company,
what's going on with them, uh,
etc. because that's the whole
hypothesis that we need to prove
with that program is that they
stay here in New Mexico and
contribute to our economic
development. That's exactly what
I wanted to hear because I don't
wanna be training all these
students to start these
businesses and they take them to
Colorado.
Uh, or Texas or Arizona, and so
uh that I, I would encourage you
to try to track that data
because that will be one of the
questions that you're asked when
you're starting to ask for
funding. They, they're gonna
want, I'm gonna wanna know and
probably a lot of other people
here at the table would like to
know what is, what are the
outcomes and you know, are they
creating jobs in the community
and did they stay in New Mexico?
so uh thank you for that answer.
um.
I was curious on the elder
volunteer, um, the elder, I, I
don't remember what you called
it, ma'am. I'm sorry. New elder
world.
OK, yes, the, the new elder
world. I wonder how do you
recruit
Thank you. They, they fight. Um,
I, I was curious, how do you
recruit, um, businesses?
To want to hire in this elder
and then you said volunteer and
something about nonprofits.
And how do you recruit all of
those?
It's uh Madam Chair
Representative Armstrong, thank
you for the question. Uh,
recruiting businesses is um.
Something we're actively
engaging in right now we are,
our digital platform is built
upon CNM's existing higher CNM
software.
So many of the businesses that
are already included in that
will kind of naturally be within
our database. However, we are
asking these businesses and we
are just now starting this like
this month, um, to sign an
employer-friendly pledge, and
it's not a legally binding
agreement or anything, but just
like I, you know, asking them
to, um.
To be aware of hiring needs and
within new elders and to not
discriminate and things of that
nature. And uh we have several
um key businesses that are
really excited to be part of
this effort, uh, CNN being one
of them, of course, uh,
Presbyterian Hospitals is
engaged, uh, PNM is engaged, so
some of the bigger employers,
um,
Around the state are already
involved. Um, and so, yeah,
currently doing a lot of that
outreach we have a very active,
uh, advisory committee for this
program. Um, most of them are
already within the city and the
state aging networks, the, uh,
rural area Agency on Aging is
part of this effort and so
through those relationships we
are also bringing in other
businesses and that's why we're
still kind of in the soft launch
phase of this platform is we
want to have more businesses and
more volunteer and job
opportunities posted.
Um, before we kind of do some
bigger press around it in terms
of engaging volunteers, a lot of
what we've done so far is in
partnership with the Activate
New Mexico program, where we are
seeking people who are retired
but looking to give back to be
mentors for the small businesses
and so that's kind of where
we've focused our energy for
now, but looking forward to
expanding that in the future.
You got my signal. Thank you.
Um, thank you for that. I, it's
really interesting, um, one last
question, Madam Chair, is, um,
how do you define a small and
medium business? What's the
definition of that?
Uh, depends on which one of our
programs. So our federal
programs, we use the federal
definition, they must have 500
employees or fewer, and I can't,
there's a revenue cap too. I
think it's 100 million a year or
something like that, um, for our
estate programs, it is a little
bit up to our funders. We tend
to.
Uh, for activator and for
adventure pitch, I believe we.
Put the cap at 50 employees and
for Adventure Pitch, it was less
than
500,000 in revenue in the
trailing 12 months.
Um, but if they're
Medium business, it's, it's
above that.
Probably less than a few 1000
employees.
OK, thank you for that. I just,
um, you know, when we start
putting definitions on things,
um, I know of a business that
was started around 37 years ago
with two people and now has over
600.
Employees, but you know, they,
they, they go above all of those
definitions, but they have a lot
to offer.
They have a lot to offer and so
I would just encourage you to,
um to not put
Business in a box just because
They are considered large and um
uh.
We just encourage that.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Do we have any other
questions? Representative Brago.
Good morning and thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, so
really interesting about your,
um, entrepreneurship program.
I'm a small business owner, so
you know.
When I think about this, I, it
took me back in time because I
retired from the city in 2010
and um immediately opened a
business right after that and I
did uh I built telecommunication
towers and I, and I, um, was it
zone planning and zoning
consultant for a few years and
um then sort of the market
crashed.
And um that was about 2013 and
so I, I actually opened a
business, Madam Chair, to um
help small businesses get
started and so a couple of my
questions regarding that, um,
and, and I'm just going back
into your curriculum, I guess,
um, do you guys teach people how
to write a business plan and
then you also teach them how to
do their taxes.
So, Madam Chair, Representative
Barrigos Barrigo, um.
So, uh, business plans, um, our
approach to it is to use the
lean startup methodology. If
you're not familiar with this,
it tends to focus very much on
um the customer, understanding
the customer and going through a
lot of customer discovery to
understand their needs.
And then we put this on, um, a
one page business plan called a
lean canvas.
The idea here is that most
startups are dead until proven
alive.
So, um, wet takes a few years.
It takes, it's a 10 year
overnight success, right? Um, so
we, uh, we, we teach that
methodology because uh most of
the time you're putting a lot of
assumptions into a business
plan, you're writing a 15-page
business plan, etc. etc. And,
and then you go out to the
market and you realize that most
of your business plan doesn't
work. Now, planning is essential
and but no plan survives the
market, right? So.
That's why we teach the Lean
Start methodology where it's
because it's one page, you can
lay out all of your assumptions
very quickly. I mean, filling
out your lean canvas for the
first time takes should take no
less than 20, no more than 20
minutes.
To just get the ideas out on the
paper, then you can start to
iterate, recognize where your
major unvalidated assumptions
are, your hypotheses, and go out
and do customer discovery or
other experiments to try to
prove or validate your
hypotheses. It's much better to
figure that out now than putting
a bunch of work in and going out
and discovering the market
doesn't exist.
Um, and then, and then my second
question, Madam Chair, was
regard to taxes because that's
one of the areas that I found
that people have, they struggle
with is their tax, um, you know.
So people pay their taxes every
month. Some people pay them
every 6 months, yearly, I mean,
and, and it seems to me like
small businesses really need
that assistance at the beginning
to get, you know, so I just
wondered about that. So that uh
tax questions we usually relate
to the small business
development center, which is
also one of the um programs that
we house the the Central New
Mexico office uh at at CNM and
so when I get questions like
that, they
geared up very much to answer
questions about tax and and
those sorts of things. That is
their expertise and um.
And other questions that are
related like that the resources,
it sounds like. We provide a
referral to
to do the SPDC and their
offices, right? I mean, we're
like literally next to each
other. Yeah, and you know, it
seems to me like that, Madam
Chair, that's a lot of.
struggle sometimes with small
businesses, um, is that they
don't have the know-how and you
know, that was one of the areas
that I that I really was
concerned with, um, and I'm just
Proud to say that one of the
small businesses in Albuquerque
that I helped get started was
Bahama Bucks. So I'm pretty
proud of that, um, but, um, the
other question that I have was
with regard to diversity.
Um, you know, for women owned
businesses or minority owned
businesses, do you have like a,
like a percentage that you
Try to recruit or try to get
people started, um, and, and,
and the reason that I asked this
question, Madam Chair, is
because when we built Beta West,
which is the Hyatt, and you
know, the downtown complex, um,
one of the things.
Um, that.
It was a federal grant that
helped to build that building
and those buildings and that,
and they used the statistics
from the downtown neighborhoods,
um, in the, in the grant
application and that was back in
the 80s, late 80s, early 90s,
um, and there was supposed to be
a, a move to help startup
businesses and we're talking
about the very small and.
You know, like 5 employees or 10
employees.
And so I just wonder, you know,
because
sometimes I think minority owned
businesses are really the ones
that struggle the most, so I'm
just wondering if you guys keep
any data on that or if you try
to recruit um
people from those populations.
Um, Man share representatives,
uh, so thank you for that
question, uh.
We do keep the data on any of
the attendees.
For that come to any of our
events, so speed mentoring,
start Fiesta, Space Fiesta, etc.
So we do, I do have those
statistics and um some of those
programs are funded by the city.
Some of them are funded by the
state, and so we, we do provide
uh demographic information back
to them. I don't have the
specifics off the top of my
head, but I'm happy to find to
go and pull those reports and
deliver the data. I would be
very interested in seeing that,
um, and I would love to come to
one of your fiestas. So just let
me know.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. Any other questions
from the committee? I have a
couple, um.
So you talked a little bit about
Space Fiesta and hyperspace, the
hyperspace challenge. Could you
tell me a little bit more about
both of those programs?
Yes, Madam Chair. Thank you for
the question. Um.
So hyperspace challenge, this
reminder is a federal program.
This is funded by the Air Force
Research Lab.
And the US Space Force.
out of Kirtland
Um, we have been running that
for 7 years now and we're on
contract to run a few more at
least.
And this program.
seeks to solve.
Government technical problems
around the space domain.
So the way that it typically
works is that the government
provides us a
Technical point of contact
within the federal government
somewhere. It's typically AFRL,
but in the past it has been
Army, Navy, NASA, um, I'm, I'm
probably missing a few off the
top of my head, uh, but they.
They provide us the technical
point of contact and that
technical person provides us the
problem statement that they are
trying to solve and it is then
our job to go out and scout
across the country for small
businesses and university teams
that may have an innovation or a
technology that can solve that
technical problem, and we
facilitate an accelerator to
introduce them to technical
point of contact, teach them
customers to.
Discovery and teach them
government contracting 101.
The result of this over the 7
years as we have had 67 alumni,
two-thirds of them have gone on
to win a federal contract worth
over 600 million and um.
They, uh, this, this model has
been so successful that
Other entities are starting to
duplicate it and where we are
looking also at duplicating the
model for other sectors beyond
space.
Um, particularly in energy and
water and a and a few other
areas as well.
Uh, your second question about
space Fiesta, so.
The objective of Space Fiesta is
was to.
Bring space to the general
public.
So it was it free and open to
the public. We've, we've only
run one of these so far. It was
in June of this year and we held
it at rail yards and shockingly,
we just had over 500 people show
up from all over and.
We, uh, along with us in the
Space Valley Foundation, one of
the mottos that we use is space
for Earth, space for all.
The understanding here that it
is not just the domain of rocket
scientists anymore.
Um, you all use GPS?
I, I suspect, right, um, that's
run by 40 satellites or so that
the federal government controls,
but it is available for
commercial use. And in terms of
workforce, now, we're not just
talking about technical
workforce, but we're talking
about paralegals. We're talking
about legal, we're talking about
communications and marketing,
um, and all the accounting and
all the other services that you
would need in a regular business
now it is, those are all
necessary for commercial
workforce. But the objective of
Space Fiesta was to show folks,
especially New Mexicans, that
this
This is a major opportunity for
us. We have a lot of resources
that are lined up for to be to
be a dominant um uh geography
for space. You have Space Force,
you have AFRL Sania Los Alamos,
White Sands, etc. etc. and Kyle
mentioned crossbow, um, and we
have.
We, we Space Valley Foundation,
QS Station, all these sorts of
things, uh, here.
Developing the space sector, but
I'm not sure this public.
I totally aware of how much we
have here and the opportunity,
um, and so that was the
objective of Space Fiesta.
We had
That event because it it it was
at rail yards if you've ever
been to rail yards, there's one
building there that's gigantic
open 25,000 square feet or
something like that, uh, and we
held a lot of um boothing there
and a lot of STEM outreach, um,
a lot of groups there that were,
we even brought art and some
retro stuff into it, had DJs and
we made a lot of fun and
inviting to the public. And then
on the other side of rail yards
in the um in the closed space,
we had presentations that were
mostly focused on.
the public about what's going on
in space, both for
entrepreneurs, the spaceport,
AFRL, we had a student art
competition that was all uh
focused on K through 12, um.
Tell them, tell us about.
What you think space is to you
and what it means. So that was
the objective there and the
feedback and comments we got
back for that were very
supportive of that. The number
one comment back was wow, I did
not know all of this was going
on and I can't wait to learn
more and see more about what's
going on in New Mexico in space.
And I appreciate those answers.
Um, when you talked about having
a university teams. I heard you
talk about UNM and partnering
with them. Um, have you done any
outreach or recruitment or
advertisement with NMSU because
I know they have a, a pretty
robust, um.
program as well.
Uh, yes, we do, um, we work a
lot with, with Arrowhead and
MMSU on on several areas, uh, so
not just space, but one of the,
um.
So there's two areas where where
we touch universities a lot in
hyperspace challenge, we
typically invite university
teams because they might have
technology that's very early
they're looking to spin out into
a company and they may have a
solution for the government's
problem statement.
So they are invited and we take
them through the same.
Accelerator boot camp that we do
with the small businesses as
well, teaching them what it
takes to spend out a company, do
your customer discovery, those
sorts of things, so.
NMSU along with all the other
colleges and universities across
the country are welcome to apply
for that against federal
program, so they want to have it
open as much as possible.
Uh, the second area with a
hyperspace challenge is that for
the last 3 years they have
commissioned us to produce their
annual university symposium, and
these are uh typically
underrepresented universities,
um, that they.
Do not have very big existing
space programs and they are
trying to.
Not force, but coerce them into
um.
producing coalitions to to
develop space research programs.
So it would be saying, well, we
could have an MSU and Purdue and
University of Colorado bowler
together in a coalition to go
after a particular program. So
that's a, again, we produced
that annual event for the Space
Force and uh the last year we
held it here and we had over 150
space researchers from across
the country here to experience
Albuquerque and um I'm happy to
say that we commit Space Force
to.
Hold it here again, uh, next
year, so.
Very good. I'm glad to hear all
that, um, and I guess the, the
last question I have is
regarding spaceport.
It feels a little underutilized
and so I'm wondering if, if you
all, um, partner with them.
Um, and what that looks like.
Um, so with regards to
spaceport, whenever we bring
people from across the country
here to Albuquerque for
hyperspace challenge or for the
universe's posium or anything
else we're doing, we almost
always set up at least a tour of
Spaceport and sometimes we can,
we try to slip into uh Virgin's
hangar also if we can. So
there's a, uh, they are
surprised to see how accessible
it is, um.
And I think I, I, I don't know
the companies off the top of my
head, but I'm almost positive
I've had at least 1 or 2
hyperspace companies come and
utilize uh spaceport.
That's all I have
Did you, Madam Chair, if I could
just add a little bit, um, we
have had the opportunity over
the last several years to work
with.
Spaceport as well as Mexico
State on a number of significant
federal grants.
Um, they were an original
partner in the Back Better grant
for $100 million of which we
were a finalist, um, and they
were also a critical partner in
the NSF Regional Engines grant
on Space Valley, um, again,
where we were a finalist.
Um, and while we weren't chosen
in the 11th hour, um, together
they helped form the Coalition
for Space Valley.
Um
So it's been, it has been um.
One of the most critical factors
for the space domain to really
succeed in New Mexico is for us
to come together and collaborate
under the same umbrella and
Spaceport, um, and you, and you
extended further to all of White
Sands um to the number of
companies that are here. Navajo
Tech has an extraordinary
advanced manufacturing program
that's been included, um, the
better the state does is
bringing those coalitions
together, the more success we
have, and while we've been.
Um, we've been the runner-up
twice and super close. Um, we
will land one of these and um
elements like the spaceport are
really critical elements of
that. Thank you.
I appreciate that. Thank you.
Um, I don't have anything else.
Does anybody?
All right, well thank you so
much for your presentation
today.
All right, if we can get our
next presenters up.
Morning.
I'm well, thank you. If you all
would introduce yourselves, um,
and your, and your uh positions
and then go ahead and start with
your presentation.
I'm.
Oh, there we go.
What's that?
I'm Marcos Gonzalez, executive
development officer for
Bernallio County and overseeing
economic development and
financing related to affordable
housing and with me is Carolyn
Tobias, the economic development
An audience.
Uh, so today we're talking about
the I-40 trade port corridor,
um, go ahead.
OK.
I
OK.
That, OK, cool.
There we go.
Uh, so.
Uh, as I said, we're here to
talk about the I-40 trade port
corridor project, which is a
partnership between some
entities here in New Mexico and
Arizona and the port of LA and
and Long Beach, um, so where
this all started was looking at
the for the public objectives
piece, especially during COVID
when we had a lot of supply
chain issues in our nation and
everybody remembers not being
able to get TP and some other
things and so, uh, we looked at,
um, the supply chain.
And like how can uh New Mexico
be an asset to that and, um, one
of the things that was looking
at is the port of LA in that
area is running out of room.
There's not a lot of room to be
able to uh store a lot of the
goods that come in from Asia,
particularly, and being able to
ship out to the Midwest or to
the southern part of the
country, especially for our,
our, um, manufacturers.
So how do we, how could we
position ourselves as a place to
not only store some of those
goods and process them, but then
eventually add value to them as
well. So that's where we came up
with the I-403port project and
also in looking at the horizon
as um fossil fuels are
eventually gonna be um phased
out is as these clean energy
components, how do we also take
advantage of becoming a clean
energy hub as well and build out
a lot of.
The infrastructure that's
needed, uh, in order to, um,
actually.
Uh, trigger for renewable
energy, especially with
trucking, hydrogen fueling, or
electrification for that
actually to happen and improve
um once again, our
infrastructure, um.
So, um.
That led us to creating uh the
consortium of their public
partners, which is in the port
of Los Angeles and Long Beach,
uh, the city of Kingman,
Arizona, the city of Winslow,
Arizona, uh Berlio County,
Sandoval County, the village of
Las Lonas, and the USDOT.
America Bureau. So this concept
of the trade port was actually a
a designated as a regional
infrastructure accelerator
program uh at the USDOT's Build
America Bureau, and essentially
the USDOTs, uh, with this Build
America Bureau is kind of
shifting a lot of their funding
into more what I call like a
venture style funding and
wanting to give you a little bit
of money at a time to actually
prove your your different phases
of your projects, so we were
ordered just under $1000 to
really.
Further out our business plan
for um the trade port project.
Um, but it's also not meant to
be just a um.
Public project. It's also meant
to be a private project as well
and really attracting a lot of
private entities to participate
at these different hubs that are
this pearl string across I uh um
I40 from um California through
New Mexico and eventually want
to add other states as well
going eastward, um, in terms of
wanting to invest in the
infrastructure for the clean
energy fueling. They'll actually
push the shippers to be able to
use the clean energy piece and
the supply chain.
Of reliability as well in
creating a lot of warehousing
and logistic spots that make
more sense for them to be able
to push goods through the
country a lot easier and uh more
efficiently, not only uh into
the Midwest and southern part of
the country, but also back out
to Asia as well.
Um, so really it's really
planned that at each of these
different hubs, and it's also in
investment district and not only
the infrastructure piece, but
also, um, private development
and job creation and um and um
we're talk here at at CNM, but
also a focus on uh training
folks into the new types of jobs
that are going to be created
through, um, having that
renewable energy components and
manufacturing, um.
This is just a little bit of
overview of the private partners
uh consortium again about that
would make up the uh consortium
piece from the shippers, truck
manufacturers, fleet operators,
the logistics and
investors and also, um, not so
much a private partner, but UC
Berkeley is also one of our
partners as well cause we're
actually partnered with them in
a specific grant to do further
testing on the autonomous
vehicles and also uh not just
limited.
The cars, but also how um trucks
would be going back and forth
between a logistics point and
then eventually ad Jones too,
and so we actually partnered
with UC Berkeley, University of
New Mexico, and the the Laguna
Pablo to do a lot of the testing
that this grant specifically
wants for not only rural areas
but also in Pueblo areas as
well, um, so we're waiting to
see if we gonna be a finalist
for that one, that'll provide a
lot of um.
Testing data and information and
funding to our area as well.
Um,
As we said before, this is a
very unique uh P3 partnership,
um, once again, uh, not only
collecting into the investment
systems, but uh, public private
partnerships and, um, really
taking down a lot of the risk
components with creating such a
big opportunity.
Um, this is just a map that
shows really the feeder shed
that goes from the West Coast to
the east coast and seeing that
we're really on the um main
trunk line, the main artery that
feeds a lot of goods and back
and forth through the country
and we see when there's little
glitches along I-40, you see how
the supply chains are, um.
Um, delayed or um different
opportunities happen, so being
able to smooth those curves out
and creating more efficiencies
for our country.
Um,
shows the.
Um, as I-40 is the fastest
growth for transcontinental uh
cargo corridor, um, it's largest
by tronage and by a truck as
well, and once again it's that
umbilical cord between uh the
the West Coast and our other
parts of the country that do a
lot of the manufacturing.
Um, and so it's really this
project really positions us
rather than seeing goods go
every day on I-40 and and bypass
us. It's how do we make those
trucks stop and add value to it
and then put them back on the
road, whether that's going back
to Asia or going back to the
other parts of the country, but
taking a stand and let's add add
value to that.
Um, so for our first, uh, in our
beginning phases, uh, we are
looking at building these hub
points at and working with the
Kingman, Winslow, and here
locally in Albuquerque, which
would be close close to through
the I-40 and Trisco Vista area
and then we building these
specific truck mobility
complexes at each of the
different sites that would
provide specific logistics
warehousing or our manufacturing
in a certain area.
And also uh provide, um.
the renewable energy uh spine to
actually allowing trucks to be
um.
A typical I40 that way.
Um,
That is just an overview of
really how, um, the asset
investment would be working
within the truck mobility
complex and showing uh from the
regional distribution point to
the type of industries and um
how um.
These inner workings can work
together.
Um, as I said, uh, it's a
public-private partnership and
the USDOT has had great faith in
us and so not only were we
awarded a regional
infrastructure accelerator grant
we most recently were awarded
$15 million for a raise grant,
which is one of the largest uh
planning raise grants that they
uh have um awarded, and so what
the elements that uh USDOT
really likes about the project
is that it's a multi-state
project and a clean energy
project at the same time
So they're wanting to invest
more into it, um, so that's $15
million will be used across the
corridor to plan out those truck
mobility complexes and those
hubs for the infrastructure that
is needed at those specific
points as well to uh bring the
project to a a reality and so
our um.
Ask of
of you all as it comes forth, we
are gonna be working with, we
have some other cousin uh trade
trade port projects as well with
um the the Ian porter project,
which is also a regional
infrastructure accelerator, um,
programs with the USDOT and the
greater Gallup Tradeport project
as well, and so we'll be working
all three of us working together
and how we come up with an
infrastructure request for each
of those different locations to
be able to push um the.
projects closer to um opening
and um we'll be bringing that to
you back here uh during this
session and, um, the other
pieces that this really shows
the need for our states. I'm
sure you have a secretary, um.
Select will be um.
Rob Black we'll be discussing
site a readiness next, but this
project also shows how having
sites ready for the private
sector to take.
Advantage of can really uh
propel our state further and
then we have a couple of utility
bills, um, that would be
benefiting to this project that
we're working on the power up
bill, um, which would allow
utilities to be able to invest
into again, that site readiness
of that infrastructure that's
needed for private partners to
actually
come online and we also have
some, there's gonna be some
hydrogen policy pieces as well
that we would be.
of that actually supports this
project in in totality as well.
So with that, that's kind of a
flyover of the I-40report
Quarter project. We love to take
any questions and answer them
and um enjoy.
Any feedback, so I I'm sure I'll
turn it back.
Thank you. And do you have
anything to add?
Thank you, Madam Chair. We're
especially excited, um, the
central New Mexico coalition
that Marcos referred to Berlio
County, Sandoval County, and the
village of Los Lunas, um, really
see this as an opportunity for
the entire state, um, yes, we're
talking about I-40 running
through the state, but it's also
speaks to CNM's earlier
conversation, you know, there's,
there's industries that our
state does really well.
Such as space and and others and
um we really feel like that this
particular project is advancing
the assets of our state. Um,
we're very fortunate that we
have I-25, I 10, and I 40.
Running through our state and we
really feel that both clean
energy as an industry and
logistics and manufacturing can
be
Be at the forefront of what New
Mexico um can take pride in and
take leadership in. So we really
see this as being on the front
end of um some great economic
development opportunities for
the state as a whole.
Thank you. All righty, first on
the list is Representative
Hadera.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
thank you very much for this uh
presentation. I, I hate to admit
this, but, uh, 50 years ago I
worked for Congressman Jim Lloyd
and uh his first, his real, I
guess, pressing issue when he
first took office was to make
Ontario an international
airport.
Um, and you know, 50 years
later, if you look at Ontario
Airport, which is was really at
the time a small California
airport, statewide airport. It's
now the shipping hub for the
entire LA area. It's, it's
massive and the business it
brought in so I was just curious
about this because
I want to know where Gallup
stands in all of this. It, it
doesn't look, and I know that's
an 11 hour drive, right from,
from the port of LA to Gallup
and one time, and I know that
the senators here so I don't
know what happened to this idea,
but they were talking about
Gallup becoming an international
airport, which would, which
would open that trade route, uh,
for, for the Southwest. It's,
it's, it would be another uh
shipping lane and it's also the
11.
hour drive, so I don't see any
of that in here and maybe that
idea is thrown out, but I just
wondered what was happening with
that. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair and Representative,
um, I do know that the Gallup
group is working with the
customs group here in
Albuquerque to be able to start
taking in international flights,
uh, for shipping and items like
that, um, with, we are working
with Gallup on their Threveport
project as well. We've been in,
um, talks and working with,
especially with um the state had
applied for the climate
pollution reduction grant with
the EPA and we were working
together.
On our projects as well, um,
specifically with, um, the I-40
Trayport corridor piece is we
worked with the cities and in
Arizona specifically that offer
the different uh trade hub
pieces that were needed for the
project, but we are in works
with the Gallup and McKinley
County area as well for their uh
specific, um.
Projects as well.
So all three tradeport projects
are um working in concert would
be able to make infrastructure
requests and being able to um
share a best practices as well.
Uh, thank you, thank you, uh,
Mr. Gonzales, and thank you,
Madam Chair, but I, I didn't see
any reference to that.
In any of these maps is.
Is there a reason for that?
The Madam Chair and
Representative Fed,
the Gallup McKinley is not an
official partner of the I-40
trade port uh corridor project
that we have designated with the
with the USDOT, but we are still
partnering with them in other um
elements.
Hm
OK, thank you.
Oh
Any other questions represented?
You know,
uh, Representative Armstrong.
Thank you Madam Chair and thank
you for the presentation. Um,
this, this is uh something that
I think a lot of us would like
to see happen, but the question.
Comes up of the infrastructure
part of it, uh, and the
different regulations.
From California, Arizona, New
Mexico, and how we deal with
that. Um, I, I made a trip to
California not too long ago and
I drove in the semis were just
packed outside in Arizona before
you go to California because
they they have different
regulations. So how do you plan
on, on handling that? Is this
part of this is it $15 million
grant on the planning, uh.
How do we, how do we plan on
addressing that?
Madam Chair and Representative
Armstrong. Um, the $15 million
will be for the planning of the
specific hubs, but that is an
element that we are looking into
as well as how do we meet those
regulations, and that's one of
the things about building this
spine, especially on renewable
energy piece, especially with
California moving in 2030 to not
allow diesel trucks in that if
we're ahead of the curve and
being able to have um hydrogen
trucks to start to roll out and
maybe some of those pieces can
be.
We actually have a fueling
elements along I-40 to specific
points, um, so that's one thing
that we're trying to work with
with California's regulations,
uh, we are, um, this uh project,
specifically the Treport
corridor project is also and
have been working also with the
trade port California project,
which is uh a trade port project
specifically in California, but
is managing to some of those
regulation elements as they're
being pushed out into.
Other parts of the country as
well, so we are trying to take
advantage being on top of the
regulations and being able to
smooth it out for the project to
work cohesively.
Thank you for that and thank
you, Madam Chairman, but the
other part of it is, you know,
we have the weight distance tax
here in New Mexico and um and we
use a lot of uh different taxes
for funding these roads, and a
lot of semis drive right
through, uh, because of
different taxes we have here in
New Mexico, so I know you're
well aware of that, but when we
start talking about hydrogen.
Running these semis, we need to
talk about attacks.
As well, because we didn't think
about that when we did the
electric.
And anything that uses our roads
needs to help pay to maintain
our roads, and if that's a real
corridor.
You know, is uh New Mexico
taxpayers are going to be held
accountable for for making sure
those roads are good, which
they're not so great right now.
Just ask Senator Munoz. He
complains about it all the time.
And uh
so, so I just wanna, I just
wanna bring that to the
committee's attention, not that
I'm for or against anything
except um there are different
laws and rules in every state
and um, uh, even in Arizona,
they, they allow double.
Uh, trailers, New Mexico
doesn't.
So I mean, there's a lot of
issues that need to be to to be
thought about, so thank you
Madam Chair, and Representative
Armstrong, please know that
they, they, uh, NMDOT is a um
supporter of this project, and
we've been working with them for
those, um, a regulation points
as well, and they've been
helping us, uh, make
conversations with the um um Azt
as well, so, um, our, um, DOTs
have been talking more, uh,
recently as well than they have
before, so it's actually.
Good that we're having a lot of
conversations between the two
states.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Representative Lujan.
Thank you Madam Chair, thank
you, Marcos, for being here, uh,
for this presentation. This is,
this is something that has been
discussed and and in um in the
works for a while, I take it,
um, but I'm gonna go to your
page 9, you have the first uh
I-40 trade corridor phase one.
How, how many more phases are
there going to be?
If you will, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair and Luhan, the, um,
so it's kind of we should have
relabeled this slice a little
bit because, um, the, the
acreages below that are there
are the trade ports at the full
buildout and so what we're
working on right now is with um
a landowner here in the
Albuquerque area to be able to
work with be able to do the
first a demonstration project,
so we're close to the
negotiations of being able to
get that land so we can
actually.
Start uh planning the
infrastructure around that piece
of property and the actual
implementation of putting
infrastructure into it, so we're
um these um.
Um,
The acreages here are actually
at full build out would be 6000
and so the better answer your
question at um there's.
Not a defined number of phases
yet because it all depends on
how much funding we're able to
get, especially from the USDOT
or different grant opportunities
that we can take down different
phases, but the big thing that
will happen with the planning
money is being able to create
natural breakpoints and be able
to take drawings up to a certain
level about the infrastructure
that we're gonna need for the
specific areas and it's really
kind of dependent now on getting
that first demonstration of
property which were almost close
to having.
Thank you, Madam Chair. And the
reason why I'm bringing that out
is because we, um, and I think
I'm hearing what are, what are
the bigger plans? How are you
phasing out those plans? I think
we need to know that as well, so
if you have that information, I
think that would be pertinent to
us and to your planning and
getting, getting your first
phase through. So what are some
of the barriers, Madam Chair, to
what your your phase one,
planning is.
Madam Chair and Represent Lujan,
a big phase is actually getting
control of that a demonstrate
site, but then after that it
would be a lot of the road
infrastructure, uh, the internal
roads, um, water and sewer, and
then making sure that there's uh
connectivity there, um, for uh
fiber.
Thank you. So, Madam Chair,
again, um, I, I keep going to
the infrastructure portion of
this and what are the, the
barriers there that you're
seeing for those infrastructure
implementations such as
permitting and things like that.
What are your biggest issues,
madam?
Madam Chair, I remember that
Lujan. I think the biggest issue
is having capital because uh
permitting is not a challenge
that's all done through Berlio
County, we it's all permitted,
it's in a a master planned uh
area and there's also phases out
for if we extend out into two
different areas of the Trisco
Vista area, um, there's pathways
for uh doing the master
planning, so there is the
pathways to complete that, but
and and then.
The other hub pieces as well.
They have those areas planned
out where they want items too,
but it's actually having the
money to be able to actually um
invest into that, so whether
it's from the money from USDOT
or we've actually got some, um,
it's tied up in the federal
budget and that gets a pass will
be on some, some earmarks from
Congressman Avasquez and um
Senator Heinrich as well, so
they've been supportive of the
project as well, um, so it's.
Really, uh, putting together the
capital stack for some of the
public infrastructure components
and then being able to attract
that private sector money to be
able to do the private sector
infrastructure improvements and
the creation of those pieces as
well.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, it
is a lot of stacking capital
stacking that you're gonna have
to, uh, continue to do to, to
get this through. This is, this
is something we need. This is,
this is, I'm just getting at the
base of how we're getting the
planning done, Madam Chair,
um, you know, looking through
your um
information that you gave us
here, it's.
It's quite the job for you to
get accomplished, and I think
that when you get your, your
policy, you get your bill
together that you're working on
cause I assume you're working
with the.
The Ready bill and all these
other things we'd like to hear
more about that, um, this sounds
very preliminary still in a lot
of ways, um, getting assurances,
um, I think we like, I would
like to see like a fuller uh
plan and how you're planning
that all so we can help. I think
that that is, that is integral
to us getting something like
this accomplished, um, and I
also saw you listed, Madam
Chair, I think this gets to the
point a little bit about what
Representative.
I was getting at other um key
players or stakeholders. What is
your engagement, um, so far,
what is your future engagement
with more of our local
governments and and other
communities along the the
corridor, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair and Lujan, um, so we
have been in working with the,
um, Gallup community area and
then as part of the CPRG grant
on the other east side of the
state we're working with the
toucan carry area as well as
kind of being, um, smaller hubs
of the one here in Albuquerque
and then in the metro area who's
been really supportive is um.
The village of Las Lunas and and
Sandoval County and you ask why
Sandoval County is for Sandoval
County, they're, I'm sure
they're um infrastructure piece
they've asked for is a sale
dean. Well, when we started
talking about Base de Van
andrisco and ours at the county
his focus is on a Trisco Vista,
but you need to have the
business case to be able to
deploy that infrastructure
dollars for that expansion
piece. So it's like, how do we
actually get the businesses and
the private capital to be able
to then just
ify the infrastructure needs
that are there, so if you fill
up this kind of gap that's
between the two roads with
actual businesses and
opportunities, then we can
justify that infrastructure
component, um, and also a big
thing is because that is going
to be very expensive
infrastructure is how do we get
our federal partners who have
the deeper pockets and the
private sector to push in for
that as well, so that's where a
lot of it's born between the two
counties is how do we work
together to.
Fill the gap to actually make um
the business case ripe to be
able to justify the
infrastructure spend.
Thank you, Madam Chair. There
are some, um, and I'm sure
you're aware, there are some
newer regulations that are
trying to streamline some of
these access, if you will, um,
uh, infrastructure to access uh
issues that we're having, uh,
just, just to throw it out
there, but this is a hard job
and I, I think as as legislators
we need to like really kind of
focus in on what we're doing
with our infrastructure and our
projects through our state. This
is a kind of an essential piece
to the whole structure of how we
are moving into.
Cleaner energy and energy
structures and infrastructure,
Madam Chair, thank you for the
time.
Thank you, Senator Maestas.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Mrs.
Tobias, Mr. Gonzalez, thank you
very much. I just wanna thank
you in particular Mr. Gonzalez
for what you do for the county.
I really enjoy working with the
county staff, um, to to to move
up to move to Mexico forward and
so anyway, thank you for all you
do the um.
You know, to build our economy,
Madam Chair, we just got, we got
to seek our comparative
advantage, you know what I mean,
comparative advantage. What do
we do better than others and
just do more of it.
A clear comparative advantage is
this supply chain, this
proximity geographically, uh,
you know, we're in the middle,
uh, in terms of rail, we're in
the middle of Los Angeles,
Kansas City, and now in terms
of, you know, interstate
highways were on.
Uh, the most, you know,
economically prolific highway,
so the the I I-40 goes all the
way to uh the East Coast in
North Carolina, right?
So you can't, uh, you can't take
rail from Los Angeles to the
East Coast without going through
New Mexico and and uh.
And obviously you could take
You could drive trucks around
New Mexico, but the most
efficient way to get to the
south and then maybe went up to
the east coast is is through
I-40. So, uh, so we definitely
have to take advantage of this
situation, the, um, in terms of
rail, Madam Chair, the
Kind of the big eye, so to
speak, of rail is down in Belen,
so it's not in Berlio County. We
don't have a uh uh a rail
transload facility in Burnlio
County where where trains,
trucks and planes meet each
other. There's an entrepreneur,
uh,
In Berne County, uh, working on
that, on that, on a transload
facility on a smaller scale, but
then you see in Kansas City or
Chicago, but essentially you
build a uh a rail line parallel
to the track, kind of like a
shoulder on a highway where, uh,
you know, quarter mile or half
mile train can literally get off
on the shoulder and you could
take the.
You know, take the train, um,
boxes, so to speak, and put them
on on on semi trucks and drive
them away or vice versa.
And then as you know, madam
chair, there's a a second
airport in Albuquerque, Double
Eagle 2, which is behind the
Petroglyph National Monument
kind of close to Rio Rancho, uh.
The,
so let's just talk a little bit
about that. The, the $15 million
and I'm sure Mr. Gonzalez is
that simply to kind of plan and
design, or is that like, is it,
is that kind of infrastructure
in the ground.
Uh, madam chair and Senator Ama
asked us a couple of elements
just to um.
To share some information on the
railers with um in the, in the
Los Lunas area, the reason why
they're partners as well is that
Berlio County a number of years
ago actually um did a um local
economic development Act, a
grant with the village where we
provided money to develop the
switch for the rail yard there
in in in um a lostness,
so that was $150,000 that we put
into infrastructure outside of
our own county to be able to.
About that knowing that we don't
have the space here in Bernanlio
County for a rail yard of that
size, but knowing that that
would provide um eventual
future, um, a group employment
opportunities for folks that do
live in Bernallio County. They
can be in the adjacent county
and and benefit um job creators
here with that a logistics
opportunity, um, on the
secondary piece, the planning
money.
About, um, uh, they'll be used
to do exactly what you're saying
Senator Maus does of doing plans
and getting designs up to a
certain point on infrastructure
components, um, at the various
sites and then uh we'll be
seeking additional money to
actually take them further until
we can actually implement that
infrastructure, but it is to
develop the plans and designs
and the engineering work that's
gonna be required for those
sites to be functional. Thank
you so much, Madam Chair, Mr.
Gonzalez, and then, um.
And then on page 9,
It says trade port Albuquerque
66,000 acres of those 6000 acres
been identified?
Um, Madam Chair and Senator
Maes, we are looking at the uh
Trisco Vista area and it would
be near the Amazon site is where
we're looking at, but we're in
final negotiations with the
initial acreage, uh, with the
and.
I'd be landowner and then as the
project is developed additional
land would be taken down as the
plan and for private partners to
take down their own land but be
part of the complex area.
Awesome, thank you so much,
Madam Chair, Mr. Gonzalez, and
then, um.
And then with regards to the
asks on page 12.
Uh,
could you elaborate on the on
the power up Bill. What, what
policy initiative is that?
Does that entail?
A Ma chair and Senator my, so
the power up New Mexico bill is
a bill that we've been uh
talking with the um.
The the um.
And our a DC group and and PNM
and some other utility pieces
that allows the utilities to
actually invest into uh at the
crux of it allows them to invest
in infrastructure that doesn't
have a user identified yet,
which kind of gets to that site
a readiness component of not
having to wait for a user to
actually be identified and
committed to a site, so we can
actually develop a lot of the
infrastructure components that
we need to make uh sites that,
um, companies.
but can't wait the uh time
period that it may take for a
P&M or another utility provider
to be able to um.
Actually deliver that
infrastructure. Thank you, Madam
Chair, Ms. Gonzalez. That's a
great point because we, um, you
know, because we've lived in
this world of scarce resources
and, and we don't.
You know, we don't tax, frankly,
um.
Um
We, um,
We, it's like a pay as you go,
right? It's like, well, if you
want this infrastructure private
sector, then you pay for it and
then you build it that that's
just not the way economies grow,
you know, but now that we're no
longer in a world of scarce
resources, we can invest in
infrastructure which will then
spur private investment and
economic growth. The, um, in
particular, uh along South
Broadway, the county was
instrumental in uh.
I think I mentioned it yesterday
kind of really quickly, but
essentially the South Broadway
corridor to I-25, uh, I-25 kind
of does an S turn on the on the
um driving towards Isleta Pueblo
and then Los Lunas because of
that infrastructure buildup on
South Broadway and and now heavy
trucks can travel on it without,
you know, jacking up the roads,
so to speak, they, um.
There's a a
A truck stop there that's just
booming, booming, and I
anticipate more, more things
being built along that corter.
I-40 has 10 times the economic
potential, uh, on the west side
of Albuquerque, going out, you
have the old uh Route 66
Central, which kind of parallels
in a way I40, but the land is
very, uh.
The topography of the land is
actually way better than where
cottonwood Mall is in Rio Rancho
is, but it just didn't develop
historically because it was red
line. It was just straight up
red line. So it's like, why
didn't Albuquerque grow along
the I-40 corridor, you know, it
was red line, all that land was
and so now we can have an
opportunity to grow along that
corridor, utilize double Eagle
2, utilize the land that you
referenced um on a Trisco Vista
Boulevard because if we build
out on the west side, I know
people kind of panic out, but in
my opinion it's the only way to
maintain the cultural integrity
of the North Valley and maintain
the agricultural integrity of
the South Valley, because if we
don't grow west.
We're going to grow along the
valley. So anyway, just
appreciate what you all do look
forward to the to the plans and
the bills and, and look forward
to support them in in January.
Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, Representative
Alcon.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
You know, I live
About an hour and 15 minutes
from Albuquerque, an hour from
Gallup.
Little place called uh Grant
Milan.
How come there's nothing
considered there. You look at
the property prices.
It's maybe half of what you'd be
on the west side at the other
senator was talking about. I
mean we got plenty of room.
Uh, why is it bypassed by
everybody? Why does everybody
that say there's like 600 acres
here that we go maybe 6000 acres
of land that we can use out
here, even if it is mount by we
can build on top of the mount
by.
So what's your story there? Why
is the, well, why does the
bypass? I mean, why the neglect
for that community.
Madam Chair, Representative
Alconn, um.
That's we are working with the
McKinley County area on their
project as well, which is uh
building out um a little bit of
a similar of a Treveport
project, but they also want to
do a lot of autonomous uh truck
testing and items like that and
taking down a lot of acreage
within the McKinley County area
as well, and we are working with
them to help support their
project as they're trying to
help us support our projects, so
we are working in parallel paths
and uh working together.
for finding opportunities, so
they're not may not be part of
um this project specifically as
a named, we are still working
with them to be able to um help
them develop, um, the project
that that they see the best for
the community as well, and we
are working in in tandem on
that.
So, but so, Madam Chair, what
you're telling me honestly is
that you have not looked at
Cibola County at all.
Madam Chair and Representative
Al Kahn, uh, in this, uh, on the
bigger.
Horizon piece we haven't worked
within Sibala County, but as we
look in different opportunities
and are narrowing down, um,
different break points in the
projects we plan to work with uh
the other communities in New
Mexico as well, but from the big
logistical point piece, um,
we've stationed these uh initial
pearl strings out, but then
we'll come back to look at how
we can work within other
communities in New Mexico as
well.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. uh, Representative
Matthews.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you presenters, um.
I'm, I'm looking at page 11 of
of your handout and I'm sorry
Mr. Gonzalez, I occasionally
I've had a little trouble
hearing you, so if I ask a
question that you've already
answered.
Wasn't that I wasn't listening.
I just sometimes didn't pick up
all that you said.
Um, I'm, I'm curious about.
I mean, it's an interesting idea
and I understand why we would
want to do this.
I'm, but I'm interested in the
structure of it in terms of who
owns it.
Who runs it.
Who manages it.
And it, you're talking about a
public-private partnership.
Um,
How would all, are there any
thoughts at this point as to
is it would you expect the state
to provide the money to put this
together with federal money, uh,
are, is there gonna be private
money? Can you kind of fill in
some of the, and I realize you
don't have all the holes filled.
But, uh, kind of what you're
thinking is.
Madam Chair and representative
Matthews from a governance
standpoint, uh, the communities
that are part of the Treport
Corridor project. They've
already signed uh a uh MOU on a
cooperative agreement for best
practices and how to um um
operate from the actual
operation of the specific hubs,
there will be uh a entity, so
like in the trade board
Albuquerque you'll be a private
entity that would operate the
actual truck mobility complex
itself.
Uh, for the infrastructure on
the public infrastructure pieces
we are looking to, um, from our
federal and then from our state
partners to help fund some of
those public infrastructure
pieces and we would also be in
the very specific, um.
Location pieces be asking for
private partners to fund those
infrastructure pieces as well,
so that is, um, I guess in all
of the above from in the terms
of being able to fund the
infrastructure elements that
once we get planned out about
what we need and how much it's
gonna be costing about how we
actually put together the
capital stack of being able to
afford the infrastructure.
Madam Chair, uh, Mr. Gonzalez,
thank you. Who, who are the
parties to the MOU at this
point?
Madam Chair, and Representative
Matthews, uh, they would be with
uh a Berlio County, the city of
Kingman, Arizona, and the city
of of Winslow.
And uh Sandoval County and the
village of Los Lunas.
And um.
Madam Chair, Mr. Gonzalez, are
there at this point any private
Partners who have signed up.
Madam Chair and Representative
Matthews, the private partners
that signed up is uh global
logistics Development Partners,
which is our private partners
that are working with the
private sector to, um, attract
private capital to the project
specifically.
It's not that important.
Um
Madam Chair,
Mr. Gonzales, who, who, uh,
Who's on the board of Global?
What, what?
Is that in New Mexico company or
is it from some other, some
other state, Madam Chair
Represent Matthews, GLD Partners
is out of uh Phoenix, Arizona,
um, but we also have, um, the
Caroline devices reminded me we
actually have some private
partners with our clean energy
fuels, uh, grant opportunity as
match funding, so private
partners came and provided the
match funding for that a grand
piece.
You wanna speak to the amount,
Carolyn.
And uh.
Madam Chair,
Are those
And
Can you share who those private
partners are?
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative Matthews, um, I
don't have the, the names of
those private partners, um, for
that particular grant, it's, it
was just submitted recently. The
clean fuel infrastructure, um,
corridor grant. So, um, but.
As um Marcus mentioned, the
The intent of the coalition of
partners is that there will be
no public public dollars used
for operation or ongoing
maintenance or anything like
that. What we're, what we're
doing as the public entities is
providing the seed and the
infrastructure in order to
activate that private
investment. So the private
investment coming to the table
around each of these investment
hubs will be
responsible for, you know.
Purchasing land, you know,
putting in their own, um,
development and, and funding it
ongoing funding the system
ongoing.
Ma'am chair and thank you for
that, um, so if I'm
understanding this correctly,
the state is not gonna be
building the warehouses and so
forth that this is.
That the state's going to
provide some seed funding and
then.
A lot of the actual development
will be done by private partners
am I understanding correctly?
I thought it was on. Madam Chair
and Representative Matthews,
you're correct. So the public
money for only public
infrastructure components with
actual like warehousing
buildings and manufacturing
buildings and um any of that
private sector piece will be
done by private partners. The
state will not be paying for
that.
Um, and Madam Chair, uh, just a
couple more questions, um,
getting off of the structure for
a second, um.
There was some discussion a
year, maybe a couple of years
ago about these kind of
facilities and the use of
driverless trucks.
Has that been on the table? Has
that been discussed?
Or is that happening anywhere,
Madam Chair, representative, I'm
Matthews, um, that's part of the
uh other great opportunity with
our partners at the UC Berkeley
Path program, um, to be doing
some of the autonomous testing,
not specifically on the roads,
but maybe contained within the
warehouse, a districts of trucks
that are taking goods between
the different uh warehousing and
a logistics points and then also
the different, um, a
manufacturing.
and pieces as well, um, but it
is a component that in the
trucking industry is being
looked at heavily and how do we
once again they get prepared for
that eventual shift in how our
goods are shipped, not only how
they the shipments fueled, but
then how it's actually
delivered.
Thank you. And Madam Chair, I,
is there a piece of property
already picked out in
Albuquerque or in Berlio County
for this project?
Madam Chair and Representative
Matthews, we are looking again
in that Trisco Vista corridor
piece, and we haven't finalized
the um negotiations with the
property owner yet, but we're,
uh, close to it.
Madam Chair, uh, Mr. Gonzalez
is, can you identify where that
piece of property is, Madam
Chair Representative Matthews,
it would be close to the Amazon
facility. I'm close to the
Amazon facility on a Trisco
Vista and NI-40. OK. All right.
Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, Representative
Brego.
Uh
Yeah.
Can you hear me now?
Um,
I just got a job with Verizon.
Is that right? Verizon, can you
hear me now?
Um,
Marco, thank you for your
presentation. It's uh, it's
really a game changer the way
that I see this, um, and Madam
Chair, I just wanted to point
out that Barbara Baca is in the
audience, the chair of the
Bernelio County Commission and
Barbara and I almost retired
together, so we've known each
other a long time. I just wanted
to acknowledge that.
Um, so
In looking at your map, Marco,
um.
And this is kind of related to
what uh Senator Maestass was
asking.
Does each of these cities that
you identified, I guess there's
You know, you had a page here
that had all the different
cities, uh, page 3.
Does each one of them have a
port then is that kind of the,
the thought process behind this
that they would each have a port
that's.
Um, related to their airports
and also related to the rail and
and I think Senator Maestas
pointed out he took my, my um my
um.
But I was noticing that
Albuquerque is not on a rail.
I mean, our rail line is not.
That close, I guess, Madam Chair
and Alborego,
um, so for each of the element
pieces, um, they provide
different, um, hot points so
with like came in and had some
proximity to the Las Vegas
market and then with the
flagstaff market as well with
their um industrial park, um,
component as well and um they
provide different, um, hot
points so with like came in and
had some proximity to the Las
Vegas market and then with the
flagstaff market as well with
their um industrial park, um,
component as well and um they're
wanting to be able to uh provide
more economic development
opportunities.
There, but in the Albuquerque
market, um, our rail component
is in the um working with a
village of Las Luna and the uh
central New Mexico, a rail park
area cause correct we don't have
the space for a rail, uh, yard
the size that is needed to bring
in a unit train and then also
because of the way that the rail
runner runs into Albuquerque as
well for.
Prevents a lot of, uh, um.
Of the rail traffic from coming
in during certain times.
Of the day as well, so that's
why we're working with, uh,
folks down in the southern in
the um.
And the next county over to be
able to do other rail
components. And the point of
those hubs, I guess, is to store
goods if if need be, right? Is
that the point of that? Madam
Chair, correct to store goods at
those pieces, but then also have
different um logistics or a
manufacturing operations as well
that um are wanting to uh that
are would add different um a
value points, so the idea is to
be able to create.
Different value points along
the, uh, corridor shed and then.
Also being there for different
filling points as well with the
renewable energy and the
charging. OK, so there's really
two pieces to that, um, and, um,
I just wondered, um, Marco, if
you were.
So the, the area that you talked
about Pelan and Trisco Vista on
the west side is that within the
enterprise zone?
Are are those areas within the
enterprise zone because the
enterprise zone where we
established it in the 90s was
um.
Uh, right off of the freeway and
you know, I-40 and um I think at
that time it was a Trisco Vista.
So I'm just wondering if that.
If that zone.
You know, have you guys looked
at that because there, there is
an existing enterprise zone in
there. Madam Chair, I have to
just confirm the census tracks
if we're in that enterprise
zone, um, it is in the op
opportunity zone that's
designated for that area of the
county. OK, I just wanted to
bring that up to you because
that was established a long time
ago and people probably have
forgotten about it, but I think
it's important. The other thing
that I wanted to mention to you
was, um,
When I was a city councilor, I
created an economic development
study and funded it and
completed it for the double
Eagle Airport. So I would just
want you to take a look at that.
We didn't think about this.
When we were doing that economic
development study, but I think
it's really important that that
study could be possibly amended
and includes some of this for
that particular airport cause I
heard um represented, I mean,
uh.
What you're a representative or
a senator now, uh,
representative Maestas, Senator
Maestas, um, so I heard his, his
mention because part of that
whole planning for that area
includes Paseo del Norte and
then arisco Vista and those
connections and those are really
important and
And especially as Rio Rancho
develops, um, that connection
from User, um, you know, to that
whole, that whole.
transportation connection, um,
so I just wanted to mention
those things, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Thank you. Uh, Senator Munoz,
and if you would, uh, start off
with an introduction since you
weren't here yesterday, uh,
before you, uh, ask your
question.
I'm George Minos. I represent
Sabola McKinley in San Juan
County from Senate District 4.
So thank you for having us.
You've got some pretty strong
coffee this morning. I-40 is a
mess, uh, it's like truth or
dare out there this morning
because I was right passing the
semi during '67 and he swerved
into my lane and then here it
goes. So uh I, I'm really in my
vehicle is self-driving. It's a
pickup truck and and so you
gotta watch it, but I, I'm, I'm
ready for autonomous cinemas
because then they can just stay
in the lane.
There'll be no driver error.
There'll be no, the power was
knocked out the other day
because the guy went off a
ramping I-40 and knocked the
power out in the side of Gallop
and so I'm kind of ready for
autonomous vehicles to stabilize
that. How many of these trade
corridors are the feds gonna
approve at the end of the day?
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator Munoz,
uh, currently for this type of
regional infrastructure
accelerator program piece
there's only 2 in the Build
America bureaus, um, portfolio,
uh, us and and I and the um I 10
1 that goes uh across the
different states and then the
trade port, uh, California,
which is just for the California
market.
And and but at the end of the
day, how many are the, are the
feds going to approve across the
US?
Um.
Madam Chair, and Senator Munoz,
um, that we can ask the USDOT
that and get back to you with
that question, but so far, uh,
New Mexico is the only one
that's proposed to that goes
across the different states and
then the one in California, so
there has been, hasn't been any
other um projects of similar
piece that um they opposed to
the bill America Bureau in the
same fashion and, and then just
representative Herrera, you
asked about Gallup, Gallup has
listed its Gallup Land Partners
is listed on the the.
So Gallop is there.
Um,
So when they, when they do
these, what, what are their
basis that they're looking for?
Are they looking for population?
Are they looking, what are the
three points that they're
looking for in these trade
corridors so that they approve
them in the right place and,
and, and there's, I don't know
how many across the state that
are doing it now, right? Uh,
Meck and buyer has one in Los
Lunas that he's pushing. There's
one in the South Valley of
Albuquerque. You guys are gonna
push the.
Northeast or what is that
Northwest side of Albuquerque.
So, so how many are they really
gonna approve when they get to
that and what is the population
that they need for approval?
Madam Chair, and Senator Monos,
so the, the different components
with those, uh, with the like
the.
I can buy piece and the other
components are, um, those are
all assets that actually help
this this type of.
Of a project and then working
with the Gala piece and then we
got the money for the two can
carry piece that would help the
the piece. So I think the more
infrastructure that the state
has to be able to actually
facilitate that type of trade
and logistics points would only
help the state, um, but the, um.
The numbers isn't yet defined on
what the um USDOT is actually
gonna be be funding, but I think
the elements that they're really
looking at for projects to fund
specifically, especially going
forward is our projects serving
multiple states and do they have
a clean energy component which
is now, which is what this piece
has the um piece in uh.
Donana County and the Igala
Partners project as well, all
are related to clean energy and
servicing across the um.
A different states piece and
that's really been we've heard
from not only USD's USDOT's
piece, but also the mandate from
from Congress of the USDOT that
they're funding projects that
are having more bang for the
bucks, so to speak.
And and is there any fueling
companies currently partnered
with you in this consortium
because if you look across,
right, you look I 90s or big
truck stops are building.
Maverick is on this massive
expansion, right? When those
companies want to convert,
whether it's whatever fuel
source, electric, right? They're
gonna be the first ones in the
market and, and I don't see him
pushing that direction. They're
doing mass expansions for the
same thing fossil fuels, and so
are any fueling companies in the
Partnership in the consortium.
Madam Chair and Senator Munoz,
so the filling companies aren't
exactly part of this consortium
yet, but when we were looking at
other grant opportunities they
were looking at partnering with
us to being able to actually
have the hydrogen fueling and
adapting their existing stations
to being ready for the hydrogen
piece and we see that that they
are have plans are being, being
ready to not only, um, have the
answer to both of having the
fossil fuel piece but then
having the renewable energy
piece.
So that they're ready for when
that does come online.
I just think hydrogen is just so
many years out. I mean, probably
I probably won't be here live
when they start running.
More than 1000 trucks on
hydrogen.
Just because the how do you get
it from point A to point B, it's
so volatile and explosive and.
And the infrastructure is not
quite there yet, um.
Talk about the electrification
because we are looking at a
bunch of electrification stuff.
I am going in front of the PRC
tomorrow to talk about
electrification and substations
and power throughout New Mexico
and how we.
harden the grid and expand the
grid, and that's the first piece
that needs to happen in order
for this to flow. Where are you
at with, with getting
More electrification. I mean if
you were to place one of these
in Albuquerque and you had.
200 electric semis pull in, what
is your kilowatts an hour
needed? Do you know all that,
or, or?
Or how we're looking at the
electrification stuff.
Madam Chair, and Senator Munoz,
the,
um, that's a that's a great
question all of our um grant
applications with regard to
clean energy infrastructure and
fueling does have the research
based on um specifically like
long haul trucking and regional
electrification for trucks, and
it is the partners are on the
fleet on the fleet side in the
actual.
Components that are building the
trucks, so it's very much in
line with the where the
technology is today.
There is
There does exist EV charging for
regional trucks is something
like 750 megawatts in order to
fuel, so someone's not sitting
there all day waiting for a
charge, you know, trucks need to
kind of charge up and then be on
their way. There is technology
currently right now and some of
the partners we're in
conversation with are in the
leadership of that technology.
Um
with regard to EVs.
Specifically for trucks, but you
are correct. It's a different
conversation than for
residential, for just charging
cars and so our focus on
infrastructure has been to serve
the trucking, regional and
long-haul specifically.
So I don't know if this exists
or not, but do we know, and this
is all going to be based on the
distance of a charge, right?
So I mean if a truck enters
Arizona and it's pretty flat to
Kingman.
And then you're coming up to
Flagstaff, right? So what are
the charges distance between
trucks that they're gonna need?
Do we know that? Is it 3 hours?
I mean.
It like if a truck leaves Gallop
and it's 2 hours to Albuquerque
and you have all the hills and
curves and everything else, how
much charge do they, are they
planning for to build that
infrastructure throughout. I
mean, are you gonna need one of
these, what's 2 hours? Santa
Rosa's 2 hours from Albuquerque.
Are you gonna need another one
in Amarillo or do we know that?
Because I mean, this is about
clean fuel and sustainability.
So do we know those numbers,
where are they going to place
them correctly, I mean.
If you leave Winslow to to
Gallup is an hour and a half,
right?
And then another 2 hours to
Albuquerque G 45 minutes, 2
hours.
So I mean, how are we spacing
those logistic ports because
then to go to Representative Al
Cohn's you know I mean if they
place one in Winslow, then
Grant's is 3 hours away, right?
And if they place one in grants,
then the next point is 3 hours
away. How how is that charging
gonna come along because that's
what, that's what we're talking
about, right?
Logistically charging vehicles
and fueling vehicles and.
There's not going to be a lot of
offloading or unloading in New
Mexico because we have no
population.
You have to have a population
base or be manufacturing
something to to unload or
offload.
Um, I think Santa Teresa would
be more of a priority cause
they're in a mass expansion and
these and I don't know why
they're not in the well this is
I-40 not I-10 corridor, but I
mean.
How are we looking at those
numbers to offload and unload, I
mean, if you look, there's one
in Flagstaff that's not listed
here, right?
That's the old Purina dog chow
that they offload and unload to
to transport down to Phoenix.
And
So have we looked at any of
those numbers or is that part of
this study or?
Madam Chair, Senator O'Neills,
we do have some of those numbers
unfortunately we don't have them
with us, but we can follow up
with you on those elements and
those different break points
that we have and for um this
project specifically what we've
been pushing for is on the uh
the electrification being for
the short haul, uh, trucking
piece, and then envisioning
working with hydrogen and the,
the long haul trucking piece,
and so that's where we're um
still working with both
elements.
pieces to happen, but we can
give you those numbers. I think
those are important to look at
it, especially, I mean, we're,
we're taking a clean energy and
high efficiency, so.
They loaded Santa Teresa, can
they make it to Albuquerque or
do they need to charge between
there.
I mean, those are things that as
a corridor you look at, I mean,
Gallup sure they want an
international airport, but I
mean I'm a pilot, we can't even
get our AWOS working to tell us
the winds or the weather coming
in, right?
And and then we're gonna have
someone the commuter flights are
actually kind of like charter
flags, they're listed that way
and then you're gonna go through
customs and I forget what the
where you gotta go through and
take your shoes shoes off and
the correct name is uh.
Sure, it's great to have these
things, but how are we going to
really make them work? I mean,
and is the open market gonna
beat us to that?
is
Loves is Maverick is them, are
they all just gonna make this
acquisition of new land or start
removing pumps and start putting
electric charging stations in.
In this corridor to beat them to
the market.
That that's a big question for
me is how is a free market gonna
react to this.
Ah
Madam Chair and Senator McNeill,
so with that question of the
free market is they do want to
see some of these initial public
infrastructure investments
happening first before they do
the um adaptation uh to the
renewable energy.
and so it's kind of like cart
and the horse team, but which
one came first for for those
components, but we are have been
in discussion with those
different um.
Not like the trucking and uh
companies, but then also the
feeling pieces that um.
You want to see how we can
coordinate the best.
best way and so, but like in
Albuquerque and you take the one
down south in Los Lunas, right?
And the one in the South Valley
that represents Senator Maestas.
I think that's his district and
then you take, you want to
create a new one. How many are
really gonna survive in that
metrics, right?
Of these offload trade
corridors.
Rail facilities, how many of
those really survive or how many
really win?
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator
Moyos, I think that there's uh.
Since we currently don't have
that many at all, but now in the
state that I think there's an
opportunity for them to grow and
help, uh, and the idea is not
only just to offload and unload,
but then being able to then
further attract a different
manufacturing pieces or even
further logistics pieces to
actually but then fueling the
offloading and unloading, so
we're not just in the onload and
offload game per se, but then
how do we actually make stuff as
well in the manufacturing piece
and being able to attract more
manufacturers to actually be.
I'm making items as well.
And then
Uh, I mean, on your, on your
real ask you're asking for, I
mean, are you asking for $15
million for these on on page 12
I see or ask, right?
Mexico trades I-10 not I-40.
Madam Chair and Senator Marios
on the actual infrastructure ask
we are still as a consortium
needing to um get together still
I'm actually further develop
that ask and I'll be a follow up
item. We just wanted you to be
aware that we were going to be
putting an ask together.
Yeah, and, and, and we in the
secretaries here.
And, and we've been talking
about electrification throughout
New Mexico what's that gonna
look like, right?
And and it's looking to us like
the state's gonna have to invest
the the major portion of the
money cause.
The, the utility companies are
not willing to to risk.
The amount of money to preplan
for something that may come.
Right, and so.
When you're looking at this,
it's gonna be interesting and
I'd like to see a number from
you guys like I need.
A substation that does. I'm, I'm
not that adept in that.
High voltage of electricity, you
know.
100 megawatts, 100 kilowatts. I
don't know what the number is,
right? What is that gonna look
like when you start, say you're
gonna put it out by double
eagle. What's the
electricrification means that
you're gonna need in that area,
and I like to use Mesa Del Sol
because it's short on water,
it's short on sewer, it's short
on power, right? And, and, and
we know that electricity is, is
really hampering economic growth
in New Mexico.
And how do we electrify those
areas and how does the state
say, OK, we're gonna build it.
And, and this ties into
community solar too because we
have a problem where commuting
consular cannot tie into
substations and get sent the
power down the grid and so how
are we gonna set those
substations.
And they could be small ones,
they could be large ones that
could have a large one in in Las
Cruces and the community solar
ties into the grid and and sends
more power, but what are those
gonna look like, especially if
there isn't I.
I I'd like to see what their
electrification needs, but
that's gonna be planning that
we're gonna need to know now
because we're starting to head
to the session to build that
cost.
what you think you need in
there, cuz if you say I forget
what the kilowatt substation
that that we talked about in
Mesa del Sol, but it's $120
million.
Right, and they're not just
laying on the shelf, they have
to build them.
So are we going to need another
one for over there?
It is that a piece of your
puzzle that needs to be.
Put in there, so we, so we, when
we build this that we're
building it.
Where it needs to be built in
the first place and then I think
the key thing is how do you tie
a community solar into that.
And sell those company
subscriptions to power.
Because it's a scription-based
power base, and so how do you,
how do you build that
substation? How do you tie that
in? and then how do you resell
the power to the companies and,
and, and where does that come
from? I mean, that's those are
key pieces, I think that.
You need to have.
Madam Chair, and Senator Moos,
and one element that we can
provide you some more follow-up
information that we're looking
at specifically with this and
knowing the electrification
challenges that our community
has is looking at doing a micro
grid project and having this be
self contained grid of its own,
uh, for the not only the
operational pieces, but then the
charging pieces and those
components, and we can send you
some more information about how
that would work.
Well, and, and I caution you on
the.
I like the microgid theory that
you're talking about because
that ties into everything, so
that's, that's very interesting,
but you gotta figure out what
we're gonna need here and so
madam Chair, thank you for the
time. Uh, or, uh, our, our uh
microphone operator is missing
lemon bars.
When he works for us in in LLC,
he always requests lemon bar so
we make sure we have them at the
committee meeting.
Otherwise, the mics kinda go
dead and they don't work and
senators, sometimes it's good
when they go dead, so
I'll quit talking then, thanks.
Thank you.
um Representative Lundstrom, and
if you would start with an
introduction before your
question, please. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and I apologize for
being late. This is a very
spread out campus and I've got a
bird's eye view of this campus,
so I apologize for being late.
My name is Patty Landstrom
Represent House District 9,
that's Gallup in McKinley
County, and I sure appreciate
being here today, uh, Madam
Chair, I just like to make a
couple comments about the
presentation today. I want to
thank the presenters for being
here and it is our project
that's listed in there with them
and just, just for clarification
for the committee.
Uh, the three trade ports, we,
we, we need to be careful to
call them trade ports and not
inland ports. Inland ports have
a federal designation to them.
And in that there's lots of
significant influence by the
feds if it's referred to as an
inland port was hence trade
ports.
Trade port is uh obviously gonna
be based on the value
proposition. So each one of them
is different and they each have
a different value proposition
and from that we would have our
targets identified of who uses
it.
So the value proposition for the
project I'm most familiar with
is very different than what
Albuquerque's would be or what
Donana County is, so the three
trade ports made a presentation
at the State Economic
Development Conference a couple
weeks ago. Um, and I think
they're all great and you will
see some legislation coming
forward that identifies.
These trade ports not by um this
location necessarily, but what
they have to offer in terms of
value. So we'll structure the
bill in a way that, um, probably
like a grant process if an area.
It's designated as a trade port
meets this these uh various
categories and can demonstrate
that these are the markets that
we would tap. I think it's worth
funding.
Um, New Mexico is in a perfect
position. We've always been seen
as a bridge state. This is an
opportunity now that we're not
just a place where people travel
through.
And from these trade ports
there's a multiplier of 3.5 3.5
times. So if the state of New
Mexico, as long as, as well as
the federal grant that this
particular trade port received
say puts in 50 million, multiply
that by 3.5.
And that's what the impact would
be in terms of an economic
scale. So I think what we'll do
is um we're not ready for it yet
as as was indicated earlier, but
the three counties are working
together. Donana, uh, Berna Leo,
and McKinley County. We've been
working on what this bill ought
to look like and try to hammer
out what those components of a
value proposition should be, so
it's not limiting just to the 3
if if there's other places in
the state that are interested,
they could also look.
At this carefully, but you
really need to have an
interstate and you need to have
rail. I mean, at the end of the
day, and all three of these
locations do so with that, Madam
Chair, I want to thank the
presenters for being here today,
know that we're on it and we
think this would be a beautiful
bill for this committee to look
at. Thank you.
Thank you and uh just as a
reminder, uh, next month we will
be doing bill endorsements and
so you might wanna get on the
schedule for that if it is
ready, so thank you uh thank you
for your presentation today. I
think it was very informative
and um I think the committee got
a lot out of it. So I appreciate
you all being here today.
Thank you. Thank you members.
we could get our next presenters
to come up.
We are almost, uh, we are
staying on almost on time, so I
appreciate that the committee
is, uh, doing well today.
Secretary Black.
Nice to have you today. Thank
you for
For attending and uh we look
forward to hearing your
presentation if you want to
introduce your team and then
just dive into the presentation.
Thank you Madam Chair. Uh, it's
a pleasure to be here. Thank you
for the invitation. Um, my name
is Rob Black. I'm the secretary
designee for the Economic
development department, uh, with
me today, I've got two of my
team members, uh, one, a
grizzled veteran, uh, that many
all of you know, uh, and Mark
Roper who's served very well in
his uh over the last.
89 months and probably 5
different jobs all at one time
uh on behalf of the state and
the economic development
department, and I want to
acknowledge Mark's amazing
leadership, uh, over that time
and, and what he's brought to
the state and the department, so
blessed to have him here. He's
my training wheels for part of
this conversation, um.
And but I also have another
individual, our new deputy
secretary, to introduce Isaac
Romero. I'll let Isaac uh talk a
little bit about his background,
um, but we're very pleased to
have him on board to help fully
staff so Isaac if you wouldn't
mind introducing yourself. Yeah,
good morning, uh, uh, thank you,
Madam Chair and members. My name
is Isaac Romero. um, just a
brief introduction, I, um, the
new deputy secretary, so thank
you for having us today. Um,
most recently for the past 6
years or so, I
I was working in the private
sector as a commercial real
estate broker, um, helping
businesses enter leases,
negotiate, uh, purchases of
buildings, um, and helping
landlords as well. Um,
additionally, during my time
there, I served both locally at
the state level and national
level on various
industry-related organizations.
Um, and previous to that I
worked for the legislative
Finance Committee for a few
years as an analyst, um, and now
I'm back in the state government
and happy to be here.
Thank you Madam Chair, we're, I
think all of you have our
presentation, um, so I'll move
through that and I'll, uh, talk
to you about which slide or
which page we're going to, there
should be the page marked at the
bottom right, um.
We'll start off with uh the
outdoor recreation division at
EDD. I was established in 2019
to increase equitable access to
the outdoors, uh, New Mexico is
one of 24 states that is
dedicated as a dedicated
resource or office to do this
work, as you can see we
The there is a
Significant economic impact to
the state for outdoor, the
outdoor economy and the number
of jobs that are supported
through that uh part of our the
sector of our economy.
If you go on to page 3, you'll
see some of the initiatives that
we have within the office of OD
and
The the fun itself has, has
supported 72,000 young adults in
accessing outdoor programs and
activities. We have a trails and
grants program that was started
in 2020. It's awarded over $18
million in projects and uh and
those projects include things
like new trails, signage, access
ways, boat ramps, over 164
different projects. But I think
one of the things I want to
highlight as a, as I think a
unique
opportunity in.
role that it's played, um.
The fund has also helped support
wildfire restoration efforts,
uh, in areas where trails,
bridges have been burned in
recent wildfires, so it helps to
restore those those access but
also then that helps restore
access to that local economy for
those resources. What we are
starting to look at as well is
how can we better use those
trails that we're building uh as
wildfire resilience
opportunities. Are there
opportunities to
For certain trails to make them
wider so that you've got natural
fire breaks that create access
for firefighters, so I think
we're trying to think about not
only how we build in that
economic resilience post-fire,
but build wildfire resilience
prior to a fire happening.
So those are things that we're
looking at opportunities as ways
that trails and grant program
can continue to support our
rural communities.
And we've got the, the clicker
on the other side of those books
there if you want.
I don't know if you wanted to
keep up thank you very much. I
did not even see that. It snuck
down on me. I'll let Isaac help
me out. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, now, on, on to page 4,
This is uh a couple of other
programs that fall within the
ORD initiatives, our growth
accelerator program, um, it is a
free 14 week accelerator for
businesses and startups in this
sector. Um, we've had 18, we're
supporting about 18 businesses
annually, um, and then the land
of Enchantment Legacy Fund,
which is helps ensure that we're
getting uh youth outdoors and
provides for our equity funds so
that those we we're creating
access for young people in
The state
Next we'll move on to the Office
of Strategy, Science and
Technology. This is a major
focus and push by the governor
and many members of this
committee.
We're preparing for New Mexico
for these these particular types
of industries so that we can
attract higher paying technology
jobs and and be competitive in
this space.
Next page
Um,
On page 6 item 6, to do this,
there are a variety of programs
that EDD is administering
through this, this division, in
particular, uh, the advanced
energy award pilot program which
launched in 2023, um, we have 7
companies that were awarded 3.4
million in the first round of
these programs, and those
include technologies and solar,
hydrogen, water treatment,
energy storage, and methane
emissions monitoring.
Um
The other part of what we are
doing in regards to these these
the particular program is
ensuring we're not leaving
federal dollars on the table,
so, uh, this office is leaning
in to the variety of federal
programs that are supporting
these particular types of
industries and making sure that
we are engaged in a way that
we're not maximizing federal
value here in the State.
Um, next, we'll move to the
Uh, Main Street program.
Uh, Main Street is another one
of ADD's initiatives that
impacts communities statewide.
We have 32 different Main Street
districts around New Mexico 13
arts and cultural districts and
11 historic districts.
Astor theater districts, pardon
me.
On page 8,
The legislature in 20 from the
years 2020 to 2024 allocated $28
million through this program in
capital outlay for 53 different
infrastructure projects. Again,
these are really supporting our
rural communities, our rural
main streets, um, these.
Investments support everything
from improved safety to creating
a place-based destinations and
supporting our local economies.
In 2025, the legislature
allocated an additional â‚¬100
million for projects, which will
be announcing soon.
And
Bresilient Communities funds as
well. So this is an area where.
Uh
We have awarded 56 seat grants
to community projects that
enhance local vitality improve
quality of life through the Main
Street program.
And part of what is beneficial
we think relates to the
mainstream program is it helps
drive also private sector
investment. So you're leveraging
those those private those public
sector dollars to drive
expansion, expansion of
businesses and, and, and public
private sector dollars into our
our local communities. We've
seen a significant amount of new
jobs. It's close to 2400 jobs as
a benefit of this over the last
four years.
Next we'll move on to our JTIP
program, um, you know, all, all
of you are very familiar with
this. It is a long running one
of the best, most successful
workforce development programs
in the country, um, it has been,
I think, since early 70s, 1972
we've been operating JTEP and it
um.
Just since this administration
has been in place in January
2019 to today we've uh helped
support 523 projects around the
state awarded just over $65
million with an average wage of
over $24 an hour, um, these and
in 45% of those investments have
been in our rural communities,
so I think that again is very
important as we think about how
do we build resilience and
economic resilience around the
state, not just in the Rio
Grande.
Um
We're also have over 2500 of
those folks in the last 6 years
have been recent New Mexico
graduates who have benefited
from the program.
On page 11 is an example of a of
a I think a really important
case study of of JTEP and the
the power it has and this is
with Cairo's Power. Cairo's
Power is based in uh Mesa del
Sol, at least their R&D
operations here in New Mexico.
They're based through a
California company, but their
R&D work is being done here in
New Mexico and they've been here
since 2020, uh, JTIP funding,
uh, as we've supported in the 13
different times since 2020
September 24.
current employment is 133
employees and we just ordered
them
additional resources to hired an
additional 27 new employees with
the idea that um.
They're looking to build out 100
new jobs.
The other thing that I think's
really important to to recognize
about Cairos is this is an
announcement that was made on
Monday of this Cairo's Power is
a small modular reactor, nuclear
reactor technology company.
On Monday, Google announced that
they have a contract with Cairos
to provide power to their data
system data plan uh farms using
Cairo's power so it can be 100%
carbon free.
Um, and again this is a company
that is doing our R&D here in
New Mexico and showing where we
are leading in these
technologies and um if if it's
something that we can continue
to to to foster and grow, uh, it
creates a unique opportunity for
us to decarbonize and lead in
that space and provide the types
of type of power needed to drive
the electrification that the
previous panel was just talking
about.
So the next uh example of.
Similar JTI uh support is with
our Cosa wind towers in Berlin.
Um,
They're a Dallas-based company.
They have have 109 employees.
Uh, we just awarded them to hire
an additional 86 new positions.
There are major economic impact
for and Valencia County, uh,
building wind turbines.
Next, um, on, uh, we're gonna be
on item number 13.
Um, this is a map of EDD's
statewide footprint. Our network
of regional business experts
with full-time reps and Maura
Portali Roswell, Las Cruces,
Gallup, Bernalio, Albuquerque
and Santa Fe.
These technical experts have
knowledge about not just EEDs
programs, but federal grants
through the SBA as well as what
is it what is available for from
other state agencies.
Uh, like DWS, TRD, and, and,
and, and assets in their local
communities.
If you have a business need in
your communities, please reach
out to our local reps um they
can be your primary point of
contact and make sure that the
individuals that that we need to
be working with Mark and Mark
leads that team, um, that we're
providing the resources to our
local EDO partners, counties,
cities, and support and and
they're a great point of first
contact.
And this, this website is
available on the EDD website or
sorry this this page or map is
on the ED website and as part of
our published toolbox and is
available both in English and in
Spanish.
Um, now on the slide 14, our
local assistant uh economic
assistant development support
leads program, um.
We, many of you know about this
already, and these are vital
locally these support vitally
local based economic development
organizations. We take pride in
our ability to help these
partners with specific
initiatives that are important
to their communities around the
state. So you'll see here the
different lead awardees, uh,
that again help support local
economic development.
Like some page 15, uh, these
are, this is, uh,
representatives of our certified
economic development
organizations. So these are
organizations that have gone
through a process with EDD and
have become certified we had two
new certifications, uh, this
year with Roswell County
Community Development Corp and
the Albuquerque Regional
Economic Alliance.
And then on page 16.
This is our our uh food hunger
and agriculture program. This is
part this is again a primary
area of focus for the governor,
um.
You know, as we saw the impacts
of COVID and what that did to
our food infrastructure, we it
became very apparent that we
needed to build a more
resilient, uh, food chain here
in New Mexico that's locally
based and that can process uh
our agriculture products here so
we can add that value here in
our community and improve the
quality of food that's being
used in our communities,
especially in our schools and
our senior centers, so that is
part of what this program does,
um.
We've awarded $1.4 million in
awards to support these efforts,
as you can see there, there was
11 million requested so this is
a large demand for these funds,
um, but we, we do think it it is
a very important aspect of how
we can help support our rural
economic development and our
agricultural programs as well as
that net benefit with our
seniors and improving the
quality of food for our, our
schools.
And then next I will, I'd like
to talk to you a little bit
about our justice equity,
diversity and inclusion Office,
our Jedi Office, um, it is the
best acronym in government, um,
it works to ensure that.
Where there's been communities
that have had systemic barriers
or disadvantages at taking
advantage of of the broader
economy we're working to break
down those barriers and to
create incentives that help uh
empower folks to be part of the
broader economy in a meaningful
way. It was created in 2021 and
we've now uh grown that staff um
to two classified and 2 GOVX
staff um part of what the Jedi
Office is also doing is helping
support.
The work we're doing around the
economic strategy work uh for
the state and the sector based
uh efforts so that the the the
team that helps redo those
programs also fall within the
Jedi uh office.
Um,
in 2023 we launched the first
ever Mexico black and Hispanic
Business summits in New Mexico
and then also we're providing
free technical assistance to
programs regarding federal
grants for very small and
minority owned businesses to
access accounting, legal,
financial services as well as
venture capital and fund
management services. Um,
And then in 2024 we launched the
first ever Jedi grant program,
uh, which in this year in
applications are currently being
accepted for those funding for
that funding.
Again, as part of that, as I
mentioned, as part of the Jedi
program is the Just Transition
office and staff um.
We've secured $1.3 million of
value through this with
additional support from that our
that our staff has has pulled in
pro bono um we have uh two fully
funded.
fellows, one from Cornell, one
from Harvard that are supporting
these efforts and we're excited
that we have one coming from New
Mexico State as well.
Um,
Again, this is uh leveraging uh
federal funds to help us with
the development and updating of
the state's economic strategy.
As we pivot now and talk about
our are gonna pivot now and talk
about our leader program and
it's in sits.
Um, many still ask why economic
development, why do we do this
work? Why does the state need to
assist for-profit companies to
build economic-based jobs here
in the state.
One answer is that bringing
dollars from outside of New
Mexico is the best way to grow
the economy and create wealth.
There is no doubt that Intel,
Netflix, Cairo's Power, Arcosa,
those two examples I mentioned
earlier with JTip are companies
that can locate anywhere in
North America.
But they chose New Mexico and
they hire employees here and
they create wealth here.
They build long term economic
security for New Mexico
families.
But the competition for those
types of jobs is fierce and what
I'm we wanted to show with this
slide is what other states are
doing around this sector and and
the types of investments other
states are making to lure those
types of investments into their
communities.
And the leader program gives us
a tool to be competitive with
other states. We have a lot of
other fantastic assets, our
national labs, our JTIP program
on the workforce side, but we
really need that what we would
call uh referred to often JTIP
that closing fund to help us
provide that additional
incentive to lock down the sort
of uh.
Good paying jobs
An example of of of.
Growth in that in one of these
sectors is around sustainable
and green energy.
Um, this is the only, this is
one of the only target sectors
that are heavily subsidized by
the federal government to help
attract that public and private
investment.
Um, but it's an area where
combined with LA, combined with
the federal tax incentives, it
makes us much more competitive
for these for these programs
here in New Mexico and in fact
we're really punching above our
weight as in regard in regards
to our securing of federal
funds, if you look at it on a
gross domestic product or gross
state product for per
individual. We're 3rd in the
country in securing federal
dollars in this sector
to support
Growth in these industries, so I
think some of the work that our
friends and that Les doing our
office of Technology is doing
and partners with all of you
have helped have really paid off
for New Mexico in this space.
And it is that the policy
background and support that New
Mexico's led on uh regarding the
energy Transition Act and other,
other.
Aggressive goals on advanced
energy that have helped us
secure those federal dollars.
Continuing on with Lita, um.
Lea is, you know, it is an
investment of public dollars
into private companies, um, and
it's, it's specifically focused
on land, uh, buildings, and
infrastructure.
Um, it is, uh, it is an
exception to, there is an
exception for it under the New
Mexico constitution regard
regarding the anti- donation
clause so it it is specifically
targeted or it was specifically
created to allow investments
like these to make us more
competitive for for growth, um,
but we do require that these
investments have a sufficient
economic impact or return on
investment for the state when we
make those those.
Those investments and these.
Uh
The leaded grants also require
security, so we're ensuring that
the the company coming forward
has the collateral that's
equivalent at least to the grant
amount so that there there's uh
they're bringing that skin in
the game to the to the party,
uh, but I think it's also very
important, uh, with within LA is
to recognize that it is
discretionary.
Um, it is a program that you
have, they have to apply for and
that uh Mark's team reviews we
have economists on our team who
do analysis of the applications
to ensure that there is a
benefit coming back to the state
uh prior to the grant of those
programs, um.
And, and we, we also partnered
closely with our county and city
partners in the process of the
LEADE grants. Um, it's not
something we're doing on top of
our local partners, it's
something we're doing in
partnership and collaboration
with, so that it is being driven
by our local communities and
what they want in their
communities.
Um
Some leader starts, uh.
And, and
These demonstrate, I think both
the.
Rural and urban impacts of LA
and the jobs that have been
created, um, we're again we're
seeing over the last 10 years
economic impact, $43 billion of
impact overall from the
investments from LEDA. We're
seeing almost 13,000 jobs in the
state, um, these are, uh, jobs
that continue and, and with that
that investment continue to to
benefit the state.
As we build these sort of
industries. It allows for other
support industries to come in,
whether it's if you if we're.
If you're building the wind
turbines, you're gonna also need
uh electricians and plumbers and
suppliers for those wind
turbines that create additional
jobs that aren't directly at the
company, but their ancillary
within that supply chain and
that's where those large
investments help build an
ecosystem that helps to support
both our workforce and, and
continued job growth.
Uh, these are some of the, the
projects.
Uh, that have benefited from LDA
programs uh you'll see Netflix
up there I think many of you
will be touring, uh, the Netflix
facility tomorrow, so you'll get
to see some of those direct
impacts of what Lita helps bring
to the state, um, uh, tomorrow.
Um,
And again, the, the investment,
the return on investment for the
state has been significant at
367 million so uh we we think
this is a very important program
for us to continue uh to, to be
able to attract large
investments in the state and
around the state and our rural
communities.
Finally, um,
On this side we have our our
2025 budget requests that we
submitted the beginning of
September, um.
We'll go into detail on these,
but it does, we do have, you
know, some additional requests
on Lita and JTip um as well as
some of the around the media
arts collective, our outdoor
equity fund and the healthy
foods program.
Um,
Well I'm sure we'll be back
visiting with you, many of you
around those priorities later
in, in the interim, um, and then
within the session itself and
next I wanted to talk a little
bit about um where we're headed.
Um, we had the, it's and I
appreciate the opportunity,
Madam Chair, to talk about kind
of the successes and and what
the the department has done with
the support of the legislature
over the last few years, but I
think where we wanna go is, is,
is that is taking on that
mindset of continuous
improvement.
How do we continue to do better
by the citizens of the state and
in particular our communities
that have been underserved and
that looks in a as a as a kid
from Lovington, um, I understand
what it feels like to grow to to
grow up in a rural community
and, and sometimes you don't
feel like you can see the
opportunities that maybe those
in Santa Fe or Albuquerque might
perceive and so um we're really
focused on how do we build on
our success.
and we see in the conversations
we've had and frankly I'll, you
know, honestly, as many of you
know the last 6 years I was the
head of the president as
president and CEO of the New
Mexico Chamber of Commerce. So
these are issues I've been
working on uh for the last 6
years and from that seat.
And
Uh, what we've, what we hear,
what I heard at the chamber, but
also what my team has when
they've done this survey work
and the and the meetings around
the state for updating the
economic strategy are some key
issues and some of which we've
already heard tonight or today.
One of them is improving our
regulatory and data regulatory
environment and data
transparency.
We would love to be able to see
a situation where we understand
how long it takes a particular
department or division, uh,
whether that's at the local
planning department or at the
PRC, how long does it take on
average for an individual
license or permit from
application to determination.
Just published that information.
It does a lot of good things.
One of the main things it does
is it helps us in government
understand where we have
failures, where we have the
opportunity to improve. So if it
takes us.
6 months to do something that
should take us 3 days, but we
don't know it because it falls
on different people's desks.
We don't have visibility into
that and so this is this would
be a tool to help us figure out
how do we better invest, uh,
whether it's IT resources, human
resources to expedite those sort
of processes so that we can be
timely so that will be a bill
that uh the administration is
working on to bring forward and
we'll be looking for for your
guidance and support in that
effort.
Um, additionally, we want to
look at.
Site readiness as a strategy for
the state.
Uh
We as we market the state in
partnership with our local EDOs
and local governments and, and
the Mexico partnership.
Today we don't have a lot of
product to market.
We, we're, we don't have a lot
of things that we know what it
that it's easy to to be able to
get somebody to come and locate
here that can we can turn the
key in 8 to 18 months and have a
project move.
Right now it looks more like 3
to 4 to 5 years to have a
project move.
So what we wanna do is do that
site assessment, site
characterization in partnership
with our local communities and
EDOs around where opportunities
for growth, identify where those
needs are, whether that's our
environmental review, historical
review, cultural view, utility
access, how do we make that site
more site ready so when a
developer comes and says we have
something that can work in your
community and that community
says yes.
We can pull the trigger and have
something go in and not lose it
because it takes us 3 years to
get.
Utilities to the site.
So one again, site readiness, do
that analysis in partnership
with local communities.
And then building onto that, how
do we deploy utilities quicker?
I know there was a conversation
yesterday around this uh with
New Mexico idea.
And we believe very strongly
that um the ability to deploy
infrastructure quickly is going
to be essential for us to be
competitive for investment in
New Mexico so we're working on
uh draft bills around that as
well. Uh, we've been in
consultation with our investor
owned utilities with our co-ops
uh we'll be meeting with our
water and wastewater uh
utilities as well.
Try to understand what are the,
how do we solve the problem of
being able to pre-deploy capital
infrastructure.
And de-risk that capital in a
way that allows for us to be
able to be competitive with
Texas and Arizona when those
projects come forward so that we
can move quickly.
Um,
We're also working to sharpen
the focus of our economic
strategy.
I know many of you I've talked
to many of you about the, the
report that came out in 2021, a
very big report, comprehensive
report, um, it was over 400
pages, uh, we're gonna be
bringing that and try to get
that much more focused and
actionable, um, so I, I commit
to you it will be under 100
pages, if not less, um, but
again, how do we make it, uh,
how do we focus those.
That we're we're really focused
on what are our strengths and
assets and how do we take on
what are those competitive
advantages within those sectors
that allow us to really prosper
and then finally aligning those
stra that strategy with longer
term goals, you know, what do we
want to achieve as a state?
On behalf of our citizens, um.
You know, the, the mission of
the economic development
department is to improve the
lives of New Mexico's families
by increasing economic
opportunities.
And by providing a place for
businesses to thrive.
So I think it's that focus on.
Helping our families thrive
helping our businesses prosper,
um,
that we are going to be so
important for what we're doing
as a department on behalf of the
citizens, so, uh,
Where we want to go and where we
want to succeed is creating that
environment that our citizens
have that so we're providing
that level of support throughout
the state.
Um
For our businesses to grow and
for our citizens to have a
pathway to prosperity. So with
that, Madam Chair, I'll, I'll
stand for questions.
Thank you. Uh, first on our list
is Senator Hamlin.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for being here. I
appreciate you, um, and I'm
really glad to see you in the
position, Rob, um, given your
chamber perspective and
understanding, uh, that like my
colleague Debbie Moore and I um
get to work with and, and, and
on that note, um,
I'm wondering, and, and I know
that you know this is like we
need to do a better job getting
that information out to all of
our our businesses, right? And,
um, you know, it's also about
what capacity do each of us have
to get that out and, uh, you
know, I'd made this this
suggestion to another secretary
of of having a page that's just
for chambers.
Um, because then what we can do
and then with like a graphic and
I can certainly talk with you
offline, but I think it's, it's
we want to get that information
out about the different programs
and the different opportunities
that small businesses have and
as you know many of them are
busy just trying to keep their
doors open. They don't have a
chance to research and look at
what the state offers, much less
what their local municipality
offers.
And so, um, you know, I'm
wondering if there's like a a
way that we can get like a one
pager that like once a month
that we can send out to our
membership that promotes like a
program that you've got there
that's and that what we can do
and and Debbie and I have talked
about this on how we can just do
statewide resources on our
websites that would have that
information and you you I saw
that you just got handed a book,
um, you know, most of them are,
are getting e-blasts and so is
it and I
I would love to keep that book
in my office and I will be more
than happy to do that. I'm just
trying to figure out ways that
maybe we can work together to
get more information to our
businesses to share with them
the different resources that
they've got available to them.
And so if we want to be creative
and talk offline, I'm more than
happy to do that, but I just
wanted to plant that seed
because I think there are so
many programs that the
department has that many of our
small businesses don't know
about.
And, and how can we maximize
that, um, without putting a lot
on your plate without putting a
lot on our plate, like let's
make it simple.
I'm gonna get that information
out. And, and I do work with
Louise and I work with Julia,
um, and know them both
personally and so, you know,
that could be also a
conversation I can have with
them locally if Mark, if that
was where you were going. No?
OK, you got something else.
Bring it.
Uh, thank you, Madam, Madam
Chair, Senator Hamlin, the, uh,
members of the committee, I, I
think one of the places we, we
do something uh uh every other
week basis that we call resource
uh wrap up.
Uh, that, that's an email, but
it's pretty much that, you know,
here's the new things, here's
the new applications that are
out, here's the new programs
that are out. Here's the things
that are, uh, happening right
now that that could be of
interest to both uh businesses
and, and communities. So I think
that's a good suggestion to make
sure that all the chambers in
the state through the through
the uh the New Mexico State
Chamber of Commerce, get that as
part of that email blast that's
one thing we could do to to.
Prove that.
I appreciate that and I think,
you know, just creative ways and
and and I also knowing what
capacities we have, like, let's
just try and maximize that.
In Madam Chair, Senator, I think
there are some, and I, I love
that you brought this up and I
think I think we can be creative
around this and I'll I'll use an
example, uh
13 years ago, I helped created
an organization called Chambers
for Innovation and Clean Energy.
Uh, it's still, it's one of the
largest networks of local
chambers of commerce in the US
and what it does is it helps a
local chambers support energy
efficiency programs, uh,
development of solar programs,
other types of.
Um, programs that
Make it easier and cheaper for
businesses to do business but do
it in a way that helps uh
decarbonize the economy so I
think there are ways for us to
think about what are the types
of resources whether that, you
know, partnering with ED with
Department of Environment and
educating and making sure that
we're educating chambers around
what are the resources the state
provides on things like energy
efficiency because that's a huge
cost driver for any business.
Can we help them make it be more
efficient, helps reduce
improve profits. So I think
there's, I appreciate that it's
an opportunity for us to be
creative about how we better not
only our programs, but talk
about other programs throughout
the state and I, I appreciate
that and and what what uh the
deputy secretary was handing me
is our new EDD tool kit uh
toolbox, um, which does have a
list of all of the programs, how
you can access those, um, this
has just been published, I think
this month or last month, so
we'll make sure that you've got.
that resource, it's on the
website, but we also have
physical copies. That'd be great
because I'd love to be able to
give those out at our mixers and
and really be able to to to
enhance this partnership because
uh there is money there and
there are many businesses who
just don't know that it's
available and so uh I would like
to do that, so I, I look forward
to that cause that's the fun
part, as you know, it's like
coming at being creative and
coming up with ways to to help
our businesses thrive, um, you
know, just a couple of other
things. Um, I was really happy
to pass the
Healthy food financing
initiative and, and uh think uh
working with uh Kendall Chavez
and Aaron and I always mess up
her last name, but Erin does a
great job uh of really getting
that those monies, um, to our
small farmers and especially our
black and indigenous farmers and
women, um, so and so I'm
committing to you that I will
continue to to to advocate for
that in terms of funding Senator
Munoz knows I always talk about
that. I turn around and I look
at him and talk about how great
it is, um, with the, um, the
The sight readiness, I know you
know Jerry Pacheco, so he's been
really good about talking about,
I mean, when we've had people
talk about that as well, and
there is this theme it's just
like there's infrastructure that
we need to have in order to
bring the big business which you
know me, I'm, I'm more of the
the locally owned businesses,
but I understand the balance,
but it's, it's, uh, you know,
out there, it's absolutely
fantastic what Jerry has got
going and he talks about site
readiness all the time and how
he is like having a hard time
like.
Keeping buildings available
because there are people out
there, um, lastly, with the Jedi
program, um, I remember when
that first started and thought
it was awesome, um, and, and I'm
glad that it's evolving. Uh, one
thing that I would encourage,
and I'm glad that there is a
black and Hispanic business
summit. I also understand that
the LGBTQ, there's a lot of
intersectionalities there and,
um, and it may be not
necessarily targeting the summit
just for LGBTQ businesses but
also including that in because.
We are everywhere, um, and, and
it does, it does go in there
with the black and Hispanic, and
so, um, but also with those
summits, that's also something
to reach out to the chambers to,
cause I think, I mean,
especially your background, Rob,
is like, you know, we know what
we can be able to do and there
might be some really incredible
partnerships with chambers at a
statewide basis, but it's also,
are you herding cats or are you?
Having really in in in effect
and so, you know, I certainly
acknowledge that but love, would
love to be able to, to promote
that as well and so thank you
for your work. I'm excited about
what you're going to do, you
know, I've loved working with
Mark as well, um, and so, uh, we
can continue doing that, but I
appreciate um all the all the
information today. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you. Uh, Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for the presentation. Um, I
was curious to know, um, you
send that out through some of
the chambers.
Um, if, if there's an entity
that doesn't have a chamber like
in small rural New Mexico we
don't have chambers. How do they
access
That information other than the
website or how are they notified
about that?
Uh
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Armstrong, if you can clarify
what, what know about all the
great book that you have there
and your website and, and how to
access possible dollars.
Well, uh
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Representative
Armstrong, um, yeah, I mean,
yes, it's on the website and its
entirety in in a PDF form that
they can download uh there and
there's also contact
information,
um, they're of who they can
contact ask more questions uh
specifically into the regions to
the regional reps.
Um, beyond that, uh, that,
that's a valid question. I, I
don't know if you don't have a
local chamber.
Or a local economic development
organization that's a really
good question. How, how do they
get to it on the website and I
don't know that I have a a
really good answer for you other
than to say that's a really good
question. We rely on those
entities, those local entities
such as chambers and local EDOs
to disseminate the information
as well as our website so.
Uh,
I, I don't have a good answer
other than to say it's it's a
good question and it's something
we could, you know, try to
figure out how, how people can
get to.
Madam Chair, Representative and
I would welcome your
suggestions, but also I mean one
of the things that occurs to me
is the cogs that the council of
governments, um, perhaps our
county and
and municipal leagues are other
resources that we can help uh
push information through.
Um, but we welcome, you know,
your thoughts and and guidance
on that.
Uh, thank you for that. I, I was
just curious because, um, as,
uh, Mr. Roper knows, we've had
some issues with getting a
certified, uh, economic
development entity in our area.
Um, so that, that comes to my,
my next question is how are the
regional reps picked in all the
regions and um or do they, it
looks like from their email
addresses that they work for the
the economic development.
Uh, department, is that correct?
And how are they chosen?
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, representative
Armstrong, uh, we, we follow
the, the state personnel
officers hiring, uh, practices,
the, the.
Offices are posted for the
appropriate time frame we take
applications, uh, we screen the,
the resumes, the applications,
they go through an interview
process, uh, and then they are,
um, offered a position, uh, if
they accept it, then they're on
a probationary period for one
year and then uh the regional
reps are the one,
People in the department that
live and work specifically in
their region, so they're
required to live in their region
that they're representing, uh,
that change was made, uh, many
years ago.
Because when they originally had
regional representatives they
were all commuting out of Santa
Fe and, and as you know, getting
to Lovington out of Santa Fe or,
or getting to Deming out of
Santa Fe is not a, it, it just
doesn't work. So, uh, that's why
we developed the, the districts
and, and have them actually live
and work in their region, but
they are classified employees
under the office and follow the
rules of the state personnel
office.
Thank you for that. uh, hence
where the red dot is in regional
region 5.
Both from Las Cruces in my
district that go, that's a very
large district. So not saying
maybe Sadi didn't no one else
applied. Who knows, but I'm
just, um, pointing out that, you
know, it's pretty far from
Catron County, which isn't a
huge economic driver in the
state of New Mexico, but, um,
just, just to have a little bit
of an issue with that, I, I wish
they were more.
Um, you know, someone from Las
Cruces.
Not saying it's a bad thing,
but, uh, smaller areas, it'd be
really nice to have one like in.
T C, Sierra County. So, uh, just
pointing that out, the next
question that I have is I saw
um.
Uh, on your improvements here on
page 28, improve regulatory and
data transparency. Uh yesterday,
uh, Madam Chair, we had the RLD,
um,
Clay Bailey in front of us and
uh I always forget if he's a
director or I know he's not a
secretary, but anyway,
superintendent, superintendent.
And um I always talk about
removing the barriers for people
who want to open businesses in
the state of New Mexico which
would include the permitting
process, all the pro, you know,
uh like in Colorado they hand
walk you through.
Everything you need to know.
And I don't know why we don't do
that here in the state of New
Mexico, it's just like instead
of let me help you, it's more I
gotcha.
You didn't get this permit, you
didn't get that license, you
didn't do this, you didn't do
that. Why don't we, why aren't
we better.
And, and do you think that that
is an issue when it comes to
Leda.
Uh, and bringing businesses here
to the state of New Mexico.
Do you think it's an issue?
Madam Secretary Representative
Armstrong, I do think it's an
issue. I'm not sure the
connection to LEDA, but I'll
I'll start on the, on the
regulatory
piece, um, regulatory
uncertainty is uh.
I
I mean, how do I say, I want to
be careful how I say this.
Um,
Whatever incentives we can
create and provide to a
business.
is not as important as being
able to move quick and with
certainty.
If you have a, if you're a
billion dollar a year company
and we can provide you $500
million in incentives.
Delaying your process for a
year.
is a lot more expensive.
And so it's that regulatory
certainty, which is really,
really important, so that's why
we have that up at the top.
Um,
I think what, what I would also
say, and this is maybe speaking
more for my old hat than the
sitting in government now, um,
I'm in a transition.
Um, but.
The
You can't
As much as you would like as a
legislator, you can't legislate
good management.
And we can't regulate good
management.
But we can help expose when we
have a problem.
And I think and that's where the
transparency part becomes really
important.
I let's understand where we're
having challenges so that we can
make so that you can make the
types of investments needed to
help the State be quicker and
more and create that regulatory
certainty so then when someone
wants to come in and make a
large investment they feel like
that investment's gonna be
prudent and I and so I do think
that's where uh if we can
provide
the if we can create the
requirement that every twice a
year every.
entity that produces a license
or permit in the State has to
publish the average time from
application to determination.
Then we can start to see where
we've got problems.
And those managers will know
I've got an issue in my shop. I
need to figure out how to solve
for this. I think that's the
type of transparency that could
actually help us move the needle
on on that issue.
Thank you for that. I, uh, Madam
Chair, uh, and, and Rob, I, I
appreciate that because, but
the, the only part is, you know,
we're gonna create more work for
them to do when they're not
really, I mean, they're behind
on the work they're doing now.
So, um, I, I think, uh, that we
could figure it out and, uh,
with your help from internal
government, uh, I, I think we
can solve the problem, but
nobody seems to want to solve
it, and so I'm, I'm happy to
hear you talking about it at
least.
Um, my next question, Madam
Chair, is, is in the outdoor
recreation.
Is
Our guides and outfitters
hunting and fishing included in
that.
And I'm your representative,
absolutely that is that's a key
economic driver uh for the state
is that the our guides and
outdoor equipment operators,
guides, hunting, fishing, those
are major drivers for our
economy and absolutely within
the sector.
Thank you for the answer. I
haven't seemed to be able to get
that answer and so I would also
like to know if it's broken down
by category when you uh decipher
that data, and if it is, I would
love to see what kind of uh, uh,
money that is for where I
represent like the, you know,
Catchn County, that's a big
economic driver for us there,
um, even in, in Socorro County.
And so I'd love to see.
How it's broken down and, and
get those numbers, um, the
other, the other part of it.
Whether people want to talk
about it or not.
Is crime.
Education
Paid family medical leave.
Property tax, rent control.
Other things that state
government.
Brings to the table every single
year.
That may hinder a company from
either expanding or moving to
New Mexico so people need to to
remember that.
That are sitting on this side of
the table. Thank you, uh, Madam
Chair.
Uh, thank you. Representative
Herndon.
So thank you, Madam Chair, and
my question of I.
Really was quite interested in
the in the section of your of
your presentation that talked
about the food.
Uh, availability and making sure
that people are getting really
good food. One of the problems
that I have run into recently is
talking to students under our
free school lunch program and
they talk about the fact that
the food is not necessarily
healthy or that it is uh things
that they enjoy eating on a
regular basis, but it's full of
carbohydrates and that
vegetables and fruit, and how do
you interact with that program
to try to create and provide
Better food for those students.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Herm and members of the
committee, uh,
I'll, I'll try to, I'll try to
speak to that, um.
One of, one of the initiatives
of the healthy food is in fact
trying to get.
Uh,
healthy New Mexico grown foods
into that chain into the school
districts and to the senior
centers into those into those
entities. That's one of the main
initiatives of getting that
locally grown food in New Mexico
into that into that circle into
that chain, um, they
They meaning uh the school
districts, the senior centers, I
mean they face really serious
serious.
Rules and regulations when it
comes to food and what they can
serve and what they can't serve.
So to say it's not healthy, it
meets the requirements that they
are put in place for for healthy
food, but it may not make the
requirements as far as a taste
good or be be fresh, uh, so that
is one of the major initiatives.
There are programs that that
Aaron, Erin meaning uh not
legislative council service,
Erin, but Erin meaning,
The one running the program.
Uh, for healthy food financing
is in fact trying to tie those
those two entities together, the
school districts, the senior
centers, and the farmers. Uh,
we've had a couple of small
successes out there. Uh, there's
a, uh, a beef processing
facility in Roswell, known as
USA beef packing that has in
fact converted all of the beef
products that are served in the
Rosville School District come
from that facility. They're
fresh, they're, they're
processed in New Mexico and it's
actually
He saved the school district
money as well as providing a
fresher resource and we're
looking for more examples like
that on a statewide basis, uh,
you're right, it is a problem,
uh, and that's what this program
is designed to try to address.
And so, Madam Chair, um, Mr.
Presenter, are you saying that
the state is the reason that
you're not getting fresh
vegetables in there, what is
the, what is the barrier and how
can we help remove it, Madam
Chair Representative Herndon,
uh, again, I, I'm not.
An expert, but I do know that
school districts, senior
centers, anybody that's serving
food to the public has, has
certain requirements they have
to meet. They're both federal
requirements and state
requirements that they have to
meet when serving those meals.
So, uh,
I can't speak specifically as to
whether vegetables are included
in every meal or not, I might be
able to help answer that if
you're,
uh, but, but I can't speak to
the fact that, you know, that.
They're meeting the requirements
that are put forth in front of
them as far as, uh, balance of
the meal and the, uh, the
healthiness of the meal. There's
no requirements out there for
taste.
Well, thank you, Madam Chair,
and thank you, Mr. Presenter,
but it wasn't taste that I was
talking about,
if I may, just because of the
work, if I may chime in just
really quickly, um, our local
farmers have the capacity to
provide the fruits and
vegetables to the school
district. This is the reason why
the Healthy Food financing
initiative was started in the
first place is because what they
don't have is cold storage. They
don't have the vehicles to be
able to truck that information
that that produce to the
different areas and so that was
the point of the HFFI was to
help
Give them low interest funding,
um, so that they could purchase
cold storage, that they could
purchase trucks, that they could
purchase tractors because they
have the capacity to do it. It's
just that they didn't have the
tools to allow them to grow that
much. And so there are people,
there's a woman that is in the
eastern part of the state who
works with the school districts
and the lunch programs and they
aggregate all of it and then
they have like all the farmers
will bring the the produce
together and then it will get
distributed out. It's a
fascinating system and if you
want I can connect you with
there's.
Kendall Chavez and then there's
also Aaron Ortogoza, I believe
is her, how you say her last
name, um, but there's, it's an,
it's a fascinating, a
fascinating system that is in
place that these small farmers
have in place, but it's now it's
getting them the resources so
that they can continue to
produce and that healthier food
can get into the school
district. So there is that
intention to do that. It's just
if there is the supply.
And that's why the HFFI is like
really working to help increase
that supply.
Madam Chair, representative, if
I could just to color that a
little bit, uh, because this is
actually something I tried to do
in a past life in San Francisco
working with uh the chefs and
farmers in in Northern
California to support San
Francisco public schools.
What, what you find is that the
the infrastructure built around
public school food development
they're looking at, you know,
less than $1 a meal.
They're, it's in the systems as
as Senator Hamlin mentioned.
Um, are built around kind of
prepackaged.
Deliverables that are very
inexpensive, but meet the
federal guidelines around
nutrition what we're trying to
do is break that cycle and
change how those that
infrastructure works.
And, and this is a new program,
but I think that's the as as the
senator mentioned, that is the
goal of where we're headed, but
we're building, we're building
on an infrastructure that was
built on a very cheap.
Mass produced food that doesn't
require refrigeration, does it
require a lot of other things
that we're now trying to to work
around so that we can get more
nutritious food to our our
students and our seniors.
All right, thank you, Madam
Chair and Mr. Presenter, my last
question is looking at your Main
Street program, and let me
specifically ask you about, you
know, the downtown area of
Albuquerque was intended to grow
into a an area that was uh a
business environment and uh
where people could go and enjoy
a cultural experience that
hasn't happened and so my
question to you is, does this
program applied to what.
could occur if you look at 3rd
Street, I don't know how
familiar you are with downtown
Albuquerque on 3rd Street to 6th
Street on Central. There are too
many vacant buildings that
should be filled with cultural
enterprises that grow our that
area. So just help me to
understand if this could be
utilized for that.
Madam Chair, um, Representative
from members of the committee,
the short answer is yes. Uh,
you're familiar with the area of
Knob Hill, uh, that is that's
not an appeal. No, I understand
that you're familiar with Knob
Hill. That is an actual New
Mexico main street community,
Doob Hill is. So, uh, if the, if
the area where to do the things
necessary to become a main
street entity, uh, have a
full-time, uh, have a full-time
person in place. I have the.
Districts of identified as to as
to what boundaries committed
within that within that region,
then yes, they could be part of
the New Mexico Main Street
program and avail themselves to
the other technical assistance
and programs that are within
that. So the short answer is
yes, they could be.
OK.
And Madam Chair, Representative,
I think another new division
that we have is the creative
industries division that the
legislature, uh, helped create
and supported this year. I think
that's another opportunity uh
for that particular portion of
of downtown to activate and I'll
I'll share another quick story
about, I think an opportunity
that could could exist, um, and
again this is going back to a
past life of mine when I was at.
The San Francisco Chamber of
Commerce.
Market Street in San Francisco
suffered from very similar
environment.
What we did is we, we worked
with landlords to create $1 a
month, month to month leases for
empty ground floor retail and
lease that to artists to do
studios, galleries, activate,
um, and what that created a lot
of traffic going into downtown,
so it became safer, it became
more attractive and landlords
loved it because they could then
market that space as what it
looked like when it's active
and.
Not dead
And so I think there's some
creative ways again we can
leverage the creative economy,
uh, division that is starting up
at EDD with some of these other
ideas about how do we activate
those dead spaces because it is
uh as as Represented Armstrong
mentioned crime is a big piece
around uh as the roles of
economic development and when
you have people enjoying and
engaging in a positive way and
in a downcome community area.
It's much safer and much more
inviting and so I, I, I.
Appreciate your comment and
welcome, you know, the creative
thinking that we can do together
about how this problem solve for
that.
All right, thank you, thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you. Representative
Lundstrom.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I wanted
to make a comment and I want to
certainly welcome our new
incoming cabinet secretary and
deputy secretary to the
position. It's good to have you,
um, and I absolutely agree,
Madam Chair, that the
infrastructure rollout is
critical in every county.
In every county and
unfortunately we're backed up
with a lot of that now. There's
a lot of money sitting there
just idling, waiting to be used,
but without question getting
those sites ready is, is
important. Here's one thing I
wanted to share with you to
think about. You don't have to
answer now because it's a hard
question.
Um, one of the most challenging
issues in in your position and
I've seen it for years and
years.
Um, regarding the department is
when bills come forward and
business associations don't
support them.
When a business association.
Chambers, economic development
groups, industrial development
associations, uh, big industry
is against a bill.
It really puts the department in
an awkward position.
I mean, your job is to advocate
for business as well as help
protect the public.
I see that is incredibly
challenging, so at some point
I'd like you to tell us what a
success look like in those
situations because what's
happened in a lot of times is
you get winners and losers.
And at the end of the day, of
course, you're gonna have to do
what the boss says, and at least
for the next couple of years,
what she says you'll have to do.
But that doesn't necessarily
move the state, so I just ask
that you think about.
What does success look like when
you're in that situation when
these bills are coming forward
because there's been, you know,
legislation that the business
community has absolutely.
Then against.
Um, you know, that we put forth
and I've been on both sides. I
mean, I've had stuff that I've
introduced that business
communities didn't like and some
that they do, so I've, I've been
on both sides of that issue.
But I, um, caution you, it'll
happen again, and it happens all
the time.
And it puts the department in a
real awkward position sometimes,
so I don't know how you're gonna
be the, how you can look at
being our referee, but we're
gonna look to your expertise. I
mean, you guys are the, are the
people that have that um
expertise when it comes to the
business climate.
And so we'll look for that and
again, welcome anything that we
can do, please ask and we'll
help you.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative,
um, thanks for the softball.
Um, I, you know, I think when I
think about that type of
question, it takes me back to
the mission of the organization.
And again, that's to improve the
lives of New Mexico families by
increasing economic opportunity
and providing a place for
businesses to thrive.
I don't think there's a single
person in this room who would
say that that's not a good
mission.
Um, what I think we also want to
be able to do is create um we
should be thinking, I think as a
state.
What are those goals that we
want to achieve that we think
are important for our state that
aligned with this sort of a
mission.
Lay that out
Let's set metrics to it.
Let's get consensus around.
What a good goal be over the
next 10 years to reduce
childhood poverty by 10% in this
state.
I don't think anybody would say
that that's not a good thing to
do.
How does that align then with
policy and strategy so that we
can implement that and achieve
that as a state.
We don't, I don't think we we
tend to set those sort of long
term goals.
But if we can build consensus
around that, it makes it easier
to say we have shared values to
improving and increasing
economic opportunity for our
families.
And then it's about the tactics.
How do we best achieve those?
I think New Mexico generally has
been pretty good at figuring out
how to work together whether
we're Democrats or Republicans
to achieve those sort of goals
in our state and, and, and our
goal will be to again really
focused on that mission to
create economic opportunity for
our families and our businesses.
Madam Chair, that's why your
plan is so important.
Uh, when you look at the
department's plan and what those
goals are.
There's they're pretty lofty.
And they're pretty broad.
Not a lot of tactical stuff in
there.
Um, I, I think that's part of
the issue. I mean, we need to
understand from your perspective
then how do we move the needle?
How?
We get these companies into the
state of New Mexico.
And I think it's gonna take some
very razor sharp focus on that
and and um.
I don't see that yet. Of course,
you've only been on the job 6
weeks. What are we waiting for,
you know, it's been 6 weeks, but
I, I still think that, uh, at
the end of the day.
We're gonna need a pretty good
referee on some of these bills.
Because there are some that are
at least seen by certain
business associations is
absolutely anti-business
friendly.
And you've been on that side.
You and, um, some are very
business friendly.
But we'll be looking to you and
your expertise and your team for
that kind of help when we get
into those debates. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Um,
next we have, uh, Representative
Allison, followed by
Representative Little,
Representative Lujan,
Representative Brego, and then
Representative Herrera would
like to note the time, um, we
are going to try and stay on
schedule. So if you could both
the questioners and our
responders, um, be really
concise in that. So
Representative Allison, uh, you
are next followed by
Representative Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for the excellent
presentation. My first question
is on slide number 3 on your
outdoor recreation, uh, grants.
I
No that that you made
contributions to 11 tribal
communities.
And I would venture to guess
that none of it was Navajo.
In my district I have attended a
couple chapters that are in my
district that are talking about
establishing trails.
And with the amount of money
that you're granting 8.4
million, I would love to have a
portion of that to establish
trails.
Uh, what is the best approach to
that? Would it be through the
chapter or can I take that on as
an individual? I know it's
probably best to talk to a
division director on that
offline, but I would like your
uh just a very quick answer I
got other questions as well.
Madam Chair, Representative,
it is, I believe, a quarterly
process of applications for the
trails program, so there will be
another.
grant process that will open up
as we get closer to the end of
the year, um, typically those
are those grants have to flow
through a government or a
nonprofit entity that is
requesting and we have an online
application process on the EDD
website to to go through that
process. Mark, is there anything
I, I think that's so it is a
it's a rolling opportunity so uh
those applications, uh.
Some either a nonprofit entity
or or one of the the tribal
government entities would be the
best applicants for those funds.
Madam Chair, thank you for that,
uh, and then my next question is
on your slide number 7 here in
New Mexico street program.
Um,
One of the towns outside of my
district, Farmington, really
took advantage of the main
street funding.
I'm wondering if those same type
of funding, uh, would be
applicable to uh one of my
community, Shiprock.
Shiprock is in dire need of an
overhaul. I wonder if they would
qualify for Main Street funds
because they are situated on the
reservation or would they not
qualify and for what reason?
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, Representative
Ellison.
Um,
We have a program under New
Mexico Main Street that we call
the Frontier program that does
allow for funding for specific
projects and in areas that are
not certified in Mexico Main
Street areas, uh, but do have a
specific project for
improvement. We have done such
projects and in areas of
non-Main Street communities,
including those on tribal areas,
uh, and I believe it was Zuni
that we had a successful
frontier project. The Zuni took
that.
Project and is now working on
becoming a certified New Mexico
Main Street community, so yes,
we could do something in
Chiprock under the frontier
program.
OK, thank you for that. And then
uh I'll make this my last
question, Madam Chair, on slide
number 13.
You
Community business and rural
development.
For some reason, a lot of people
think that I'm going to have a
lot of time on my hands after
December and they have talked to
me about some economic
adventures, being a member of
the board and such, uh, I will
probably talk to Mr. Roper
offline to see if he can give us
some direction with that, thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. Um,
we'll go to Representative
Little, uh, and then followed by
Representative Lujanov. She's in
the room. Representative Brego,
Representative Herrera, and
before we go to Representative
Little, um, Isaac, um, Senator
Munoz is just curious about
where you parked your car.
Cause apparently.
Do you, do you hit Senator
Arthur John Arthur Smith's car
with his car, so he's just
wanting to make sure he stays
away from your car.
Uh
Thank you, Madam Chairman, uh,
and, uh, Senator, uh, members,
uh, I actually was going to
address this early because I
expected this uh for you, yeah,
it's like,
yeah, Senator Munoz, you know
what he's doing, but I did
submit for the Guinness Book of
World Records, the highest
number of senators, uh, Senate
Finance chairman's vehicles
crashed in one instance, um, so
that's pending.
Congratulations, we will
celebrate you when you, when you
hit that. All right, thank you.
I wanted to make sure I got that
before we, we uh finish off. Um,
so Representative Little
followed by Representative
Lujana for Representative Lujan
is not here, then Representative
Brego.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I have
several questions, but I will
ask the others um offline, but
the one that I'm very curious
about, I'm learning more about
the LDA programs. And in your
presentation I did appreciate
that um the you went over it and
In a way that was really helpful
to me. Thank you so much. So,
Madam Chair, my question is I
did not hear, and I'm curious as
to whether there's a time frame
requirement for uh for
businesses to stay in New Mexico
that received those funds, um,
I'm going to, what happens if a
business is not successful?
Or decides to leave in a in a
time frame.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, Representative
Little, uh, it's a great
question uh as.
As Secretary Black noted in his
presentation, we require
collateral equal to the amount
of the grant award and that
collateral is held in place
until
The project is completed and the
time frame has elapsed in most
instances.
Uh, on smaller later awards,
that's a 5 year time frame.
It's a bigger projects are
usually a 10 year time frame.
Um, and that collateral is held
in place until all the
requirements of that agreement.
In the event of those
requirements are not met, then
we use that collateral to fund
the clawbacks as per the
contract. Uh, so there is
protection in there. It's not in
perpetuity, but there is a time
frame in there, um, and we all,
we always look at where we are
on the return on investment, uh,
as far as what's been the fiscal
impact of that project back to
the state and.
Personal income tax, grocery
seats tax, uh, and then, uh, as
compared to how much leader
we've put into it. So there are
protections in place. It is a
grant, but in reality it works
more like a forgivable loan
because we hold that collateral
until the things are are given
and then we release the
collateral. Thank you so much.
Oh, did you have something to
add, Madam Chair?
OK, thank you, uh, one follow up
question that I have is, um, can
you say or what would you say,
uh.
The experience for New Mexico
has been in seeing the types of
businesses that are.
Mm.
Less successful.
Um, we all come in with great
ideas. I'm a small business
owner myself and Madam Chair, I
want to see my business continue
to thrive, um.
But I am curious about that. Can
you offer a very high level view
of maybe some types that I have
not been successful and if not,
that's quite all right. Thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative, I
think, um.
When you think about a startup
company or or
or uh
A growth company um or even just
somebody trying to figure out
how they wanna, uh, sell bread
out of out of a truck.
There are 3 things they really
need, they need uh financial
capital they need human capital
and they need customers.
And where we need to as we think
about creating this
entrepreneurial ecosystem.
We want to be able to help
support the development of all
three of those resources for a
business.
So certain businesses fail here
because they, we, we don't,
we're not producing enough, uh.
Computer engineers or software
engineers.
And they can't find that
workforce locally.
Uh, sometimes they've started up
and they don't have access to
capital financial capital to
help them get to the next stage
of development, so they go to
some place where they have
access to that capital.
Or uh the customer base isn't
something that works for that
particular industry here in New
Mexico.
So I think those are at a high
level, the, the things that we
think about as we think about
trying to create an
entrepreneurial ecosystem that
helps somebody take an idea to
$100 million a year company that
stays in New Mexico.
Those are 3 major pieces to
that, and then you throw in uh.
How you know what are the costs,
what are the, how quickly can
they get infrastructure, all of
those sort of things to service
that business all play in, but I
think those three pieces are
where we see vulnerabilities.
Thank you very much for that
response. Thank you, Madam
Chair. That's the end of my
questions. Thank you,
Representative Little. Um,
Representative Barrego and then
Representative Herrera, um, if
you could be cognizant of the
time, I'd appreciate it. It's a
representative Barrego. Thank
you, Madam Chair. I will try to
be definitely.
Um, so thank you, Rob, uh, and
your staff. I know that you guys
will do a great job and even
though uh Representative
Lundstrom said you were only
there 6 weeks. We're only giving
you 8, so you know.
Better get busy, right? Um, the
million dollar question.
I how long does it take to get a
permit and um I'm glad that uh
Dale Decker is in the room
because 30 years ago.
Dale and I and Paul Silverman
and a bunch of us worked on
trying to answer that question
for Albuquerque. How can we
streamline the process and Madam
Chair, as I think about this and
having been a.
City planner for over 28 years,
um, and a county planner. I
also, you know, it, it's
imperative to me that, um, we
think about, you know, each
site, each use, and how they
differ, um, and I'm sure you're
gonna be thinking about this a
lot, um, Mr. Black, but I think
that what's really interesting
is that.
This question of predictability
um throughout the state and
keeping in mind that we have 105
municipalities including towns
and 33 counties who all have
different codes, including
zoning codes, transportation
codes, environmental codes,
parks codes, uh, water and sewer
codes and um and then we get
into the building part of it,
which has a whole different set
of rules, Madam Chair.
Um,
so I hope that you guys are
going to be work with be working
with um the uh American Planning
Association, uh, with the, um,
American Institute of
Architects, the American
Institute of Landscape
Architects.
To answer these questions
because it's not going to be a
simple answer, um, for.
Any of these communities across
the state because they all have
a different set of codes and so
I think um.
As we think about this, I mean,
we, we need to be very clear,
Madam Chair, and very cognizant
about what predictability we're
looking at and what areas we're
looking at because.
As we know, zoning is a whole
different ball game from
infrastructure and
infrastructure is a whole
different ball game from
building codes, so I just want
to point that out, Madam Chair,
and I'd be happy to work with
you, Rob, on this issue because
we worked on this issue. NAOP
has worked on this issue. I
mean, over the years, I, I don't
know any group organization in
Albuquerque especially that
hasn't tried to answer this.
Question and we still haven't
come up with a really good
answer. So that's why I, I say
this is a $1 million question,
Madam Chair, because it really
is, and I think that we need to
be very clear as to what we're
presenting to the public and
what we're presenting to those
companies that we're trying to
attract is what is it that
They are looking for also in
that predictability, so, um, I
just wanted to make that
comment, Madam Chair. Thank you.
Thank you. um Representative
Herrera.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Rob, and welcome to
both of you. We're excited to
have you join the team and uh
looking forward to working with
you and you should know I've
been a big fan of Leda, uh, for
many years. As soon as I learned
about it, we started working
and, and they've done a great
job um as as best you can in
rural New Mexico, you know, I
have the northern part of the
state Rio Riba mostly a little
bit of Santa Fe to and.
And Sandoval, the size of
Massachusetts, um, and, and what
hurts business there is that you
don't have reliable electricity.
You don't have reliable water
and you don't have reliable
internet and without those
three, it's pretty hard to start
a business. That being said,
Lita has managed to do some
stuff up there that's pretty
impressive, um, I would just
like to say that we worked
really hard to train people on
the water trust board. We got in
$300 million in new grants last
year.
For a water transport grants to
improve aging infrastructure and
water, 75 year old
infrastructure problems leaking
pipes, everything, so we're
working on that. I also just
wanted to point out that I
worked about 3 years ago with
legislators in the north central
region with the cog.
And I'm just telling you this
because I think it's a good
example we invested over a
three-year period, a group of
legislators going from Santa Fe
up to Ques, you know, all the
north, north central.
Uh, $1000 in grant writing
capacity.
And um the return on that
investment has been around 65
million in a three year period
that's helping local
governmental entities apply for
grants and in rural communities,
you don't have, you don't, it's
hard to keep good staff, uh, the
capacity isn't there. There's a
lot of turnover, a rural county,
a rural cities really struggle
and you know in our area they
have to compete with salaries at
the lab. I mean, that's just the
reality, so it's hard to keep
good people.
But I just want to talk about
this because what Monica Abaha
did, uh, her genius was that she
didn't hire two grant writers
before.
I'll never forget before the
July 1st, you know, the, the
start of the fiscal year, she
had 10 contractors on on tab,
you know, so that if anybody
needed help with Grant, uh, you
know, and some people can do a
CDBG and some people can do an
EDA or an EPA. You have
different specialties. She has
10 contractors, so when I come
to a person in my district and
they need help I say call
Monica, you know, and they'll
get and then she pulls from that
pool so.
Really for kind of a very little
money, I'm just suggesting Lita
might use that example. There's
no way two people can cover a
whole area, but, but that
example, and if you need half
that was done with capital
outlay money from different
legislators who who pulled our
resources to just make that
happen. So it's just an idea.
It's working. It continues to
work. I'm always surprised at
the return on that investment
and you know.
No, it's, it's so nice to, you
know, these guys can run a water
system, but they can't write a
grant, you know that's the
problem.
And I can't, I can write a
grant, but I can't run a wire
system.
So, so I'm just saying that's
working in in uh Rio Riba and I
just wanted to share that
information with people. Thank
you. I I don't need a comment,
Madam Chair. Thank you very
much, Representative, and so,
um, so Isaac Rob and Mark, thank
you very much. That finishes our
presentation today. We
appreciate it and appreciate the
opportunity for collaborations
and I'm very excited about it
because I think all of us
understand what the potential is
and then where the roadblocks
are and so how we can move those
and I appreciate your leadership
in that. So thank you very much.
Um, we are going to take uh a
short lunch break, uh, lunch is
available. I do want to thank,
um, Marla Schulz and Martin Olea
from CNN for providing us with
breakfast this morning. Our
lunch providers are Carol Wright
and Kristen Thompson from the
New Mexico Restaurant
Association. So thank you very
much for that.
Also, we do have a wine industry
class tour uh that will be at
3:30, um, we have been told that
the students in the wine
industry, in the wine industry
class are actually creating
personalized charcuterie boards
and so um we do wanna try and
make sure that we are on time
for that at 3:30. Uh, so thank
you very much. We're going to
recess for 15 minutes, give us a
chance to start our lunch and
