Good morning, everybody.
Thank you.
Waiting for my vice chair,
Chatty Kathy over here to get in
her seat.
Um
Welcome to economic and rural
development. Um, I think we are.
Oh, there's Josh Hernandez.
OK?
Um oh. And there we go. We were
We were kind of slowing things
down because we were still short
A quorum and I think we've just
made quorum, right?
Yep. OK, very good. So, um, once
again welcome, everybody. Glad
you're here, um, very excited to
be chairing this year. Um, last
year, our vice chair carry
Hamlin, uh, took us to some
great places. And so we're
trying to, um, take us to some
different places, a few
different places, and, uh, but
hit some of this Some of the
topics that we didn't get on to
last time, And so, um, with
that, What I'd like to do is
just start.
The committee and let us start
introducing, Um everybody who's
on the committee. Uh, tell us
where you're from. And maybe why
you wanna be on this committee?
Uh, things that you wanna talk
about, and, um, what we are
gonna do if you have certain
subjects. We're gonna go through
the our, um, work plan. And so
that would be the time to put
that into the possibilities of
what we discuss. So with that,
um, I am going
To, I guess. Start with, uh,
Senator Griggs. We'll start on
this side of the room. Work our
way. Uh, right. And then we'll
end with us. So, uh, Senator
Griggs, if you'd like to start
with the introductions, Thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm I'm
Ron Griggs. I am from Alamo.
Gordo. I represent Senate
District 34, which is the west
half of Eddy County south, half
of Otero County. I've been on
this committee since I got in
the Legislature. I believe in.
Uh uh, 2012. I've got several
little things that we've worked
on. And I've got a couple of
things that I wanna work on this
year, One deals with a larger
tax and one deals with, uh, the
Util.
Or the opportunity to revamp and
use old mall, uh, facilities
for? Uh uh, for either housing
or business, So thank you, madam
Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. My name
is Tanya. Mira Dal Moya. Uh,
representative, I should say,
um, District seven, which is
Valencia County. I am um, the
city of Belen and the East. Part
of the county. Um, this is I'm
still my first term. So this is
my second year, and I actually
honestly believe that this is
this is the one that I had the
most fun in, uh, last year, so
I'm pretty excited about being
here again, and hopefully we'll
get to continue. Um, I really
like this committee because I do
come from small town. Uh and, um
And being an educator.
Um, the being able to work with
all of the the different
businesses in your area in order
to educate the Children in that
area. I think this is a this
along with the education
committee is is perfect for what
I do, because I really do want
to be able to, um, use all of
the different developments that
are going on and all the
developers in order to be able
to educate the kids so
Good morning, madam Chair. Uh,
thanks for having us, Um Gail
Armstrong State representative
District 49 largest house
district in the state. I love
saying that so you guys will
hear it a lot. Uh, And I'm proud
of it. Uh, my husband and I, uh,
started a business 38 years ago.
We have over 900 employees. Uh,
we have all together about eight
businesses from small to large.
and um rural New Mexico and New
Mexico.
All suffering. Uh, I ha I. I
represent Valencia, Catrine,
Socorro and Sierra. Um so some a
few cities in there, but a lot
of land mass and villages and,
um, I think it's imperative that
we try to help.
Remove barriers.
Uh, for businesses to start up
here in New Mexico, So I'm
excited to do that. And yes,
this is the most fun committee.
Good morning, Ma. Good morning,
Madam Chair. My name is Alan
Martinez. I represent, uh
district 23.
Which is the northern part of
Rio Rancho in the west, part of
the town of Berno, Leo.
Um
I am proud that I have served on
this committee for my entire
legislative career. And by that,
I mean both years.
But the reason I'm interested in
this committee is because
This committee has the
opportunity to do some
Great things to move. New Mexico
forward.
To shine a spotlight on some of
the stars around the state.
And also shine the light on some
of the struggles and how we as
policymakers ease those troubles
and, uh, make it a little bit
easier for businesses to exist
and grow and we could attract
new businesses because
If we want to move New Mexico
forward that's going to be a key
piece, so I appreciate being on
this committee.
Good morning, Madam Chair. I'm
Joy Garrett west side of
Albuquerque House District. 29.
I come to this committee as much
as I possibly can. Because
economic development is a vital
part of my district in the West
Side. Uh, we have Amazon. We
have a movie studio coming in.
We have double eagle to airport
and because it's one of the
areas where Albuquerque and
Bernal can expand westward, Um
it's just a big deal. And, um, I
also like to
Intersection of the
transportation network with
economic development. My
district also has dozens and
dozens of small businesses. Many
of them are home based
businesses. Uh, but I just think
this is a really, really vital
Committee that brings together
finances. Transportation, uh,
the workforce and, uh so I'm
happy to be here today. Thank
you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
Meeting members and, uh,
audience. Everyone's listening.
I think this is absolutely one
of the the best committees and
and really important committee.
Uh, I've been on this committee
since I started. I'll be serving
now. Four years. Um
First appointed and then elected
and
I'd say the heart of my district
is our small small businesses.
Uh, here in Santa Fe represent
house district 48 and a lot of
my work has been done in our
rural um, counties in the state
PRI primarily in the north.
Um, but those in the South too,
as I got to work with our
lieutenant governor when he was
a state senator from Silver City
and understanding all those
rural needs and those rural
economic development concepts,
things that I'm really
interested in. The things that
I'm really pushing are looking
at our infrastructure through,
um
Our grid modernization
electrifying our states in a
healthy way, and our water
issues because we all know
without those those
infrastructures and those two
things, those two concepts we
have no economic development.
Um other things that I have
worked on and will continue to
push through this committee, our
arts and culture with our
business as we have, um
We have the the the growth
factor with the EDD, um, helping
them grow over their main
streets and understanding where
they are and some of the needs.
They have, Um, 11 concept that's
been brought to me through the
small businesses is
Looking at, uh, liquor licenses
for them. Uh, other thing I'm
I'm looking at and hoping we can
discuss is, uh, a AD OE
collaboration center. Some seed
money that's been given to you
and M and looking at how we can
study that with, um
With reference to the economy of
of of our states when we have
Lel and we have Sandia and we
have, um
Other national organizations in
our state, how we how we develop
in that relationship and that
economy Um Madam chair and
another thing I'd like to look
at is, um, our gig economy
growth and where we are with
that how we're modernizing our
jobs. How we That growth? Uh,
sector is thank you, Madam Chair
appreciate the time.
Thank you, madam Chair members
of the committee. Good morning.
My name is Martin Zamora. I
represent house district 63.
Uh, happy to be here this
morning and look forward to
this.
Meeting and and how we get
started. Thank you, madam Chair
members of the committee.
Representative Allison.
Good morning. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Yeah, a minute.
Um, I'm Anthony Allison. I
represent District four. I have
nine Navajo chapters in the
communi small communities of
front line, Kirtland Water flow
and northwest Farmington.
Um, I really enjoy coming to
these meetings because I like to
hear what how the rural
communities are working on their
economic development.
Um, in my area. It's kind of
hard to get anything established
because half of my district or
at least three quarters of my
district is on the Navajo
nation.
So if there's anything that's to
be developed, we have to work
through the Navajo Nation
government, and that is a big
chore in itself.
Uh, most recently, a week ago.
we I got invited to attend a
meeting with a board that was
developing. I is a 501 C Three
committee that is, uh, embarking
on an economic opportunity. Uh,
just outside of Shiprock, so I'm
willing to take a whole things
back. And you know what I have
learned. I know where the
resources are. Um, I know we
can't really rely on the Navajo
Nation government to get us
started, but I know the
resources from the state.
I thank you for all the
presentations that we have been
through. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Johnson.
Good morning. Thank you, madam
Chair and vice chair and
colleagues and, uh, Y a bench
and I to my right since, um, my
brother is leaving us at the end
of the year. I'm gonna use every
opportunity to greet him in the
most respectful way in our
native Navajo language. I am
glad to be here today. I
represent House District five.
McKinley and San Juan counties.
I represent Northwest New Mexico
area of Gallup.
Gallop.
Of the town and 15 Navajo
chapters. And, uh, this
committee is important to me
because I represent a community
who serves in the tourism
industry.
We have, uh, energy, mineral and
natural natural resources
development that, uh, we're
concerned about and, uh
We are also interested to do
more in our outdoor recreation
area because we are known as,
uh, adventure capital of the
world, and I represent a
community of people who are very
skilled, talented, meticulous
and hard working, so the
workforce development programs
are important to me.
So with that, just want to say
good morning and thank you.
Thank you, representative
Hernandez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, I'm
representative Joshua Hernandez.
I represent District 60, which
is the south and west portions
of Rio Rancho. Um, I serve as
uh, the ranking member of your,
uh, Commerce Committee. Which is
my favorite committee. Um, I
have a whole list of stuff that
I would love to go over this
year, um, permitting, keeping
going on site readiness. Um,
infrastructure, talking about
utilities and what the future of
new Mexico and utilities looks
like. Um
Bunch of the fun stuff that I'm
sure we'll talk about. So thank
you, Madam Chair.
Representative Romero.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Good
morning, Everyone, Um
Representative Andrea Romero
from Northern Santa Fe County.
Um, we go from the city of Santa
Fe through the POA Valley into
the city of Espanola, Um, also
have, uh, represent four
sovereign pueblos poet T Su Nam
and San Difonzo Pueblos. Um,
really excited to be here, um,
as a voting member housing
Economic development and water
priorities. Um, is what comes to
top of mind for our community.
Um, really excited to think
about what? Um, comes next and
how we work through the interim.
Thank you so much for for being
here today.
Thank you, Chairman Linda.
Thank you, madam Chairwoman,
Madam Vice Chairwoman Committee
members. Good morning, Derek
Lente from House District 65,
representing parts of Sandoval
County, San Juan County and RBA
County. Uh, primarily very much
rural New Mexico Tribal
American, New Mexico as well. I
represent, um, the town of Brno,
Leo, as well as seven pueblos
five chapters of the Navajo
Nation and the Hickory, Apache
nation. And, uh, just looking
forward to the discussion ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you. And before we jump over to
the other side, uh, represent
Duncan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Good
morning.
Good morning, madam vice chair.
Um
I'm mark gun and I represent
District two west side of San
Juan County. Uh, I'm an advisory
member to this and and, uh, I
don't know why I'm not a regular
member.
We'll work on that. Alrighty,
Uh representative Royal
Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Chair and, uh,
Good morning, madam Chair, vice
chair, members of the committee
and those in the audience
Listening. My name is Patricia
Royal Caballero and I represent
House District 13, which is the
far Southwest Quadrant of
Albuquerque.
And I've been on this committee
since, uh I my first term. I
think we've been on this
committee together since our
first term. It seems like it was
just yesterday. But it's 12
years. It's had time is running.
Um, I'm I wanted to be on this
committee because I spent my
career, uh, training,
certification and career as a
community economic development
planner and developer, and so I
have a unique um, perspective
and understand.
And I'm just tied to the whole
notion of uplifting our
communities and I wanna ensure
that our communities have access
and opportunities so that they
have viable and sustainable job
and career. Um, opportunities,
but I think that requires small
businesses and businesses to be
married to our communities.
There has to be a very strong
relationship between, um what
drives business development in
our
And that's our, um our
communities themselves. They are
looking for jobs and career
opportunities. So I'd like to
just continue to, uh, focus on
that. And also on, um
The world of, uh, renewable
energies. We are now.
Way behind in our development
opportunities as they relate,
and I want to dispel the fears
in our communities about, um and
I heard this. Just this week
again. Um, the fact that
renewable energy will take away
from viable job opportunities,
so I hope we can get to that
discussion and and have a A
real, um
Robust discussion around that.
Thank you, madam chair and vice
chair.
Thank you, Uh, Senator Stefanik.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Uh,
Madam Vice chair. It's a
pleasure to be here today. I'm
an advisory member, but I
represent currently six counties
and in January it'll be four
counties, but many of those are
rural communities. And so I have
that in my interest as I come
here today, also, uh, when we
talk about the topics later, I
have
Deep concern for the future of
health care professionals and
workers in our state. Thank you.
Thank you.
Representative Burgo.
Thank you, Madam Chair and Madam
Vice chair and
All the members that are here
today. Um, I also serve as an
advisory board member to this
committee. Um, but I'm really
happy to be on this committee. I
worked as a 30 year. Plus and I
won't say how long planner and,
uh, I worked in economic
development for the city of
Albuquerque. Um
One of the things that I
I'm very concerned with is that
we don't do planning in a
vacuum. Um all of the links and
connections that have to occur
between education jobs, housing
transportation. Um, and the list
goes on.
All of these things are
interrelated, and it's important
that we create these linkages
and it's important to me as a
planner, especially especially
the other piece is crime, of
course. And then how we balance
our, You know new jobs with
economic prosperity, but also
our environment and how we, um
Preserve our environment for our
future. So those are some of the
things that I think about a lot.
Um
I think that you know, we want
to move our state forward. We
want to have new population come
in and new jobs and we need to
encourage and attract new
businesses to New Mexico because
all of our neighbors are doing
it. And so it's time for New
Mexico. I think our time is now,
um
I I'm also a small business
owner. Uh yes. You can be a
Democrat and have a small
business and I've had a small
business since 2010.
Um, but it's important that we,
you know, um
Raise everyone together in our
state, and I just wanted to
mention that I mentioned to the
the I grew up in northern New
Mexico by the way, and and I
still have roots down there, So
it's important that we also have
meetings in the northern part of
the district. I just thought I'd
mention that
Senator.
Um is it Oh, good afternoon,
almost madam chair and vice
chair. Members of the committee.
I'm state Senator Benny Sinal,
representing
Senate District 22. I used to be
a chair of this committee ways
sometime way back.
Um, I represent, uh
Tribes in pueblos and Hickory
Apache nation in my district.
Um, this important committee to
me because you know, economic
development is important. Across
the state and tribes are
integral part of our economic,
uh,
Uh, a base. Uh, here in the
state, and of course, many of
those areas still
Lack basic infrastructure. And
so we really truly can't talk
about economic development
statewide when we have large
areas where, you know adequate
supply of infrastructure roads
Broadband is, uh, missing, so
that's my primary interest, and,
uh, hopefully we can continue to
make a a dent on many of those
that that that need to support.
Thank you.
Thank you, Chairman.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, I am
representative Elise Oli Alcon.
I represent, uh, Purchase and
McKinley County.
Uh, in my district. I have a
quite a few Navajo chapters. The
whole play is uni and believe it
or not, I hit the Arizona border
on just about every side of that
part of the state. So there's a
lot to look at that hopefully
bringing in, uh, economic
development on the border area,
and, uh, doing something for the
state of New Mexico. Thank you,
Madam Chair. I am an advisory
member and
Happy to be here.
Thank you, representative
Herndon.
Thank you, madam Chair.
I am happy to be here. I
represent house District 28 in
the Northeast Heights, and there
are two items that I want to
bring to this committee that I
am definitely passionate about
one. We are looking forward to
laying EV stations around this
entire state. And what is
important is that we realize
that there that our state is
comprised of 51% women, So I'd
like to make sure that we're
pushing women in the trades and
so talking to companies that are
going to be training the
workforce that will be
That will be installing those EV
stations. We wanna make sure
that the workforce is trained in
New Mexico and that they're not
bringing people in from outside.
That is gonna be incredibly
important. And the other thing
that I, um want to make sure
that we're doing this as there
are still 250 schools in the
state of New Mexico that don't
have a broadband connection and
that those women that can also
be trained to lay broadband, so
that's another major economic
development. And the second
thing, madam.
Chair that I would, uh madam by
year that I chair that I would
like to bring forth is that with
respect to, uh behavioral,
health and mental health and
well being to keep our economic
well being at a high level, it's
important for the state to take
a major, uh, a major stand and
having good behavioral health
and mental health care
facilities available Right now,
there's a, uh there is a
facility open in Hobbs, New
Mexico, There's one open in al
Turkey and one open in Las Vegas
so we can cover the state and I
want to make sure that we are
able to, uh, do that and engaged
in reengaging thinking about
having compacts, uh, with our
other members, but also making
sure that we're utilizing
facilities and individuals, uh,
within our state to make sure
that that health care and mental
wellness is taken care of. And
thank you, madam Chair.
Thank you, representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, High
Committee. I'm representative
Janelle and yoru. I represent
District 19 in Albuquerque, New
Mexico. That's the fairground
area and the very aptly named
International District. Um, I
happily serve on committee with
chair
Uh, standing committee during
the year and this is my second
interim committee here. I really
enjoy and appreciate the work we
do in the international
district. Um, we have a lot of
small businesses that need
support need to be brought out
of the home and into brick and
mortar because I hear from a lot
of small business owners that
they're really interested in
doing that, and I wanna support
them in that effort and also
drawing new business as well.
And, uh, this is the place to do
it. So glad to be back.
Thank you. And I really
appreciate um
That everybody seems so
enthusiastic. And yes, I just
wanted to reaffirm that we are
the best committee. Uh,
especially during the so
Um, I wanna before we introduce.
Um, the vice chair and myself
will go to, uh, the staff.
Good morning, madam Chair
members of the committee. I'm
Erin Bond. I will be your late
staff for this committee. Um,
and I hope to continue the fun.
Good morning, everyone. Martin
Fisher, staff attorney for the
Legislative Council service.
Hi. Good morning, madam Chair
members of the committee. My
name is Julia and I work at the
LFC as the fiscal analyst on the
economic Development Block. Um,
it's really nice to meet you all
and I look forward to this
interim and to provide any
assistance as you all see?
Thank you.
And hi, I'm Erica Flan. I'm
gonna be back up on this
committee. I look forward to
working with you all. Thank you.
Person.
Already We'll go to our vice
chair.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair
and committee. It's so lovely to
see your faces some of you. I
got to see last week at the
water conference and we're all
recovered from sunburn and and
water logging. Uh, for those of
us who are able to go on that
raft trip. My name is Kerry
Hamblet. And I'm the senator for
District 38 in southern New
Mexico, uh, represent not only a
part of Las Cruces proper, but
also, uh, some rural parts of
the community of San Pablo and,
uh, Mesquite and Vado and
Sunland Park and Santa Teresa.
And so it's a It's a really
beautiful mix. Uh, of this and
in my day job, um I am the CEO
and president of the Las Cruces,
Green Chamber of Commerce, and
we talk about the importance of
locally owned businesses. But we
also see the con the connection.
Uh, that many of you have
already touched on that are
locally owned businesses. Give
back to our communities. We want
to continue to nurture those
connections. Um, just as a fun
fact, local businesses give back
to local charities, 350% more
than do national chains, and
it's because they're invested in
our community. Most likely they
employ our family members.
Friends and our neighbors or our
our family members, our friends
and our neighbors and we
recognize that small businesses
are the backbone of our
community. But we also know that
small businesses have a tough
and we know that they need to be
able to have support and I feel
that our job as this committee
is to come up with creative ways
to support that, and so I'm
excited about some of the
topics. Uh, you your topics have
inspired some other topics that
I would like to suggest for our
work plan, but I also would like
to continue working on some
projects that were discussed
last year like
Um I really want to work on a
bottle Sanitation plant and SRO,
Um, for our for our restaurant
industries for our spirits, uh,
and wine so that they can reduce
their overhead cost, um, looking
at the catastrophic business
relief program that Martin
Fisher helped craft that become
came a little bit of a different
thing because of it needed to be
a loan program. We'll talk about
that, um as well because I think
this is the year that we are
able to get that, uh, tour
that's open statewide, not just
something that has benefited in
Las Cruces. You know?
Creative ways to connect
renewable energy and reducing
reusing and recycling to our
small businesses because we know
when they reduce their costs and
their overhead that their
profits and their continuing
support back into our community
increases. And so I'm excited
about those opportunities and
then with representative Romero
talking about water as an
economic driver, um, that we had
as a as a result of some
conversations that happened last
week at the water conference, so
I'm excited about this
opportunity, and I'm very happy
to support Madam Chair, uh, in
this and be her her
Her cheerleading squad. Um, uh,
Scotty and I can go ahead and
and just stand behind her and do
a couple cheers while she's
chairing this community, um, but
it's always so fun. That's why
the committee is fun because you
know we'll do those cheers. Um
and and have a great time doing
it so very honored to be on this
community. Uh, very honored to
be the vice chair this time
around, Uh, and look forward to
all the conversations that we're
gonna have in the good times
that we're gonna have. So I'm
very grateful. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you. And like I
said, this is why it's one of
the best committees because we
have a a good time. Uh, I
Do Gallegos. I represent
District 52. Interestingly
enough, Uh, the senator vice
chair here. Uh and I are some of
our districts overlap, and so
we've had the opportunity to get
to know each other a little bit
better. Uh, we have got a good
working relationship and we, um
in working to really better our
communities we've seen where
there's a lot of deficit. So
we're I think we're both really
open to to making some changes
and see looking at some
policies. Uh, that really need
to happen. Um, before we get
Far into into the work plan I
want. I wrote it down a
statement and I wanted to read
it all to you today. Um
So I'd like to read it, uh, for
the committee, and for the
record. My goal for this intern
is to hear topics and propose
legislation that impacts
business, large and small. In
New Mexico. Some of those
matters may overlap with tax
issues or broader social policy
impacts that I want this interim
and economic and rural
development to focus on business
matters. How it impacts business
in New Mexico. Other interim
committees exist to hear other
aspects of various issues.
My hope is that during the
regular 60 Day session, many of
these business bills hurt bias
during the interim will be heard
by the House, Commerce and
Economic UH, Development
Committee and Senate tax,
Business and Transportation
Committee, respectively. Um
I sit on many, uh or I've sat on
different committees, and I
think so many times the issues
overlap, but I wanna make sure
that we go back to how does it
How does this policy affect
business? Whether it's rural, um
or urban, whether it's a small
or large businesses, And I think
that those are questions that we
need to continue to have it at
the forefront for this
committee because many times
Um, me being social worker. I
always want to start talking
about the fluffy stuff and I
want to start talking about
which is all very important and
I think that there's a place for
it. Um, but I wanna make sure
that we always bring it back to
the business component, So I
just wanted to make sure I threw
that out. Um, I also wanted to
talk about small business for in
my day job or at least the
paying job. Um, I, I run a
nonprofit. I'm the executive
director of Meia Casa. I've been
doing that for over 20 years.
We advocate for kids that are in
foster care. Um and I think what
the vice chair said, is that
when small businesses are doing
well that they give to local
nonprofits, and so, um, I think
that that's also a really
important piece to keep in mind
that, you know, we all work. Um
together to make our communities
better, and it starts with many
times the small businesses, So I
wanna keep that at the
forefront. Um, very, very
honored to be chairing this.
This committee this time around,
Um, the last, uh, time last, Uh,
session was my first year as a
chair, and you know there was a
few bumps, but overall, I think
we did really well and this
committee um, I, I know it
during the the session, our
committee really stuck together
and I. I think that this
committee even has more of of
those, um
Attributes to really want to
have those discussions, so I'm
really proud to be chairing. So
thank you for allowing me to do
that. And with that, I'm gonna
turn it over to staff so we can
start talking about, uh, the
work plan. I wanna make sure
that everybody has the
opportunity that if you want to
throw out a topic that we will
definitely get it down. Uh, we
only meet how many times
Four times so we're limited on
what we really can get Get done.
So we're gonna try. They're
gonna all all of the, um I think
all of the topics are important,
but we're gonna try to put as
many together as possible. Um, I
also wanna do some site visits
at different places. Um, I've
been, uh people at different
municipalities have reached out,
um, wanting to to show us
things. Um, so I think it's
important that we
And we're seeing what's working
in communities and maybe what's
not working, and if there's ways
that we can help in that area,
So, um I'm gonna turn it over to
staff and we can start but wanna
hear from everybody that wants
to put in a little bit of input,
so
With that I'm gonna hand it to
Aaron.
Thank you, madam Chair. Um this
work plan was designed to allow
for flexibility. Um, in the
future, as the chair has
requested, Um, and it's worth
noting that this uh, work plan
is meant for guidance, but it is
not limiting so other topics can
be considered as their race.
Um, so based on the plan, the
economic development, economic
and Rural Development and Policy
Committee will explore and
discuss major areas such as
updates from government agencies
involved in economic
development. Uh, that's
including, but not limited to
Economic development Department
Workforce Solutions regulations
and licensing division. Uh, the
Department of Agriculture, the
Department of Tourism, um M
nerd, um and any others that may
arise, Uh, the committee will
also discuss economic
Initiatives and priority
priorities in communities around
the state. Uh current and
developing energy economies in
New Mexico. Um agriculture
industries is economic
generators. Uh, challenges
facing the recreational
recreational. Excuse me
Recreational cannabis
businesses, Uh, developing
outdoor recreation economies.
Uh internships, apprenticeships
and workforce development
programs. Uh, higher education
initiatives, Tourism
hospitality.
Gaming economies. Uh,
transportation, infrastructure
and development and housing and
evictions.
And madam chair.
Stand for questions.
At this time, I think, um, I'm
I'm gonna talk about where the
locations are gonna be, Uh, one
of the locations, um is still
the last one is we're still
looking at some possibilities of
adding another location. And
then, uh, I'm gonna open it up
to the floor for a topics.
So if, um we wanna
We will start. Uh, May 31st here
July 25th and 26th will be in
Riodosa.
August. 21st and 22nd will be in
Farmington.
September. 11th to the 13th is
in Las Cruces. And I
specifically did that. So you
all could go down and buy your
chili from Hatch.
And October 15th through the
17th.
I know that, uh, representative
Garrett has really pushed for
Albuquerque. So we're looking at
Albuquerque, Uh, will end in
Santa Fe, but we're
We've got either rear Rancho and
today it was brought up that
possibly Espanola, so we're
still in flux on that. So that's
we're looking. So, um, And with
that, um, I'd like to open it up
to, uh, the committee. All of
the committee. Uh,
representative Romero.
Thank you, Madam Chair. This is
a great list. Um, I just wanted
to see if on item C if we could
add, perhaps to that line or
subsequent to that, um, talking
about current and developing
both clean technologies and
energy economies, the nuance is
just that there's a lot of, um,
interesting work being done. Um,
that the, uh, State Investment
council is investing in, um, in
clean technology working on
climate mitigation, um, looking
at drought mitigation.
All of these different things
that aren't exactly energy, um,
that I know that the state is
investing in. I think it would
be a great way for us to look at
that and also inclusive of of
hydrogen. I don't know if we
want to spell it out. But
obviously the train has left the
building. There's things that
are happening in the state. Um
With that.
And I don't know if there's
anything specific to perhaps
water that we want to call out,
Um with water infrastructure,
um, or infrastructure that
surrounds some of our
dilapidated, um, whether it be
transportation, bridges, roads,
Um, that all are inclusive of of
the the
You know, ongoing effort to
spend federal dollars? Um or
perhaps have some sort of
understanding of how that's
going, um, would be helpful.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Thank you, Um
Senator Stefani.
Thank you, madam Chair on. Uh,
this would these topics could be
attached to many of these items
that are on here. So, um
We are having some problems in
one of my, um
Counties with cannabis and, uh,
with Chinese owned properties
and the director of the
cannabis, Uh, Division or Bureau
has indicated he doesn't have
enough authority.
To close down problematic.
Areas, so that might be one
topic. Another topic. We I, uh
have a group that I've been
working with that wants to amend
dark skies, which would affect
outdoor recreation areas and
tourism. And so I think it would
be worthwhile to hear what
changes that they are looking
at. And, uh, another area that
relates to health care and
professional jobs would not be
to have a debate about medical
malpractice, but maybe to have a
one.
One on medical malpractice
presented by the insurance pool
from the office of the
superintendent of insurance
because we all are asked to vote
on these topics, and I'm not
sure we all get the detail.
Thank you very much.
Uh, representatives Zamora.
Thank you, madam Chair members
of the committee.
As a lot of you probably
remember, Uh, quite a few
sessions back. I carried a
weather station Bill.
Uh, it has to do with, uh
Claims on the insurance for
agriculture.
The state climatologist, uh,
working out of, uh, New Mexico
State University.
Has put that program together.
It's it's halfway the
construction of the weather
stations is probably 50% or a
little over 50% done.
The data is being collected.
Uh, it will help New Mexico
economy on the agriculture side.
It will help us on, uh
Maybe mitigation of of, uh,
climate change. Uh,
We are currently working.
At the federal level to fix some
issues that we have with that
program.
Uh, we did receive, uh, federal
support from Martin Heinrich and
Ben Ray Lujan to put this
program in place.
Some of the information is not
getting all the way.
To Washington, uh, with the R MA
Risk management agency.
And there's still some issues
that that we're trying to.
To fix their
But I would think that it would
be good for this group.
And I've talked to the state
climatologist. He'd be glad to
present.
To any of the groups that that
are willing to listen to them,
and, uh
I think it'd be good for this
group to to listen, uh to the
state climatologist and and see
how
This has progressed forward. We
have, uh I believe four other
states in the union following
our lead on this on this weather
station program, and they're
looking to do the same thing.
Uh, New Mexico. I believe.
If I remember what the
Words were from the state
climatologist will have the best
weather station program in the
United States. When we get done
installing this
Uh, very important to the AG
community and
And, uh, I believe that the
That we will look in the future
into helping with
Uh, travel conditions and and
other things that the weather
Uh, challenges us with
And, uh, I think it's something
that
Will need further support in the
future.
From us.
I think we we ought to be
looking at supporting this
program for decades to come.
Thank you, madam Chair members
of the committee.
Thank you, Representative. Uh,
Representative, uh, Roy B, Cro.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I have a
couple of, um
Suggestions so
In the
Letter C on Page two where we've
already had, um, input
concerning clean technologies
that representative Romero just
mentioned. I'd also like to
stress if we can tie in, uh,
tribal energy development around
the state. Uh, as I've mentioned
in other committees, I attended
a a tribal energy summit, and
it's amazing to know. I thought
only two or three tribes were
driving. Uh, energy development.
as it turns out almost every
tribe in the state.
Already either with project
developments. They received a
considerable amount of, uh,
federal funding to help
subsidize or supplement. Uh,
their investments. And so I
think it would be very worthy to
hear what they're doing and see
whether what we can learn and
the other communities can learn,
uh, from their experience.
That's number one suggestion and
I did also suggest that, um, a
group that might be able to help
Aaron and others pull this
together. If we, uh go in that
direction would be sovereign
energy. They're the ones
coordinating the tribal project
development around the state.
So, um, that would be my one.
And Madam chair. I You know, I.
I heard your statement, and I
appreciate it as we all know, um
and we've said in our in our
presentations, uh, we know that
small businesses thrive, but
they thrive only when we have a
strong workforce and
Consumer base, and so there's
gotta be. We've got to focus on
that. Really, In my opinion,
that relationship because that's
what we wanna strengthen when
we're looking looking at our
economies, right? We wanna be
able to have them sustain and
strengthen, but they can only
sustain if we have those strong
relationship between the three.
So with that in mind, my
question is and I don't know if
we've given you've given thought
or the, um anyone has given
thought I wanted to ask a
question.
About, um
So well make a suggestion
actually, and letter G.
With that.
Thought.
Um, And when you mentioned site
visits
I think it would be great to see
a project or a business, uh or
even a training program that
either CNM and unions are
involved in because they are
modeling right now. Training
programs on the job training,
apprenticeship and, um, they
have had a success. I've heard
that their efforts have been
really successful in placing the
apprenticeship.
Apprentices.
And, um, strengthening the whole
workforce development, So that
would be a great um, you know, a
great site visit I. I don't know
where that might fit in. It
could be, uh, I don't know
whether, um There are other
Community College.
And union relationships around
the state. But I know that they
they are in Albuquerque with CNM
and, um various unions, and they
have the the model that most,
um apprenticeship programs are
using anyway. So that was
another suggestion. And then my
question is this in letter H and
letter K letters H and K. What
will be the actual um,
perspective or direction for
discussions?
Um
When we have a hired
initiatives are we looking at
particular? Um
Higher ed
Um, business development.
Initiatives. I just wanted to
kind of get a feel for where we
were going with that and the
same with housing and evictions.
We What are we? What are we
looking at? What would be the
perspective or approach? Uh, for
those two items.
Uh, so representative. What? We,
um what we had done is we had
asked members if they wanted to
email topics, and so, um, when
they emailed those topics, they
made it onto this list, and what
we'll do is we'll try depending
on where we're going to try to
tighten that up and figure out
where we can place. Some of
those, um and and get as much
bang for our buck because I
think if we can somehow turn you
know if we're gonna go to, uh,
CNM maybe talk about maybe, uh,
looking at
You know?
Subsection, whatever. And so
that's how we're gonna try to
just capture as many as we can.
OK, thank you. That answers the
question. But it also part
whoever suggested that if we
have an engagement of that, in
in discussion that would be
helpful Whoever suggested what
they had in mind, so that would
help. I guess you all in
planning. Um how we approach
that. Thank you. I appreciate
it. Thank you.
All right, if we can go to
representative Armstrong
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
would, uh I love all the all the
topics. They're great. I think
they all coincide in one way or
another. Um, One of my first
questions is the proposed
different date from the calendar
that we had on here. Um, And so
is it being changed to August
21st and 22nd instead of the
15th and 16th.
It is being changed. OK, but I
will not be able to attend that
Which That's not that I mean,
you you are my favorite
committee. Just intent anyway.
Um, I would be happy if you're
in Albuquerque to invite you all
to come to our business, Uh,
which is a private business and,
uh, see our apprenticeship
program that we have put in
place over 20 years ago.
Uh, we graduated 100 and 20 last
year apprentices and, um, I
think we're doing a good job in
that so you could actually see
all the different elements of
the business and we'd be happy
to host as well. So, uh,
anything that, uh, to help this
committee realize what
Small business that grew into a
large business has done for, uh,
its employees and how we
appreciate them and how we work
together with them, not against
them. Also, I would love to hear
more about, uh, regulations and
licensing. Uh, it costs around.
Uh, a couple of years ago, It
was around 8 to $9000 more in
New Mexico to build a home
because of our regulations, and,
uh, we're talking about creating
housing in
Mexico and, uh, I. I would
really love to hear more about
how we could remove some of
those barriers and I think
people that are in that industry
could could come in and
possibly, uh, inform us on that,
Uh, you know, we we have housing
and evictions on here. I mean,
we can't talk out of both sides
of our mouths if we really want
to improve New Mexico and grow
New Mexico grow housing grow
economics grow everything in the
positive direction.
Then we can't bring up rent
control and encourage people to
build housing.
So it's it's we We've got to
really be careful on that. And,
uh and we need this. We need
businesses in New Mexico to be
sustainable. And, uh, when we
introduce legislation that's
harmful.
Um it's not sustainable, and it
makes it more difficult for
people to do business in the
state of New Mexico, uh every
single day employers think about
the Mao's that they're feeding
by creating jobs and trying to
protect those jobs.
And so, I. I really think we
need to look at the whole
picture Also.
Probably the number one thing on
here is transportation and
infrastructure development. If
we don't have that
Businesses aren't gonna open
businesses aren't gonna come
here, uh, and along with
broadband that's included in
broadband. One of the things
that I think that we could help
by building, uh, to encourage
building in New Mexico is to
find a way to help communities
develop a, uh, get the utilities
to their property. There's a big
problem with the the lag time of
getting utilities to property
where people can build buildings
or rent buildings.
Um
And or even housing.
So TRD is a big one.
For me A regulations and
licensing sorry and
infrastructure and, uh, again,
The, uh, the option is open to
come to her A A great facility
in Albuquerque. Thank you, madam
Chair.
Thank you. I appreciate the
invitation and I'm gonna talk to
staff about seeing if we can get
that worked in, Um, because
that's I think that'd be great.
Um
Actually, Johnson was first, Uh
representative Johnson.
Thank you, madam Chair.
I believe this bullet can go
under item number B and or C,
But just, uh, bullet to look at
sight, readiness and meeting the
energy needs of existing and
future, Uh, New Mexico
companies.
Thank you.
Representative Lujan.
Thank you, madam Chair. Um, one
of the things that I
I mean, we keep peering over and
over for economic development is
grow, grow grow and as mentioned
by a few of us already. What
does that mean for the state
when we're looking at, uh, the
needs for infrastructure and for
water, and so I would recommend
under item C. Um, we're looking.
We add, um
I think it was mentioned Clean
technologies, climate
mitigation and such with the S
IC. I would add that we need to
talk about RT OS and as
mentioned just previously with
our site readiness in meeting
the needs of diversifying our
economy under the ETA.
And what that means for our
state and how what are the
economic challenges where the
economic advantages where we how
are we planning? And how are are
we strategizing around that huge
initiative that we have before
us through economic development?
So I'd say one of the things
that I'm aware of, and I'd like
to see. Added to that is, um,
looking at Advanced Energy
Alliance That's been proposed,
Um, for any, um, individuals in
our states, which they are
building.
Um and innovation center or
possibly in Albuquerque with
with the city of Albuquerque. So
I'd like to know more about that
and and what they're doing, And
how are they? How they are
moving and and getting things
together there? Um, Secondly,
along with that, uh, item D
agricultural industries and
economic generators. I'd like to
look at regenerative
regenerative practices for both
our small and big. Um, uh,
Agricultural. Uh, industries.
Uh And then, uh,
Item H, uh, the higher education
initiatives. Um, you'll hear a
theme here as I'm as I'm
talking. I'd like to know more
about the DOE collaboration
center with UN M.
And how we're how that is, Uh,
worked into an economic generate
generator in in the study of
that, and then I moved to item.
Uh, K. We're looking at housing
and eviction. Specifically, it
says there. I know that it
leaves it open for us to have
further conversation. I would
add. We need to talk with M FA
and NM FA. Um uh, when we have
those discussions and talking
about those economic growth, uh
Sectors because we just gave a
huge amount of money to NM FA
this last session. I'd like to
know where were those
developments are are headed. How
how things are shaping up if you
will, and I would also I mean,
I'd add, Um
Yeah, I just said that. What are
what is that? ETA update in
planning for the future with the
climate issues I don't see here
under item A that we're talking
with the OS C. I think we need
to add them and I would add
under item A, um 0.6, the
energy, minerals and natural
Resources Department. I'd add
that we need to have an
environment department there as
well and specifically looking at
the water plan with produced
water, brackish water and what
those economies
Are looking like and how we're
going to build them out in our
budget, Madam chair. Thank you.
Thank you, Uh, representative
Duncan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, one
of the questions or topics that
I would, Uh um ask to be put in
it in
Martin may already have this
under probably, uh, C, and that
would be the spor pay the poor
space definition in the
liability is far as it pertains
to, uh, carbon capture.
And I know, um
You know, for the Northwest and
the Southeast, Um, communities.
Uh, that's something that, uh, I
think we'd like to discuss. I
know Senator. She has some
Some questions about that and
would also like to discuss some
of those as well. So thank you.
Senator Griggs.
Thank you, Madam Chair and and
most of you know that during my
time in the Legislature, I've
worked, Uh uh, on liquor for
different things. Uh, I think
there may be some movement. Uh,
now to go in and look at some of
the, uh, the licenses some of
the things that, uh, were
changed back in the big bill
that passed a few years back.
Uh, one, for instance, is in New
Mexico. We created the
restaurant.
Be license, which allows for
more restaurants to have the
ability to sell, Uh, spirit.
But the cost of that to to renew
that is $10,000 a year the cost
to renew your, uh other big
licenses like your your retailer
license and the name of the
other one that Spencer licensed.
Those are about $1000 a year, so
I think it's something that we
probably need to look at to see
because that then allows those
small businesses to readily
retain that license to stay in,
uh, to stay in business.
Um
And I, you know, as we're as
we're talking about economic
development, we talk about small
business because that's what
makes new Mexico made up of is
small business. Um, in item I we
talk about tourism. We talk
about hospitality, which is
Tremendous number of small
businesses.
And
One of the things that we we, we
don't address in here and it's a
controversial It's it's very
controversial right now, and
that's the paid family and
medical Leave Act.
And the impact of it.
Is tremendous on small business.
And so I
I don't know. Madam Chair if you
want to get into that very much,
But I think it it certainly
wouldn't hurt to have an update
on where the sponsors of that
bill are have. They made any
adjustments to the bill? And
what are you hearing from the
New Mexico Chamber of Commerce
for from Area chambers of
commerce on what they feel might
be the impacts of that bill on
their
Local businesses. So II I
realized that's a tough one. But
I think from when we talk about
economic development, all the
stuff that we want to do that
we're we're talking about.
Could be dramatically impacted
by the passage and
implementation of that one bill,
So thank you, Madam Chair and
that's
Your choice.
Thank you, Um representative,
uh, Royal Cabrio for round 20
Sorry.
Representative Garrett, We'll go
with her first. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I want to plant a seed
for the summer of 2025 while I'm
at it, because I think both the
chair and the vice chair will
still be involved with this
community. I'd like to see a
field trip from the port of Los
Angeles to central New Mexico,
and I'll tell you why the topic
that I wanna would like the
committee to look at this
interim, um is the I 40 trade
Port corridor, which was passed
in October. I understand there's
a
And Tradeport also, and, um, it
involves. I'm not gonna say
which letter it involves BC, G
and J. Um, it involves also
three county specifically,
Berno, Uh Sandoval and Rio,
Rancho and Las Lunas and
Valencia. Um, it involves
hydrogen fueling stations. It
involves, um a lot of
infrastructure along I 40 it
involves how small business
This is can grow a large
businesses can grow.
Um
And it and it also involves both
federal and state funding. So I
just
Think that the topic has a lot
of related things to it that are
really apropos of this
committee. But I'm seriously I
I'd like to see us get on a
hydrogen truck.
Thus, in L a go through the
tour. Uh, it also involves
Gallup. Um, although it's not
part of the trade port, it's
intimately involved with the
counties along I 40 west of
Sandoval and Nao
And then uh, one small thing on
on when we're in Las Cruces. I
know that, uh Jerry Pacheco went
around the state cultivating
small businesses that could be
developed to serve the border
industrial complex.
Um, so I'd like to see what what
has that resulted in? Where is
that at? Because it's even
though we think of it as just a
border thing, it actually
they've made efforts involve the
entire state. So I'd like to get
an update on that. Thank you.
So I'm I'm thinking that next
year, Madam Vice Year we just
Take it on the road and
But my
friend, uh representative
Herndon.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Madam
chair. We talked about having
the regulation and licensing
department come forth, but I
would also like you to if we
could think about asking the
General Services Department and
the reason being is that they
are responsible for looking at
the contracts. The
administration of the
procurement code and so that we
can see or have some sort of
data and analysis of these
large, uh, RFPS that are let in
the save New Mexico who are who
is actually being
Hired to carry out those, um
those contracts and those RFPS
So that would be really great if
we could have that information
and also CNM is responsible for
doing a lot of of the training
and the trades for sure. Uh,
many of the things that we've
talked about is, uh part of
that, so it would be great to
hear how those individuals are
actually being placed and how we
can see how workforce has been
developed through our community
colleges and I do know that
there's the community.
College down south that is
primarily responsible for
developing work for us in laying
broadband and have them come
forth also and explain how they
are training people. And how
many of them are actually
getting in, Um, employed.
Uh, representative Bargo.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Um, I'm gonna just call this out
because I don't see it.
Specifically called out his
film, and I know that you
probably meant to have that
under item B, but I think that's
such a huge economy and such a
huge impact to all sectors of
our state. Um another thing
that, um
We don't and I don't see it on
here, either, but it really does
impact our, um, tourism and, um
it impacts you know, is Parks
and the state parks and how you
know people are attracted to our
recreation. Um
And I. I just wanna mention that
I really see
Like two different or maybe,
maybe even three different
pieces. Here is the small
businesses, the manufacturing
and the agricultural because
they're all very different, and
they all have very different
needs. Um
As we go forward, we really need
to talk about because, like in
in the case of manufacturing, I
mean they really depend on
On products being moved. And,
um, I think it was
representative Garrett or
representative Armstrong, who
brought up the transportation
issue. I mean, they have
different, very different. Um
Um, needs as far as
transportation. Some require
error and rail and in order to
move
Production and and those types
of services. So I I think that
when we're looking at these
issues, it's it's imperative
that we break it down.
Even more specific to small
businesses. Uh, manufacturing
and maybe agricultural and maybe
even something else? I don't
know, but I'm just giving some
thought to this. Um and and when
I brought up the issue of parks
and recreation, I think about
places like Silver City and Tao,
which are completely different
places in the world, um and
probably have completely
different needs. Um, When? In
Taos, you have a ski basin, and
by the way, I haven't been to
Silver.
So I have to get there, But, um,
I can't compare. Um, but I I
know that it's a beautiful
place, and, um
I just think that we need to
really think in terms of
Urban and rural and how
And what the needs are for those
areas. Thank you.
So I'll just add to. That is
last year we did go to Silver
City, and we did get to do some
touring there and some and it's
great tourism happening. Um so
it it is happening. And so when
I watched you online hoping to
continue that, uh
representative uh Royal
Caballero
Thank you, Madam Chair, I. I, um
I don't have any other
Um, suggestions for the work
plan, however.
I was sitting back here
thinking, um and this is after
representative Armstrong and
Senator Griggs spoke, Uh, I
think this committee actually is
in the perfect position. Um
To offer example and maybe
demonstrate a way to do things
and I think that's what you were
talking about. Um, when you
Major statements and and intro
began our committee and what
you're envisioning and your
goals and it also overlaps with
your comments about the
committee during the session,
and how hard it is and that you
had a difficult time. But you've
met the challenges and the
committee completed its work.
And you did. You were
acknowledged for your
outstanding job as chair in the
committee.
So
My point is that the re we all
have to deal with the reality of
the fact that we have
fundamental differences,
Fundamental differences, which
then dictate our fundamental
differences in our approach, so
there are differences with
mindsets positions, whatever in
our approach.
Perhaps when we enter into our
discussions on these hot topics,
whatever we wanna call them.
Perhaps we can do so.
From the perspective of thinking
outside of, um outside of our
perspectives, right our our
fundamental differences and
think more about
Presenting suggestions and
resolutions and maybe this can
spill over with the presenters
on our topics. Um, that can
bring us closer to alignment.
Uh, closer to the spirit of
compromise closer to getting out
of this impasse, and, um
Um
World of Yeah World of impasse
because ultimately when we don't
get into that spirit of trying
to find the solutions or a
compromises our community
suffer.
And we don't want our
communities to suffer because
every single one of us all 70 of
us in this house of
representative
Madam chair. We know we have
diverse community. We represent
communities, all our
communities. Poor working poor
well to do you know, and you
name it demographically. We have
to represent those communities
in the end, right when we when
we get elected, and we take the
oath, So if this committee which
has the toughest job because we
have so many varied
perspectives if we can just
start from the standpoint of
presenting, um
Suggestions that would help move
us more in alignment.
And out of impasse, and I think
our communities would really,
uh, appreciate. Uh, our
Are demonstrating that
willingness in the interim
process, Madam chair, it is
probably the best place to do
that, so that when we do come
together, and we all take our
oath on, uh, in January that
we're ready to use that same
approach in trying to, um
enable and enact good
legislation that will help all
of our communities that that
sparked, uh their their
presentations help spark that
thought process And then
finally.
If you can take us to Taiwan,
and we can all learn
From all of the great
development that's going there
and how they've invested with
poor land mass. That would be
great. Um, that's just a joke. I
just
Thank you, Representative. Uh,
Lujan.
Nobody else.
Now Ch We round two
Has every else everyone else on
round two.
Thank you. Uh, thank you. Um, I
just like to add under the, um
Or was this section um
Energy economies and what's
going on with our we We really
need an update with the federal
dollars and the IRA and all
those those, uh, those federal
funds that are out there.
There's
We We? We're meeting the roads
of very significant time with
economic development, and we
wouldn't be able to have many of
these conversations around. Um,
how we are developing, uh, new
energy economies and such such
things like that, then then we
would have if we didn't have,
uh, those fundings as federal
fundings available and with that
that that's gonna go to the
infrastructure again. What do we
do? Where is broadband? Where
are those fundings? Where are
those gaps? Funding where we
need an update on all that and
how that is.
Been mentioned at the forefront
of economic development right
now, if we don't have our
infrastructure in place, uh, we
we don't have economic
development. So where is all
that planning with those
funding? Thank you, madam Chair.
Thank you, representative
Hernandez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um I
just wanna add W. Uh, let's see
two things. So, uh, I would like
to second the decarbonization
that representative Duncan had
talked about earlier. I think
that's super important As we go
along, Um and then under B, if
we can talk about, um
How we make permitting for
development. Um, faster, more
efficient. Uh, I think it is
something that in a lot of
communities in the state right
now, you know, time is slipping
And then some communities I've
heard is taking 6810 months to
get a permit to start building
something. Um and I, You know, I
don't know that we will find any
answers or all the answers, but
I think it's it's a worthwhile
conversation to start. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you.
That, uh
Do we have anybody else?
Round three. I mean, I'm just
kind of a
Madam chair connecting the dots
in regards to, um, talking about
perme permitting barriers,
regulations. I think somewhere
in here if we can have the the
PR C included in some of these
discussions, because, uh, we're
looking at a I We're looking at,
you know these techno
technological advances that are
really going to help increase
again. Economic development.
Where are they? How are they
meeting the the needs. How are
we helping them? Meet those?
Those, Um
Those issues that they're having
so kind of looking at those
barriers, which mentioned just
now about permitting and other
kind of regulatory things. Thank
you, Madam Chair. I appreciate
it.
Thank you, madam Vice chair.
Thank you so much, and and I
wanted to be to to go last just
because I think all of us agree
that when we're talking about
economic development, we we
really can't look at it from one
solution point and I've made
this reference before of like
the wheel of a bicycle tire that
every individual issue that we
bring to this committee has
multiple components, and all of
us from our committees know
those multiple components like
the spokes of a bicycle wheel.
We talk about small businesses.
Not only are we talking about,
um, pain and
Force development. But we're
also talking about what makes it
difficult for them to do their
jobs. Is it higher utility
costs? Is it uh, you know,
delays in permitting, um, costs
of supplies. We all know that
the supply chain has been
severely impacted and has
brought up the cost of
construction fees and
construction costs. And so III.
I appreciate that This committee
is willing to look at all of
those different spokes and
recognize that there's not just
one solution to an issue that
we're addressing in this state.
And so I'm I'm really G.
For those conversations, and I
think it's something that's
uniquely special about this
committee. Um, a couple of
things that I would like to add
to, um, this and I know that
staff will work on where those
categories go with with us, Um
As we've talked about the
internship program, and we have
an internship program, uh, that
is really thriving in southern
New Mexico that we've actually
had. I think 450 young people
apply for these internship
programs, and I believe right
now, the allocation that we gave
at the state was $5 million, but
they actually need 15 million.
If we're gonna address these
internship opportunities
throughout the entire state.
So, um, I would like that. That
if we can bring that onto the
the work plan is to talk about
that and weave that into
apprenticeships internships, um,
and also supplying a workforce.
Um, because if we can nurture
and cultivate young people who
are interested in working in our
areas of business, um many of
us, I think Representative
Armstrong has probably had that
example in your business given
that you've been there so long
as you've gotten people when
they're young, and they stay
with you.
Because of that loyalty because
of that family because of that
commitment and the investment
you've made as an employer in
the investment they make in you
as an employee, and so I think,
um, you know, looking at how we
can support the internship
program at a statewide level, um
to to to do that as well, Um,
one of the things that we
brought in to this community
last year. Um, but because of
the nature of the last session,
we weren't able to bring that
forward is the catastrophic
business relief program. Martin
Fisher, uh, worked on that, um,
found any of the
That might be concerning worked
on those out. So I would like to
bring the modified version to
this committee. Uh, at some
point for consideration for
endorsement, uh, had many
conversations about that last
year with this committee and I
know um and correct me if I'm
wrong, Representative Armstrong,
you are interested in that, uh
as well, um so that we could
help because we all know that
most small businesses are one
catastrophe away from shutting
down either their griddle goes
out their freezer goes out their
cooling units go out, and this
is modeled after a program in
southern New Mexico that I used
my junior money when it
Junior money two years ago to
help support businesses If there
was a catastrophe, and, um, the
last time I talked with our
economic development department,
um they, um, had supported six
businesses that lost their HVAC
units at the height of the the
heat waves and that would have
destroyed those businesses. And
so I would like to to bring that
forward.
Also something that we talk
about. Um and I mentioned this
Also with Representative
Armstrong is really kind of
connecting renewable energy and
recycling to small businesses
because we know when they reduce
their waste and reduce their
overhead. They're increasing
their profits and we had had
this conversation.
Your microphones here in the
house are crampy. Um, when we
had this conversation, uh, last
year was with the, uh, wine and
spirits industry and the amount
of money they have to spend on
glass bottles that they don't
get. And the whole point of
reduce, reuse and recycle is not
to create a need for them to be
re to be manufactured in the
first place. And so, um, talking
with some of our friends in the
spirit and wine industry is if
there is a way that they could
recycle their bottles and re
Them remember when we were in
Demming at the Las Combes plant,
They had people there just
because they had a batch that
needed labels and that was
manually intensive to have
people remove those labels. If
you all remember we were in the
back and getting the tour and
If we could create a plant that
would that would sanitize and
dabel bottles for our growing
spirits industry and reps. And
Senator Griggs, I did not know
it was $10,000 to renew that
license. That's ridiculous, um,
to help our small businesses so
I would love to continue those
conversations. Um, but also that
if we can reduce their need to
buy bottles to replace for their
spirits, it also serves as a
customer engagement opportunity
for these
Businesses because you bring in
10 bottles of their spirits and
they can get a discount. They're
gonna keep coming back. These
are opportunities for small
businesses to maintain and
recruit new customers. And so,
um, actually, what I meant to so
because you're like, What am I
gonna write down, Senator
Hamblin? Uh, a bun. A bottle
Sanitation plant in SA would
really like to look at that and
figure out how we can do that.
Socorro, centrally located. Um
and, uh, and it would make sense
also, um, remaking renewable
energy more affordable to small
business.
Is because the way that our tax
credits are right now it's not.
It's not enticing to small
businesses to put renewable
energy on their facilities, and
we need to make that a little
bit more accessible to them, Uh,
as something when I was talking
about the, um EV charge, Uh, the
EV tax credits the tax rebates
that we worked on with the
budget last year, one of the
questions that I had in those
conversations with the
governor's office was to put
charging stations in rural
communities and small businesses
and seeing how we can help
Encourage people to not only,
uh, see that there are way more
areas that they can charge their
vehicles, therefore, making it
much more enticing to them, but
also how we can encourage people
to go and support small
businesses while their cars are
charging. So let's try and do
that. And then, um, when a
conversation uh and
representative Romero and I can
also talk about this is water as
an economic driver. We've talked
about diversifying our economy
and yet
We also understand how we have a
AAA business area. We have the
oil and gas industry and we have
people who have been working in
there and getting good paying
jobs right out of high school
and if we're continuing to talk
about diversifying our economy,
we I think we as a legislative
body need to provide
opportunities for those workers
to make either equal or more and
newer fields because they have
every right to be concerned. If
we're talking about removing an
opportunity for them to put food
on their table and support their
families, so let's work.
On
Creating more opportunities for
people who are working in
industries to be able to
continue to thrive and make a
living. And I think that, um, we
can do that, especially with the
the I can't get the specifics
because representative Romero
knows more about that, but water
as an economic driver, um and
how we can do that, and not only
protect that resource but also
help support an industry to do
that. And so those are the areas
that, um, I would like to to
have considered for
We're planning. I know. Uh,
Aaron will be like I I'm not
really clear what you were
saying. Senator Hamlin because
you went on and on, Uh but we'll
go from there. Thank you, madam
Chair.
Thank you, madam Vice chair. Um
one thing that was not put on
the work plan, and it was
brought to my attention. Uh,
Senator Sheer had reached out to
me. He had asked for poor space
definition and liability, uh,
required for direct error.
Carbon capture, and I'm not
quite sure what all this is, but
we want to put it on the plan.
Um, I wanna make sure that it
everything that you all have
said goes on in a general way.
If you I just like Senator, Uh,
Hamlin just threw out a lot of
information. If you wanna put be
more direct, please reach out to
myself and to, um, our Erin,
especially our our staff, but
that way, um, if there's
something very, very, um
If we need to focus in, we can
do that, Um, I think we've got
topics in their big topics. Um,
keep in mind. We only have so
many dates. You guys are looking
or sounding very ambitious at
the first day, So I think, uh,
we could have probably hit the
ground running today. Um, I
think it I think it's exciting.
And I think that this is why
this com This committee works so
well because I want us to be
open and have lots of ranges
from when we bring up a topic
that we we have so many ways.
We can go in that topic. Um, but
if you want to see something
real direct, please reach back
out to us so we can capture that
because I don't know that we
captured everything. Um, but
with that, I wanna make sure
that we get a chance to go to
public comment and also, um,
that you all turn in your, um
You're reimbursement forms. Make
sure we get those in before
Everybody leaves. Um so handing,
uh, making sure that we go to to
public comment. I guess I'll go
to Erin.
Are we seeing anybody?
No.
Because we we we talked to
everybody out.
Before everybody leaves. We've
got to do a motion to to make
sure that we're all in agreement
And this is the overall work
plan that we wanna do if
somebody would like to make that
motion vice chair
I'm a motion for acceptance of
the work plan as amended.
And we've got a second.
And before I release anybody, I
need to refer to the staff that
we have done that correctly and
that if there's anything else
that we need to do before
releasing everybody
Oh, and if anybody's opposed
Everybody still agreeable. Very
good. Alrighty. Sounds good.
Thank you. Uh, we will be. Um,
uh, We're gonna try to make this
as, um
As entertaining but also that
everybody gets something out of
this, So I appreciate your your
participation and IP, Uh,
appreciate you all being willing
