Admiral Beverage Company and it
sounds like it's gonna be a fun
tour, so I'm hoping everybody
can come, um, and then we have
got dinner, uh, for legislators
as well and, and staff, and so,
um, wanted to get us moving
because they will be waiting for
us around 3 o'clock. So, uh,
thank you for being here today.
If you introduce yourself and uh
go ahead and start with your
presentation.
All right.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Members
of members of the committee,
thank you for, uh, having me
here today. Um, we're gonna talk
a little bit about, um.
A little update on the alcohol
beverage industry. Uh, my name's
Edward Cooper. I'm the vice
president of public affairs for
Total Wine and More.
Um, you all may have a handout,
um, I have, I have zero slides,
um, but I do have a hand out
front and back, um.
Uh, I'm gonna tell you a little
bit about, uh, Total Wine and
more, and also a little bit
about the three-tier system,
um, I think I'm gonna start with
the three-tier system if that's
OK, Madam Chair. Um, three-tier
system is the system by which,
um, all alcohol, um, uh, flows
through here in the, in the
United States, um, uh, many
people know that, uh, um, that
the 18th Amendment in the late
19 teens, um, brought about
prohibition.
And in 1934, actually 1933, the
21st Amendment was passed, and
that repealed prohibition. Um,
uh, shortly thereafter there was
a book that was written called
Toward Liquor Control that was
backed of all things by John D.
Rockefeller, um, and a number of
other folks, and in it, it laid
out what could best be described
as a plan for how alcohol could
be, could be.
could flow if you pardon the
pun, from uh from the 3 from a
newly created three tiers. The
top tier, um, as you, oh gosh, I
do have it on the top tier is
producers, uh, distillers. I I
love it, uh, distilleries and
wineries, so producer
manufacturers, um, uh, of which
there are many, not just here,
um, in New Mexico and throughout
the United States, but through
just about every um uh nation
that
You can think of on the planet
that that makes um uh distilled
spirits, wines, and beer.
Uh, the second tier, the middle
tier is the wholesale tier, um,
which was, uh, put in place, um,
in part because of the book tour
uh liquor Control and also the,
the effects of coming out of
prohibition with the 21st
Amendment and the members of
that tier are wine and spirits
distributors, beer distributors,
um, in some states, not here in
New Mexico, but in some states,
uh, um, that have chosen to
remain what's called a control.
State
Um, where the state controls
either the uh wholesale.
Of alcohol, um, or the retail or
both.
So, um, that's why, that's why I
put those in the, in the
wholesale tier. What's missing
in there is what's called
importers. So there are some,
uh, they, they would also be
part of the wholesale tier and
in fact um um
sitting next to my friend who's
a wholesaler, um, he can set me
straight on this, but many, um,
uh, many wholesalers, uh, or
there's a number of wholesalers
that are also act as importers
as well. The third tier is the
one that in many ways is closest
to the customer, um,
The end customer, I should say,
and that's uh retailers there's
two types. There's on-premises,
that's bars, restaurants,
taverns, they have an
on-premises license and they
could sell, um.
Typically buy the drink, uh, and
then those who are off premises,
who have off-premise licenses,
um, which would be, uh, liquor
store or package store like
Total Wine and more, um, uh, and
there are over 1000 both 1000 of
those licensees here in New
Mexico of varying degrees of
scis uh here in New Mexico, um,
and, uh, uh, a relatively recent
phenomenon across the country
here in New Mexico as well as
uh.
Is the ability to sell alcohol
in in grocery stores. Those are
also, um.
Off-premises retailers. Um, that
is the, the, the three-tier
system. So thank you for
indulging me.
Um, I'm gonna tell you a little
bit about Total Wine, and then,
uh, um.
Uh, answer some questions, talk
a little bit about some taxes
and then, um, and then answer
any kind of questions you have.
Uh, on the flip side of the
three-tier system is some quick
facts about total wine and more.
Um, we are a
uh package store or a liquor
store like any other, um, we
were founded by two brothers in
1991 in Delaware. Um, the store,
uh, that store still exists,
it's still open. We've never
closed a store. That first door,
uh, um, was 975 square feet.
Um, just to give you an idea
about what 975 square feet might
be is maybe from here on over.
That's about 975 square feet.
Um, uh, over time, the two
brothers who one was founder
and, and co-owns it with his
brother. Uh, over time, um, they
expanded down the east coast,
um, and have continued to
expand, um.
And they did so based upon the
fact that that um uh well, uh,
one was uh went to school and
got an MBA and learn kind of
what we think is the, the most
important part about being a
retailer, and that is
understanding your customer.
And what uh what what that owner
learned was if you're laser
focused on customers and their
needs, um, um, be it products
they're looking for or
operational um conveniences like
in-store pickup or delivery or
whatever it may be. If you're
laser focused on the customer
and this applies not just to
total wine but to every
retailer.
uh, large, medium, and small. If
you're laser focused on the
customer, you'll succeed.
Um,
So, uh,
I'll tell you a little bit
about, I'm not gonna read from
the quick facts, but I will
summarize from them, um, uh, we
are all about the customer.
We, um, uh, believe in giving
the customer what they deserve,
and that is price, service,
selection, and a customer
experience. Anybody who's ever
been in a total win or more, I
hope, has has gotten a little
bit of, of understanding about
that. We strive to be the price
leader in every market that
we're in. Um, we try our best to
be to educate and.
Train our team members. Um, we
take very good care of our team
members, um, um, uh, and we
provide them with the knowledge
that they need to be able to
help the customer, uh, and then
we think that we're that we're
giving a good customer
experience. We always try to be
able to improve on that and are
always open to suggestion, um.
The
Uh, I'll start off with actually
a fun fact.
Um, it is apropos of really
nothing other than um something
that may stun people in this
room.
The
The average total line and more
customer.
Comes to total wine and more
between 3 and 5 times a year.
It's a big shop.
Um,
they those customers take
advantage of the price and the
service and the selection.
And that's it 3 to 5 times a
year.
Um, the question you may ask a
question, I, I don't wanna get
ahead of myself here, but what
do they do the rest of the time?
Well, um, after the big shop is
empty, right, we're not
convenient. You have to drive to
us. Um, there are package stores
that are much more convenient to
the customers that come to us
those 3 to 5 times a year, and
that's where they are the rest
of the time.
Shopping at their at their
local um uh package stores, um,
those owners know their
customers. They know the
customer's spouses, they know
what those folks like, um, that
is something that I don't see
changing or that we don't see
changing any time soon. We can
try our best to be able to know
our customers as best as we can.
We'll never be able to compete,
quite frankly, um, uh, with
those folks who, who um who when
somebody walks in and says, I
happen to have that great cab
that you were talking about the
last time.
Um, uh, that, that is, uh, kind
of circles back to what I said
before. Um, if you're a laser
like focused on your customers,
you're going to do well.
Um, we, uh, a typical total wine
and more.
As, uh, is a big box.
Um, we're no longer 975 square
feet. Um, that store isn't even
975 square feet anymore. Our
typical boxes are somewhere
between 20 and 35,000 square
feet.
We um.
I, I've been with the company,
um, 15 years. I can only
remember one time when somebody
actually built.
Off of a pad, a total one and
more for us.
We, we
Predominantly take 2nd or 3rd
generation retail space.
Um, um, Home Depot, uh, Toys R
Us, uh, Bed Bath and Beyond's,
um, uh, difficulties is an
opportunity for retailers like
us, um, we, we're not terribly
crazy, uh, in this, um,
Uh, about, uh, retail space
sitting empty. So we do
something about it. Um, if the
demographics and if everything
works for us in terms of of of
the type of stores that uh the
type of customers that, that
surround those areas.
We have currently 12,000
employees across the country.
As I wrote in here, we've got as
of this year, as of this month
we've got 280 total wine and
more stores in 29 states. Um,
that I found out this morning is
inaccurate. I wrote it last
night, by the way. I it's
already inaccurate. We're
opening in our twenty-ninth
state, uh, sometime next month.
Um,
In Nebraska
Um, what we are most proud of.
And that's because um they are
supercharged and excited to be
working at Total Wine is our is
our team members.
Um, our team members.
Um
Well, first of all, we're unlike
any other alcohol retailer and
that the number of folks that we
need.
need to be able to run our
stores, right? $200 to 35,000
square feet with 88,000 wines,
4500 or so um spirits and 2000
beers, um, every store is a
little bit different. Every
store is, is, uh, is, um,
curated differently. We need
somewhere between 50 and 75 team
members to be able to run those
stores.
Um,
About 15 years ago.
The two owners, the two owners
are now no longer operating in
day to day. Um, one of the store
owners, um, has filed a um a
long held um passion and
interest, um, and has run for
public office. Um, the other,
um, is active and involved in in
his philanthropy efforts, but
they're still our owners and
members of the board, um, but we
are run by professional retail,
uh, um.
Uh, executives, um, uh, but what
happened about 15 or 20 years
ago was that the older brother
and the younger brother, the two
owners decided that on our
On our job applications.
They were going to ban the box.
They said, um, and at the same
time, um, they chose to, uh, um,
to set up our hiring in such a
way that we would welcome
returning citizens as team
members, um, it's uh, it is
something both of those have
turned out to be immensely
successful for us.
The
The uh.
The team members that we do have
on on staff who um who are
returning citizens, their
retention rate is off the
charts. They work hard. They do
great, um, and so we like to
think of ourselves, um, even
though we're large, we can still
be personal and um uh and we,
uh, again, it's our team members
that are treating our customers,
um, and giving them that good,
uh.
service, um,
what we do is provide them with
training. The first thing we do
with them in training is safety,
safety not only in a store where
there's a lot of glass and stuff
can be broken, but stays, but
safety in terms of, um,
Uh, uh, in, in terms of running
and operating a retail operation
that, by the way, we don't need
to spend a whole lot of time on
because most of our team members
come from the retail world.
Um, again, I mentioned a couple
of retailers that have gone out
of business. Um, those folks,
uh, um, who have worked in
retail know that it's long hours
on your feet, um, customer
service is is is, um, uh, is,
uh, first and foremost, um, we
also get it by the way, from uh
team members from the restaurant
world.
Again, on your feet for a number
of hours, you've got a sense of
what it is, it is to please a
customer.
Um, so, uh, but it's safety in
terms of um uh prevention of
sales to minors.
Uh, we have a whole, we train
our teams weekly.
Monthly, quarterly, and
annually.
At every week at just about
every week, weekly training
session in in I hope all of our
stores, but I imagine, um, uh,
most of them, uh, they are
reminded of of the fact that uh
that nobody is allowed in our
stores.
Um,
Who's under 21 unless they're
accompanied by a parent or a
guardian.
We will turn away people. We, we
are a beverage company we sell
Pepsi and Coke. We sell ginger
ale and sodas and seltzers and
all that kind of stuff doesn't
matter. We're an alcohol
retailer, we're not going to let
them in. At all of our checkout
stands, you will see that if
you're a certain age, um, we're
gonna check your IDs. We also go
one way, one additional way, um,
beyond that, and that is, uh, we
incentivize our, our front-end
team members, our cashiers to
ask for ID.
It's not a lot. It's a little
bit, um, but it adds up, um, uh,
they don't have to wait every
two weeks for it to show up in
their pay. It shows up at the
end of the week. I pay them
through a check, um, and, uh,
last year from 2023.
Company-wide we had uh about
10,000 cash register
transactions.
We had 0 sales to miners. We
have, we still have compliance
checks, um,
um.
Bailey has left, um, but, uh,
um, but the, uh, um, Mr.
Sanchez's office is uh checking
compliances just as his
colleagues in states all around
the country are doing that as
well, um, we've got the best
record on No sales to minor and
no sales to folks who are who
are who are visibly inebriated
as well. I was showing um uh
Carrie a uh uh something on our,
on our, uh, not our website but
on uh uh an online chat.
Where somebody was complaining
that they wouldn't, that total
one and more, they gave us one
store, and they gave us one
store because total win and more
would not allow that person who
is there with their kid sister,
right? The person was 21, but
the sister was not, the younger
sister was not, and we said, I'm
sorry, we can't allow you in
here.
Um
So be it, uh.
So
I guess the last things I want
to talk to you about and then I
will, I will, uh, move on. I
know I'm, um, taking up a little
bit of time is, um, you know,
there's control states and there
are licensed states, um, in just
about every license state that I
know of, um, taxes, uh, we
collect like every other
retailer, we collect taxes at
the um sales taxes, um, but
about every, just about every
state that I know of, um, that
we operate in excise taxes and
those type of things so.
Collected by the wholesalers and
I'm, I'm going to uh um uh pass
a baton in a second. Um, what we
have found in um
In at the retail tier is that
when there is some uh change or
perspective change in taxes on
uh, um, you know, percent of
volume as opposed to, you know,
that that's that that's not very
good, that's bad. One of the
reasons unintended consequences
is
Customers trade down.
Um, and so while the intended
purpose may be to be able to um
uh uh uh be noble. Um, the fact
of the matter is, is you're in,
in many instances, you're not
finding, we are not finding that
uh that the customer will, um,
Will either consume less.
Or, or not at all.
And so, um, uh.
They will trade down um and
spend for some uh something
that's uh um.
Perhaps equally as uh harmful,
um, but less expensive.
With that, with, with that
happiness, I will, uh, uh, Madam
Chair, I'll take any questions
that you may, you or the
committee may have.
Actually, what I like to do is
go on to the next presentation
and then we'll do all the
questions at once.
I'll do your uh
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, uh, my name is Alan
Markey. I'm the region vice
president for Premier
Distributing.
Here in New Mexico, and I thank
you for the opportunity to
present before the committee
today, and I want to provide an
update on the economic
contribution that we as a
wholesaler group provide
Um, in the state of New Mexico.
Uh
Today I primarily represent
The larger wholesalers so I
represent, um Admo Beverage
Company from ourselves, Premier
Distributing, uh, Republic
National Distributing Company.
And Southern Glazers, Southern
Glaciers wide in spirits and LNF
distributors.
We are the larger wholesalers,
but there are dozens of
wholesalers, smaller wholesalers
throughout the state.
Of New Mexico.
And the data I'm going to
present today is largely from
the 5 large wholesalers.
I'm also gonna touch on the.
So get there get there. There we
go.
There you go.
Uh, so I'm also gonna touch on
the tree tier system that Mr.
Cooper referenced.
And our role in that system.
So as uh Ed mentioned, uh, after
the repeal of prohibition in
1933, the system was broken into
three pieces. Producers and
manufacturers who are brewers,
wine growers, and distillers,
wholesalers is in the middle,
and then retailers like Total
Wine that we then sell to.
Uh, I'll go through the benefits
here in a minute of that system.
Uh
wholesalers are very capital
intensive operations. They're
very labor intensive operations
and they're very expensive
operations to run. We make
things efficient for both the
manufacturing tier and for the
retail tier.
Instead of having multiple
brewers delivering to retailers
like you'll see in the bottom on
the left.
We've already much consolidate
all of the uh incoming product.
We at Premier Distributing
represent 40 different
suppliers.
Yeah, on the alcohol side, we
also distribute non-alcoholic
beverages and have 22 different
suppliers on the non-alcoholic
side.
The benefits of the three-tier
system of enumerated several of
them here, but the main ones
that I think are relevant um in
New Mexico.
The first one is the collection
of tax.
Uh, we are a very efficient and
very timely collector of tax.
Um, the alcohol excise tax
that's levied on alcohol.
We also provide significant
market access to smaller
producers.
I'll cover later the volume and
the the revenue that we um
Uh, support in terms of local
distillers, brewers.
And wine growers
Uh, but because of the three
tier system and the wholesaler
role in that system to provide
access to markets.
Uh, you will see now if you look
back 20 years and you look at
what a beer shelf used to look
like.
There were very few
manufacturers who were providing
most of the products on those
shelves. Today, if you go to a
beer shelf, you have massive
choice for consumers. Retailers
of massive choice in terms of
what they can buy from us, and
consumers have a massive amount
of choice compared to
Um, what they would have had 20
years ago. And what you may see
in the soda aisle. The soda
aisle is a very different
business.
Um, it is generally a uh pay for
space business. So it's
generally consolidated amongst
large manufacturers, not local
producers as you see in beer,
wine and spirits.
Um, in terms of our economic
contribution.
The biggest contribution that we
make similar to what Ed talked
about in terms of total line and
their employment is as a
collective, just at the 5
wholesalers. We employed 1300
New Mexicans,
um, in New Mexico. We also have
some people who live in border
towns, uh, that serve
communities and uh we're proud
of what we do in terms of
employment. We're proud in terms
of the positions that we provide
in terms of entry level jobs to
provide people with a career
path and long term.
Opportunities to move from.
Beginning of a career where you
become a merchant, you're a
merchandiser, or you work in a
warehouse and you work your way
all the way through to
leadership and management to be
able to run a distribution
company in our state. So on this
particular, uh,
Chart page you'll see trailer of
Associates there on the bottom
left. They all started out at a
warehouse and merchandizing
level, uh, Rick Moya, Elena
Sassa, and Martha Carroll, and
they are now a key members of
the leadership team here in New
Mexico.
Uh, we provide warehousing jobs,
merchandizing jobs. We train
people to be commercial driver's
license drivers, and we moved
people, uh, through our career
paths into sales and management.
In terms of taxes paid, I
estimate that the total payroll
that we contributed in the
Mexico economy is about $700 to
$80 million a year. For those
1300 employees that we employ
throughout the state. We pay or
we remit about $3.8 million of
payroll taxes.
And we pay counties, um,
Over $500,000 in real estate and
personal property taxes each
year. In addition, we obviously
have a heavy fleets and we pay a
lot of diesel, gasoline taxes,
uh, heavy duty mileage taxes,
and obviously pay gross receipts
tax and compensating tax on the
services that we consume as part
of our business, particularly
surrounding um
uh chilling a refrigerated space
maintenance and service, uh,
fleet main
equipment maintenance. So, uh,
we have a significant knock-on
effect, not just through
payroll, but also through the
taxes that we pay, uh, in terms
of the effect that we have and
the impact we have in New
Mexico.
Now one thing I do want to touch
on because it becomes topical
when it comes to legislative
sessions is alcohol excise
taxes.
Um, alcohol excise taxes are
levied by volume.
Yeah, and they have been in most
states since the repeal of
prohibition in 1933.
It is a tax that is collected by
wholesalers. We're very
efficient at doing that. The
sales that we sell this month to
retailers, we will remit the tax
by the 25th of November.
Um,
We're timely
Which makes sure that any
programs that are funded from
the monies that are collected
through excise taxes are funded
timely.
Uh
But ultimately it's a tax on
consumers and it's a tax on the
Mexicans' cost of living.
Uh,
there have been, um,
In the last few sessions.
Conversations about cents for
drink.
And I want to just convert what
that means in terms of.
Um,
I'm just gonna talk specifically
about beer, and the largest beer
package, the leading beer
package in New Mexico is a 30
pack of 12 ounce beer.
If you're talking about a 25
cents a drink.
Increase in the tax on that
product.
That will result in a $7.50
increase in the amount of tax on
that product.
We will pass that on to
retailers, and retailers will
add in their retail margin to
that product.
So the price increase will be
about $10 per package.
For customers who are buying a
value oriented.
Uh, product, they're price
conscious consumers are buying
it to share with friends,
they're buying it to share with
family, enjoy over a meal after
a hard week's work.
So that would result in about a
30 to 30 7% increase in the
retail price that that customer
is going to pay at the register,
which in a time when consumers
are challenged by the cost of
living would be a significant
impact on any consumer.
The other conversation that has
come up in recent years is that
hasn't been an increase in the
alcohol tax in 30 years, and
that is true. There hasn't been.
Um,
Well, when you look at the
numbers, the reality is even
after no tax increase in 30
years and you'll see it on the
slide there, but you'll see it
more graphically on the next
slide.
New Mexico has, as we know.
One of the lowest personnel per
capita incomes in the state. So
on the top left, you will see
how we rank versus Arizona,
Colorado, Oklahoma and Texas.
And then you will see the
Mexico's in yellow where our
taxes are relative on spirits.
Wine and beer relative to the
surrounding states.
And for compared to most states,
we are significantly higher,
even without an increase in the
last 30 years.
So to levy any increase in tax.
On consumers at the current time
when cost of living is a
challenge, seems like relative
to other states are doing.
To be a challenge.
So I just want to touch on that
because that is something that
is topical when it comes to our
industry.
But I want to jump back to the
economic contribution that we
make.
And the significant positive
economic contribution we make,
particularly through the
employment that we provide
throughout the state.
So you'll see here a list of 80
communities throughout
throughout Mexico. We are
primarily based obviously in in
terms of our warehousing
facilities in the center of the
state.
Um, you'll see in Albuquerque,
we employ 441 people as a group.
In Clovis, 20 people in
Farmington, 22 people in Santa
Fe, 63 people in rows about 132
people. So even though our
warehouses are primarily
centrally based here, although
some wholesalers do have
warehouses in Las Cruces, as we
do, and Roswell.
There is employment throughout
the state.
And you can look at it and you
can look at your districts and
see what employment we have and
the economic knock-on impact
that we have on all of those
communities. You'll see some
surrounding border towns listed
here also, but this represents
um,
About 1100 of the 1300 employees
and where they currently live.
Uh
To see the the the dominoes in
terms of the economic impact
that we have.
In terms of careers.
Um, a lot of our employees are
non-college degreed.
A lot of them come in as entry
level positions in the warehouse
or as a merchandiser. And this
is our for premiere, this is
kind of our career path below,
similar to what Ed talked about
in terms of total wine, we
train.
We train our people in safety.
We trained them to be
professional, we trained them to
merchandise stores effectively
to rotate beer. Beer is a fresh
product.
And it needs to be kept fresh,
removed from the stores when it
expires.
Um,
And we provide internal training
and development resources. None
of our training is external. We
train all of our own commercial
drivers.
Who then obviously have a domino
effect as they move through uh
employment maybe in other
places.
But
People moved through various
levels for each position, there
are certain criteria and
training and experience that
needs to be acquired before
people move to another lab.
But people can have long-term
careers uh with our companies,
uh, Mark and Elena and uh Rick
that I mentioned earlier, Mark
and Rick have been with us for
25 years and worked their way
through the career path.
Orlena's been with her company
for 8 years.
I moved to a leadership
positions, and are very
successful in what they do.
So people moved through from
entry level, we train.
They moved to management
positions, they moved to
leadership positions, they moved
to sales position. And these
opportunities outside of our
industry may not be as available
as they are within it.
The other economic contribution
that we make, I referenced it
earlier, uh, access to markets
and.
The opportunity that we give New
Mexico brewers, distillers, and
wine growers.
To expand their businesses. In
the last 12 months we've
purchased over $27.5 million.
product from New Mexico Brewers,
wholesalers, or brewers,
distillers, and wine growers.
We provide very cost efficient
access to the market, to
independent and chain on-premise
and off-premise retail accounts.
And we've allowed and
contributed to the significant
expansion of that successful
industry in New Mexico.
And we hope to continue to do
so. You'll see there, the
picture I have below is what a
shelf set looks like today. It's
very different to what a soda
set looks like and it's very
different to what a beer set
looked like 20 years ago.
Uh, because of the access that
local brewers.
distillers and wine growers get
from due to our position in the
marketplace.
In terms of charitable giving,
um, in terms of cash donations,
we've donated over $770,000 to
national and mainly New Mexican
charities in the last 5 years.
Um, we additionally donate
product, um.
To various community
organizations throughout the
year. And we also are involved
when there are fire disasters
throughout our communities,
donating truckloads of water and
also on an ongoing basis,
donating pallets of water to
volunteer fire departments
through the association with the
National Volunteer Fire Council.
So we try to do our best to
improve our communities
throughout the state.
Um, so hopefully that gives you
a flavor of our industry and how
we contribute to the vitality of
the New Mexico economy and we
want to continue to do that. We
want to continue to expand our
businesses as the economy grows
and um again, on behalf of all
the wholesalers, I thank you for
the time today.
Thank you, thank you for your
presentation, um, do we have any
anyone with questions? OK. Go
ahead, Senator. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Mr. Cooper, what do you mean by
returning citizens.
Turning citizens is a term
that's used for folks who were
previously incarnate uh um have
been uh
Previously in jail and have
returned.
So these are opportunities for
them to, to build, to build a
work history again once once
they get back in. OK, great, I'm
glad that you do that. Thank you
very much for doing that.
Any other questions?
OK, uh, Senator Maestas.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you gentlemen very
much just um.
The uh
Thank you for the
The PowerPoints as well.
Um,
There's gonna be a appearing on
taxes in a different committee I
think on Friday so folks are.
Anticipating that, but um.
The uh
When, when, when I refresh our
memory when product is sold from
the distributor to the retailer.
I rush receipts tax collected?
Or just the excise tax.
Gross receipts tax is charged on
the purchase by the by the
consumer at retail.
So the excise tax flows through
from the wholesaler.
To the retailer, retailer,
that's part of the cost of their
product. So they have their
margins and then at the register
gross receipts tax is also added
on top.
OK, great, great. OK, so the
excise tax is charged.
Uh, to the retailer when, when
it purchases and then the good
old fashioned GRT is charged to
the consumer when when it
purchases. um, do we, do you
know what percentage, madam
chair, what percentage of, of,
um, alcohol is sold by the drink
and what percentage is sold by
the package in the state of New
Mexico.
I don't know percentage. I would
say for our business in terms
of.
What is all off premise, so to
retailers like Total Wine,
grocery stores, packaged liquor,
probably 90.
192% of our business is that.
In terms of bars, restaurants,
etc. I would say it's about 8%
of our business, and that's just
premier distributing. I can't
represent what it is for the
other wholesalers.
Madam Chair, gentlemen, you said
8%.
Yeah, 8%. Thank you. So that's
incredibly high, Madam Chair.
Incredibly high in researching
House Bill 255. I think Boston
obviously is an extreme, but
Boston 73% of the alcohol
consumed in Boston is by the
drink.
Uh,
People just have a different
relationship with alcohol than
we do here in New Mexico, I
think last time I checked it was
like 85% plus alcohol is
purchased by the package.
That's I may members I may have
misspoken 8% is sold by the
drink.
No, I understand. No, I
understand what you said. OK,
so, so yeah, thank you, sir. So
anyway, in Boston, 73% is sold
by the drink in New Mexico, I
believe it's somewhere of 85%
plus.
By package and so because of
the, the horrible stories of
DWI, we're led to believe that
that liquor by the drink is the
devil liquor by the drink is
horrible that that that the more
point of sale, the more DWI,
it's actually a liquor by the
drink is actually a more mature
relationship with alcohol and
liquor by the package and that
package liquor, you know,
someone taking a 30 pack home on
a Tuesday night that that
actually has a higher social
costs
Despite the fatalities on uh
because the DWI has a higher
social cost than liquor by the
drink. So I think, um, you know,
if there's any further
discussions on, on uh
entertainment venues, uh.
Comedy venues, entertainment
venues, you know, allowing more
uh licenses to sell alcohol by
the drink, we should consider
that, uh, because in my opinion,
like liquor by the package has a
higher social cost.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Uh, Representative,
oh, excuse me, Senator Tollman.
Well, thank you, um.
Madam Chairman,
So thank you gentlemen for being
here.
Mr.
Marky, you.
You have 5 corporations. What
percentage of wholesaling is
done by these 5 companies in New
Mexico.
You obviously have the major
share, right?
Madam Chair, uh, Senator, yes, I
would expect we would have most
of this year.
80-90%.
Oh
That information isn't available
publicly.
Um, it's not, I don't know what
the total industry size is in
New Mexico because New Mexico
does not produce reports of what
excise taxes collected monthly.
By distributor, so I don't know
the share. It's safe to say it's
safe to say it would be by far
the
Bulk major portion.
Well you said thank you for that
answer.
Madam Chair.
You indicated that you spent.
$770,000 on charity.
Or is over the last 4 years you
divided that by 4 and you get
190,000.
Well, the alcohol industry spent
more than that lobbying the
legislature last year. They
spent somewhere between 200 and
250,000 pounds.
Just to put that
Figure into perspective.
Also,
New Mexico has the highest
alcohol related death in the
United States.
Does that concern you at all,
Madam Chair, members, Senator,
members committee, Senator, I
would, of course, it concerns
us.
I'm sorry, what? Of course it
concerns us.
Can you expound on that?
Um, we don't have to.
And one last question, uh.
For one last comment, Madam
Chair.
Um, I can assume you're going to
oppose an alcohol tax increase
again this year, in 2025.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee representative, I
can't speak for all 5
wholesalers. We, that's not
something that we have discussed
in terms of what our position
would be on any particular bill,
but given that
Our current tax
After no increase in 30 years is
still one of the highest in the
region or is the highest by far
in the region relative to.
New Mexican's personal per
capita income.
I would expect, yes, that we
would pose an increase in the
tax. Well, thank you, thank you
for that answer. And one final
comment.
Question, Madam Chair, is
You know, in the past, the
medical profession.
Recommended
moderate drinking.
So in the last few months
there's been a
Multiple articles I've read that
the medical profession is now
recommending you don't drink at
all.
Um,
Does that concern you at all?
And I'm sure members of the
committee, Senator.
Currently the USDA is updating
their dietary guidelines, which
will be published in 2025.
And we as an industry would
await the outcome of that study
that they're currently
undertaking. I'm sorry, I got
bad ears. I didn't hear that
last time. I didn't have my
hearing aid in today, um.
The USDA is currently reviewing.
Their dietary guidelines.
And alcohol is one of the
components of that review.
And we would await the outcome.
Of that review.
Um, and what their guidance
would be based on.
The evidence that they find.
OK, thank you for that answer.
That's all I have, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Lopez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
again, thank you for your
presentation today, um, Madam
Chair, you know, we've had a few
bills in front of the
legislature, um, with regards to
raising the tax on alcohol.
And of course, it's not an easy
task, even just to have a good
thorough hearing in either
chamber, um.
But I appreciate the questions
and comments being made by both
Senator Maestas and Senator
Tollman, um.
And I think this is just more a
comment, Madam Chair, is that.
The use of um alcohol.
is at a high rate in New Mexico.
Very, very high, um, and we know
that the the numbers are there.
Um, Madam Chair, some of us have
been around when we close like
up and drive up liquor windows.
And I've made this comment to a
few of my colleagues, our
colleagues, and that even when
we have gas stations that sell
packaged liquor, it's just to me
another form, Madam Chair, of
having a drive up liquor window.
Except this time you put gas in
the car, then you drive away and
pop one open.
Um,
I guess, Madam Chair, when we
talk about
Raising taxes on something that
we don't necessarily need to
sustain ourselves.
I, I always find it an
interesting discussion, not just
amongst us, but amongst the
public and lobbyists when they
come up and try and share with
us as to how um.
Money is contributed to certain
entities such as what was
presented here in front of us.
But you know, Madam Chair,
maybe.
Um,
looking as to how.
The the how to say the.
The hurt that comes into our
communities from the consumption
of liquor.
You know, DWI, domestic
violence. I mean, there's all
these other outcomes.
Of when people
Use drink liquor for whatever
reasons they may be doing it.
But Madam Chair, we don't have
enough programs to help people.
In the state of New Mexico.
Um,
To help themselves.
You get off
From having to use liquor as a
way of making themselves feel
better, much as much, I mean,
liquor is a drug.
And all the other drugs that we
have available.
Um, you know, a tax increase 25
cents. We can see the numbers
and we've seen it in testimony
before, Madam Chair.
But for me,
If we could increase taxes on
liquor, maybe that would
decrease consumption to a
certain limit.
You know, a certain extent.
Because even on cigarettes we've
seen it if you increase taxes on
cigarettes, there's a certain
limit that people can.
have financially maybe to
purchase all the liquor that
they so choose.
But we also, Madam Chair, I
think, need to look as to what
we do to invest in services that
help our people.
So maybe some of this increase
in the tax could be utilized for
services provided for those who
um.
Need help.
For lack of better terminology.
An investment in some of those
health services, counseling,
whatever it may be because not
everybody has access to
insurance that pays, um, I mean,
you know, we know the list and
we talk more about what the
social ills are.
There's nothing wrong with
having a glass of wine, a glass
of beer.
But when you do, and I, we see
it when we go to the the grocery
grocery store, yes, but even at
the gas station, people walk out
with those huge, you know, it's
not a six pack anymore, it's a
huge amount that they walk out
of the the gas station with as
their driving away.
I think New Mexico could tax
itself a little bit and use
those dollars to invest in
helping.
Our people.
Just a comment. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Senator.
Representative Montoya.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, just
Kind of a greater uh overview of
today, just interesting to me
how where we handle.
Um,
Liquor
And marijuana, how we handle it
so differently.
Um,
The one thing about liquor,
packaged liquor.
I I don't have to worry about
somebody who's drinking packaged
liquor.
Uh, getting
Uh, lethal dose of fentanyl.
Um
We don't have to worry.
About um.
The
The mass homelessness that we
see now.
Um, and if anybody was paying
attention, coincides with us
changing our marijuana laws.
Um,
It it's just interesting to me
how we, we are looking at a
state like New Mexico where we
have a massive.
Uh, addiction problems.
And yet we're trying to prop up
one industry.
When we can just drive down the
street, we'll be going here in a
little while to to the toll wine
location if we want to drive
down central, um.
There has always been
homelessness due to.
Alcohol in New Mexico.
But not what we've got now.
And it it's just interesting to
me.
That one conversation we're
trying to prop up an industry
which is a.
A drug.
And then we're looking at maybe.
Taxing an already taxed heavily
taxed industry.
Um, a few years ago I started
working with at the time, uh,
representative Maestas.
On, uh, doing away with.
Um,
The, the, essentially the folks
who had won the lottery with
liquor licenses because we had
so few in our communities. If I,
I grew up in Farmington and I
could go over to Durango and
every other business has a
liquor license.
And they're cheap.
And most of the alcohol consumed
across the border in Colorado is
by the drink.
We created this problem of
alcoholism in New Mexico by
limiting the number of outlets
that we had to serve alcohol.
Because if you wanted alcohol,
you had to go buy it and then
you had to take it home.
Hopefully you wouldn't be
consuming it while you were
driving there, but we created
that problem.
I think we're in the.
In the process of remedying that
problem.
But it it's just.
As I've listened to the comments
to the previous.
A presentation and the comments
to this presentation, it's like
we're treating.
Both sets of of uh.
Substance that can.
Alter your state. We're we're
treating them differently.
And I don't, I don't understand
why. I don't understand why we
wanna pick.
A winner
And create a loser all of a
sudden. I, I, I really just
don't get it. If we're gonna
allow people to make these
decisions, and that seems to be
when we when we went down the
road of, of recreational
marijuana, we seem to decide
that we were going to let people
make up their mind as to what
they're gonna consume.
And I guess we're gonna do that
until we prop up.
Marijuana industry enough that
then we can then start trying to
tear it down.
It's just it's just a.
Interesting to me to listen to
the comments.
As if we're in favor of one and
we're against the other, and,
and like I said, the one thing I
know about if I go get something
at Total Wine this afternoon. I
don't have to worry about
getting a lethal dose of
fentanyl in my total wine
package.
Um, until we have a.
More reasonable.
Alcohol distribution like, uh, I
think Senator Maestas mentioned
in Boston where people go and
have a drink or two.
It's really expensive to have
more than one drink or two in a,
in a location, but until we get
to that point where we're
saturated with enough liquor
licenses where that can happen
and people can get the alcohol
close enough to home that
they're not driving.
50 miles like you would do in
Tula Rosa.
Where there's maybe one liquor
license and all of Tularosa at
one restaurant.
Um, other than that, you're
driving to Alamogordo and then
you're driving 55 miles an hour
or more on the road to get home.
So, instead, you go to Walmart
and you buy a 30 pack.
And then, and then in a state
like New Mexico where we already
have a group of people who.
Already have addiction problems.
Then are they opening it on the
road, or then are they drinking
the entire 30 pack in 2
evenings.
Um, this is a greater
conversation and I, and it's
just, it's just interesting to
me as I've sat here just
listening to, we, we.
We're ignoring our overall
addiction problem in New Mexico,
and all you have to do is drive
down the street.
And observe it for yourself.
And uh I, I, I think, I think
this is a comprehensive
discussion. I don't think, I
don't think we should be.
Have animosity towards one if
we're not going to.
Treat the other in the same
fashion. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Uh, do we have any
other questions for our
presenters?
Yes, yes, Representative
Brendon.
Thank you, Madam Chair and um
presenters, you know, as I look,
and I, and I hear the
conversation, I look at the
community contribution, uh,
charitable giving, which is
really quite admirable, and one
of the things that I've been
listening to in the conversation
regarding um the alcohol tax
that had been discussed,
particularly during the last
legislative session was the
money would be used for
rehabilitation. And so if we
look at the fact that you give
already
To charitable organizations,
what would happen if you
expanded the your giving and
that you gave to an organization
that was focused on
rehabilitation, for example, and
uh and how would that work out
as a, as a good compromise in
terms of what was wanting to be
achieved and what is actually
happening. So it says that you
give $770,000 to national and
local charities, and since 2020,
so that's 4 years, that's about
1.
$191,000 a year or about $5300
per organization. And I'm just
thinking that if that if we had
the party sit down and you're
given already to charitable
organizations. If it was a
nonprofit that was utilizing the
concept of rehabilitation, we
might be able to come to a good
compromise. So I'm just giving
you that to think about and uh
we can discuss that later. And
thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you and um.
I think some really good points
were made.
Um, especially when we talk
about both cannabis and alcohol
and um in my brain when I kept
hearing both of the the
conversations, I am.
You know, to hear where some of
those tax dollars are being put
and instead of going back into
the general fund, I do think
that we should designate that we
do look at mental health
services. Um, I think that would
be, that would really move the
dial because I think what we're
saying is we're trying to
regulate how people, people, we
want to regulate how people
behave.
Uh, through taxes, and I don't
think that that works, um, you
know, I, I, I've run an agency.
I'm a social worker, and I have
seen people with addiction
problems for you for many, many
years, and what I, what I think
I heard you say is that they go
to a lower uh brand instead of
cutting down usage, and I have
seen that firsthand and so I'm
very, very confident that, I
mean, I don't want people doing
rubbing alcohol and, you know,
doing other things like that
which would be.
are more damaging, um, I, I
believe that that we can do
this, um, in a smart way, and if
we are gonna do look at tax
increases or where we're going
to put the taxes because I don't
wanna, I don't want, I don't
like when we say tax increases
cause I get nervous, um,
especially in an election year,
so, but what I wanna say is we
have to put those dollars in the
right place and so, um, I
appreciate the jobs that you're
giving you Mexicans. I
appreciate the economy. I
appreciate being able to go get
a nice bottle of wine.
Um, and, and, um, what we also
need to do is have some
education, um, with starting
with with kids, you know, we, we
need to talk about what alcohol
does. We need to talk about
being of age to make those
decisions for their brains to be
developed enough to be able to
make some of those decisions and
so starting at that level, um, I
think and then moving on, and
so, um, I think you gave us all
lots of things to talk about,
but for the most part, I think
we all were kind of on the same
page.
So I thought at least that's a a
good direction for this
committee. Um, with that, I'm
going to close this segment out.
I appreciate you being here. Um,
we, we have a little bit of
housekeeping to do, so I'm gonna
go ahead and, and dismiss you
all and we'll do a little bit of
housekeeping before we, we
adjourn. Thank you, Madam Chair.
So thank you, thank you.
I.
No.
So before, before we adjourn
today, um, you all have been
given the updated calendar of
where our, where our uh tour is
gonna be, um, I'm hoping that
you guys will really, uh, go to
the two tours that we have lined
up, um, because, um.
Both locations are doing nice
things for us. And so they want
to, you know, we're the one
tomorrow, there's gonna be
students involved. Um, we also
have a dinner invitations and so
everything is on your sheet
here. So I wanted to make sure
that one of them was left off
for tomorrow's dinner, and I
wanted to make sure you all had
that information. Um, and then
of course on Thursday we um are
one of the, one of the uh only
interim committees this year to
be able
to Netflix and so I think that's
gonna be really pretty cool, um,
before we close out well we need
to look at our minutes and uh do
we have a,
a motion has it has you have
you,
has everybody looked at the
minutes? Probably not.
My motion to approve the minutes
from the last meeting.
Seconded by Representative. OK.
All righty, well,
Thank you
That was the, the one piece that
Aaron.
Oh
Would you like to take it up?
OK, I thought it was gonna be.
OK,
let's get all in favor.
Uh.
See, I try to rush this all day.
I have to rush myself, um, were
there two sets or just one? I
think there should be 2. No
one's ours and then one's mine.
What's the agenda for this.
Alrighty,
so we,
we, we do have 22 sets of
minutes. OK, wait, wait, before
we go there, so with no, with no
opposition, the first set is
approved and I will go to the
second setupt's meeting, yes.
I'm motion to approve the
meeting in minutes from
September.
11 through the 13th in Las
Cruces.
We have a
A second, do we have any
opposition?
OK.
And they, those are approved as
well. Alrighty, um, I hope to
see you all at the next
location. Can we leave our stuff
here, Erin?
All right, we can leave our
things here and we will see you
