It also be very respectful of
everybody's time. Um, so I'm
gonna try to move us along. So
what I would like to do is start
with introductions of the
committee and of course we're
gonna start with representative
Allison, if you'll just give us
a, where you're from and, uh,
and introduce yourself. Thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
been in my language that means
good morning.
I know you're not going to hear
that too much after January.
But I'm glad to be a part of
this committee, and I'm from
District 4, which is in San Juan
County. You don't get no, no
further northwest in New Mexico
than I.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee and everyone
present. My name is Martin
Zamora. I'm House District 63. I
cover the south half of Curry
County, north half of Roosevelt,
all debaca, all Guadalupe, and a
little touch of San Miguel
County. Glad to be here in
beautiful Albuquerque, saw a few
balloons this morning. Looks
nice. Thank you, Madam Chair.
OK
Uh, Madam Chair, Madam Vice
Chair. Good to see you.
Uh, I'm Representative Joshua
Hernandez. I represent District
60, which is the bottom part of
Sandoval County, um, right up
against Albuquerque.
Uh, good morning, everyone,
Madam Chair, Madam Vice Chair.
My name is Christina Parajon and
I'm the representative for House
District 25, right in the center
of Albuquerque. Thanks for being
here today.
Hello, good morning, Madam
Chair. Bill Tollman
representing, uh,
A portion of the Northeast
Heights, Senate District 18.
Look forward to today's
discussion. Thank you.
Madam Chair, good morning,
Antonio Maestas, Senate District
26, which is here in Berno
County, Albuquerque, uh.
Uh, west of the river, uh, West
Mesa, Triscoll neighborhoods.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
state rep Joey Garrett. I
represent uh Northwest
Albuquerque, and when you see
the volcanoes, they are the
spiritual and physical center of
my district. Great to be here.
Representative Breo, do you want
to introduce yourself?
Um
My navigation had me everywhere
but here.
Um, so I'm representative
Cynthia Brego and I represent
District 17, which is closest to
Cottonwood Mall area Rio Rancho,
and uh Corralis, thank you.
Good morning everybody. I'm
Carrie Hamblin, senator for
District 38 in southern New
Mexico and um uh enjoyed
exploring the campus today
trying to find the building, but
I'm really glad that we're all
here. We, we are gonna have an
exciting day.
I didn't know that we were
putting a scavenger hunt as part
of our tour today, but it sounds
like everybody got a little, a
little tour of the campus. Um, I
am Dorian Gallegos. I'm chairing
this committee this this
interim, uh, session, um, very
happy to be here, District 52
down in Las Cruces, uh, southern
part of the state, um, very, uh,
It's always nice to come up
north because it's always so
much cooler, so I'm always glad
about that, so, um, with that,
I'm gonna ask our first group
of, uh, presenters to come up.
We've got, um,
The mayor of Albuquerque, Tim
Keller, Max Grender, the
director of economic development
for the the city of Albuquerque,
Greg Hall, uh, mayor and city of
Rio Rancho and Victoria
Archuleta, senior economic
developer for Village of Las
Lunas.
So good morning, um, I, before
we do start, I do want to
recognize um two legislators
that just passed, uh, John
Arthur Smith and Donna Irwin. I
just want to make sure that um
we just have a moment to uh
think about them and, and, uh,
maybe send up a prayer or two.
they were titans in the
legislature, and I just want to
make sure to, to just take a few
minutes.
I was telling um Mayor Keller
that John Arthur Smith had a
going away party for himself a
couple weeks ago, he did it in
Palomas. Uh, he took a shot to
all his friends and he said he
wanted to uh make sure he heard
what everybody was saying about
him before he left this earth,
and so, um, to, to the very end,
he was still in very good
spirits and so I had the honor
of of having a few minutes with
him, so, um, just wanted to
mention that and with that
I'm gonna turn it over to you
all, um, I'm gonna ask you to,
to be uh uh not too brief, but
we're a little behind on
schedule. Uh, I don't, I wanna
be, wanna keep things moving,
but it's very, very pleased that
you all are here today, so I'm
gonna just pass it over and you
all decide who starts first.
All right, well, uh, good
morning, um, Madam Chair and
members, uh, my name is Tim
Keller, Mayor of Albuquerque,
and former member of this great
committee. uh, I love this
committee when I was in the
legislature, and so I hope you
all have enjoyed uh the summer.
I know you got a little, you
know, the summer, the interim,
get a little bit left, of
course, and then be I headed
into the session, so, uh, what
I'm gonna do actually, I think
this will help with the clock.
I'm just gonna provide a brief
welcome just on behalf of the
city. Those of you who are
coming in from out of.
Town. Welcome to Albuquerque,
um, and, uh, you know, it's a
city of, of course, many
challenges which are not
necessarily economic development
and so that's why I'm
particularly glad to spend some
time talking about some of the
good things that are happening
in Albuquerque. And so with me
is our economic development
director. He is the
professional. He is the one who
actually can give you real
answers and uh all that kinds of
things, uh, so Max Schooner is
our director of economic
development. You may recognize
him because he used to work for
you.
Directly at the New Mexico
Economic Partnership, and so we
poached him uh from there. And
so, uh, we're glad to have him.
He's now been at the city of
Albuquerque, uh, almost 2 years,
And so it
it can feel our questions and I
will just say this, I think 3
things uh for legislators to
think about. Uh, number one.
Is that uh we are on the cusp of
something very, very special in
Albuquerque, and it is that, you
know, we have these two
companies, Eon and Maxion and
their solar panel manufacturers,
they have agreed and have all
signed all the relevant
documents to move to Mesa del
Sol from Asia and uh create, and
I'm not exaggerating here, at
least 2000 jobs and.
Bring in $2 billion worth of
investment. I mentioned those
because my good friend Greg Hole
is here and he'll remember this
is actually bigger than when
Intel came.
So we are expecting in 10 years
a giant new community at Mesa
del Sol. So this is very good
news. This is also the thesis
that we've had for quite some
time, which is that New Mexico
should be a hub for renewable
energy manufacturing and how
amazing that it is that that
actually could be possible. Now,
I'm a little bit skeptical about
all of this because we've been
burned many times, uh, by
companies who've made promises
green.
To the shot solar, um.
Orion, Universal Hydrogen, those
are just like since I've been
mayor, uh, I can't even remember
the other ones that, you know,
we've all been on this committee
a long time.
have heard. So I just want to
let you know that, I mean, I
really, if one of these two
companies comes here, it is
going to transform central New
Mexico. That's a great thing,
but uh we want that shovel in
the ground and so if you have
further questions on that and so
forth, that's also why Max is
here, but just wanted to let you
know how what a special time
this could be like because the
state has done everything, the
city has done everything, the
county's done everything. And
also I want to thank each of you
because a lot of the incentive.
No surprise to all of you is our
the the vast majority of the
incentives are the state
incentives. The city comes in
with our own help, uh, but, uh,
we tend to more work on the
zoning and all these other
things that companies need. So
that's one thing to share.
Second thing is.
We have seen anecdotally, many
more vacancies uh of small
business commercial real estate
in Albuquerque and we are really
getting uh the wave of three
things coming together, the end
of the pandemic and the
advantages of DoorDash and
Amazon and Target grocery and
Walmart grocery and all of these
things that are enabling home
delivery, and we're seeing this,
uh, take a huge
huge hit in uh retail
pharmaceutical, uh, and what I
mean by that is Walgreens.
Walgreens are closing all over
the country and they're also
closing here and unfortunately
they're closing in our most, uh,
you know, uh, sort of
economically challenged
neighborhoods, and we saw this,
uh, actually even with Walmart,
uh, but it's, it's, it's
fundamentally economically about
mail order. That's what's
driving this all over the
country because it's just so
easy now to get stuff delivered
to your door.
So we have tried to do things
like buy these properties, these
corporations will never sell to
us. We're over 3 on this. We
continue to try and do that and
work with them, but they have a
whole just different perspective
on real estate management, and
they can wait us out for
decades. Uh, they have the
balance sheet to do that, but I
did want to let you know it's
also hitting our strip malls. I
mean, strip malls like it's not
there's glamorous about a strip
off, but look, this is our town
and many of your towns and to
see a bunch of vacancies.
Typically, if you look at them,
they're being driven by a
product that is now just so easy
to get by mail. And so this is a
challenge that we're having at
the intersection of commercial
real estate and economic
development. The third thing is,
uh, which is a more positive
thing on the small business
side, we have finally combined
about 6 different economic
development offices in one stop
shop. So uh we now have the one
Albuquerque Business Resource
Center, and it has its own
building.
that's a city building, so it's
not gonna move and it's got all
our minority and women owned
business support services there.
So that's dialed into the Espano
chamber. It's also dialed into
CNN, uh, and uh the state and
federal programs. And so for us,
that's actually very exciting.
It's also in the heart of
Bereles, uh, which is a great
home for it, centrally located
but in a wonderful traditional
neighborhood.
So, um, I think I'll actually
kind of close my remarks with
that, but as a whole, uh,
ironically, we do see our
population growing for the first
time in about a decade, which is
a great thing, and uh our
economic numbers actually look
good. So if you look at income
and if you look at GDP we're
actually, you know, slowly
steady going up, which is good.
Um, we'd like a little more
growth for sure, uh, but the
reality is that the base numbers
like in the rest of America are
pretty good, but there's all of
these.
Holes in that big hole I was
talking about was around small
businesses and look oddly even
even national retail where we're
suffering, so you know, there's
just been this notion of winners
and losers in the economy right
now, and that's no different in
Albuquerque, but.
The X Factor is those companies.
If even one of those companies
delivers on what they said they
are going to do. It is such an
economic impact we are going to
see a tide lifting all boats.
Uh, so with that, uh, I'll hand
it over to Max and uh thank you
for your time and welcome to the
Duke City.
Thank you, Mr. Mayor.
Madam Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Max Gru. I'm the
director for economic
development for the city of
Albuquerque, as the mayor
mentioned previously, worked in
a similar position for the
state.
I wanted to take a moment and
reflect on economic development
in Albuquerque and in the state.
We are in the business of
creating career pathways for
Burkenos and for New Mexicans.
We are in the business of
creating jobs, good jobs, well
paying jobs, jobs for benefits,
and the reason we do that.
Is that our theory of action,
our theory of change is that one
of the levers we need to pull,
one of the things we need to
lean into is create jobs and
career pathways for New Mexicans
to build generational wealth.
And when I talk about
generational wealth, I talk
about the wealth that lifts all
of us, and lifts our families.
It lifts our neighborhoods. It
lifts our cities, our state, and
make no mistake about it, it
lifts our country.
And look, uh, it'll be no
surprise to you that we are
smack in the middle of the
madness that is election season.
We are in a time where social
media tries to convince us that
we need to draw lines on the
concrete that we need to
proclaim you're either with me
or you against me. Where, where,
we are compelled to give up on
notions of complexity and nuance
and ambiguity.
And it is against that backdrop
that economic developers like
me, like the folks in my
colleagues in this room and at
this table, economic developers
all over the city and the state,
we choose, we choose to believe.
That at the end of the rainbow
after all the political
exaggerations and, and all the
cacophony of talking points
after all of that has subsided.
There's always more that binds
us together as Burquenos as New
Mexicans, and as Americans.
And those things that bind us
together, those are often those
things we like to put the word
public in front.
We believe in education as a
pathway for the life of our
children to be better than our
own, we believe in public
education. We believe in the
notion that we want to feel safe
as we walk in our streets and in
our neighborhoods, we believe in
public safety. We believe in
public infrastructure. We
believe in the notion that
nobody should ever go bankrupt
because they got a medical
diagnosis. We believe in
Public health.
And you know, when, when an
economic developer like I says
things like that.
It's really code for. We cannot
have any of those things unless
we have a strong tax base, look,
we may fight like cats and dogs,
how to pay for them, how to
prioritize those things, but at
the end of the day, unless we
have a strong tax base, we
cannot have any of those things.
And a strong tax base is code
for two things. Number 1, we
need to have enough going on in
our.
Economy and our local economies
and communities for the dollar
to stay in our communities to
exchange hands many times to
move from neighbor to neighbor
before it gets siphoned off by
some kind of nebulous global
entity with a pretty website.
And we need to bring fresh
dollars into our city and into
our states. We need Texan
dollars.
We need German euros. We need
Japanese yen to flow into New
Mexico and into Albuquerque.
And so I'll tell you one thing,
I've been doing this for a
while.
Over the last 30 years, the US
and New Mexico is, is no
different. We could not offshore
jobs and companies quickly
enough.
This is the first time in my
career.
That you can be a CEO of a
global company and you can sit
in an Irish pub anywhere in the
world and you can do the math on
the back of a cocktail napkin
and you can come to the
conclusion that you can actually
afford to come to the US to
onshore, to reshore to the US to
create US jobs because there are
enough incentives in the system
and there are enough protective
tariffs.
And once you've made the
decision that you're willing to
come to the US that you're
willing to come back to the US,
New Mexico is a fabulous value
propossession.
Our quality of life.
Our cost of living.
The luck of our geography two
highways that connect the
Atlantic to the Pacific Ocean, a
highway that connects Mexico to
Canada, Albuquerque being
equidistant between Galveston
and Houston and LA and Long
Beach, which means if you were
importing materials or if you
are exporting products, you do
not have to go to the Panama
Canal, which as a company is
going to save you money and
time. You think
our workforce, you think about
the relationships we have with
our colleges and universities,
whether it's degree programs or
certificate programs. The
highest concentration per capita
of PhDs right here in the state,
3 national labs if you include
the Air Force research lab that
value proposition for companies
to come here is strong.
And so I wanted to say on behalf
of my shop at the City of
Albuquerque on behalf of Mayor
Keller, we are so thrilled to
work with you shoulder to
shoulder as you do this
important work looking forward.
And I wanted to, you know,
rather than speaking about
specific bills, I wanted to talk
about some topics that I believe
my colleagues and I, and you
will hear this from others that
are important to us, to the
state, to the city at this
moment in time.
Infrastructure.
We need shovel ready sites, and
we need turnkey ready facilities
in order to stay competitive.
We need to be able to expand and
our and accelerate our utility
infrastructure readiness.
We need to be able to enter into
public private partnerships, so
we can not only leverage the
expertise of the private sector,
but we as government can start
moving faster, approaching the
speed of business.
We need to lean into the
strategic water supply.
One of the first questions when
companies think about coming
here is, well, what about water?
What about waste water? We need
to be able to answer those
questions with confidence.
And we need to have the
willingness to continue to
diversify our economy to lean
into manufacturing because that
creates those jobs and those
career pathways that we need.
So I'm gonna cut the, I'm gonna
cut this short, uh, because I, I
do realize we're running out the
clock here. But again, I want to
thank you for the work you do. I
want to thank you for the time
you spent spend away from your
families. And please know that
economic developers all over the
state and that economic
developers in the city of
Albuquerque are nothing but
thrilled to collaborate with you
as we think about the
60-day sessions.
There are important questions to
which we need to find answers
and resolutions.
And you know, if you, if you
look around this room.
And there's a, there's a
something a mentor of mine uh
used to say if you look around
this room, always remember we
are exactly who we have been
waiting for to rise to the
challenges of our time and the
challenges are many.
And we are nothing but excited
to work with you. Thank you very
much.
OK, I don't know if we were
gonna put this, uh, we sent a
slide deck over where we, here
we go. OK, perfect. Thank you.
Well, good morning, uh, Madam
Chair, Madam Vice Chair and
committee members, certainly
appreciate each and every one of
you inviting us here to speak
today and talk about some of the
things that are happening in
Central New Mexico right here in
the Albuquerque Rio Rancho area,
just a lot going on, uh, you
know, both north of Albuquerque
and south of Albuquerque got uh
just everything happening here.
So I've got a quick slide.
Deck I'll go through here, uh,
real quick to kind of touch on
where Rio Rancho's at right now
and then some of the points
that's brought us to where we
are today, um, and our first
sight deck because many of you
may know, uh, Rio Rancho is
currently ranked as the 3rd
largest city in the state, uh,
just trailing slightly behind
Las Cruces at this point in
time, but you know, we're we're,
we're, we're, we're chasing you.
We'll continue to chase, but you
know, a good race is never a bad
thing, right? Uh, it's
competition is never a bad
thing. Uh, we are a home-ruled
municipality with a council
manager form.
government, uh, with a, uh,
professional staff and a
full-time mayor that would be
the position that I feel.
Anyway, um, we are currently
guided uh by a strategic plan,
so, uh, about, about 7 years
ago, 8 years ago, we embarked on
the process of uh really trying
to narrow down the things that
we were focused on to make sure
that, uh, as we grew and
progressed, it was by design and
not just by luck or circumstance
that we
Actually had a plan and that the
things that we're doing actually
have to fit into one of the
buckets that we've created here,
the 5 key service areas that we
identified with quality of life,
uh, community and economic
development, where some of those
key features, public
infrastructure, huge as we all
know, we're struggling statewide
with that. Uh, public safety,
another key initiative that we
focused on, and then of course,
organizational excellence,
making sure that we're providing
quality services moving forward,
so, um, from that strategic.
plan, uh, we updated that in
2023 and that one, that current
one runs till 2028, um, and at
that point we'll reevaluate it
and update it and kind of go
from there. Um, some of the
recent accolades that the city's
received is a top 25 places to
live in the Southwest by
livability 2024. Fortune.com
ranked us as 50 best best places
to live for families in the
United States, Motley Fool,
ranked 3 Rancho #2 on their list
of the 10 most
Affordable cities with high
salaries and low cost of living
in the west, uh, top 100 best
places to live in the United
States by livability. Top 25
best places to live in the
Southwest by Livability 2023 and
top 100 best places to live in
the United States by livability
2023. So we have been, this
isn't just local recognition,
this is, uh, this is external
recognition of individuals that
are looking from the outside in
on what's happening uh in Rio
Rancho, and we certainly
appreciate those ac
and that recognition for the
hard work that we're doing up
there in Rio Rancho. Um, one of
the key things that we know that
that uh builds into the
lifestyle and making ourselves
an attractive community. Aside
from getting a Trader Joe's,
which I think that's the one
thing that our community can't
give up on, right? Um, we do
have, I do remind everybody that
we are only 43 years old, so in
city ages I refer to that as
being a teenager. So we're still
trying to figure things out as
we as uh as we go.
Uh, but some of the investments
that we made very early on that
allowed us to really get a leg
up, uh, in that quality of life
area is uh the healthcare
facilities that we have in Rio
Rancho, when you think about,
um, suburban communities that
are on the, on the outside of a
major metropolitan, you don't
generally see those communities
have two major hospital systems
right there, um, and so we have
UN M San Regional, uh, there
that is the county hospital, and
then we have Russ Medical Center
in Russ
has undertaken uh several
expansions over the last 8 years
with 2 new wings and a medical
office building that they've
added to that. So we've got
quality healthcare on the south
side of the city and on the
north side of the city and then
not too far, just outside of the
city limits in Albuquerque is
the loveless health systems as
well. So really the proximity to
health care out in Rio Rancho
has been phenomenal. Um, the
investments that have been made
have been very strategic and,
and they provide great service
and they attract a lot of people
to the community.
The other thing in the area of
economic development back in I
think circa 2019, we established
the city's first ever uh
economic development fund. So we
actually have 1/16 of our GRT
that actually goes into an
economic development fund and
that was key, uh, in attracting
and retaining NTX bio or
Nature's toolbox in the state of
New Mexico. So we were able to
contribute to that. Also,
although albeit a small but uh
token contribution, we were
also, uh, able to make a
A contribution to Intel's
expansion and kind of the
recommitment to the New Mexico
when they brought the $3.5
billion investment into the
state. So, uh, uh, bringing back
the, uh, the advanced packaging
systems and of course the
development of the silicon
photonics process that they're
working on right there at that
at that facility, and well, yes,
this facility is in, uh,
technically in the county of
Sandoval, uh, it is in the heart
of Rio Rancho, and Rio Rancho
was really grown up around it
and there's reasons.
was left as county, um, and, but
the partnership there has been
amazing, not only for the city
of Rancho, but for the city of
Albuquerque and the surrounding
communities. Corrales Bernallio,
uh, it's really uh a statewide
benefit that that company brings
to the state of New Mexico so we
recognize that they serve the
community of New Mexico, uh, not
just as just as a standalone for
Rio Rancho, um, expansion, uh,
we've seen a pretty good
expansion of commercial and
retail services. Early on
Maria Rancho, once again being
only 43 years old, spread out
over 103 square miles very
rapidly. This is very close to
the geographical size of
Albuquerque. So spreading out
like that gave us a lack of
density in housing. Well, we do
have over 40,000 homes that are
up there. They're really spread
out all over the place, so
getting attracting retail
development is very difficult,
as you know, the retail models,
they look for a maximum density,
but uh we have just recently
seen the entrance of sprouts,
uh, and the
We've seen great development up
in the north end of Rio Rancho,
which is a tremendous
partnership with the town of
Bernalio and the Pueblo of Santa
Ana, as they have added the
hotel up there in the last 10
years, and Tesla was just
recently added up there and then
on the town of Bernalio's side,
you've seen a lot of grocery
like Walmart superstores and
things like that added in there,
adding conveniences to the
residents and we've had 3
grocery stores that have been
added to the city in the last 5
years. And as was mentioned,
A lot of uh by, by Mayor Keller.
There's a big push to just buy
everything online or get it
delivered.
And so, um, uh, really trying to
not only offer those local
services and identify those
things that are.
Uh, necessary that people like
for convenience, but also making
sure that the uh infrastructure
is in place to accommodate some
of those online deliveries and,
and I know my wife, I, I believe
the front of my house is either
a grocery store or an Amazon uh
relocation center because I walk
up and all the packages are
always there. I'm like, you
know, uh, so anyway, but yeah,
she does, she loves the online
shopping. Now, uh, obviously
with economic development, some
of the key attractors of
bringing a quality workforce
into the community.
Um,
is, uh, is, is not only
hospitals, great medical
services, great services, but
there's, as we know, in the
retail services, um, and these
are just some of the things that
have opened up Southern
Boulevard Corridor, uh,
Enchanton Hill's commerce area,
User Gateway, uh, some of the
different things, investments
that have been made over the
last 3 or 4 years that are
either completed or underway,
but housing, housing is that
critical issue and I was proud
to spearhead Rio Rancho's first,
uh, actual official.
Affordable housing plan that we
put into place just a couple of
years ago and adopted that as an
ordinance so that we can start
to meet the needs of our
workforce housing and continue
to offer a broad range of
housing opportunities for
professionals, uh, whether
that's multi-family built to
rent, uh, uh, single family
residential, but if you'll
notice here by this chart, uh,
in the last 4 years, Rio Rancho
has carried the bulk of new
housing starts over the last 4
years for the first time
exceeding the housing starts in.
It's issued for single family
residential exceeding
Albuquerque's and um once again
we go back to, you have to go
back to the very beginning of
Rio Rancho and understand that
why, why did Rio Rancho just get
to the place where we uh created
an affordable housing ordinance.
Why was that necessary? Well,
Rio Rancho really was the
quintessential original
affordable housing community.
That's where people came to get
a, a, a, a half acre property
and a $200,000 house and, you
know, back in the
In the 60s, 70s when it first
started with Rio Rancho estates.
Then it, then you saw
communities like uh North Hills
come online where you could buy
a nice little house and a nice
little community and I think the
starting price of those back in
that in the day was 300,000
$40,000 you could jump into
those in those same houses now
are reselling for well over 150
$200,000 those very same houses,
so the housing markets in the
drive, uh, for the demand is
really running up the price on
these, so creating.
Uh, affordable housing
ordinances, um, uh, to so that
the city can be nimble and work
with developers to get to meet
the needs of the workforce.
Well, we may not have all of the
industry up in Rio Rancho. uh,
Rio Rancho, uh, for the region
serves as a major, major source
of housing for the for the
workforce in the, in the region.
So when you think about this,
um, I think it's about 60% of
your Rancho, uh, leaves Rio
Rancho.
Every day, um, they go somewhere
else to work, whether that's
Santa Fe, Albuquerque. So we've
got about a 60% work shed up
there and uh so your workforce
is living in Rio Rancho and
working in Albuquerque and other
surrounding areas. So that's why
it's important that Rear Rancho
be of, uh, you know, a strong
partner in this area and when we
point this out, uh, with on the
housing starts, it's not to say,
yeah, yeah, we won, it's yeah,
yeah, we're being a great
partner in the area that's
meeting a need.
that without these, without
these house starts, we wouldn't
have a lot of the professionals
that are going to fill all those
jobs that Mayor Keller just
talked about. So, uh, those 2000
jobs that would be created by
the solar companies coming in
and on the energy side of that,
you know, Rio Rancho's got a
3500 acre solar farm that's
going up in an area called Qull
Ranch, which is just to the
north of Double Eagle Airport,
and that's underway right now
and then we've got another solar
project that's in the county
that's just a little bit north
of that one. So you're gonna see
Uh, in the Rio Rancho Sandoval
County, you're probably gonna
see pretty, pretty soon about
7000 acres of renewable energy
off of our west side there that
that that's being invested in.
Plus when you talk about
economic development, I want to
touch off uh uh uh what you
said, uh Max with the, uh, uh,
with the water wastewater.
Infrastructure is critical, and
if you ask me what I think our
brick wall is or the light at
the end of the tunnel that's
actually an oncoming an oncoming
train. It's infrastructure and
more specifically, it's
wastewater and if you want to
drill down beyond that, it's
wastewater. So Rio Rancho has
invested heavily in what we call
the aquifer recharge or aquifer
reinjection. We actually take uh
as much of our wastewaters we
can, we clean it to a near
potable quality. We pump it up
to an injection well and um.
Uh, clean it one more time, and
we put that back into the
aquifer at about 3 PSI through
the sedimentary layer to give it
one more cleaning from the, from
the earth itself, then it enters
into the aquifer and we're able
to put about 800,000 gallons a
day back into the awkward
banking that and keeping it
here. We don't store it above
ground where it can be, uh,
damaged or evaporated, uh, we
can put that back in the aquifer
for future use and that pertain
that protects the long term uh
uh viable.
of the aquifer. Remember that
when we go through these
droughts and we drain those
aquifers off and we're not doing
anything to do that, a natural
occurrence called subsidence
happens where your aquifers
start to close up on you because
that water is missing. So
putting that water back in there
and using the natural storage
facilities that we have from the
earth, um, is one of the best uh
ways to do that, um, and so
we're working on ways of
expanding that and hopefully
holding that as a model because
if we can recapture that
wastewater that we currently
clean and then
put into the Rio Grande, uh, and
then that just goes downstream
or it evaporates if we can put
that back where it came from,
uh, we, we're, we're really
doing a lot to to sustain the
long term preservation of the
underground systems that have
supported New Mexico and
sustained New Mexico for so many
years, and we can do that going
into the future with just some
smart management on that and
that also gives us renewed water
availability. So wastewater, in
my opinion, is one of those
things that we really need to
look at.
Um, and take the resources that
we have, clean them, reuse them,
clean them, reuse them. This is
not new. You see California
doing this, you see Arizona
doing this and uh it it adds to
the long term sustain
sustainability of the water
supply, and it answers that
question that industries are
looking for is what does water
and wastewater look like, and
then once those things, once the
infrastructure is in place,
looking at what's the
infrastructure of her housing,
what's the infrastructure for
public safety? What's the public
The infrastructure for the
public education that you have
in the state, so all of those
things play an invaluable role
in the economic development
world. And so, once again,
moving on to, uh, you know, the
future legislative session, um,
we will, the rearrange your
governing body will be
officially adopt the 2025
legislative priorities and
capital outlay requests later
this year. Those priorities
include public investment in
infrastructure, water,
wastewater, once again, getting
back to that, uh, Riarancho,
like many communities have seen
a
50 to 100 50% cost increase in
infrastructure projects in
recent years, we're not unique
to this, so, um, looking to the
legislature to do what we can uh
to to have them be a partner
with us, uh, on these various
different infrastructure
projects, investment in public
safety.
Obviously, additional personnel
needs, rearancho is seeking
funding to build uh build a new
fire station to to serve the
growing population, um, and so
we're continuing to grow our
public safety investment
workforce development and
economic opportunities, Rio
Rancho supports legislation that
makes available more resources
for job creation and economic
development programs, including
site readiness, and then IA
reform is something that we've
talked about over the past few
years we continue to work with
the legislature on that and
municipal.
Municipalities across the state
are facing similar challenges.
So as we adopt this, these
different legislative priorities
or look at different pieces of
legislation. I just encourage
each of you to, uh, sit down
and, uh, uh, meet with the
mayors, meet with the city
councilors that are on the
ground in the various
communities. I know once again I
know Albuquerque is important,
don't get me wrong, it's the
economic engine in the center in
central New Mexico, but the
outer lying communities are
Our cogs in those wheels as
well, those are engines as well
that help support that. And so,
uh, just meeting with the local,
uh, with the local uh elected
officials, uh, when, when this,
uh, when this legislation is
developed and then adopted, uh,
would be a tremendous help so
that you can get our uh local
perspective on how some of this
legislation either promotes or
impacts uh in in a positive or
negative way, uh, as we're
trying to achieve these goals. I
would add this one final thing
as um as.
Um, I close, uh, one of the
things we really need to talk
about and I'm hoping we can get
the local communities involved
is there's been talk about
preemption on local zoning, uh,
to meet, to, to somehow fix the
housing crisis. I think this is,
uh, I, I don't think that this
is a good idea. Each community
has its uh uh unique
characteristics people move
there for those. There's
legacies there. People have
lived in those communities,
whether it's Las Lunas, Berlin,
uh, Bern Leo.
Balla, Albuquerque, uh,
Edgewood, any of these
communities with their
uniqueness. People move there
for those unique opportunities
and uh if you were looking at
some sort of statewide blanket
to say this is the way we're
going to zone for housing. I
think that that uh really flies
in the face of the uniqueness of
each and individual community.
So I would ask that you please
meet with us, meet with
constituents before you say,
yeah, we're just going to make
zoning decisions that are
statewide and single, you know,
one size.
It's all. I think that would be
a, a, um, I think it would be a
disastrous idea, but, um, but
that being said, let's talk
about it so that we can figure
out what's going on, but there
are communities like Rio Rancho,
um, we've done some aggressive
rezoning and we've uh we've been
very proactive about rezoning
stuff to try to meet the needs
need for the uh for the uh
demand on the housing market,
and we still have a very strong
diversity of housing up there
from entry level homes, although
I don't know how you call a.
150 $200,000 home and entry
level home when I was in my 20,
800 was more than I could afford
at that time, so, but you're,
you're just seeing all this that
everything shift from a price
perspective, uh, and, uh, uh,
but we still have great
opportunities up in Rio Rancho
that you can get in in a nice
starter home. Uh, we just
recently completed a, uh,
affordable housing community,
uh, I think 600 units of
affordable housing, which is for
senior housing and workforce
housing. So we're moving in
the right directions to try to
make sure that we're meeting the
needs of the workforce in the
central area. So with that, I'll
just say thank you very much and
appreciate the opportunity to
highlight some of the things
we're trying to accomplish up
there.
You bet.
Thank you. Um, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, my
name is Victoria Archuleta. I'm
the senior economic developer
for the village of Los Lunas.
Um, I'm honored to be here
representing Mayor Charles Grigo
and the council for the village
of Los Luna.
Um, as some of you may know, Los
Lunas is growing very fast and
of course that's very exciting
for us. We are one of the
fastest growing communities in
the state of New Mexico, I
believe specifically second
right behind Rio Rancho, but
Mayor Hall will let you hold on
to that title for just a little
bit longer. We trade back and
forth.
Yeah, and as one of the fastest
growing communities, um,
We definitely attribute that to
our ease of doing business. Los
Lunas does um very much tout
itself on a community, sorry,
I'm sorry. Thank you. That is
easy to do business in in terms
of the speed of our permitting
process, um, and avail available
industrial land.
So we are, uh, again, we
consider ourselves pro-busines
specifically we're 20 minutes
south of downtown Albuquerque
and the International airport,
and so it's not that far, um,
some of my family members who
are not familiar when I started
working with Los Lunas thought
it was further than Santa Fe,
um, from Albuquerque and I had
to remind them it's a very short
20 minute drive um from the
metro area and
With that, you know, Los Luna's
growth has really positioned it
as
Part of the Albuquerque metro
region. So we do subscribe to
the Albuquerque Greater MSA. Um,
we do draw from the population
numbers and workforce and vice
versa.
So this was a commercial, but.
Um, I will have to send that at
a different point. Um, so some
of the companies that we do have
in Los Lunas in terms of
economic development, we are
growing very fast, um.
Los Lunas in the last couple of
months, um, specifically from
January 1st to June 30th had
over 100 net new businesses, net
new business registrations that
were specifically small
businesses and brick and mortar,
um, businesses in village
limits and then a total of in
that same time period,
245 registered businesses, and
many of those by way of either
uh construction contractors,
subcontractors, or just other
types of companies that are now
doing business within the
village of Los Lunas.
So some of the biggest companies
that we have, as you can see,
um, the Los Lunas metadata
Center, I think is what really
put us on the global map, um, in
terms of being a hub and center
for innovation and technology.
Now, the metadata Center, I'll
talk a little bit more about it
in a different slide, um, but I
would equate Meadow's impact to
Los Lunas as to what Intel has
done for Rio Rancho and just
seeing that exponential growth
that Rio Rancho had after the
presence of Intel, we are
currently at the forefront of it
because of Meta.
They set up shop in 2016, um,
they announced an additional
expansion at the end of 2021
began in 2022, and they are
still currently under that
second expansion. So once that
second expansion is complete,
it'll be a 4.2 million square
foot facility, um, on a 750 acre
campus and so Meta's presence
and the speed at which they
showed up and said, you know, we
want to be, um, you know, up and
running in X amount of time,
which was a very aggressive time
frame. They actually
pushed Los Lunas to
Well, we had to step up our game
in order to meet their needs,
meet their demands by working,
um, even with the utility
companies, um, such as PNM to
get that up and running very,
very fast. And that has been a
complete game changer in terms
of economic prosperity for our
community. The Walmart
distribution center is currently
celebrating their 25th year in
operation, and they were the
first big corporation to really
set foot in uh in Los Lunas they
have over 750 employees and in
Sometimes, um, like now for the
holiday season can go up to 850
employees. And that specific
Walmart uh distribution center
services all of New Mexico, um,
including Gallup, which is the
biggest busiest Walmart in the
entire country, um, now Southern
she's she's Southern Colorado,
excuse me, and West Texas and El
Paso, so that.
Anytime you see uh a Walmart
semi truck cruising around
anywhere in New Mexico, it's
going to say Los Lonas DC on it,
so just something to point out,
um, and other couple of
companies that have really had a
significant presence and have
made a mark in the village of
Los Lunas, um, while Cominoy,
Niagara bottling, and also an
accurate machine and tool which
is I think one of our best kept
secrets, um, they are a very
large DOD, uh, and DOE
contractor based out of Los
Lunas. So we're definitely
seeing um metal injection.
polymer injections coming out of
that specific facility, and that
company has a very unique tie to
Sandia National Labs and
Kirtland Air Force Base.
So some of our community assets,
um, as mentioned, were
pro-business community, um, and
I do, uh, you know, credit Mayor
Charles Guego, and before him,
Mayor Louis Huning Senior for
their long term vision of
economic growth and prosperity
for the village of Los Lunas.
Um, that has really helped us to
expedite the availability of
industrial sites, as mentioned,
we have over 2000 acres in our
industrial area, um, available
workforce, so something that is
very interesting.
About Los Lunas is for a very
long time we were considered
just a sleepy town just south of
Albuquerque, bedroom community,
and so many people work, excuse
me, lived in Los Lunas, drove up
I-25 and worked in Albuquerque,
and we're still seeing some of
that, but that traffic is
turning around. There are more
young professionals now that are
seeing um very lucrative
engineering and tech
opportunities and construction
opportunities in Los Lunas and
that traffic is turning around
and anecdotal.
I know there are individuals
that drive as far as Rio Rancho,
Algodones, and even Grant and
Gallup for work in Los Lunas,
and that's something that's very
special, um, we're not solely
just expediting our workforce
into the city of Albuquerque,
um.
We are now leveraging the
workforce that we have in the
village of Los Lunas in Valencia
County, um, and really trying to
provide opportunities for
individuals to live and work in
the communities that they've
grown up in. And one specific,
um, one specific case study is
the Amazon distribution center,
which opened on August 13th, and
we had several representatives,
um, and our legislators there,
um, for the grand opening, but
the Amazon distribution center,
it's a over 1 million square
foot facility and
In about 3 months' time, they
were able to hire 1500
individuals to work at that
facility and I said that at a,
at a the governor's conference
on economic development and
someone just gasped in the
audience. Well, where do you get
1500 people from? They were
already there in Valencia
County, in Los Lunas, and a good
20% of those 1500 were transfers
from the Albuquerque one site
from uh the ADQ one site on
Albuquerque's west side to the
ABQ 2 site in Los Unna.
By the way, I'm
was not super fan of them
calling it ABQ 2, but they go by
airport codes.
Um, we're also very unique with
the presence of these these
companies to just have, um, more
funding into our Valencia County
business incubator for startups,
um, and small business support
as well. Um, we're also seeing a
lot of, a lot more activity out
of the University of New Mexico
Valencia campus. We're lucky to
have not one but 2 satellite
campuses, one which is
specifically the workforce
training center in Los Lunas,
which is very close proximity to
our industrial park and then
also the Tomei campus which is a
little bit more.
Um, on the southern end of
Valencia County.
Um, the workforce training
center.
Again, this is a very unique
facility. This is something that
has really helped bolster our
economic development activity.
It also helps us attract
companies, um, specifically when
Meta first came to Los Lunas,
they were trying to just fast
track all of these construction
employees to no construction
math to be able to get up and
ready to actually.
Build the the facility that was
coming and the University of New
Mexico Workforce Training Center
was able to do customized 8
week, uh, an 8 week program for
for this construction, which is
the large contractor at Meta to
get everybody up and running and
so the uh UNMVC is very much um
in line with economic
development priorities that are
part of the village of Los Lonas
in Greater Valencia County.
So again, workforce data, um.
Los Lunas itself is a little bit
over 18,000. Valencia County has
close to 8,080,000 residents,
many of those are still
commuting outside of Valencia
County for work, but we have so
many new families, young
families coming in, um.
Affordable. Our housing is
affordable in the sense that you
get more bang for your buck, um,
than in places, certain parts of
Albuquerque, so, um, we're
seeing a lot of young people
move in buying sometimes their
first homes in
Uh
Yeah, and it's something that
they've been waiting for and now
that the market is kind of
getting a little bit better.
We're seeing a significant
uptick in the sale of new homes,
so currently we have about 550
homes in progress by either way
of permitting your construction,
and in the near future, uh,
possibly the next 3 to 4 years
we have over 2000 homes in the
pipeline within village limits.
So that's something that's very
unique, very specific, um, to
Los Lunas, and of course this is
exciting growth, but our growth
doesn't come without its
challenges.
Um, on the
On the bright side, um, the
presence of some of these big
companies has boosted our
average household income
specific to, excuse me, median
household income specific to the
village of Los Lunas.
And so new infrastructure, we
have numerous projects currently
in progress. Um, the biggest one
that um is in the pipeline is
the I-25 interchange, also known
as Los Lonas Boulevard, um, so
it's currently funded um for
this next legislative session,
the village of Los Uness will be
asking for another 80 million
for phase two of our
interchange, um, for those of
you who, um, may or may not be
familiar, we only have one
interchange in the village of
Los Oas and
That is uh very scary after 2
o'clock, all the schools are
letting out, all the big
companies are letting out, um,
and with the presence of again,
Walmart, Meta and Amazon just.
Having constant flow of traffic,
um, with semi trucks and
employee vehicles, um, in and
out of Los Lunas that is really
causing significant damage to
New Mexico Highway 61 of the
things that is just become very
prevalent to me in my time
working there is we are 10 years
behind on a 3rd interchange and
so we were all, we'll also be
asking for um initial funding
for the 3rd interchange on the
north side of Los Lunas and our
north side of Los Luna does, um,
but
To the Isle of Pueblo
reservation and also um some
county land. So there's
definitely going to be some
unique, um, workarounds and
challenges and trying to get a
third interchange, this first
one, you know, feels like it's
probably taken 20 or 25 years,
um, but we are in, I will say
desperate need for that 3rd
interchange on the north end.
So this is a map of Los Lunas,
um, as mentioned, the north side
is the Pueblo Vileta, um,
everything that's in color is
our village limits. So not only
have we grown um by way of
population growth, but also an
annexation of land and our
ability to service all these
different areas either for
residential growth or um
industrial growth as well.
So lots more, there's.
Sorry, Los Motos Business Park
is one of 3 distinct business
parks in the village of Los
Lunas that make up our
industrial area in Los Moros is
um where Walmart distribution
center is, um, technically, Meta
is also part of Los Motos,
although it does border the
Huing business and tech park and
this map is a little bit
outdated, but it's definitely
filled in, um, substantially
from this image right here and
as you can see, Mexico Highway 6
is on the border of that
industrial park. Again, Meta
taking up majority
Of Los Motos Business Park, um,
4.2 million square feet upon
completion, and they anticipate
about 400 to 450 meta-specific
jobs in terms of technicians and
engineers and management, but on
a daily basis as they're
undergoing their expansion,
there's over 1200 construction
workers that includes
electricians, plumbers, um.
That are on campus from Fort
construction on a daily basis
and so that's something that is
definitely good for our uh our
tax base. It's good for our GRT
um.
And that's something that we're
looking into specifically
creating um in the village of
Los Lunas, we are not home rule,
so our
Incentives that we can leverage,
um, you know, we're somewhat
limited in terms of what we can
actually establish, but we will
be doing um some more
workarounds with that very, very
soon.
Also within Los Motos, um, very
near the data center. I'm
excited to announce we have our
Valencia County Regional Medical
Center, which will be the first
hospital within Valencia County,
and this is something that has
been a long time in the making.
It's been over 20 years, um, for
a long time it was a discussion
on does it go in Los Lunas? Does
it go in Berlin, um, but the
Valencia County commission
finally decided the site in Los
Lunas was the optimal site. And
so that'll be about 40 to 45,000
square foot facility, 15 beds.
Um, just to start with, and then
that specific piece of land that
the hospital will be on has room
for future growth, which we do
intend to utilize.
The humaning business in Tech
Park, that is our kind of next
major center of growth. Um, this
is something that is, we, I
mean, I talk about humaning
business Tech Park on a daily
basis and, um, you know, my
colleagues from Sandoval County
in the city of Albuquerque, Max
and I have been in many, many
meetings trying to attract
companies into the region and
we're very much leveraging our
industrial area as part of a
regional strategy. And so the
heating business in Tech Park,
it is home currently to Amazon
P&M, um, has their.
Uh, station that they're
currently building, um, to, to
expand capacity within the
industrial area and I know our
folks at P&M are in the room, so
I will let them talk on that
when they have some time. And
then the Central New Mexico Rail
Park. So going to the point of
having infrastructure and shovel
ready sites.
Central New Mexico Rail Park is.
One of the biggest opportunities
I think for Central New Mexico
and we don't have any utilities
servicing it at the moment, so,
uh, it is a BNSF certified site.
There is a rail spur, um, in
that business park.
But there's no utility. So a
site selector came and said,
hey, this is great, you know,
you're BNS certified site, but
you don't have anything else to
help us build our business here.
And so, unfortunately we've lost
a couple of opportunities that
would have been very pivotal.
An instrumental for, for the
region, I think.
So we are currently um the
village of Los Sonos is
extending water and wastewater.
Again, PNM is also
a uh upgrading their capacity in
the village of Los Lunas, but.
There needs to be, I think,
more, uh, more emphasis on site
readiness, on getting that
infrastructure in the ground,
being proactive, you know, not
waiting for the next big user
that says, hey, I need to be up
and running in 24 months.
Sometimes the timelines that,
you know, Max and I are seeing
are, you know.
Anywhere from 12 to 18 months
for some of these companies and
we need to be able to have a
faster speed to market and you
know, we're seeing a lot of
these opportunities, you know,
come across my desk in Los
Lunas, um, no doubt that they're
seeing those in Albuquerque and
Rio Rancho and just um
collectively as a metro region,
I think there's a lot of
opportunities for us to work
together on expanding that
infrastructure.
And so look to the future, um,
the village of Los Lunas is
currently a hub for technology
innovation and logistics again
with the presence of the Amazon
fulfillment Center, which is
servicing not just New Mexico,
but these.
Goods and commodities and
products, for example, coming
into Amazon, they're coming in
from the port of Los Angeles,
the port of Long Beach, by way
of I-40, come off of I-40 New
Mexico Highway 6, and then
they're going out to the rest of
the country as far as Tennessee
and New York. So
Los Lunas Valencia County is
already a
Pivotal uh player in terms of
not just uh logistics in the
state of New Mexico, but for the
entire country as well, um, just
south of us in Berle, we also
have the BNSF fueling station,
which is one of the largest
filling stations in the country,
um, and it's certainly the
biggest one before they get to
the Midwest and I mean, we just
see thousands of rail carts
coming in and out of um Berle on
a daily basis, and many of those
are some of the big corporations
that um.
are present just in different
parts of the country.
What's interesting about, um,
also our relationship with Bolen
is that I, I do predict in some
future, because we are
landlocked by the Pueblo of
Vileda, we will not blend into
the city of Albuquerque the way
Rio Rancho does, um, but we will
see continued growth and blended
communities between Los Lunas
and Blen, and I mean it's
already happening as we grow on
our southern end with the new
I-25 interchange and as Bla
grows north, um, I mean, it is,
it's growing very rapid and so I
I definitely.
anticipate that blend, real
communities will continue to um
Be a center for affordable
residential growth. Not only
that, but I would strongly
encourage all of our legislators
if you're given an opportunity
to visit the Arcosa wind tower
manufacturing in Berlin. That is
a very unique and very special
asset that we have in Valencia
County and they are in full
swing in operation and they're
preparing to ramp up their
operation in 25 in 2025 and
2026. So, um.
That is gonna be very unique for
the amount of renewable energy
that we have being manufactured
in the state of New Mexico and
Valencia County currently is per
capita.
The like the leader in
manufacturing in the state, so
that's something, you know,
definitely keep an eye on Los
Luna. We're not a sleepy little
town anymore. We are wide awake,
open for business. Valencia
County is thriving and is
booming and.
I, um, you know, hope that, uh,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee when uh some of that
funding, the funding request
comes for the I-25 interchange
that 80 million. Um, it'll
really make a huge impact and
big difference, not just in Los
Lunas, but for the Puebloleta
and the city of Albuquerque and
the greater metro region.
So thank you.
Thank you and thank you all for
the presentation. We do have a
couple of people on the list.
We'll start with Senator Hamlin.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you all for sharing this.
I, I, uh, from southern New
Mexico, we come from a
perspective of that there are
many different communities who
are doing fantastic things and
we need to share that because,
um, what you might be doing in
Los Lunas, uh, we might be
already having that
infrastructure at the border
Industrial Association and
having some of those things kick
in really and being being site
ready,
Um, and understand that
frustration and Jerry Pacheco
down there does a fantastic job
of of doing that, um, uh, uh,
and, and I also get that we need
to have these bigger businesses,
um, because they help fund a
hospital, right? You know,
however, my concern is our small
businesses and, um, and I'm
wondering, uh, what are you able
to do? And if there is this,
you, you've got the, the new
business incubator and so how
are you nurturing your small
businesses while you're
balancing.
And bringing in these big heavy
hitters that are taking care of
some infrastructure that, that
we're not able to do at the
state level or you're able to do
at the city level, so I'm
wondering how you're supporting
those small businesses. Yeah,
so, um, Madam Chair, Madam Vice
Chair, thank you for that
question. Um, specifically in
the village of Los Linus, we do
have um several organizations
that are specifically focused on
small and medium business
development, um, the Valencia
County Business Incubator, which
you had mentioned, um, is only a
few years old, so they're still
growing um and
In terms of the amount of staff
they can hire, but
You know, the, some of these big
companies, for example, like
Amazon and Meta, they have
financially contributed to the
business incubator to continue
to support entrepreneurship. We
do have the small, the SPDC uh
small business development
corporation, not corporation,
but uh SPDC has a presence in
UNM Valencia, and so both UNM
Valencia, the Workforce Training
Center and the Tomei campus and
have initiatives related to
entrepreneurship courses related
to entrepreneurship and SBDC, I
mean, they have hundreds of
clients. Um, they're probably
one of
The biggest SBDC offices, uh,
busiest SBDC offices in the
state of New Mexico and at a
time when I believe it was uh
Grants or Gallup had lost their
SPDC representative, um, the
site in Los Lunas took on all of
those businesses, all of those
small businesses in terms of,
um, counseling and helping them
create business plans, so I
believe.
Uh, our, our small businesses
are really thriving in a really
positive way, again, with the
presence of not just these other
companies but with the new
residential growth that's coming
as well. The film industry has
also brought um a substantial
amount of activity into the
village of Los Lunas. Um, funny
enough, if someone wants a
border scene or something that
looks like Afghanistan, they're
going to Las Lunas, um, Netflix,
uh, recently had a large
production at the Luna Mansion
and so.
Uh, a small business owner, I
also serve on the board for the
Greater Valencia County Chamber
of Commerce and at the last
meeting, one of our small
business owners who has an
antique shop said that when that
Netflix production was in town.
Their site managers went in and
spent over $2000 in a single day
just on extra props and, you
know, different things that they
could use for the scenes. So
that's something that is um the
presence of Netflix, and I know
there will be a tour here soon,
but um.
It's having a ripple effect in
the state of New Mexico, and
we're definitely reaping the
benefits in Los Lunas. Um, but
back to small businesses, um, we
also
Uh, you know, keep our, our
permitting at a fair, at a fair
price. I mean, we have a $25
business permit for businesses
of all size. We try to make it
affordable and easy for them to
set up shop and do businesses,
and I also believe that the cost
of, you know, leasing or buying
a commercial retail space is um.
You know, definitely very
affordable for a lot of
companies.
Thank, thank you for that. I
appreciate that. And one of the
things I run the Las Cruces
Green Chamber of Commerce when
we talk about specifically
locally owned businesses as the
backbone and as the largest
employer nationwide, um, and so,
uh, one of the things that we've
done is you mentioned the film
industry is, is working on
helping our small locally owned
businesses be film ready so that
they can handle craft services
and that they can handle those
resources. Um, and one of the
other things, um, that we try to
do is encourage and especially
with these, these the, the big,
the big heavy hitters.
is supporting entrepreneurship
that will meet their needs so
that they don't pay for
something out of state that they
can actually support something
here. So we talk about
sustainable communities and
keeping money in our community,
um, and so, um, I, I hope that
that's also something that
you're able to to help nurtures
to create those businesses that
are meeting the needs that
Amazon and Meta and all of those
that they need, um, so that we,
we help support that small
business entrepreneurship.
So I, I appreciate that. I don't
know if you had any comments to
that or not, you don't have to
if you don't, Madam Chair, Madam
Vice Chair, don't have more
beyond that. OK, thank you. Um,
and my, my last question is to
Max and it's kind of along those
same lines is like, what are
some examples of of the support
of the small business because we
talk about these big, big chains
and, and everybody coming in,
but I'm wondering, I'm thinking
about the different small
businesses, um, my wife is
making a bread order that I have
to to pick up on Thursday before
I head back to Las Cruces at a
locally owned bread.
and, and I'm kind of wondering
what is Albuquerque, the city of
Albuquerque, doing while you're
balancing, recruiting these big
folks to come into town, which,
by the way, when you spend $100
at a chain, only about $14 stays
in our community, whereas when
you spend $100 at a locally
owned business $64 to $68 stays
in our community, so I'm kind of
wondering how are you balancing
that in support of your locally
owned businesses.
Madam Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
thank you for the question.
Uh, I, I'll, I'll try to answer
on a number of levels, uh, I, I
think the overarching response
needs to be, look, we don't get
to pick and choose, we've got to
do it all. We've got to support
our small businesses, our mom
and pop shops are
microbusinesses, our mid-size
businesses and we need to lean
into this very unique
opportunity we have right now in
onshoring and reshoring large
international companies.
Uh, specifically, and you know,
Mayor Keller mentioned this, um,
there are two things I would
like to highlight in the city of
Albuquerque. The first one is.
You know, if, if you think about
the um.
perspective that the small
business owner brings to a
challenge. Where do I go?
Whom do I ask the question, what
language do I need to use? So
one of the efforts that we have
made is trying to bring all of
the supports and services for
small micro and mid-size
businesses under one roof as
Mayor Keller mentioned.
Um, you know, we had the grand
opening, uh, just last week and
so we will see how that works,
but essentially I think our
Our underlying philosophy behind
it is we do not want to have to
expect a small business owner to
know how to articulate exactly
what it is they need. They need
to be able to walk into a city
facility and throw up their arms
and say this is where I want to
get to, and I need somebody
similar to Health and Human
Services if you think about a
care coordinator, I need
somebody to follow me through
that path.
Hold my hand and connect me with
um uh the right entities. The,
the second thing I want to say
is in Albuquerque and, uh, you
know, we're always open to
helping other communicates
replicate this. We have dropped
training Albuquerque, which is a
partnership with CNM, uh, which
provides ongoing professional uh
certificate level education to
individuals who are trying to
further their career in
A small and medium sized
businesses. Uh, we just hit the
2000 mark of individuals
supported. It's, it's a
fantastic program and it really
works hand in glove with the
GTA program at the state, the
job trading, um, incentive
program. The last thing I will
say, and I say this coming from
a family of small business
owners. There is nothing that is
better for a small
business than to know that
you're gonna have an additional
5000 people with disposable
income walking through your door
on a daily basis to buy the
bread to uh do your dry cleaning
to uh engage in in some kind of
service. So we really think of
it as a holistically here in
Albuquerque that.
In order to support new
businesses and in order to
ensure that the dollar continues
moving from hand to hand, we
also need to bring fresh
increased additional dollars
into the community. So I, I'm
not, I'm hoping I didn't answer
my question. Um, so I'm, you
know, the thing that I'm, I'm
thinking of is in my work with
small businesses, they know
exactly what they need. They
need permits to move through
fast. They need employees and
they need um access to whatever
city.
Services that are available. We
have the small Business
Development Center in Las Cruces
and during the pandemic the SPDC
took on the brunt of that, and
they did an exceptional job, um,
but what we have and also is
that, you know, if there's a
catastrophe, if a piece of
equipment breaks down, that
business needs access to capital
very quickly. And so they know
what they need, um, they don't
necessarily need somebody to
tell them what they need. They
need access to those resources.
And so that's where I'm
wondering is what access to
those resources
Does the city of Albuquerque
provide for small businesses
cause the offshoring and
reshoring, that's not relevant
to a small business. They want
to be able to have employees.
They want to be able to sell
their product. They want to be
able to open their doors, they
want to be able to pay their
utilities, um, so I'm, I'm just
kind of wondering like what,
what is Albuquerque doing?
So, so similar to, uh, the
community that you are in, we
have a robust um partnership
with the SPDC, uh, as I said, we
have the small business center
which has both the small
business office, which is a uh
city office and the MBDA which
is statewide, but is is housed
in New Mexico, uh, and again,
the uh small business resource
center center is a one.
Stop shop for the small
businesses so that they don't
have to guess whom they need to
email, whom they need to go to,
so they don't feel like they're
being sent from one person to
the next, but they can have
their answers and their issues
addressed in in one visit.
Um, I, I appreciate that and and
I'll, uh, yield just so that we
can move on, but one of the
things that I think we do, we
don't do well at the state level
and also the local level is
reaching out to those small
businesses to let them know what
resources are available, um, and
so I do appreciate that you
serve on the chamber board
because that's really the, the,
the next approach to reaching
those businesses to share, um,
and my colleague Debbie Moore
down in Las Cruces and I, we
have a tendency of working, uh,
and, and advocating that the
state to have
Those connections with chambers
because that is your frontline
access to those small
businesses, and so I would
encourage that to keep working
with the chambers, um, to make
sure that those small businesses
know what resources are
available because they're busy
trying to keep their doors open,
they don't have time to
research, and so, um, so I
appreciate the efforts and I
appreciate trying to expand that
and so thank you, Madam Chair, I
appreciate the questions. Thank
you.
Lujan, you weren't here when we
first started. If you wanna just
give your name, your district,
and then go ahead with your
question. Thank you, ma'am.
Sure, uh, Representative Tara
Lujan House District 48 in Santa
Fe. Uh, thank you all for being
here. I'll just dive into the
questions, um, long presentation
I didn't hear. Mayor Keller, but
I've, I've actually spoken with
him offline about some of the
things, um.
What I'm, I'm really interested
here, Madam Chair, um, are the
things you really hit on and
some of the the conversation on
the the housing demand and
market in the state, and I
appreciate the extensive,
extensive conversation we had
with the Rio Rancho, and the
conversation there. We know that
Rio Rancho is a place for high
development and economic growth
in the state, um.
My question is, with the housing
demand and you, you do have a
lot of the population in Santa
Fe, especially our frontline
workers, so.
I, I both appreciate that, but
also trying to look for a better
solutions so that we can keep,
um, our folks working in the
place, uh, living in the place
where they work, uh, so you
mentioned that you have a lot of
single family units and
production and development. What
are the types of affordable
housing units are you looking at
because you also mentioned a 600
unit solely affordable housing.
Um, we know through development,
Madam Chair, and through, um.
Um,
Good use of our of our resources
that we have mixed living and
housing units. So if you solely
develop only one area for
affordable housing like with 600
units, what does that do to the
rest of the, the neighborhoods
and and uh places of living. So
I'm interested, are you looking
at other uh types of affordable
housing and mixed and, and not
just single um housing units.
I'm sorry, Madam Chair, um,
committee member, uh, Luhan.
Thank you for that question
because it's very important that
we don't just isolate um uh uh
affordable housing in one
location, so I think that's
where you're getting at in this
particular case, this was a uh
affordable housing, uh,
multi-family unit that was put
up in Enchanted Hills where half
your population, where half your
workforce lives, you know, we
call innchanted Hill's Little
Santa Fe. Uh, but, and, and
there's a lot of them there and
I used to live in Enchanton
Hills, um, so this is right
there. It's built in an area
Where it's got great access to
resources like grocery stores,
amenities, there's a public
library up there now. You've got
the block, so this was developed
in an area, um, and, and then
there's a lot of single family
residential that kind of flanks
it around, around the edges
there, and half of it is senior
affordable living and the other
half is workforce, affordable
living, um, what we're looking
at is in, and, and we haven't
had one come forward yet because
our affordable housing
ordinance.
is still very new and has not
been fully tested yet. So we're
still working on how we're going
to develop that out, but the
idea is to create communities
that have a blend, right, with
it, and so, um, uh, the, the,
uh, in this particular case on
this particular, uh, uh, uh,
multi-family unit, it kind of
got started in the middle of us
developing our ordinance because
we're trying to get out in front
of this and kind of, you know,
meet that need as it as it
brings itself forward. But
looking at single family, uh,
single family residential that
also
was in that realm of affordable
housing that's blended into
various different neighborhoods.
And then also looking at
multifamily that's closer to
public services, for example,
we're looking at a lot of stuff
where we would have a blended,
uh, multi-family that has market
rate and affordable kind of in
the same complex.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, we're all looking to
resolve this issue, so I just
wanted to make sure or ask how
you're developing that because
you are going to continue to
grow and you have that capacity.
So I just want to say, you know,
your housing most is Santa like
50% of our workforce or as you
said, but it's really critical
and it's really crucial as we,
we look at other better ways to
um.
to maybe change some of that
dynamic and I I'll take
responsibility for sale and Faye
here, um, then I just have a
general question for everybody
if uh if you wanted to, to talk
about that. So as we are growing
with the economic development
opportunities that we have and
we have great, we have great um
strength in New Mexico and
capacity and opportunity to
grow, especially with our big
businesses. I'm going to kind of
hit on meta right now is that
the data center. This is a huge,
huge um growth period for them.
And we're seeing these data
centers and this growth across
the nation and the need for it
as um as uh our population is
growing and technologies is
developing and we're we're
moving into new types of
technologies that demand a lot
of this, um.
This tech technological
advancement. My question is,
There that also creates a great
need on our uh for energy.
And so I'm glad that Rio Rancho
described some of the renewable
resources, energy resources that
they're developing and growing
there. I didn't hear if you're
doing that, but, but with as big
of a site as as Meta is, what
additional resources are they
looking to develop or or
influence for the amount of
energy that they're going to
need for this data center, Madam
Chair. And before we start
answering, I'm going to ask for
real concise answers because
we're getting real behind on
on time energy if you can if you
To structure the question
around, what is the future of
energy in each of your uh
municipalities. Thank you, Mr.
Madam Chair.
Um, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Lujan, um, that
is, I, I appreciate that
question and I do have to say
Meta has set the bar very high,
um, as a, as a corporate
neighbor within the village of
Los Lunas, they do have um
substantial, it is a high water
and a high power user, but they
have done a really great job at
offsetting um what they're
using, you know, by establishing
solar farms, solar facilities,
putting that power back into the
grid and offsetting news, um,
maybe not specifically within
the village of Los.
but within at least 9 other
counties in the state of New
Mexico, and so they really are
the gold standard for um giving
back what they put in, not only
in terms of energy and utility
resources, but also just back to
the community. Um, they do the
same. They have a a net zero
water initiative and um they're
currently working on different
water restoration projects
throughout the state of New
Mexico. So, um, and, and that's
kind of this again, they set
high standard and when other big
companies want to come into the
village of Los.
we say this is what we expect
from our corporate neighbors.
So thank you, Madam Chair.
Obviously, one of, one of the
things that Rio Rancho's done is
when some of these projects come
forward, and I'll make it real
short is just being very
aggressive about, you know,
modifying our zoning to allow
for certain uses, so in the, in
the, in the, in the case of Qull
ranch, we had to add that solar
farm as a permissive use for
that particular land and that
sailed through the governing
body very rapidly, um, and move
that project forward pretty
quickly and so that, uh, whether
that's with the housing or with.
Businesses coming in or um any
type of activity, if we can make
it fit and just kind of putting
our head down and plowing
through and getting the zoning
done so that things can move
forward and it speeds up the
time that we can actually put
shovels in the dirt.
Perfect. Thank you, Madam Chair.
And I did hear from both of the
municipality here about the
zoning and how you're you're
streamlining that. I think we,
I'd like to have a conversation
about how you're exactly doing
that because that is the
greatest, one of the biggest
issues that we're hearing across
the state as a barrier to
getting economic development
accomplished for our state.
Also, I'd also like to talk to
you because I want to save time
for others, um, our water usage
and what that means and what
your needs are because you are
growing and, and even down in
southern New Mexico as our
As our vice chair mentioned,
there's great opportunity, but
we have to have a plan for the
use of our resources and the
development of the of energy
need and, and how that affects
our grid. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Appreciate the time.
Uh thank you, Senator, Maestas.
Thank you, Madam Chair. A quick,
quick update city of Albuquerque
on the, the soccer stadium.
OK
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator.
Uh, I don't have any updates
beyond what, you know, is in the
press.
So we, we, we are still excited
about it, uh, going into uh
Balloon Fiesta Park and time
will show what the timelines are
for accomplishing that.
Well, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you gentlemen, and just a
quick comment on on Albuquerque,
I think um you spoke about
generational poverty. Thank you
so much for talking about that
because that, that should be the
overwhelming priority of state
government and policymakers in
this state locally, um, we, uh,
the way we build infrastructure
in Albuquerque is is outdated
and and not conducive to to the
realities of our uh.
of economic growth and and the
realities of of the coffers of
state government. 20 years ago,
Madam Chair, we had a planned
growth strategy where we
essentially put a a buffer
around the city forcing uh
infill and trying to facilitate
market market forces to build
and and redevelop the downtown
core and not and not uh
incentivize what was referred to
as sprawl development. We don't,
when the banks crashed in 2008,
policymakers didn't flick the
switch.
They didn't, they didn't come to
a new reality that we had a 10
years of of recession, 10 years
of lack of economic growth. We
even had like even a a a
negative population growth in
Albuquerque, um, so anyway, the
way we grow is that the private
sector has to furnish the
infrastructure to develop its
own economy. Uh, in South
Broadway with Cap Lotley mons,
we put a little about $1 million
into the South.
Broadway
Section, uh, which is about a
half a mile stretch and it was
concretized and and with heavy
duty concrete, and now it
facilitates a truck stop which
is millions of dollars in in tax
dollars and, and grew out that
whole economy on South Broadway
all the way to Isleta, um.
So our water utility company is
fantastic. We have the best
water utility company in the
country. It's called the Water
Authority Bne County,
Albuquerque Water Authority. And
as you know, Madam Chair, it's 3
board members from City of
Albuquerque, 3 board members
from the county, and then of
course the mayor, uh, city of
Albuquerque uses 8% of the
state's water.
8%. So when we talk about growth
and water, where are we going to
get the water, um, just do the
math. Albuquerque can double its
size and only take up 16% of the
state's water. 80% of our
state's water goes to 2% of our
economy, agriculture, so, uh, so
I'm not criticizing or, you
know, making an opinion. I'm
just that's just the reality on
the ground and we have to deal
with that, those facts and and
ask ourselves, do we want to
grow economically, do we want to
overcome generational poverty.
Or do we want to, uh, you know,
allow those folks who
Use their own selfish desires of
what they want Albuquerque to
look like to win public policy
arguments. So I think it's time
that we uh expand water
infrastructure along South
Broadway corridor, Mesa del Sol
and uh and other places along
the Coors I-40 corridor on the
west side because if Albuquerque
does not grow, Madam Chair, this
state will not grow. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative Brego.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Madam
Vice Chair. Um,
so, really good to hear from all
of you this morning, and I wish
Mayor Keller was still here, um,
you know, when I, when I listen
to all of these comments and
Mayor Hall and I know very well.
Together because we worked on a
lot of stuff together, uh, when
I was city counselor, um.
The thing about growing is that
we really need to start thinking
very regionally about our growth
because um our resources are
limited, and it makes our
resources go further and also
when I worked with uh Ralph
Mimms from the Office of
Economic Development in Los
Lunas when they were bringing in
Facebook, um, Madam Chair and
and Madam Vice Chair, um, and
I'm gonna give you an example of
Skfka.
And a Mafka when I was on the
flood control board, we worked
very closely together on the
edge of Rio Rancho and the edge
of Albuquerque, um, with regard
to our stormwater, Westside
Boulevard, uh, Mayor Hall and I
worked very closely together on
West Side Boulevard and
developing that even though the
city of Albuquerque paid for it,
but we, you know, we, we
collaborated as much as we
could, um, as the west side
grows and I'm gonna focus on the
west side because it is an
important area.
Um, a lot of people still
traveling across the river on a
daily basis, which, you know,
our carbon footprints are just
expanding because of all that
travel, and there's only limited
access, um, to the east side. So
when we're thinking about the
growth of the west side, we need
to be thinking a lot more about,
um, well, and then let me give
you an example, the area and,
and I'm, I'm glad representative
Garrett is still here. Um,
The area of uncer and um Paseo,
actually the zoning allows for
almost a brand new windrock
Coronado Center to be built in
that area, which is very, very
high density if you think about
it. Um, and, and, and things are
shifting in that direction
because we have, you know, the
Devil Eagle Airport in that area
and we need to be planning for
that access as well. Um, and I'm
seeing this from a planning
standpoint, Madam Chair.
Because I think that when we
talk about regional growth.
That's where our, our, um,
You know, our resources when we
Grow individually, we are, our
resources are limited, so when
we grow and think more
regionally, we, we can expand
our connections and an example
of that that uh Mayor Hall and I
are very familiar with is Paseo
and unser, um, and both of those
expansions, um, so I just, I, I
bring these up, Madam Chair,
because I think that we need to
be connecting and I keep saying
this, our housing.
And our transportation and how
they, they work together and
reduce those carbon footprints.
Um, also Mesa del Sol and how it
interacts with uh Los Lunas. I
mean, these are really important
issues that I really would hope
that the state and I, and I
think that I'm bringing these up
because I, I keep sort of
pounding on these issues is that
it also affects how our water
is, you know, the limited water
availability.
Um, one of the areas that I
wanted to point out when Mayor
Hall and I worked together on at
City and I was city councilor
was the area of unser which I
see as the second Knob Hill and
if you guys haven't been up
there and I saw Sky Dvore here
who took a chance and put
tractor there and marble, and if
you come to those areas now at
unser and McMahon, you'll see
the growth on both sides of
Albuquerque and and Rio Rancho.
Um, so I just, and I think
that's representative of
Little's district also, um, but
I, I just bring this, these
issues up because zoning does
play a huge role and zoning is
already existing in many of
these areas, so it's really hard
once a zoning has been
established to change that
zoning, um.
And I bring that up because I
think it's important when we
talk about mixed use development
and thank you, Representative
Lujan for bringing that issue
up. We need to be thinking about
mixed developments, how the
housing and the transportation
affect each other and building
on those corridors where people
can access their jobs and
actually access.
Either transit or the rail
runner or um, you know, and, and
really think about leveraging
our, our um resources and thank
you, Madam Chair, for listening
to me, but
It's kind of the way my mind
thinks is how do we think more
regionally and use our limited
resources that we do have to
sort of.
Expand and and grow because we
are gonna grow just by the
nature of all of these
developments that are happening.
I just came from um Las Cruces,
by the way, and I traveled like
this was last week, I traveled,
um, and I saw the expansion of
of the I-25 corridor, and I was
thinking to myself, you know,
all the way to Las Cruces, we're
we're developing, I mean, we're
growing. So thank you for that,
Madam Chair. Thank you.
Uh, represented a little if you
would introduce yourself and
then uh go ahead and ask your
question. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and I will try to
make this succinct. Good
morning, everyone. I'm Charlotte
Little. I represent House
District 68, which is in the
northwest corner of Albuquerque,
the city of Albuquerque in
Bernelio County, um, uh,
generally speaking, that would
be Paradise Hills Ventana Ranch
area south of the Sandoval
County line up to Passel del
Norte.
A very compact, very suburban uh
community. So my question, uh,
and it's very good to be with
you. Thank you for the updates
that you've provided. Um, my
question with all of the Madam
Chair, with all of the
discussion that's been around
development, whether it's
education, um.
I have ED education, economic
development, housing and or and
infrastructure. I'm curious
because in the area that I'm at
we've had these challenges on
the west side of Albuquerque
about development going on there
with all of those challenges
that are being faced. One of
them that hasn't been presented
except by Los Lunas, uh, and
thank you very much for doing
that. Was the opportunity to
begin to partner with uh
communities like E.
Pueblo and I'm very curious
because all I am, I put this out
there because each of you in the
cities that you represent and
we're trying to grow together.
I'm curious as to the
relationships that you have with
these tribal communities because
those reservation lines do, uh,
uh, come up against them and uh
in the past it had been somewhat
adversarial or after the fact,
and we have had recent
experiences where that's
happened.
Especially in the petroglyph
area and other, other areas. So
my question, Madam Chair, is,
um, if you're at liberty to
discuss in brief, and I'm happy
to have a conversation with you,
uh, in, in more detail later,
but I, it's important for me to
ask if you're at liberty to
describe the opportunities that
you've begun to partner now with
tribal communities versus later
when.
These plans are in place when
concerns do arise because uh as
we know, tribal communities are
not going anywhere. They're
going to be here, they're going
to be, uh, it's important that
their voices are heard in these,
especially when it comes to not
only the water and the land, but
also the sacred sites that exist
here because these communities
have been here for millennia and
so they're not, um, it's very
important that those voices are
considered when these
Conversations are taking place
and certainly uh we all will
benefit from economic
development opportunities from
housing.
Um
For many reasons, that's my
question, Madam Chair. Thank
you. I, if you wouldn't mind uh
if you can briefly, but like I
said, I'm happy to have this
conversation as well later.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
OK.
Madam Chair Representative
Little, um, thank you for that
question. Um, you know,
definitely for us, the biggest
uh relationship we do have is
with Isle of Pueblo, um.
It's, um, hasn't always been,
you know, rainbows and
butterflies, but we definitely
do have um a strong productive
working relationship with the
Pueblo, um, I, I would love to
take you up on that offer to,
you know, have a conversation
offline because um one of the
challenges that we see from, uh,
you know, the village of Los
Lunas standpoint is we're having
so much growth and it's all
budding up to a sle of Pueblo,
and we want to be able to
support the pueblo's, uh.
A vocalized desires to establish
their southern end of the pueblo
on the Valencia County side,
because currently they have um.
The uh resort and casino, which
is thriving on the northern end
within on the Bernelio County
side of the pueblo, um, but we
want them to, um, also take
advantage of the growth in the
industry and the new development
that's coming in within Los
Lunas in Valencia County, so,
um, sometimes these
relationships can be
interesting, um, given that the
leadership and elected officials
are often
Changed every year or every 2
years. I think specifically for
letter, um, there's a new
governor every, every 2 years.
So, um, specifically when I
started, um, nearly a year ago,
or excuse me, a little over a
year ago, um, I was a few weeks
into the role and the the
council at that time, um.
You know, approached the village
of Los Lunas with a couple of
great ideas and then, you know,
fast forward the following year,
it was a different set of of
elected officials, so, um,
again, we want to continue to
have a very positive and strong
relationship with our Puebloan
tribal communities.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
So
Madam Chair, committee members,
um, as far as rear rancher goes,
I think one of the best examples
of how we're working together
and once again, no relationship
is absolutely perfect. There's
always work to be done. There's
always ways that we can improve
those relationships, but I do
point to Northern Rio Rancho
where we have a partnership
between Rear Rancho, Town of
Bernolio, and the Pueblo of
Santa Ana where we are
collectively growing really a an
economic hub there that's a
force to be reckoned with when
you
Put the, the pueblo's hotel and
casino and their entertainment
venue, uh, right there in the
same, and, and of course, uh,
some of the retail development
they're doing right there, uh,
on the 550 corridor. Then you
look at what's happening on the
east side of 550 in the town of
Bernlio with the Walmart and all
the retail development that's
happening there and then just
across the street, you've got
all of your housing options in
Enchanted Hills along with the
block and Plaza and enchanted
Hills, uh, and and what's being
done there.
And Commerce Center. So I think
you see a really cool economic
uh uh economic development
scenario unfolding there,
especially which I, I thought
was just brilliant, the, the
addition of Tesla right there. I
mean that just, that just zinged
the whole area. I thought that
was the coolest thing, um, and,
and that just really shows and
when we all three, all, all
three of the communities came
out to celebrate that, that the
entrance of Tesla into that into
that economic hub.
So I think there's a lot of cool
things and working with Santa
Ana, one of the things that we
really are very focused on, and
we went back to, uh, what we see
is one of the big issues that's
going to be going forward is
what are we all doing as
communities in the area of water
and wastewater that resource is
vital and I love what CNN is
doing on a lot of their water
wastewater. It's very similar to
what Rio Rancho is doing from
the MBR plants. Um, I don't know
if they've gotten the aquifer
injection yet, but I know
they're doing some really cool
stuff around the MBR, the uh
membrane bioreactor plants that.
Cleans our wastewater, which is
no longer we can, we can no
longer view wastewater as a
byproduct. It's got to be viewed
as a commodity, and how do we
invest to make sure that we
reuse that commodity as many
times as possible. So when we do
that, our aquifer injection and
our aquifer uh uh recharge
systems that we're investing in
a rancho really uh benefit
anybody that any, any, any, any
aquifer user to the south of Rio
Rancho as as we recharge that
aquif
Draw less from the river from
from the pumping that goes on,
so I think those are the things
that we look at and, and we're
always open to additional
opportunities to work closely
with our neighbors, uh, because
there are neighbors, they are
partners and uh they're part of
the great community that is New
Mexico.
Uh, Madam Chair, um,
Representative Little, uh, thank
you for your question.
Let me begin by saying that in
the city of Albuquerque and my
shop, the economic development
shop. We recognize explicitly
that we are working and living
and recreating on native land.
And we
On a deeply the principles of
self-determination and
sovereignty.
The city of Albuquerque
instituted a statutorily a, um,
a, a need for meaningful
consultation, um, with the, uh,
sovereign governments that are
adjacent to affected by a
development in the city of which
as much.
Um, we see a lot of things
happening, as you know, and you
pointed out at Mesa del Sol, and
I think the relationship with
this letter is robust.
Uh, you also mentioned the uh
development at, at uh Double
Eagle. We are in a regular and
consistent, um.
In person, uh, convenings with
the Pueblo of Laguna, uh, met
with the governor and his
economic development team just
maybe 2 weeks ago we're going to
be meeting again at the
beginning of November.
So look, we, we understand that.
The use of resources that is
correlated to the kind of growth
that I think we are seeing and
we are anticipating are going to
affect all of us, and we need to
be transparent and respectful
and clear about articulating uh
those consequences whether they
intended or unintended.
I will also say that one of the
things that we are very much
leaning into is, you know, we
have a saying in the city of
Albuquerque. It is not a lack of
opportunity. It is a lack of
equitable access to opportunity.
And some of the projects that
Mayor Keller was referencing,
you know, he named Ebon, he, uh,
named Maxion there are others by
law, any company that avails
itself, um, of the um incentives
that are tied to the IRA, the
inflation Reduction Act has to
enter into a CBA, a community
benefits agreement with the
horse community and communities.
And this is something we are
absolutely uh working on and,
and, and most directly, right,
there's a million things that
the community can benefit from,
but most importantly, we want to
make sure that those thousands
of jobs that we keep on talking
about that everybody has
equitable access to those career
opportunities.
So that's, that's um you know,
it's, it's close to, to my heart
and my soul, and we're gonna
continue doing that work.
Thank you, and I want to say
thank you to all the presenters
today. I, um, I think that you
brought a a vast amount of
information and we appreciate
your presentation, um, and I'm
going to quickly exit you so we
can get the next group of
presenters up.
Sorry, Madam Chair, just one
quick correction. In my
presentation, I mentioned
housing starts that had exceeded
Albuquerque. So what I meant to
say was the percentage of the
market share, uh, jumped up
there. So I wanted to correct
that because I realized I said
housing starts in permits, but
if you look at my chart, it's
based on the percentage of the
combined housing starts with
Albuquerque and Santa Fe, as
opposed to Rio Rancho's market
share jumping up over uh those
percentages, so I wanted to make
that real quick correction
because I knew I said starts and
and permits, and I meant
percentages,
so thank you.
Clarification and thank you once
again for being here today.
Thank you, Madam Chair. And also
we encourage you to enjoy the
newsletter that we send out 3
times a year we're ranch up.
We'll make sure that everything
is is getting distributed.
Thank you all.
So our next presenters. So, um,
we are running behind.
And so I'm just putting that out
there to our presenters and to
our um legislators.
So I'm hoping we can, we can
move a little quicker uh to try
to make sure we, we stay on
task. Thank you.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Jason Espinoza, uh,
with my hat on today as
executive director of New Mexico
IDEA, which is the statewide
economic development
Good morning, Madam Chair.
Members of the committee, I'm
Misha Saavedra. I serve as the
director of customer marketing
and economic development at PNM.
Uh, and we appreciate you guys
having us uh in front of the
committee today. Uh, so we're
talking about preparing for
growth and specifically energy
needs, and we're going to talk
about this through the lens of
what has already been mentioned
several times this morning of
site readiness. We've talked
about that throughout the
interim, uh, and we'll continue
that again today, but I also do
just want to know, you know,
electricity is a critical
component of economic
development, the availability of
reliable, affordable, uh, power
supplies is essential for both
attracting.
And retaining an expansion of
our existing businesses,
supporting industrial operations
and then improving the overall
quality of life in New Mexico as
well. And we do realize with
economic development, the
increasing demands and changing
expectations of both of our, you
know, industrial, or business,
uh, consumers, uh, puts mounting
pressure on our electricity
electric utilities to meet the
needs of our economic
development community and the
general public as well. So
again, we're going
Talk about, um, sort of site
readiness, but then talking
about how do we prepare for
growth? Uh, we're going to go
ahead and just skip the first
slide unless I'm gonna have
Alicia add on, on here, but I
think we all know why economic
development is important.
As, as Jason alluded to, um.
Electric utilities are becoming
an increasingly important part
of the economic development
equation. And what we're seeing
as utilities across the nation
is an unprecedented demand and
growth in demand for electricity
and infrastructure development.
What, what we see at PNM is a
huge opportunity to support our
communities and um we can do
that, we believe by investing in
economic development by focusing
on high
Quality job development within
our communities. We want our
children and as a mom of 5, I
certainly want my children to,
uh, be able to be educated in
New Mexico, start their careers
in New Mexico and go on to end
their careers and retire here in
our beautiful state. And we also
want to, um, I, I was happy to
hear, um, Senator Maest to speak
about generational uh poverty
because that is something that I
was the first in my family to be
able to get out of and.
And that was through investments
in in my education and so I, I,
um, have also just a very
personal interest in providing
opportunities to reduce poverty
throughout the state of New
Mexico, um, and really look to
improve the quality of life for
all New Mexicans.
We believe in economic
development that industry
diversification is critical both
to economic stability and
long-term viability and the
opportunities that we're seeing,
uh, offer that um here within
the state to start bringing in
new industries and new companies
that can provide an increased
tax base supporting sustained
value add investment back into
our communities and education in
roads.
And other infrastructure that we
were just speaking about, um,
and also other much needed
community services throughout
our state in both urban and
rural communities.
So I'm gonna talk a little bit,
uh, just a, a primer on, on site
selection cause that's sort of
our lens today. So site
selection is usually done by a
third party that a company
hires, and that can be an
existing company here in New
Mexico. We've seen that, uh, or,
or a company out of state
looking to relocate or expand
their business into a different
geography, um, and so site
selection really is the process
that a company takes in
identifying, evaluating, and
then choosing an optimal
location for a business or uh
their project, it involve
An analysis of many factors
including, you know, market
dynamics, competition,
accessibility, infrastructure,
and regulatory requirements, uh,
on, on the slide you have in
front of you in 2024, site
selectors named their sort of
top factors in influencing their
decisions. I, I think it's no
surprise 76% said workforce and
labor availability was number
one. but if you look at the
other 2 and 3 on here, utilities
and infrastructure 74.
1% of site selectors said that
was a top factor and then 60%
said availableability of
development ready sites. Um, so
we're going to talk about how we
address those and then just to
hit that home again, uh.
Site selectors Guild, which is
sort of a trade group for site
selectors, uh, 82% of them agree
that for industrial projects,
the availability of development
ready sites was sufficient
sufficient infrastructure
including utilities will be and
is the top location driver in
2024.
It's go and go on. And we're
just gonna talk quickly about
some of the unprecedented
opportunity that we have in New
Mexico relative to uh some of
the growth uh nationally, but
they are power heavy customers,
so we want to talk a little bit
about that.
So what we are seeing is that
utilities are becoming
increasingly important, as I
said earlier, um, and that is
because the growth in demand for
electricity is coming from very
large energy users and um these
are industries that we in New
Mexico, um, are seeing positive
opportunities from one of those
being green power manufacturing,
um, we're also seeing, um,
thanks to federal policies and
increase.
In electric vehicle, uh,
charging infrastructure as well
as manufacturing, we're seeing
uh reshoring of companies
interest in coming back into the
United States and a growth in
foreign direct investment and
bringing new companies um into
our country. All of these are
fantastic opportunities for New
Mexico, um, and the good news is
that economic development, as I
like to say, is a game of
relativity, and what that means
is that so long as New Mexico's
answer
are better than those in our
region, better than those that
we're competing with, we can win
and um we are faced with
challenges in meeting the demand
in um in and growth in the need
for electric infrastructure, but
we are not alone in that. This
is a national, um, sort of
conundrum for all utilities. So
if we are able to solve for this
and act quickly, that could
quickly become a competitive
advantage for New Mexico. Couple
that
With some other things that have
happened around us, a lot of
the, the states around us have
already seen a high amount of
growth. They're running out of
sights. They're running out of,
um, space, and many of them are
even running out of um critical
resources like water and so that
also really shines a spotlight
on New Mexico and provides a
huge opportunity for us and what
this means, and I think this is
the most important piece is that
To the extent that we can act
quickly, that we can make New
Mexico a strong competitor, we
will be putting ourselves in the
power position, no pun intended,
um, but in a position where we
can choose the industries we
want. We can choose the
companies and the types of jobs
that we want in the state, and
that's amazing.
Uh, it, it's just one thing to
add as some regional data just
to, to support that too and
we're looking at the Albuquerque
regional area and their project
pipeline for one of the economic
development groups, you know,
manufacturing accounts for 65%
of the share of those project
pipelines, then you'll go down
the list it's data centers
corporate services distribution
and logistics, uh, and drilling
down on that even more, I mean,
sort of the data centers lead
than with renewable energy,
aerospace equipment, battery
manufacturing.
chemical manufacturing as well,
uh, research, development,
distribution. So again, all
these are going to have high
energy needs for the most part
and how do we make sure that
we're site ready uh for that.
And one of the ways that we do
that moving to the next slide is
by reducing risk to the
companies looking to expand or
move here to relocate here in
New Mexico by really
accelerating the timeline, uh,
at the end of the day, time is
money, and when we look at it,
when we offer even the best
incentives.
If we can tell a company, you
know what, we'll shave off a
year of your construction time,
you'll be up and running 12
months ahead of the other state.
You know how that's a lot more
money than we can ever give an
incentive. And so what we wanna
do is really look, because right
now we don't have any strategic
investment in getting our sites
ready and getting our utilities
up and running for those
potential sites. So we're, you
know, currently in a scenario of
lost opportunity. We know the
opportunities are there, but we
don't have the sites available,
where we want to get is that
bottom accelerated timeline
where we're moving up the state
local partners, private
partners, investing and sort of
the
Soft site prep, which we'll get
to, uh, and at the end user can
come in and has a shorter
timeline to getting the business
up and running, whether it's
manufacturing or what
distribution logistics. Again,
we got to shave off that
timeline, that timeline is worth
more than any incentive that we
can give, so we want to work um
on doing that. We see 36 other
states doing some sort of site
readiness, um.
Program, uh, you know, these
very either at the state level,
the regional level, the local
level, uh, there are two
commonalities between all the
programs that we see, uh, site
characterization, so first is we
got to evaluate the sites and
that's something that the
legislature, you as a
legislature have already
initiated. Uh, there was a
$500,000 appropriation in, in
the budget this year that went
to EDD, um, they recently, uh,
closed the RFP process. They
went out to RFP.
And they're looking at doing
basically a side analysis of
Opta, I believe 30 sites that
are publicly owned in New Mexico
to figure out what is the
current permitting? What if uh
utility infrastructure is there,
um, what assessments have
already been done, whether it's
environmental or zoning and
assessments. They're really
trying to figure out what is the
highest and best use for that
land, but what is the potential
cost and what is the potential
timeline so that then we noticed
where to strategically invest to
shrink that timeline.
Uh, and then the second would
then be site development, uh, a
lot of the other states have a
site development fund that
actually then works to put in
the site development. So you're
looking at uh like phase one
pre-development, so a lot of
grading, other stuff, uh, and
when we're talking about money
being put in by other states and
weren't the competitive market
we're in, uh, Virginia has put
in $126 million towards their
site readiness program,
Tennessee's 65 million, Ohio 50
million, and Michigan 87.5
million.
1 million, so other states are
moving in this direction,
already have in New Mexico needs
to really seize the opportunity.
Uh, when you go to the next
slide really talking about this
is is a three legged stool with
site characterization program
the pre-developments, uh, the
ability for utilities to operate
and deliver proactively and that
permitting transparency and
timelines, which has already
been discussed a little, so I'm
gonna um talk just real quick
and then hand it over to Alicia
to go more in depth on the
energy side. But again, site
characterization program
development. Again, that's sort
of the getting phase one done.
So getting the dirt moving.
Uh, the environmental
assessments, geotechnical
surveys, zoning and land use
approvals, making sure that's
done and timely and where it
needs to be. What is the
infrastructure and utility
availability, site clearing,
grading, getting the drainage
set, permitting regulatory
compliance, uh, and then, you
know, looking at, you know, what
does it cost to build a
speculative site development if
that's a possibility. But all
this is done based off of that
assessment, so it's ready, it's
getting ready in the direction
for whether it's
An industrial site, an office
site or whatever makes sense for
that um piece of land. So I'll
hand it over to Alicia to talk
uh a lot more about the energy
side.
One of the things that, uh, one
of the reasons we're here today
is we've been collaborating with
other utilities talking about
how we can participate in site
readiness in a prudent and uh
responsible way because as uh
many of you probably already
know, uh, utility infrastructure
is not cheap. We live in a state
that is, um, has a high
percentage of impoverished
citizens, and so all of these
things have to
We carefully balanced and taken
into consideration.
We know that our biggest
challenge is with speed to
market. We are really not able
to build fast enough at this
point in time because today we
have to have a customer sign a
contract before we can order
equipment before we can actually
start to uh design our system
and move into then after that
approval processes through our
PRC and then into construction,
um, and so it can take us a
number of years from a signed
contract.
To be able to deliver utility
infrastructure. Most of the
companies we're talking with
today want that power in 2 to 3
years, and that is simply too
fast for us, unfortunately,
under the current process.
What is adding and exacerbating
that issue for us, our supply
chains. Again, we're not unique
in this supply chains across
industries are, are increasingly
challenging, um, we're seeing
that timelines for long lead
equipment are just getting
longer and longer, um, and we're
seeing that more and more items,
even items that were not long
laid before like wire, um, are
becoming long lead items and so
what that is doing is it's
putting even more pressure.
On our processes and we're
needing to have those reviews
and approvals happen even faster
because what that means is I, if
I can't order equipment until I
have an approval. I need that
approval to come faster.
And so, um, what we have
realized as utilities across the
nation is that we are going to
have to build a head of
customers and ahead of signed
contracts and we're going to
need to relook at the approval
processes that we have today.
We know that this has to be done
in collaboration because as I
said, we have to be really
careful about where we're making
investments and if we're really
trying to build ready sites.
What that means is that we all
need to be building in the same
places, um, and so what we have,
um, as utilities sort of come
together and decided is that the
New Mexicoconomic Development
department would be a great
organization to oversee and
certify.
Not only the prudence of the
investments that are being made,
but also certifying that the
locations where these
investments are being made makes
sense based on historical
interest, and the reason we
think that NMEDD is the
organization to oversee this,
um, is really twofold. The first
is that they have knowledge and
history, um, with respect to the
projects that have expressed
interest, the types of projects
that are interested in these
locations as well as the sizes
of the capacity.
needs and so they have enough
information to be able to make
educated decisions about how big
this pre-built infrastructure
should be. The second reason is
that they have a statewide view
and so they'll be able to pick
and choose sites throughout the
state and both both urban and
rural communities, so that we're
not leaving any of our
communities behind.
And the last piece in talking
with our smaller water
utilities, uh, mostly, but also
with some of our smaller
electric co-ops is they're
concerned about their ability to
participate because of uh of.
Lack of access to affordable
capital to be able to pre-invest
and prebuild, and so the
solution that uh we've been
working through for that are low
interest loans that uh will
allow these smaller utilities to
have access to capital and to
participate in the site
readiness program.
If you move on to the next
slide, I want to talk a little
bit about a little bit more
about how we think this low loan
program could work. We believe
that a 5 year maximum term uh
for this low interest loan would
be appropriate. It would not go
on to customer bills while it's
being held as a loan, and it
would remain held there, um,
being used by the utilities to
build that infrastructure, um,
until one of two things happens.
Either one, a new customer signs
up and they take service at that
site or to that 5 year term
lapses. On one of those two
things happens, then the cost
could then be um moved on to the
utilities books and recovered
through rates. If a new customer
is coming in and taking service
at that site, which we believe
was site readiness that will
happen, um, the new customer
will immediately have to pay
back a portion of that loan of
the
That cost themselves and they
will be on the hook to pay for
overtime the incremental cost to
serve them, so they will be
covering that cost of
infrastructure to serve them.
And what we've seen, especially
with these larger users, is that
over the course of um 7 to 10
years, they are, um, bringing in
actually more revenue than the
cost to serve them, and what
that means is they're
effectively driving down the
cost of utilities over time for
all customers.
The most important thing that I
want to make sure um we're clear
about is that we do not want
double dipping and this program
would not allow for double
dipping, so the, the program is
either paid for by the loan or
it's paid for in utility rates,
it will never be able to cross
both.
And so I just wanna uh take a
moment to just, um, sort of
summarize a little bit here, um,
really for us, the reason that
we need a legislative, uh, your
legislative assistance, if you
will, in, in improving these
processes expediting the
timelines, offering these, uh, a
low interest loans to smaller
utilities is that we really do
have to start building faster.
We need to be able to provide
power to companies within 2 to 3
years to really start to compete
to be able to choose, as I said,
the industries and the companies
that we want here in the state
and um to give you a sense of
how big these users are, our
average at P&M. Our average ask
is 250 megawatts and so that's
the equivalent of about 100,000
average sized homes here in New
Mexico. These are very large
users.
And that means that the
infrastructure we're going to
need to build to be able to
accommodate many of these, um,
is not going to be, um,
inconsequential in cost. We know
that, um, our supply chain
timelines today are too long,
um, many of our, um, major
pieces of equipment to be able
to support that size of load
we're looking at 3 to 5 years
just to get that piece of
equipment in from the time we
order it and so you're already 1
to 3 years behind what the
customer.
needs in addition to that, many
of these require generation to
be built and generation takes us
4 to 5 years to be able to
construct one approval within
that process takes nearly a year
and a half just one approval
within that process. And so
that's one of the processes that
we're asking to have expedited
within the legislation. Once we
get through all of that and
we've constructed the
infrastructure, we then have to
Um, go to our PRC and ask them
for approval to recover the cost
of our investments. That process
takes 1.5 to 2 years just to get
through that process and get
approval. And so you're asking
utilities and the current
process to really hold on to
these investments to carry the
debt for 6 or more years, and,
um, while utilities like uh El
Paso Electric P&M can handle
that. We have, you know, bigger
And sheets and we can manage
that for some of these smaller
utilities, they really have
would have a hard time being
able to do that.
And so in summary, the only way
for us to compete, we believe,
um, is to build ahead of our
customers and we see that there
is substantial and frankly
steadily growing interest within
New Mexico and so we believe
that this is a less risky time
to make these types of
investments, then it was a year
ago 25, and certainly 10 years
ago, um, and we, we know that
competing and winning can be
transformational. We
See that down in Las Lunas. We
will see that again here shortly
in Mesa del Sol with some of the
recent ones that we've that
we've heard announcements for,
and we believe we can continue
to win, and we can continue to
bring opportunity to New Mexico,
and we want to do that in
collaboration with all of you,
our lawmakers, as well as all of
our stakeholders who are
actively uh partnering and very
interested in seeing a brighter
future for New Mexico. Thank
you.
And just to add on to that
section too. I mean when we talk
about the rest of site readiness
and getting the dirt ready.
If the utility side is not
complete, it's all for naught
because that timeline hasn't
moved up. It has to be the dirt.
It has to be the utilities, you
know, we're talking electricity
here, but it was mentioned the
other utilities as well. I mean
water and wastewater are
significant component of this as
well. So we need to get everyone
aligned. We need to get those
timetables moved up or we're
going to miss out on those
opportunities. Uh, the last
slide that that we have on here
talks about the third leg of the
stool, which is really, again,
it's timeline driven permitting
transparency and timeliness for
everything.
That, that we do. And so I I put
on here just to interesting
program that the federal
government stood up when they
were looking at permitting their
Fast 41 project
or which really establishes a
governance structure, set of
procedures, and then funding
authorities to make transparent
their review and permitting a
federal projects. And one of the
interesting things that they
have to do is when a project is
brought onto this sort of new
Fast 41 process. There is a
virtual online
dashboard that says this will
get done in this many days. This
will get done in 60 and so on.
And so it's really
accountability measure and it's,
you know, transparency there,
um, that we can get some of
these environmental uh reviews
done that we can get other
things that state agencies need
to move along, uh, just as a way
to increase sort of
accountability and transparency,
and also, you know, the goal is
to move up timelines where we
can, and if we can't on certain
items, the goal is to be trans.
Parent and know what that
timeline is, because if a
company is looking to expand or
um relocate to New Mexico. Yes,
the goal is moving up that
timeline, but to know the
timetable as accurate as
possible so that they can make
their decision based off of
that, uh, is something that New
Mexico really needs to to move
towards as well, um, so Alicia,
any lasting that, uh, with that
we stand for questions.
Thank you and um I appreciate
the presentation. Uh, we have
Couple of people on the list,
uh, Representative Hernon, if
you would please introduce
yourself, um, before asking your
question.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
Representative Pamela Herndon,
and I represent House District
28 in the Northeast Heights,
where we're working together to
make it the most walkable
district in the entire state of
New Mexico and with that my
questions are these, Madam
Chair. My first question is goes
to uh Miss Savera in terms of
her work as a car as a customer
marketing and economic
development person. I just want
to bring something to your
attention in terms of the wider
spread.
A people that you that you focus
on. So right here in our state,
you absolutely notified and
informed us that we are an
impoverished state where more
than 50% of the people are on
Medicaid. So one of the things
that's important for P&M to
realize is that when you are
providing services to
individuals and those
individuals are, are sick, that
you don't cut off their
electricity. And so I, I'm
asking you to look at your
policies and how that works. And
then when
People do pay the electricity
bill that has been turned off
for whatever the reason is, then
there's this process of paying
the electricity bill, then they
have to go through another
process of making a a response
or a request to get it turned
back on. That's absolutely
honorous and I just asked you as
an economic development in the
way in which we are looking at
our citizens that we address
that. The second item is to look
specifically at all of the
things that you're talking about
in terms of infrastructure and
growing. And how are you
are working with with uh CNM.
They have a workforce training
process here where they're
working on apprenticeships for
our individuals as we grow our
own to help this marketing
infrastructure. How are you all
reaching out and making that
work with them?
Madam Chairman, Representative
Herndon, thank you for the
feedback. I will absolutely take
that back and I'm happy to work
on that and thank you for the
question. Uh, we are always
looking for partners, um, to.
And frankly, we, we also need
employees.
Um, and so one of, one of the
programs that we stood up just a
couple of years ago in
partnership with CNM and other
um secondary education, uh,
facilities was uh bring to to
create a pipeline of
Uh, I'm losing the word, um.
Excuse me.
People come to work, uh,
voluntary like, no, it's
internships. Thank you. I don't
know who just said that, but
thank you for saving my tired
brain today, um, so we, we have
created a program, um, to look
for internship opportunities,
not just at P&M, but with other
large employers throughout the
state that was a program that we
um we actually initiated, uh,
partly because we, we do need
employees and a lot of times
working for the electric
utilities.
Not that exciting. It's not the
first thing that people think
of. I want to be, uh, I wanna
work in accounting for an
electric utility when I grow up,
so we're trying to drive that
interest through that internship
program and we are working with
CNM on that. We are also working
to launch another program, um,
in a broader way right now we're
just working with a few schools
who have, uh, expressed
interest, but CNN has recently
um expressed an interest in
growing the linemen, um, program
with us.
And so, um, that's actually a
fantastic program because you do
not need a degree and uh you can
make a six-figure salary at the
end of your apprenticeship, so,
um, that is another program that
we're very invested in with CNM
and with others.
Well, thank you very much and
thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Uh, can we have a
Representative Matthews also
introduce yourself and tell us
your district before you're
asking your question.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um.
Can I get this right the first
time. This is a special moment.
Uh, I'm Marian Matthews. I'm the
state representative in District
27 in Albuquerque, New Mexico,
um.
I, this is, let me just start by
saying this is a really
interesting idea, um, and.
My first question is.
You said it doesn't involve just
electricity, it would involve
other infrastructure. So for
example, you mentioned water and
I assume it would include
natural gas, is that right?
OK, you're shaking your head,
yes. How about broadband and
connectivity.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Matthews certainly would include
that when we look at sort of the
utility spectrum, I think when
we were talking about water,
wastewater, connected broadband
connectivity, uh, electricity,
anything that's gonna be
utilized by the site out there
needs to be part of the site
readiness sort of in
infrastructure investment to to
be ready for companies to come
into.
OK. And uh thank you, thank you
for the answer. What about
transportation?
Infrastructure.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Matthews, certainly, I think
part of the site assessments,
the, the characterization part
of it would be to look at what
transportation infrastructure is
available, what transportation
infrastructure needs to be built
out, uh, so when we're looking
at both public transportation
and general roadways and other
infrastructure that's gonna be
part of that assessment because
when we look at companies and
their site selection process,
transportation is a critical
component, so it needs to be.
Part of any program.
OK. Thank, thank you again,
Madam Chair, uh, presenters, um.
So one of my questions would be.
How much time effort has your
organization spent talking to
these other utilities,
infrastructure, sources and so
forth and sort of where is this
idea.
Um, in the, in the war in New
Mexico right now.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Matthews,
uh, right now, New Mexico idea
as the statewide economic
development professional
association has really taken the
lead on on sort of convening our
membership along with our
partners, our membership
includes economic development
organizations that are nonprofit
organizations as well as local
municipal and county uh economic
development agencies, uh, as
well as electric utilities, so
part of that conversation has
been PNM, the co op.
El Paso Electric, um.
And, and New Mexico Gas Company
and others, so we've been
holding uh different sets of
meetings throughout the year,
uh, meeting with elected
officials, meeting with our
partners, uh, we just recently
had the governor's conference on
Economic Development which we
held a couple of weeks ago with
300 folks in attendance from
around the state, uh, and there
were multiple sessions on site
readiness, so we're trying to
bring in as many folks and
stakeholders as we can into the
discussion, um, in terms of
where we are in the, in the
process and I'll have Alicia.
Add on to this as well. Uh, we
sort of have the bare bones of
legislation uh drafted as of
right now for the general sort
of site readiness when we're
looking at site characterization
and a site development fund, uh,
right now with our utility
partners are weaving in some of
the suggestions, uh, from PNM
and others to make sure that our
utility and electricity
components are in uh uh
integrated into the draft bill
as well, um, because if it's
not, then, then, then it's not
gonna work, um, so we're.
Almost completing and and by the
end of the month should have a
complete draft that uh we want
to get out and and share with
legislators and other
stakeholders uh for uh more
input as well.
However, Alicia respond to you.
Madam Chair Representative
Matthews, um.
The only thing I would, I would
add on this is that for
utilities we've we've seen this
wave coming. This has been
something we have seen, um,
coming our way for about the
last 5 years, knowing that we
were going to get to a point
where, uh, there really wasn't
any more excess capacity and we
were going to have to start
building one signed customer at
a time, really putting us at a
disadvantage and um with an
inability to truly support
economic.
Development and so we've we've
been having conversations, um,
actively for about the last 5
years with different utilities,
um, and certainly that includes,
um, natural gas like New Mexico
gas, uh, like hatch is a good
friend, so, uh, we have, we've
been having these conversations
trying to figure out what are
the things that we need, what
are the things that would enable
us to be able to um support
economic development when this
when this
Time came, and I will say it
came faster than we thought, um,
and it's moving faster than we
hoped, um, but where we are
right now, as Jason said, is
that we've put together, um,
sort of a culmination of all of
our ideas, things that we think
will work into legislation, um,
and that draft is very much
circulating among partners right
now, um, and we're hoping that
we'll be able to introduce that
in this next session.
Uh, Madam Chair, wow, that's,
uh, all are moving right along.
Just a couple more questions.
You mentioned about the knee,
our need to do this, to be
competitive with other states
that are also doing this kind
of.
Planning, if you will, and
infrastructure planning
Madam Chair, my, my question is
two parts. One is what states
are we competitive with now?
Could you give a couple of
examples and if we do this.
What states would we be?
Then competing against and what
does that distinction.
Between the different levels of
states, if you will.
Matter in terms of the kinds of
businesses.
Um, and the kind of economic
development we might have, so
that's kind of a complex
question, so.
Uh, but I'm sure that you, you
both can do a great job
answering it.
I hope so, uh, Madam Chair,
Representative Matthews, I
actually really love this
question, um, so we, we today
compete, uh, certainly
nationally, but we find that we
compete very often with Texas
and Arizona, um, and California
is another one that that's
pretty common.
We also, um, find that, uh.
When we're competing with those
types of locations often were
competing um for things like
data centers, uh, particularly
when we're competing against
Arizona. Those don't bring a
particularly large number of
jobs with them and so the folks
that we want to compete with are
Georgia and the Carolinas who
are bringing in a tremendous
amount of manufacturing, um, in,
in technology that
um are able to pay high wages,
um, but also have, um, entry
level positions and so they,
they have robust training
programs and they're able to
bring in, um, let's say, entry
level folks who just come out of
college, hopefully some of my
kiddos and um, you know, uh,
train them and help them to have
full career paths, um, into the
future and so those are the
types of companies that we hope
to compete for things that will
Have longevity in the state,
things that uh companies that
will, um, not only create
products and services, but, um,
bring with them a lot of, as I
said, high value jobs.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Matthews, just one thing to add
that to that too. I think one of
the great things about a program
like a site readiness program is
the investment is made in New
Mexico and stays in New Mexico
because it's about New Mexico's
infrastructure, whether it's the
water, wastewater, uh, the
energy, the dirt, whatever it
may be, so even if a company
doesn't end up coming in right
away, that investment was made
and stays here in New Mexico and
improves New Mexico's sort of
Economic competitiveness moving
forward. So anything that we do,
uh, it is a true benefit to the
state.
Uh, madam chair presenters, I, I
look forward to looking at your
draft legislation. This is a
fascinating and exciting idea.
Thank you very much.
Thank you. Representative Feda,
if you would introduce yourself
and then ask your question.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, and
thank you presenters and uh.
When I think of uh my name is
Susan Herrera. I'm a
representative from the North,
uh, I represent the counties of
Rio Riba Sandoval, a little bit
of Santa Fe, a little bit of
Taos. So my district is about
the size of Massachusetts, just
to put it in perspective, um.
When we talk about economic
development and energy and and
all these big ideas. I always
think we're talking about
Albuquerque South. That's what
it comes to mind, and, and I get
why we have no, we have no 4
lane highways in the north.
Uh, we have our electricity is
uh usually the hemis electrical
co op and it can be spotty at
times. You can't, it's not a
reliable always source, it goes
down a lot, um, and I, we have
Kit Carson, of course, in the
north was just kind of the lead
and uh in renewable energy for a
community. So it's not that we
don't have great projects, our
water systems are all really
mutual domestic water systems,
except for the
of Espanol and Chama and those
are
Have big problems too, big
funding problems. So when we
talk about economic development
and we're talking about from a
statewide perspective, I guess
I'd like to know.
You know, our, our biggest
mutual domestic water system
serves about uh between the two
of them combined they serve
about 500 families. They still
have a regionalized they're
working on it and that they're
probably sitting on the most
beautiful aquifer in the north.
We have no aquifer mapping
statewide. Uh, we are
introducing legislation to get a
better idea of how much water we
have and all the surface water
in the north and certainly in
Rio in the Chame and the Rio
Riba was taken back.
In 1938 and devoted to the
South.
So, so that's the struggle that
I live with and um in talking
about economic development in
the North. So I'd like to hear
your perspective on, you know,
and, and economic development,
they talk, they think it's a big
deal if they create 7 jobs.
In a in a community and it's
because all those factors are in
play and it's also on us because
as a state legislators, we
haven't devoted enough resources
to rural New Mexico. It's, it's
that simple. So I kind of like
to get your perspective on that.
Thank you.
And let's let's be concise.
Sure thing.
Madam Chair, representative
Herrera, um, I, I think that is
actually a really great point
that you make, um, I don't think
that all locations are going to
be equally ready for
development, but I do think that
what this can create is a is a
path for that and so, um, part
of the legislation that was uh
that Jason spoke about that was
passed last year to evaluate
site readiness. That's going to
be
Part of that equation and
understanding what are the
challenges with the sites that
are less ready and how do we
start moving them toward
becoming more ready, so perhaps
they're not ready for the
electric utility investments yet
or the water utility investments
yet, but what are the things we
need to do to get in place to
get them ready and so I think
this is, uh, what we're, what
we're suggesting is, is part of
a of a broader process that sort
of puts um and prioritize the
sites and then looks.
What we need to do to keep
moving more and more sites
toward being ready.
Um, man, I'm sure representative
here uh just adding on to a
comment that Alicia made during
the presentation, economic
developments relative. And I
think you made your point there
too and in smaller communities,
7 new jobs is certainly a huge
win and should be celebrated.
And so I think again going back
to that site characterization
and doing that analysis, the
highest and best use is going to
be different in each community.
What is the highest and best use
for this, you know, tract of
land is gonna.
Certainly be different than in
Chama than it will be in
Albuquerque versus uh espanola
versus Las Cruces. And so I
think that site characterization
and having the data to know what
the transportation, what the
water of the utilities sort of
situation there and
understanding the community and
that building, moving that, um.
tract of land towards that
developable goal is what's gonna
actually help move forward some
of these communities in the path
that they want to, I think,
again, we said it at the start,
this is our opportunity to
choose what industries and what
businesses we want to come to
New Mexico. We just need to get
those sites ready for those
specific uh industries.
Uh representative Armstrong, uh,
please introduce yourself and
then your question.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, I'm
Gayle Armstrong from Magdalena,
New Mexico. I represent House
District 49, which pretty much
goes from Los Lunas to Hatch
from Mountain Air to Arizona.
Bobs and weaves all around and
through there, so, um, sorry I
was late to my apologies. I had
some economic development to
deal with in Magdalena.
Just sharing, um, and so anyway,
uh, one of my questions is, uh,
I was curious if any of the
utilities.
Um, the, the broad range of
utilities have other issues that
need to be removed that are in
statute or law.
So that we can move forward on
some of these things, and do we
know what they are and, and is
there legislation coming down?
Madam Chair Representative
Armstrong, I appreciate the
question and I have to say go
Mustangs. My mom is from
Mountain Air.
Um,
yes, we do, we do have an
understanding of what the
challenges are, and part of the
reason that the legislative
pieces circulating right now is
that we want all of the
utilities to be able to provide
their input so that when we put
this piece of legislation in
front of you all to vote and to
consider, um, that it is
representative of all of the
needs.
Um, thank you so much for that.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I know,
uh, just speak from personal
experience that there's some
issues, um, that need to be
dealt with and so I wanted to
make sure that they, those are
well known and and uh talked
about, um, I like, uh, first of
all that you're talking about
not just expansion, I mean, not
just new businesses, but
expansion for new for businesses
that are already in uh in New
Mexico because we always seem to
be working so hard to bring new
to New Mexico.
when there's a lot of already
really good here that could
expand. So I appreciate that.
Also, um, I don't know. I, I
will, I will, I'm excited to
learn more about why you want
New Mexico economic development
department to have that because
It makes it political.
In the winds of whatever
governors here, and, and I don't
know that that is the best.
Place for it. Just throwing that
out there. Uh, I, I've had
issues with the economic
development department in my
area, uh, and so.
Just a little thorn in my side.
So
Just make sure you're looking at
it.
All the, all the
Puzzles pieces. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you. OK, we've got
3,
more people on the list, and I'm
gonna cut us off at noon, so
keep that in mind.
Um, Representative Luhn.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'll try
to be as quick and succinct as I
can, so through your um site
readiness and growth and and.
As you're developing
legislation, what is?
How are you integrating, um,
How do I say it's just the
sustainability of the
sustainable uh development in
regards to
Our environment and our social
and economic uh development.
I don't sure.
Madam Chair Representative
Lujan, thank you for that
question. Um, as you may know,
PNM is a huge proponent in
sustainability and green energy,
and we have, um, I believe very
aggressive goals in that, um, in
that, uh, arena. What we are
looking to do as far as P&M's
perspective is that we will
continue to develop green and
sustainable energy, we will
continue to um be very cognizant
of our.
Carbon emissions as we move
forward and um I think.
It will be important that um our
partners are also being, uh, you
know, within the other utilities
are making those commitments to
sustainability as we move
forward, um, so I, I can't speak
on behalf of the other utilities
and what they're hoping to do,
but certainly from our
perspective, that is something
that we are always uh looking at
and considering when we're um
signing contracts with
customers, making sure that, um.
That as they're signing those
contracts that they're they're
bringing with them that um
sustainable component is very
important.
I sure, is that component going
to be part of the legislation
you're bringing forward?
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
Lujan at this time, um, it, it's
circulating, um, I do know that
in an original iteration that
that was one of the components
that we had put into the bill,
um, was, uh, specific language
around uh creating renewable
generation to serve these
customers. What will ultimately
come out because it is a group
effort, uh, I don't know, but,
but that was certainly in the
original.
Thank you, Ma. I really can't
wait till you get this forward,
and I would encourage that you
actually put that component into
this piece of legislation or
you're going to have very
serious pushback, um, and it's
probably one of the big
component that we're going to be
looking at, uh, legislatively as
well to make sure that you are
touching all those, those points
in that responsibility point is
um integrated within the ETA
that we have in place already.
As we know, we have to, you have
to make those considerations and
you have to make those efforts.
To, um, to integrate that into
whatever policy you're you're
moving forward with, so I'd like
to even have further
conversation about that and see
where you are with those, those
components. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. Uh, Senator Lopez.
And if you'll introduce yourself
as well.
Uh thank you, Madam Chair. Linda
Lopez, state senator, District
11, which is the southwest
quadrant here in Bernlio County.
Um, and thank you,
Representative Lu Han, renewable
energy was a question I also
wanted to ask, um, because I
didn't see it specifically
listed on your presentation. So
thank you. Um, just a quick
question with regards to kids,
um, how does this work with
affect, um, those communities
that may be interested in a tax
increment development district.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator Lopez,
uh, you know, I think this can
work either in, in tandem or
parallel with, with communities
that want kids. What this does
cause TI does have somewhat of a
longer process to get that done
legislatively approved. What
this does or what this would do
is provide a mechanism that, um,
is more timely and ready to get
moving forward some of the
infrastructure, but it wouldn't
necessarily impact current kids
uh and of community.
He's wanting to go still go that
route, they, they could, it
could just work in tandem, but
it doesn't conflict with it at
all.
Thank you, Madam Chair, just
because of the way tis are set
up and, you know, for
infrastructure issues, right? I
mean, who pays for it, all those
different components of when we
talk about that and there's some
mirroring that I see here also,
but again, who picks up the tab?
So just a question to for
thought. Thank you.
Thank you.
And our, our last question comes
from uh Representative Brego,
and you've got about
2 minutes 2 minutes. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Um, I'll try to be succinct, um,
I, I find this really a
fascinating conversation because
in my 28 years as a city
planner, we talked about a lot
of this type of um, you know,
predictability for developers,
um, and communities, not just
developers, um, and in a city
like Albuquerque, which is the
largest city in the state, um,
you know, I, I wonder how, and
I'm
Sure you guys have already
thought this through, but you
know, we have 105 municipalities
in, in the state of New Mexico,
in the state of New Mexico,
including towns and about 33
counties and given that.
Each of those cities and
counties have different codes.
So, keeping that in mind, um, I
just wonder if you guys are
working with um the municipal
league, the um UNM community
regional planning department,
uh, or community regional
planning division or department,
I guess, um, and then, um, the
American Planning Association
and groups like that because
these individuals, these
organizations have thought this
through for many, many years.
of how we create site readiness.
So that's my first question,
Madam Chair, if you have reached
out to any of those groups?
Uh, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Barrigo, uh,
we've been working with a lot of
the uh local municipalities and
counties on the legislation, uh,
certainly will reach out to UNM
and that the uh the planning and
association as well, I think the
more input. One of the things
that that we've realized through
this process is because everyone
touches this in one way or
another where, um, so we need
everyone aligned, um, and, and
everyone on the same page, so
we're happy to reach out to
them. Well, thank you and thank
you for that, Madam Chair. Um,
And you know, just in thinking
about this, this list that
you're talking about for site
readiness. I really think about
the different levels because
there are in fact and and uh
representative um Herera brought
that up and she has a smaller
community, but like those,
there's gotta be some sort of
standard that is set for
different types of development,
Madam Chair, including, um, you
know, manufacturing, retail
housing, um, because there's
different types of environmental
requirements for housing as
there are for industrial, so
those sorts of things are things
that I think about, um, and I'm
gonna give you an example of
that, Madam Chair. When we did,
when we were um looking at the
rail yards to develop that for
housing, the environmental, um,
study that was required was a
level 2 as opposed to a level
one for retail. So and that's
why I bring
up because there are different
standards for different types of
developments, so I'd be very
interested in seeing, you know.
When you guys come up with this,
how you look at those different
levels and those different
standards, um, and then finally,
the other thing that I wanted to
mention was like Albuquerque
High, Madam Chair, when we
developed Albuquerque High, we
had 3 developers, we had to put
in new water and sewer lines and
different dimensions of pipe.
From the street just to
redevelop that property and um
you know, these are important
issues because when you're
talking about predictability and
you're talking about cost to the
state, then we really need to be
thinking, you know.
At those different levels, so I
just bring that up because these
are things that we had to go
through at the city of
Albuquerque that um really did
impact the bottom line, which is
cost and time. And you know, in
development, time is money, so,
um, I just, I just raised those
issues because I think that and
I'd love to talk with you guys
offline a little bit more
because I could go on forever
talking about this stuff, but
um.
I really look forward to what
your, um, and the, the other
thing and no one, no one has
raised this was the anti-
donation clause, how we get
around that. So, um, that's,
those are my comments. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you and
uh Senators Tollman also said he
had one question and that will
take two answers for you.
So.
OK. Well, thank you. Thank you
for giving me an opportunity to
speak. I'll be very quick, and
I'll accept quick short answers.
So on page 3, you talk about the
24 top factors.
Um, you got
76% work for 76% of what
importance.
So you got 60% availability so
is workforce more important than
availability of sites.
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator Tollman
says 76, yeah, so it's on the.
How influential it is in site
selecting. So the top 1 76%,
that was the most influential.
workforce availability. That's a
little bit more important than
the availability of ready sites.
According to the site selectors
in this particular poll, yes,
that's interesting because every
time experts come from out of
town to talk about why we're not
doing better.
They always mention the fact
that we.
Have a lack of skilled
workforce.
So let's
I just want to point that out
that it's something uh.
That we should be working on.
Uh
Madam Chair, Senator Tom, and I,
I think so, and I think, you
know, Alicia talked about the
investment in the trades that
P&M has made, I think the
legislatures made huge, huge
investments in CTE programs in
high school when you're looking
at apprenticeship programs, this
legislature set up a permanent
fund for apprenticeship
registered apprenticeship
programs here. Um, I know our
local economic development
groups and chambers are also
working locally at certification
programs along with higher ed.
So I think there's a lot of
energy and a lot of movement, I
at least I see um legislative.
and locally on, on workforce
sort of and labor availability,
and so we're concentrating on
another area that we can impact.
Well, thank you for that answer
and thank you, Madam Chair. I
have a couple other questions
but I'll talk to Jason off site.
Thank you.
Thank you and thank you for your
presentation today. I know we
were rushing you towards the
end, um, but we're about an hour
off, so I wanna make sure that
we get our next presenters up
here. I know that they're
catching a plane out of town,
um, and so I did not wanna.
Not have them speak after they
flew all the way in. So I
appreciate um.
Everybody's willing to work with
me on that. So if we can get our
next presenters up.
Cannabis guys. Mhm.
If you wanna tell. Mhm.
And we got a big
they get like $3000 something,
is that what I read 3000 outlets
for cannabis.
Oh yeah, they're gonna be going
out of business.
Even ultra high red is going up,
is closing some of this story.
Why the hell do you ever allow
that?
Because we didn't get.
Before we already gets settled
in and um I think lunch will be
about 12:30, 12:45, um.
But I wanna make sure to uh
thank uh Marla Schultz and CNN
for hosting us today and for
breakfast. I appreciate that and
um
We are
Working on getting everybody in
if for the next presentation, if
you all just wanna introduce
yourselves and then, um, I'll
let you decide how what your
presentation will, in what order
you go?
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name's Clay
Bailey. I'm the superintendent
of regulation and licensing
department.
Madam Chair, members of the
community, my name is Todd
Stevens and I'm the director of
the Cannabis Control Division of
New Mexico.
Madam Chair, member of the
committee.
If I make any faux pass, I'll
just blame it on being from a
small town in Indiana, but nice
to be with you. I'm chairman of
Schwa our Greenleaf at Everest.
I'm sorry.
Madam Chair and committee, my
name is Erica Hartwick Brown.
I'm the owner, co-owner with my
husband of Carver Family Farm,
Albuquerque's first
micro-cannabis business.
OK, Madam Chair and members of
this committee, thank you for
the opportunity to come to you.
I'll go through my fairly
quickly, uh, that way, so I
think everybody knows uh we're
in here to do you an update on
the cannabis and where we're at
and kind of what we're going to
be asking for uh this coming
session. Uh, our mission
statement, uh, well, our mission
overall for RLD we know we
license over 400,000 individuals
in every kind of trades all the
way from reconstruction to
alcohol, tobacco, cannabis
boards and commissions, all
kinds of stuff. Uh, over at the
cannabis
Our, our mission is for the
health and safety of all New
Mexicans and the license and
regulating all commercial
cannabis operations state, uh,
we're struggling with this at
the moment, but we're trying
hard to get it done. Our
cannabis control division is a
total of 30 employees, uh, 13 of
them are compliance officers, so
we'll go over that here in just
a little bit on what they do,
uh, but, uh, we've got 30
employees over there working
right now.
On a revenue update as of today,
uh, or through September 30th, I
think it's brought in $1.3
billion into the economy,
approximately 416 million of
that is medical and of the adult
use $944 million of that. Some
of this is self-reported, so
some of the data may be off a
little bit uh from the cannabis
individuals that have the
licenses, but that's as close as
we have. Our top 10 cities I've
got you a slide on that on page
6. Albuquerque, Las Cruces,
Santa Fe and Sunlen.
Park are the big hitters. I
think they have been
consistently, even though the
others have a lot, you know, of
revenue coming in also. And if
I'm going too fast, tell me, but
I'm trying to catch you back up.
And I talk fast regardless,
right? On our licensing update,
total parent licenses are 1,556
total approval license premises
are 3,071. A lot of what we get,
uh, uh calls about and uh
legislators asked about
retailers. It looks like we have
one in every corner.
I think we have 11,006 licensed
retailers, of which about 30% of
them have never done anything
within our bio tract system, so,
uh, for the most part, we don't
believe they're active. That
still leaves, you know, 700 of
them out there, right? So
there's still a lot of them out
there.
The administrative authority.
You know, we, we operate
pursuant to the cannabis
Regulatory Act and the Lynn and
Erwin Compassionate uh use Act
and the ULA. So a lot of our
stuff that we do
administratively, we have to go
through the ULA um.
Oh
and get you kinda keep up with
me. So we're on page 8.
Let's go to 9.
The enforcement issues.
Uh, to date, I've really been
pushing our group. We've added
uh Robbie Sachs was our first
employee. He left, I don't know,
a few months ago.
Uh, but we've hired another
attorney and I've stayed on her
to chase and work on this with
the compliance officers. So
we've issued 19 settlements. We
have one hearing pending. We
revoked 10 license, we fined
4,294,000 thereabouts. And we've
collected 353. Now some of
these, uh, are being, you know,
objected to. Some of them are,
they're arguing with me. I'm
proud to say at least I got one
of the restraining orders off of
me, correct? for on me
personally, so I, I take this
serious. I really do take this
regulation.
And serious. So that's where
we're at. I'm really tickled to
up today. We've got 33 total
notices of contemplated action,
uh, and that comes from having
the investigators out in the
field finding out what's wrong.
If it's something small and
easy, we try to work with our
license needs to get it
corrected. If it's something a
lot more egregious than across
the consequences come with that.
Uh, are licensing act on page
10, it allows us to find up to
10,000 per violation, and the
NCAs may proposed administrative
penalties to include fines,
license and license suspension
in which we've done all of them
all the way down to revocation.
Generally speaking, if we
revocate one, it's up to 3
years, I believe, generally. The
unlicensed activity, once we run
into that, that is a criminal
activity. We only have
administrative and we'll talk
about in a little bit
administrative authority. Uh,
it's a challenge, uh, the, you
know.
Law enforcement, they've got
their hands full with what
they're doing fentanyl and guns
and violence and, you know,
everything else, so it, it seems
to sometimes not be quite at the
top of the list and it's
understandable the things
they're dealing with.
So, like I said, once it gets
into the unlicensed activity. So
if we find somebody and we take
their license away from them and
they keep uh operating. It's
unlicensed now it's criminal.
It's no longer our issue.
Uh, we would like it to be for
good reason, but temporary
restraining orders, uh,
preliminary injunction sought by
CCD. I had one of your
colleagues and, and for good
reason, tried to explain to me
how to use things better to my
ability, all the tools I had.
So I took and taking that tool
out of the toolbox and we're
beating it to death. Uh, we're
asking for temporary restraining
orders, uh, injunctions.
Interesting enough, uh, we need
them within 3 to 5 days. A lot
of times we don't get them 3 to
5 months. I mean, it's a
challenge. We can go back, we
can ask for them, uh, we don't
have the luck as some folks
would have when you pick up the
phone to get an injunction done,
but we're trying hard to get it
done.
And usually that's within
district court. I think we've
got one maybe in the federal
court where they took it back, I
believe.
On the compliance update, uh,
retail inspections, we've done
854. The producers 731,
manufacturers 640 and
consumption area inspection 7.
We get people requesting license
for consumptions, but there's
not too many that take it up. In
August of 2023, we added seven
additional enforcement officers,
uh, and then so it'll show when
2022 we did 138 inspections.
2023, we did 1,122. This year
we're up to 2,232.
That's actual numbers right now,
right? Uh, we've struggled, as
you've seen some of the news
media on us getting 100% of the
inspections done, we're working
toward it and we're working
really hard, I think by the end
of the year we'll have hit
everybody at least one time.
But uh a lot of times this
requires another inspection or
something to go back onto, so
it's a, it's a full time job,
keeps 13 individuals, one of
them is a manager and 12 of them
are actual inspectors out in the
field, so it's a, it's a full
time job to try to get through
these things and you know, they
pop up on every corner. They,
they do stuff on the weekends.
Now I've got Todd's group out on
weekends making certain that
there's not any underage,
they're not doing it out in the
parking lot, uh, a lot of things
that we're looking at packaging,
all kinds of things that.
You know, that looked toward a
kid that be, you know, a kid
would want to look at like cook
it's something that like an Oreo
cookie wrapper or something
along them lines.
Last legislative session, y'all
were gracious enough to, to
assist us. We're in our 3rd year
of cannabis. We're gonna keep
needing changes as we find as it
grows. It's a, it's a different
type of an economy, a different
type of a, a, a group that we're
working with different than what
we're used to and we're learning
as we go. There's other states
and uh that have are getting it
right and working toward it, but
they've been at it a long time
and we're looking at some of
their, their templates and what
they've done, um, and this is
one
Might as well go over here and
let Representative Lujan.
Take a stick to me because we
tried to get the federal
background. We discussed it out
in the hallway. I thought we had
it right. Uh, she told me I
didn't have it right in two
weeks ago, I think, or a week
ago last week. She's the first
one we notified.
We yet again have been rejected.
However, what is a little bit
helpful with this is they gave
us a little bit of a guidance
before it's you, you send it and
you try to get it. I think
Representing Lujan's bill.
Now looking in hindsight was a
lot closer. I think we still
need to clean some of it up to
get where we need to be, but
obviously, uh, I was gonna catch
her earlier and let her just
take me on right then, but uh
she was right, I was wrong and
uh we're trying to, trying to
move it forward.
Uh, we also increased, uh,
criminal penalties on
unlicensed, uh, cannabis
activity this last session.
It's, uh, I think the highest is
a 4th degree and the challenge
with a 4th degree felony.
Generally speaking, I mean, it
can take up to 18 months in
jail, but it's really a slap on
the wrist and uh and that's
where the challenge comes in
with local law enforcement
trying to to do that.
We also changed the law where
it's clear that or change the
the statutes you guys that the
liquor control license it had
indicated that you couldn't have
both where you can a person has
an alcohol license, can have a
liquor license, just can't have
them in the same establishment.
And I think that was the intent
originally I think I'm not
certain I wasn't there when it
was first, uh, uh, signed off,
but that's where we're at and
that's what went through last
year. There was, when we went
out on the Senate floor, I think
there was 10 amendments to our
bill. By the time it made it
back through the house and back
to the Senate, we were back
where we started. Uh, it was a
challenge and uh.
I mean, I, I thought the session
would never end that 30 day.
Uh, packaging requirements we
made it stronger, we made it
tougher. I think there's still
work to do on that because
there's still, it appeals to
children, young kids, I mean,
back when I was a kid, you know,
if you went out and tried
something, the chances of
getting harmed.
Or a lot less nowadays they
nowadays they lace it with
things that's really gonna hurt
our children. I mean, I preach
to mine every night. I really
do. I don't want something bad
happening to them and it's a
different environment, so we
have to really tight and be
really careful.
And uh continuing the CID's
limit of allowing how many
plants, I think it's 20,000
sorts gapped out y'all gave us
the authority to leave it at
that instead of it just being
where you could add to it.
So the last thing really is the
2025 legislation proposals. I've
talked to a lot of the
legislators I've talked to the,
you know, my bosses, I've, I,
I've been pounding this and
preaching this, we have got to
get some more authority if you
want us to handle the cannabis.
I already explained to your
local law enforcements are up to
their up to all their ability
they can do handling what they
do without trying to take on the
cannabis, uh, liability or the
cannabis enforcement. It's 4th
degree felony
They're chasing stuff that's a
lot more egregious that can be
bad, um, they've been support
with us, so when we come, we're
gonna be asking for embargo
seized and destroy or we can
actually stop somebody, just let
me turn the water off and it'll
stop the illicit or it'll help
some of it, right? We've got a
lot of it out there. Right now,
I go out there and I find
somebody with 20,000 plants, he
doesn't have a license or they
don't have a license, we tell
them no, shut it up, we can get
a court order maybe and they
just keep growing, they ignore
us.
Uh, and I mean 10,000 plants,
20,000. I think the last one was
400 or 50,000 that was up in San
Juan, right? I mean, we've been
all over trying to stop this
stuff and we've been just
stonewalled and where we can't
get it done. We need that
authority and coming with that
authority is going to take a law
enforcement within RLD.
We're gonna have to take it on
and do the, the 4th degrees and
we're going to have to go that
path if we don't get both the
season and the law enforcement,
there's no use getting park. We
either got to go all the way and
us put a stop and do the best we
can to stop the illicit. So when
we do file on a criminal or or
we file on a uh one that's
licensed and they ignore us and
keep moving forward, then we go
to the judge and we still have
to follow the ULA, right? But
then we can go to the judge and
then flat get it shut down to
where we can go out there and
deliver it. We're out there
showing up with, uh, Gordon
Jung.
with these, some of these
individuals aren't the easiest
to get along with, and you can
imagine what I'm dealing with. A
lot of them have, um.
Uh, I believe human trafficking,
there's some of that going on.
Obviously the FBI has been
involved in a lot of it. So
that's gonna be our asks this
year. We're gonna run a bill on
that, uh, and, you know, ask for
the support and, um, you know, I
I I've been saying this very few
times will you find an agency or
department that comes forward
and says give me more because
right now if we stick with
administrative and we stay there
once it's deemed criminal, we're
out. We still get the calls, we
still get blamed and we still
get challenged about it, but I
care enough about
In this that somebody's got to
stop it.
And it's gonna have to be us.
Like I said, law enforcement,
they're doing what they can, but
they have their hands full with
everything else they got going
on. So it's gonna fall to us, so
hopefully y'all will support
that or look at it, uh, like I
said, it's gotta be all or none.
There's no use giving me half of
it without the other half it's,
it's got to happen, but we're
willing to take it on and I
don't know if you'll have
another superintendent that ever
walks in here and asks for more
to do. Uh, the ones of y'all
that have worked with me know I
work around the clock. You may
not always agree with everything
I do, but I try and I really do
try. And, uh, we're asking for
that
In the process we're asking for
10 more additional compliance
officers, so we can get around
and make the inspections and
make sure they get them
compliant instead of hitting it
once a year or in some cases, as
was on the Larry Barker, you
know, that we haven't got them
all done.
And we're working hard to get
them all done. We want to get
the new ones done quickly and
make sure you're in compliance
with it. And there's a lot of
things to look at, so, uh,
really with that, we'll ask for
the necessary equipment and
stuff that comes with it. I know
that's pretty quick, but, um,
and because of the time I went
through it relatively quick, so,
um, Chairman, Madam Chairman, if
you want me to answer questions
now or we want to move on to
next presenter.
Let's go ahead and hear all the
presentation, um, I do
appreciate that you went through
it quickly, but I think you were
very thorough, so I appreciate
you being here and um let's hear
from the next presenter.
Great, Madam Chair and committee
members, uh, great, great to be
with you.
Appreciate the opportunity. You
know, I think before we figure
out where we're headed, it's
always important to really
understand where we have been
and some of this may be old
history for folks, um, but I
think, I think it's, it's really
important, you know, and, you
know, we'll get through this and
I'll I'll share why, you know,
how did we get here? You know,
the story starts with really a
story, a guy named Harry
Anslinger, um, who really
created, uh, created modern, uh.
Drug cartels and organized crime
here in the United States, um.
You know, he served longer, uh,
as head of his bureau, then J.
Edgar Hoover. Most people don't
know that, and he was a very
powerful guy. Uh, you know, he
also architected the world's
drug policy. So in terms of
influencing other nations and
how they receive funds from the
United States, very powerful.
You know, and it, we find
ourselves in, you know, the
1930s, what created this, well,
after prohibition or right on
the cusp of prohibition, uh,
going out of style and, you
know, folks being able to buy
alcohol again. He had a very
large department and he was
going to take very large cuts in
his budget, so we had to go find
a reason to have a large budget,
therefore, he added, he added
cannabis, marijuana with the
likes of cocaine.
And heroin, etc. and that's
that's factual.
You know, he also created a
burgeoning illegal market, the
likes of of uh Arnold Rothstein,
who was really the founder of
modern day, um.
Drug trafficking today, illegal
drug drug trafficking. And, you
know, the states such as New
Mexico, we deal with that today.
We deal with that across
America. So, uh, it started a
long time ago and we're getting,
we're getting things organized
and being more, I think, uh,
having more common sense about
it.
Anyways, I, I appreciate the
opportunity to be able to
educate and, and share and have
discourse with you. Uh, I do
have a deep connection with New
Mexico. Uh, I got about a 20
year uh record here. uh before
this, I was president of
Albertson's and Chief Operating
officers, so we had a number of
grocery stores that you may know
Albertson's and Safeway, um, we
also brought Market Street to
Santa Fe for those that are in
Santa Fe, that was something
that
Uh, I was able to do with our,
with our team there. So, I'm on
the board and the chairman of
the board in a large owner
investor in our our Greenleaf
and Everest here in New Mexico.
We try to do things absolutely
the right way. We try to be a
good partner with Clay. We, uh,
we try to absolutely follow the
rules and to have a safe
environment for the community
and for and for children, you
know, this is a very personal
project for me. Uh, my story, I
grew up, uh, a little farm town
in Indiana, uh.
Southern Baptist, you didn't
really talk about cannabis and,
you know, you maybe had a few
beers on, on back roads when you
were in high school, etc. but my
dad went to Vietnam. He
volunteered. He was a Purple
Heart veteran, uh, really
struggle with post-traumatic
stress was actually a customs
inspector, believe it or not,
uh, in Arizona.
And cannabis really helped him.
I didn't know that. He kept that
from me for a long time, uh,
until later in his life, and I
asked him if he thought I was
crazy getting involved with it.
He said, Justin, I've been using
cannabis a long time and it's
really helped me and uh and then
he had esophageal cancer, we
lost him last year and cancer
was, uh, ate him up, but I'll
tell you, cans helped him an
awful lot, and you know,
eventually we had to go to
morphine, etc. but it was, uh,
it kept him who he was for a
long time and helped his
Life, so very personal to me and
I think everybody's got some
stories like that.
You know, I think the RLD and
the CD CCD are great partners
like Mr. Bailey and his team are
doing a great job with what they
have. We gotta help.
Uh, you know, where we're at
today in New Mexico, it's not
all that dissimilar from where a
lot of states have been
historically, you know, there's
a thriving illicit market.
They're not paying tax revenue.
They're not getting their
products tested. They're not
packaging them right. They're
selling to minors. That is not
what we signed up for as an
industry, not what I signed up
for.
You know, there's a real risk to
public safety.
Retail saturation. Well, why is
competition bad? Absolutely not.
Competition's great. We welcome
it, um, as everyone should, but
competing with people that don't
have to play by the rules that
don't pay taxes, they don't have
to go through testing who, uh,
or a danger, you know, to our
kids. We gotta step up and do
something about that, which
hopefully we're gonna do here.
Under-resourced CCD. I'm gonna
show you a couple of charts here
that's a benchmarking exercise
to show where uh New Mexico is,
I think we can do better as a
team here. Uh, we've got to
destabilized industry. Many
folks aren't paying their taxes.
Uh, what happens when you don't
pay taxes? What happens when you
have it stored and you're not
doing well, well, you got to
find a way to make it.
So what do you do? You go buy
cheap product that's illegal, so
I keep my doors open.
That's one of the unintended
consequences happens all across
the country, particularly in
this market.
You know, we have dangerous
intoxicating hemp. No one knew
this. I didn't know this. We
passed the 2018 farm bill. You
think it's great. OK, we're
gonna have hemp and you know, it
will go into products, etc. uh,
into industrial applications,
but there's a little, there's a
little uh call out in there
where.
Less than 0.3% intoxicating him,
you can concentrate that and get
delta 8 or TCH.
TCH or THCA, and when you light
it or heat it up, it turns into
THC.
People don't know that, so
there's about 20 states who have
outlawed it or regulating it. We
need to at least have that
conversation in this state.
The good news is there's a clear
path uh to major improvements
here. I think, uh, competitive
stable market protects our kids,
protects our communities, help
small operators helps folks with
35 stores who are one of the
largest taxpayers in the state,
at least with with regards to
cannabis allows us to open more
stores allows us to train
people, create careers for
people, which we do, uh, we're
creating a heck of, uh, I think
a heck of a team of folks that
know how to run a store.
How to run a business, they know
how to run a P&L, and those
folks will go on and probably be
entrepreneurs in the future,
which uh I think good, good
begets good.
You know, I think enhancing the
appeal of our neighborhoods with
good clean stores following the
rules, making sure we have
setbacks, etc. that's good for
those are good for our
communities.
Our policy priorities.
You know, expand the number of,
uh, CCD inspectors to 30 and uh
the guy at the right of me is
probably saying you're crazy.
Uh, I'll show you why I think
that's important. Don't know if
we'll, we'll have the courage to
get that done, but I hope so.
Uh, temporarily pause the
issuance of new retail license,
not forever.
Let's just calm everything down.
Let's simplify what we're doing.
Let's enforce the rules that we
have without bringing more and
more folks into this that don't
have all the experience to do
this. No one's saying let's cut
out entrepreneurs.
For people to my left. Let's
just make sure we're doing it
the right way and they actually
have an opportunity uh to win
and create a, you know, create a
nice business for their family.
That's empower enforcement.
Let's give them the, the rights
to search, seize, destroy and
charge people. You, they did
this in New York.
Called Operation Padlock.
They had a huge problem last 2
years. They've done this within
the last year where they started
busting the bodegas, they
started busting sea stores, they
started busting illegal.
Uh, you know, they've got vans
running around New York City.
They have busted them and it has
sent ripples through. It has
improved dramatically. So all
we're saying is let's give Mr.
Bailey a little more authority
here to do what he needs to do
and he'll get it done, I'm sure.
You know, and then let's ban the
sale of intoxicating hemp
products, you know, they're not
good. I can give you, I give you
a story. My son, who's a senior
in high school at DePaul
University in Greencastle,
Indiana, one of his buddies,
they went one block to the sea
store. They bought what they
thought was CCD,
um, CBD, I'm sorry, CCD CBD, too
many acronyms, yeah, yeah,
apparently not, uh, but bought
CBD and you know what they were,
they were really out of it for.
2 days they ate an entire bottle
of gummies and did and then
finally it kind of set in and
they were a mess for two days
and I couldn't believe that was
happening in Greencastle,
Indiana, which is about 6000
people, maybe 4 or 5 stoplights,
so we need to, we need to do
better.
So I'll share with you where,
where I come from on the 30, the
30 people. If you look up here
on the chart.
So if you look at New Mexico on
the bottom here, so for 3,071
licenses in total. There are 12
inspectors.
In Colorado, there are 50
inspectors with about two-thirds
of that.
In Oklahoma, which has been the
worst state in the entire
country. It has spawned illicit
activity. It's too much supply,
it's going all over the US. It's
actually I there was Oklahoma
supply in Barcelona, Spain when
I went into this little smoke
shop, uh, probably about 6
months ago, uh, they're
producing too much, they weren't
cracking down and you can see,
uh, even in Oklahoma they've
got, you know, per licensee 86
licenses where you can see 256.
In New Mexico, woefully
understaffed and, uh, you know,
for us to do this, I think we
got to do better. And by the
way, there's revenue
enhancements for the local
economy and doing that in terms
of tax revenue.
So we've got to be able to
control licenses issues as well,
so, you know, the, the smaller
entrepreneurs to the, to the
extent that they can't compete,
they will go down a different
path to survive. We can't have
them doing that. If you look at
the percentage that are not
paying their taxes, it's
staggering. It's absolutely
staggering, and you absolutely
need to understand that.
So, what are we looking for? So
we're looking for more
enforcement power. So the
authority to conduct lawful
warrantless seizures.
would be our recommendation. I'm
not speaking on behalf of the
gentleman in my right. Authority
to arrest individuals involved
in trafficking illegal cannabis.
Let's give them the right to do
the right thing. Authority to
place administrative hold on the
movement of cannabis products.
Suspected of being adulterated,
tinkered with, etc. Authority to
embargo and seize products. You
can bust someone, but they don't
have the right to seize the
product. What are you going to
do with 10,000 plants as Mr.
Bailey said earlier.
And then authority to seize
premises and put a padlock on
them if they're breaking the law
and they're selling to children
and they're not doing the right
stuff to keep things safe.
intoxicating hemp band very
quick here. You'll see the red,
you'll see the red and the
orange states up here. The red
is, uh, outlawed, intoxicating
him in the red. If you look at
the orange states, they have
regulated it, make sure they
test it, make sure they, uh,
they have the right, uh,
warnings of the label, etc. the
rest of the the country is
starting to learn this. Most
people don't understand what the
unintended consequences was with
the farm bill back in 2018.
You know, we support expanding
the CCD's enforcement powers,
increasing number of compliance
inspectors, uh, amending the
Cannabis Regulation Act, uh, to
pause the issuance of retail
licenses to calm the waters.
Let's get our, let's get
organized and simplify and then
banning intoxicating hemp and we
are on the same side with you.
We want public health. We want
to do things the right way and
we want to generate revenue for
the state counties and.
A local municipalities. So thank
you.
Thank you.
Madam Chair and committee
members, thank you so much for
having me here today. It's a
true honor and um I feel like
this is uh.
This is really what.
Andrew and I were hoping to be
able to do is come in as a small
mom and pop and I have a voice
and a seat at the table, and I
really appreciate that from you
all. Thank you.
So I am Erica Hartwick Brown. I
am one of the two owners of
Carver Family Farm. My husband
Andrew's back there, um, we are
primarily growers and patients.
Uh, I am running most of the
administrative work up front,
looking for great resources and
uh support team building a great
support team for financials and
all of the things to try and
make sure that something that we
had a feeling was going to be a
great success is.
And now we're trying to figure
out how to make sure that we're
doing all of the things right,
um, with accounting and taxes
and all of that and what that
means uh for a small business
like ours moving forward and
also knowing that uh the micro
license is something that was
established so that an
organization just like us would
have a ability to come into a
green rush situation and be able
to sustain, and we are, um.
We are sustaining, I can't say
that we're thriving right now
and.
Y'all are giving me the
opportunity to tell you why, uh,
so.
Just to go back real quickly for
what is an integrated.
Is it gonna go backwards?
Ah,
what is an integrated cannabis
microbusiness, uh.
It's a person or business
authorized to conduct one or
more of the following production
of cannabis at a single licensed
premises with no more than 200
total mature cannabis plants at
one time in our possession.
Uh, we also manufacture the
cannabis products, uh, which
means that we can, um, do
extraction processes as well as
packaging, um, and then sales
and transportation, we, uh, we
do have our sales, we have
retail at our at our position,
um, but we are not transporting
other than when we take it to
get tested or when we take it to
our, uh, wholesale, uh, partners
that we have.
Just recently established in
about the last year, so with our
200 flowering plants, we are
able to actually sell through
our own retail location and have
partners all around the state,
which is we're pretty proud of
that.
Um, we can have multiple sub
licenses, but they all have to
be under our one mother license.
So right now, like I said
before, um, we have our garden,
which is our production. We do
extraction and packaging under
our manufacturer license and
then we have a storefront which
is right over by Balloon Fiesta
Park off at Alameda and I-25,
and I really hope you guys come
in and check us out. We're open
Monday through Saturday from 10
to 6, and we love giving tours.
What's pretty cool is we have
again our retail manufacturer
and our production all under one
roof so you all can come and see
every part of this process.
Yes
Uh, we have a 6300 square foot.
All of it is indoor. We grow
organically and no to living
soil using LED lighting and
water conscious irrigation
methods, the Blue Mat irrigation
system, which I'm happy to talk
more about. Uh, we're currently
in Senate District 13, House 44.
Uh, we employ 15 hourly
employees. uh, Andrew and I are
the other two employees, so
we're 17 total and as owners we
are not employees.
Our lowest hourly pay is $16 an
hour. That's for the entry to
come and work with us after 90
days, it's pretty much an
automatic increase and so our
median hourly pay is about 1937
before tips, our entire hourly
staff splits the tips that come
in through retail.
And that's something that we're
proud of talking to our
customers about because they're
very excited to be able to know
that the tips that they are
giving, they see everybody there
on site walking through who it
is that their tips are going to.
A retail space is open, as I
said, 6 days a week, closed on
Sundays, but our garden never
closes, as y'all know, plants do
not care, um,
since we opened, uh, in March of
2022. We opened a couple of
weeks early so that we could
sell directly to medical
patients. We wanted patients to
know that we are patients and
that it was really important to
us that they knew that we were
going to be there for them. We
opened early so that we could
make just medical sales and then
on.
April 1st when everybody else
was opening for rec, we opened
for rec as well and had a
fantastic day. We had the news,
it was awesome, um.
We have served about.
4,955 people since we opened,
uh, our total sales in 2023 was
1,765,655 and the excise taxes
that we paid in 23 was 121,460
With this number, I am going to
tell you that y'all, I would
much prefer to employ another
person and sponsor another
family, then pay those excise
taxes as a small business. So I
know that when you guys um first
started talking about bringing
this project into fruition. It
was compared to the craft beer
world and so I would very much
like us to go back to
potentially looking at who we
are as a micro license. I think
there's a
Handful of us that are operating
that have multi licenses under
one that are in one location.
I'm honestly not sure who else
there is out there. I'd like to
find out, um, and if you all
just gave us that incentive, I
think it would make a very small
impact on you all's bottom line,
but it would make a huge impact
for us to be able to cap those
um excise taxes or something.
Let's talk about it.
I am going to reiterate what
these guys are already saying,
which basically was with the RLD
and with the CCD, we really
enjoy working with them. We
open, you know, welcome them in,
open arms, um, a lot of the
compliance officers come through
one specifically we'll actually
bring new hires in and tell us
we wanna show our compliance
officers, what they should be
looking for is what they want to
see. So with its labeling our
plants with its how clean our
operation is.
With all of our staff wearing
badges, all of the things we are
used with the CCD as someone as
a as a model of something to
look for. We also from the very
beginning have said we're all
growing the system together. You
guys are giving us the
opportunity to do this work in
the light and not in the black
market in the light we wanna
figure out how to do this so
that everybody succeeds.
There's, we don't see the CCD or
the RLD as the bad guys at all.
We see them as part.
Um,
Let's see, the idea behind RLD
is for our protection and CCD
implementing strong enforcement
measures enforcement measures to
prevent illicit and unsafe
cannabis activity is the last
sentence of their mission, and
that's the part that we see is
actually really, um, where we
can fill in some gaps with that
enforcement, so before I go
forward with that so much, I do
want to back up into when I
really would like to request is
Additional, um.
Attention to our current our
current laboratory testing. Uh,
right now, we believe that when
all of this was set up, it was
to ensure product is safe for uh
New Mexicans and uh tourists to
consume that we as a small
business and um we're very data
driven that we could quantify
our data, figure out our
potencies, our yields, work with
scientists to be able to really
be able to um communicate what
those medical benefits or.
Torrents could be from cannabis
and cannabinoids and then
destigmatize cannabis and
normalize it as a safe product
through education. That's
something we do every single day
in our retail. Everybody that
comes in, we love to have long
conversations with them about
how is the last product that you
tried, what did it do for you?
Did you like it? Was there
something about it you didn't
like? That sounds like that
turpine, you know, mercy might
not have been the right
connection for you. Let's try a
different, different kinds that
that might be able to help.
with the with the sleep or, you
know, the pain relief that
you're looking for. We are not
doctors.
We make sure that that's clear.
We're working with them to be
empowered to find.
A solution for their needs.
Um, and that's part of the
stigma stigmatization of
cannabis.
Is that it can, it is a safe
product, um, and it can become a
more safe product through
education and so if we can find
patterns with terpene profiles
that help consumers match
themselves to particular strains
for pain relief, sleep, etc.
that's something that, you know,
we have the power to do, which
increases the, you know, power
of this industry in general,
which helps us focus on the fact
that this is more about patients
and less about money, which also
is more about families.
And growing what is very special
about something that can happen
in New Mexico.
So with that,
I need more help with the lab
with the labs, um, we've used
scepter, Rio Grande analytics,
Argonne and Bluebonnet, and
although none of them are
perfect. Argon Labs has proven
to be the most consistent with
quantifiable lab data for us,
um, Argonne was recently taken
offline in July, uh, because
we've heard, of course, we don't
know exactly they were missing
documentation, uh, during the
renewal process. 3 months later,
we still don't know when they're
gonna be back.
Um, most producers and
manufacturers are forced to shop
for the lab who delivers the
highest THC percentage. Again,
this is something that you know,
came before us as far as before
New Mexico as far as um
different ways to quantify and
actually create levels of, you
know, top shelf, middle, lower
shelf, and a lot of that was
based off of the percentage of
THC, um, we personally only have
one price for all of our grand
price is $11.
across the board, it doesn't
matter what the THC is because
somebody could actually have a
much better experience from
something that's a low THC that
a high. We also in-house created
our own, we bred our own CBD THC
1 to 1 strain that.
is going gangbusters. People
that come in asking for the
highest THC, get that one and
then they also get our CBD THC 1
to 1, which is a 16, 16%.
So when it comes down to it,
what I'm seeing is education
equals, you know, repeat
customers, not necessarily
always having the highest THC
percentage, but when we stopped
being able to use Argon Labs, a
strain that we have put through
the system, uh.
Probably 5 times at this point,
which is our own earthships, we
bred it ourselves, we know
exactly what to expect from it.
It would come in consistently
around 21% THC.
We took it to another lab
because we didn't have access to
Argon anymore and it came back
at 13%.
Now if y'all think about that.
If you guys go out to grab a
beer or something like this, I'm
gonna come back to the craft
beer industry quite often. If
you go out to have a beer and
you want something light and
it's supposed to be 4.6%, but in
actuality it's 6.4%.
You got yourself having to
figure out what to do, how to
get home, you know, it changes
your night. It changes it
changes your entire, uh,
interaction with that product,
especially for new customers,
you guys, we get so many new
people that have never tried
before and want to come in and
try it for the first time to see
if it helps them sleep or helps
them with their pain, and if I
give them something that I know
what I can do is say I am very
familiar with this. This is
something I grew literally feet
away from here.
I can tell you that all of the
people that work here who
consume, we have them all try it
out too to make sure that is
this, is this smoking
differently than it was last
time? No, same exact strain,
same exact experience, maybe a
little bit more this or that,
but that's what happens in
living soil. You're gonna get a
little bit of fluctuations, but
that's still something that
scientifically.
That we can follow.
Um,
But I will tell you that we've
had people that come in that
really enjoy Earthships pass on
it.
Because this time it's at 13%.
So we're having a direct impact
within, you know, 3 months of
having Argonne go offline and
so.
Another, so of course we tried a
different lab, um, because we
were forced to basically shop
for a lab that we were gonna try
and find had a more, you know,
um, consistent number with us,
and we called that lab and they
literally told us to cherry pick
our best bud to bring over to
testing from one of the, and
that's not what you do. That's
not scientific. You don't do
that.
Um, you wanna take something
from a lower, a middle, and a
top from your plant if you're
just testing one plant. You
don't want your laboratory, your
scientist telling you to cherry
pick what you think is gonna be
the best, but.
So as much as I appreciate them
trying to work it out for us so
that we might be getting the
best retail sale.
That's not what we're looking
for.
In 2023, Carver Family Farm
submitted and passed 188 strain
batch tests with Argon Lab.
We spent over $37,000 before
taxes on those labs.
In 2024, we spent about 30,000
$31,000 in labs.
This is, um.
A lot of expense for something
we can't trust and that we're
trying to work with patients,
we're trying to, you know, be a
credible industry.
We need help. We need help with
that.
So, um, on the next, I realized
I just this.
Fast forwarding.
Um, so I come with, I come with
ideas, um, standardization
between labs, uh, you can do a
ring test or something similar.
I have some links on there for
what a rain test is, what some
other places have done, um,
designated laboratory oversight
inspectors. So again with the
CCD or however this is that it
might move forward. Um, if there
are inspectors that are, are
specialized in lab inspections
versus the same person that
comes to my grow also goes to
the lab and
You're looking for badges and
they're looking I I don't know,
um.
If I have no idea, so I think
that having specialized
inspectors would be a good
thing.
Um, all new, uh, oh, and then
going back to, um, enforcement
and that sort of thing.
As we started this this whole
recreational thing, um.
We got licensed before we got
inspected. We got licensed in
December the first time we saw
CCD was in May, I believe at the
following year.
Um, that was cool for us. We're
hardcore. We don't want to mess
around, we're given this
opportunity. We're not trying to
cut any corners, um, but.
For that reason, I feel like
moving forward any new license
needs to be inspected prior to
opening.
That would just stop having to
get the toothpaste back in the
bottle or in the tube for when
people are, you know.
Um, not playing fair.
Um, if going back to the labs
thing, if a lab has to go
offline, please, please, please
have a backup plan so there's no
break in service, um.
And then if there's any way that
we can fund more education, that
would be awesome, um, if we can
find more resources for the
existing labs, a grant program,
um, labs are expensive. I get
it. I totally get it. And the
other thing about, um, cannabis
is until it's federally
legalized or something changes,
it is literally impossible to
find funding for it unless it's
a private funder.
And so that therein lies our
issue with getting better
resource.
or researched for what this
plant has to offer us.
And so, yeah, I would also ask
please RLD CCD, can you help get
Argon back online or somebody
else if there's another lab, it
just having, having that gap has
caused a severe um bottleneck
and issues with the current
situation.
And then, um, CCD unsustainable
without more funding, we already
have talked about this, um, the
idea of the CCD not having
gotten out to all of his
licenses yet since we, um,
opened in March 22, uh, we've
seen the CCD 9 times.
We are, um, we have 432 square
feet of flowering canopy.
Um, we're talking about these
places that are miles.
And have many, many square miles
and many, many, um, uh, grow,
grow garden tent things outdoor,
all of the things, and we are
432 square feet of flowering
canopy inside a 6300 square foot
building.
We love seeing the CCD. We just
know that we're doing OK.
Please go check some other guys
out, um.
For example, our most recent
visit was last week from a very
friendly compliance officer who
said that we popped up on his
computer to inspect that day and
upon arriving at our facility,
we informed him that two of his
counterparts had visited us for
the same license.
Less than 2 months earlier, he
wasn't coming back to check
anything specific. He was coming
to check on the license as a
whole. He called back to
headquarters while he was there,
gave our employees fist bumps on
the way out, took pictures of
our licenses or or uh.
Photos on the walls on the way
out again.
Have no problem seeing CCD, have
heard that there's other stuff
they could be doing.
Um,
They've, I don't need to go back
through this, the 13 staff, um,
to oversee 3,071 approved
licenses. Um, please give them
resources and, um, designate
funds and authority for them to
be able to, um, do the work that
they need to do to hold people
accountable, to get in and
license or um inspect people
before they go into operation. I
think that would really help,
um.
At one point, I guess, um,
Senator, um, Bill Rems said that
we gave storefronts to the drug
cartels when we passed
recreational marijuana. I don't
believe that, y'all. We did not
do that, um.
We didn't give anything to the
drug cartel by passing
recreational marijuana. We are,
however, taking away our ability
to build a strong and
sustainable cannabis industry by
underfunding the department we
created to oversee its inception
and growth.
We are sustaining but just, um,
we are not thriving because our
regulators are hamstrung.
Um, please consider again going
back to the craft breweries as a
model. They've been given a tax
differential, which is
essentially 1/5 of the rate for
big beer, um, that's helped them
open and expand. The rate is
based on the amount produced and
scales up accordingly.
Craft breweries were given the
ability to open 3 taprooms,
off-site locations in addition
to their manufacturing facility,
while we may not be advocating
for that. It's an example of
assistance. Right now we can
only have our one retail. It can
be off site, but we're only
allowed as the micro to have one
retail.
Craft brew also has other unique
abilities like the right to
self-distribute, the right to
sell other manufacturers craft
products in their taprooms,
alternate alternating
proprietorships to name some.
Carver Family Farm is only
allowed to sell Carver Family
Farm product out of our retail.
We were at least hoping to be
able to sell other microp
producer product.
Um, we are allowed to wholesale
out, which we are setting up a
uh partnership right now with
Schwarz, but we also are um
partnered with some other
people, which is extremely
helpful, especially with the
280E tax our retail kills us.
Kills us if we don't have
wholesale, we can't sustain.
Um, so that's another thing for
y'all to pay attention to and
all that comes around and we're
unsure of the, the number of
active integrated micro license
holders, but we would like us,
um, y'all to consider making
some concessions for us micros
for the excise tax.
And we are an actual um
embodiment of.
Uh
Of his uh business that has
career pathways.
And is establishing generational
wealth. Um, we have a 13 year
old daughter. She may not have
any interest in our business,
but we are showing her how, so,
and that concludes my
presentation. Thank you very
much.
Thank you. All righty. Well, I'm
gonna bring your attention to
the time again. We've got
1234567 people on the list. I
would encourage you to pick one
or two of your best questions,
um, or thoughts to put out
there, um, because lunch is
getting ready, it's, it's ready
to be served, and I don't want
the staff to have to wait too
long, um, and I'm hoping that we
can move this along. So, our
first person will be
Senator Hamlin. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and mine's just really a
comment, um, uh, and reflection,
and so I use cannabis for sleep
and I also use it for pain, and
I grew up in an era where um it
was stigmatized and it was
illegal and, um, it was
certainly targeted to a
particular population of people
who used it, um, but I
appreciate as I've gotten older,
I appreciate being able to sleep
through the night. My wife has a
medical card because she was in
an accident that resulted in a
TBI and um she helps
That helps her with her anxiety.
Now just full transparency, I'm
also the CEO of the Las Cruces
Green Chamber of Commerce, and
we are the only chamber in town
that actually has dispensaries,
um, uh, our green leaf is one of
those, um, as is Everest, as
some of the smaller ones, and so
I navigate that line very, very
carefully because I certainly
want our small producers to be
able to thrive but also
understand what the the larger
companies bring in.
Excuse me, but I know as a
legislature.
Um, we're committed to
addressing the weaknesses in
this legislation every year. Um,
we also understand the
frustrations and the the
restraints that CCD uh has, um,
you know what we're experiencing
in Las Cruces is we're having
dispensaries pop up and then
they go out of business. And
part of that is because these
smaller businesses don't have
the resources that's regular
businesses, businesses that are
non-cannabis businesses cannot
get access to, cannot work with
the Small Business Development
Center, cannot work with West,
um, through the green chamber.
I do my part to help them, but
also there's there, there has to
be, um.
Some meeting in the middle
because one of the things that
is a concern for me that I'm
seeing is that there are
dispensaries that operate in a
manner that it is like getting
baked in your garage on a
Saturday afternoon, and these
are businesses. This is not a
pastime, and so what happens is,
is that we see those businesses
fail because number one, they
don't have access to those
resources, but also they don't
do the research to run a
business and use the resources
that they can get and so.
I don't, I, I, you know, and I,
and I don't have the answer to
that question. It's more of just
what I am seeing that is
happening with our dispensaries
is that these are folks who
invest their livelihood,
probably mortgage their home,
probably borrow money from
family members, um, because they
don't have the capacity that
Schwarz has, right? And so, um,
we don't want those people to
lose their livelihoods, but we
also have to recognize that you
cannot operate this as a cash
cow.
And so I, I try to use the
opportunities to get that out
there, um, but you know, it's,
it's also, you know, do we slow
down licenses? I don't know if
that's the solution, um, you
know, it's, it's, we, we've,
this is I use this as an example
uh on a regular basis when we
look at issues is the wheel of a
bicycle. And in the middle,
you've got the issue and you've
got the spokes. This is a
multipronged issue that we have
to address, and I appreciate
having your input here today,
um, and so, uh, uh, you know,
it's, it's, we have to
be able to offer services that
dispensaries don't have access
to just because of the federal
regulations and, and, um, and uh
prohibitions, but also there has
to be some education to the
people who are wanting to get
into this industry who are
wanting to make this as
something that, um, your
children will be able to benefit
from and be able to approach
this as a business, not as a
cash cow, um, and so I, I do
want to continue
You having those conversations,
um, and the one thing that that
I would like to put out there is
I really hope and I've talked
with Ben Leinger from the
Cannabis chamber about this. Can
we reuse pre-roll packages, the
waste that is generated from
pre-roll packages.
is just constantly going into
the landfills. If we can return
those things that's customer
engagement because if you bring
in 10 pre-roll containers,
you'll get the next one at 50%
off and then those things can be
shipped back. They can be
cleaned, they can be reused. It
reduces the overhead of a
dispensary or the person who is
manufacturing that and it also
provides the dispensaries with
the opportunity to engage their
customers. So I would like to
put that out there. I don't know
if that is something that goes
through RLD.
Um,
but if we can have that
conversation because the tree
hugging hippie in me hates
seeing all that plastic go into
the garbage. So if we can do
that, but then also use that as
a customer engagement
opportunity for dispensaries to
bring people in.
It can not only go for pre-roll
containers, it can go through
wax containers, the resin
containers, all of that so that
you don't have to spend money on
buying new products like that.
I've been talking with
Representative Armstrong, the,
the bottle sanitation plant and
Socorro that I would love to
have is a similar thing. Let's
reduce our use of those products
so that we can reduce the
overhead of small businesses. So
that's my comment, um, and I,
and I hoped I kept that quick,
Madam Chair. Thank you very
much. Thank you, Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you all for your
presentation. Uh, first of all,
first and foremost, I want to
thank Superintendent Bailey for
working so hard and actually
asking for more to do, uh, that
is rare. Uh, so in the end I'm
gonna ask you what is your
budget increase and what are you
going to be asking for because I
want to make sure that uh, uh,
appropriations is, is ready for
that and uh I will be your
biggest advocate. I can
guarantee that, so, uh, how, uh,
our farms licensed along?
With businesses or that
everything's separate.
So representative uh or Madam
Chair and Representative
Armstrong, uh, they ask this
year is gonna be an increase of
5 million. We're asking for 7
law enforcement along with the
equipment that it takes to use.
We've asked for 10 additional
compliance officers and of
course the equipment that goes
to it now.
When we when we go to the
legislation and the attorneys
obviously going to have to get
involved with this. Part of the
challenges and part of the
reasons, uh, Secretary Bowie was
talking to me, is when we get to
the embargo and the seas and
destroy it, right? What do you
do? If they, if they collect a
semi load of 50,000 pounds. They
have to keep it all. We can't do
it, you know what the cost
that's going to be, or if we
harvest 10,000 plants, we can't
keep it off, so we're gonna try
to have to figure out some
legislation that the group and
uh you know, the ju
The Senate Finance, not Senate
Finance Senate Judiciary, House
Judiciary, they can come to some
common ground is what
legislation can we come up that
we take resident samples. That's
the only way that's gonna work
or else like in Colorado, they
got a whole air base that they
use, uh, as for the second
question.
committee members, uh, Madam
Chair, uh, we license, uh,
standalone producers. We also
license them under what we call
a vertically integrated cannabis
establishment, uh, so they can
have multiple or they have the
microproducer or as the young
lady from Carver Farms has the
micro integrated cannabis
business which houses all those
under one license.
OK, thank you for that. Um.
Do the, uh, Madam Chair, do the
local authorities, like if you
found a farm that didn't have a
license and they were producing,
they had all these cannabis
plants with the local
authorities get involved because
of the lack of the license, so
it would be actually illegal.
What, what do they get involved
at all, say in rural New Mexico?
Not here in Albuquerque in and
Madam Chair Representative
Armstrong, it's a challenge,
right? I mean, it's a challenge
there again, what do they do
with it? How do they go about
it? Uh, some of the locals have
been a little more helpful.
But at the end, the reason I'm
asking for the authority we're
asking for is because it's not
happening. There's so many
things they're dealing with
that's beyond cannabis that
their resources are stretched.
The last one I think was
Torrance County telling me we've
got 13 officers for the whole
county come find our stuff
that's wrong. Well, I've got 13
for the state right now. I get
where they're coming from,
right? Domestic violence and
everything else they're trying
to handle, uh, uh San Juan
County, I think they reached
out. We tried to work, you know,
with them, and we're trying to
work with all of them, but I
understand
And the restrictions and what
they're running up against. So
there again, that is why we're
asking for the authority. It's a
huge ask. I'm not gonna turn
inspectors if we get it. I'm not
turning inspectors into law
enforcement. We are going to
hire law enforcement. That's
what I need and, and you know
whether they're retired or
they're tired of the beat or
whatever it tends to, but right
now it's, it feels like a lot of
times it's us. I believe they
are trying to help us as much as
they can, but their resources
are stretched beyond for things
that are considered, you know,
even worse, right?
And they've got some.
Well, thank you for that. I, um,
I, I wanna go really quickly to
the labs. How many labs do we
have that test the product and
are they in-state or all of them
out of state? And who inspects
those?
So, and I'll let you, Todd get
interview, but Madam Chair and
Representative Armstrong, I
believe there's 6 labs, 6
locations, 5 licenses.
And we've recently changed and I
have some concerns with what you
brought up. I mean, I'm
concerned with a lab that has
21%, and another has 13.
I mean, usually it's the
opposite, right? The ones give
you a bigger, higher percentage
than the ones that don't,
so yeah,
well, I'm, I'm, I'm concerned
about that, so obviously we're
gonna check on it. We, we were
using state labs uh recently
I've gotten two contracts out
there. We've got some
individuals, you know, they've
got to be scientists to handle
this and they're going to go in
and do the inspections. They go
through the license process they
will be inspecting the labs. If
we had our own in-house uh
inspector to do it, it's gonna
take unique individuals.
Cannabis is the one group.
That we get multiple
applications, right? No one else
everywhere else, you know,
you're begging people to, to
try, but that would be a lift to
find an individual or
individuals that can handle it
because from what I understand
and I haven't looked through the
applications thing, it's a
process and then they have to go
back in and make sure how they
process and how are they keeping
the decontamination, what all
items they're using. Uh, so
we're working toward getting the
ones that aren't up and running
and we're also gonna be looking
toward getting the ones all of
them consistent as much as we
can. There's always
be a way to.
To change it to, you know,
favorable in one way or the
other way, so I, I don't know
what is up with the difference
in the percentages, but that's
something I took notes up and
we're gonna look at.
Thank you for that. And how many
times are you required to to
test your product per year?
Uh, where we are required to
test every strain every harvest.
And so because we are a small
batch operation, we have 5
flower rooms that harvest about
every 16 days and we run upwards
of 8 strains per room.
So we test 8 strains every 16
days and it's about $250 a test
if we run it for flour and for
extract, same strain needs to be
tested for two different
products.
OK, that, that helps a lot
because we don't know that
information. Uh, one thing that
I just want to end with, Madam
Chair, is that um there's no
other business or none that I
know of. If you want to.
Be a barber or a hairdresser.
You can't open before you get a
license.
You have to have the license to
be able to open, so I really
would encourage.
Um, the state to
not give a license until they
have all their ducks in a row. I
don't know of any other industry
that can open before they have
the license if you'd like to
comment, Mr. Superintendent.
Madam Chair, Representative
Armstrong, I, I, I can't
disagree with that, right? We've
changed the rules, uh, used to,
we the people get licensed prior
to me even and I even had some
heartburn with that with, you
know, construction about
building opening up and things
like that. Now we're the, the uh
last stop.
We are now. You gotta go through
the water, you gotta go through,
and that can take 6 to 8 months,
right, if you're going to be a
producer, but we're the last
stop. Now you have to have your
planning and zoning, uh, some of
this, the jurisdictions have
kind of pushed back wanting us
to go ahead and license Prior.
But at least now before when we
were given licenses out and and
I'll use the retailers. There's,
I think there's 1000 6 of them.
I told you there's 700 supposed
to be active.
People would buy these license,
uh, and this even happened up in
San Juan County. They'd buy a
license sometimes with intention
of going into business and
sometimes maybe not maybe they
just wanted the license in case
they went in later. So there are
a lot of places that didn't even
have any production, any
license, any retailing, any of
that going on. So I can't really
answer prior, but I do know now
we're trying to make certain, at
least the first inspection is a
quick, easy one, right? And when
I say quick, they're not gonna
be up and functioning at the
first one, but it's also all
the, all the
Things that you have to go
through planning and zoning
Sunland Park, you know, or, or,
or Donana County would be upset
because all of a sudden they'd
have a state license, these
individuals, and, and I think,
uh, Senator Hamlin uh approached
that subject was the fact, while
these folks never been in
business.
Now this, this is different than
the gentleman sat next to me. A
lot of these, they have no
business practices and don't
understand it. So they'd get a
state license, they just opened
up and deal with the county or
the city, right?
I shouldn't said that way, but,
but anyway, they just went
forward without it. So now we've
tried to slow that up. We've
tried to change it to where we
are the last stop. Now, we take
a lot of hits that it's taken
868 months. But a lot of that
goes with, uh, state engineer
waiting for the water if it's a
b or or get the local
jurisdiction to, uh, do the
planning and zoning. So we're
doing better at that, the extra
added 13 individuals we had was
13 or 7? we added 6 added 6, OK.
I got so many numbers in my
head. The extra 6 we added.
changed that. I am concerned for
this lady over here is getting
more.
Inspections and some of the
others. Now I think that was
that that we're getting closer,
that did happen prior to me
getting up here and that's one
thing I told Todd, you know,
quit getting low hanging, let's
get out there and get them all.
So we are getting better now. I
do believe that what you used as
a example is sometimes when I
was doing LP gas, obviously I'd
want to take a new inspector to
a place that he knows what he's
supposed to be looking at.
So I would take him to where I
could show him everything, take
my time, and I knew I wasn't
gonna have a lot of issues that
didn't mean we don't take them
to a bad one and we do, but I
think we're getting better at
that. We're working toward it.
Uh, I, I agree we're trying. I
think Todd's even had the
directive to make sure these new
licenses are completed and we're
trying to get all the ones that,
uh, as it came out in the news
the other day, weren't, haven't
seen an inspection, so we're
gaining on it.
Hopefully by the end of the
year.
Thank you for that bring me
along and,
and Madam Chair, um, it's just
one more uh reason to that I
would advocate to change the
system, uh, and and in RLD to
be.
Um,
And getting a license in the
state of New Mexico just like an
inspection in the state of New
Mexico to have a walk through.
Or you pretty much hold their
hand all the way through the
process, not just for cannabis.
I know we're talking about
cannabis now.
But other other institutions,
you want to open a business and
here you go, OK, I'm gonna open
this gas station. How do I know
what inspections I need? How do
I know what licenses I need, you
really have to want to do
something and do it right to be
able to do it and do it right,
and so, um, but I also.
I just, I, I just want to
advocate for, um.
For doing better, I want to
thank you for doing better and I
wanna um just make sure that we,
the industry is here. Let's get
it right.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Re.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
representing Bream District 31,
far northeast Heights of New
Mexico, um, Madam Chair, let me
begin by Mr. Bailey. I want to
talk about the um.
Uh, location out in Torrance
County that has all the
marijuana grow.
Um, you've already gone to
court, the court's already found
them.
Basically, um, in contempt,
you've taken their license away,
you find them, $100.
What my question is, why can't
we go back to the court and find
them in contempt of court and
ultimately have the court come
in and give you some type of
order to go after him.
Madam Chair and Representative
Vre interesting you brought that
one up cause that's been a, a
challenge all the way across.
We've been to court, I believe
that's the one that one of them
that filed a restraining order
on me and.
Took me to or had me going to
federal court, which would have
been fine. We recently, I think
last week we went before the
judge again. Uh, she wants to
have another evidentiary
hearing.
Uh, so we're trying.
And, and I'm I'm a little.
Frustrated with that because the
outdoor grows are gonna be
harvested by the time I can get
it shut down.
But we've asked, we've tried,
we're following the court
system, but recently they said
when we go back, you know, we're
looking at going back at the end
of October, it hasn't been said
and it should be for uh an
evidentiary hearing, um, that
will show that they are still
operating.
And one of the concerns I
believe that came up was the
fact that it's a huge amount of
money, right? I mean, there's at
least 100 to 20 dollars,000
dollars worth of plants.
And I think she wants to make
sure she gets it right so
there's nothing that come to us
on the backside, uh, this
individual has no license, as
you indicated. Matter of fact, I
got two of them out there and a
3rd 1 on the target, but uh.
No license, um, they, they.
Represented his religious.
Product, uh, you name it, it's
been it, but we're trying, we're
trying to use the court system
the best we can and we've asked
for, I do believe there's other
agencies, both state and federal
that are involved in that one in
particular.
Uh, they're looking at things
larger than what we are, so I've
been told, but they haven't
brought me into the fold yet and
may not.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and Mr.
Bailey, do you see organized
crime operating or working with
those individuals out there?
Madam Chair and Representative,
I, I, I don't know as I can say.
Part because we don't get into
that side of it, uh, but I mean,
there's evidence of.
You know, the talk, there's
evidence of individuals out
there that.
May or may not be their living
conditions aren't the best, but
we're not uh.
I don't have the authority and I
don't have the.
The experience, I guess.
To
To actually make a justified
comment on that. I know what I
think, but that's something
else. I, but I do know they're
working without a license, which
is criminal. That I do have
down.
Thank you, Madam Chair. My next
question is Mr. Dye. You wish to
freeze all the current licenses.
How do you propose to keep those
licenses if we were to freeze
the number from becoming like
the old liquor licenses worth
$1000.
Yeah, Madam Chair, and
Representative room, thank you.
Great, great question. Well, I
would go, I would look at other
precedents, so not that we have
to invent all the great ideas.
So if I look at the city of
Denver, uh, we have a a
moratorium on retail licenses in
Denver in Colorado. If you look
at Montana, they have a
moratorium on theirs as well. If
you look at Oklahoma, that was
really a trage
way that thing rolled out, they
have now put in a moratorium. I
think we look at this on a
temporary basis. I think we
allow regulatory to catch up to
the market.
Uh, Mr. Bailey was handed
something that was moving very,
very quickly, and you know,
Colorado's had a decade to deal
with it, just use that as an
example. So I think we use that
as a, as a template to let's
catch up, let's get people doing
the right thing. Let's get,
let's get everything tested,
etc. and then certainly we can,
we can talk about and have a
conversation about how do we
reenact that or how do we open
licenses back up again, etc. we
can talk about setbacks, we can
talk about, uh, if.
You have an existing license and
you're a good player, could you
get an additional license?
There's lots of variables that
we could talk about to construct
something, sir, without all the,
all the answers.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and then
lastly, I would note that every
state that legalized
recreational marijuana.
Experienced overproduction.
every state.
That legalized marijuana had the
drug cartel come in.
Um, they also, every state
except New Mexico that legalized
recreational marijuana also
looked at the drug driving issue
except for New Mexico.
Now
As a retired
narcotics officer. I'm going to
tell you that the liso and the
Sinaola.
cartels are here in New Mexico
operating.
They are businessmen.
They know they're they're going
to undercut your business.
And they're going to continue to
operate in New Mexico that way,
as they are across the US.
So, um.
They are here.
Anyway, um,
That I read a report from RLD on
one location here in New Mexico
where part of the cartel was
uh the partners in that
business, and they were listed
on that report and I'm sure if
you'll talk to Mr. Bailey and
tell you about that one here in
Albuquerque. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Uh, Representative Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for the presentation, uh, my
question is gonna call is gonna
fall similar to uh
Representative Reems, um,
Superintendent Bailey, you
described the, the, um, you
provided a description that
we're at the beginning of this
uh the experience of the
cannabis business in New Mexico
and um.
I heard that also the discussion
about the some of the impact
that's being felt now regarding
retail oversaturation as well.
Um,
OK
On page 5 of Mr. Dye's of Mr.
Dye's um, uh, slides, um, he
proposed, uh, there's a
Proposal to temporarily pause
the issuance of the new retail
licenses that are being issued
and so I'm wondering if there is
consideration in this current
legislation, has there been
consideration to establish a cap
on the number of licenses that
are being issued, is that part
of this now, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair and Representative,
that's been, uh, tossed about
and talked about the last
session, just talked about this
one. we have it really weighed
in heavily on that, what I've
asked is they keep that
separated from the bills we do
because it's controversial,
right? If you have a license,
then OK, if you don't, you may
still want one. I do believe in
not totally compare it to
alcohol, but with alcohol.
You know, you don't want to lose
your license. That's one thing
you don't want to lose, and when
you lose it, you don't get it
back. And I mean, matter of
fact, you don't even get a new
one, somebody doesn't get to do
it. So there's, I don't know
fear factors right, but respect
factor there.
Um, I mean, there's pros and
cons to I think all of it.
Obviously, we have still got
some catching up to do and some
things that we need to do as an
agency to get there.
For the most part they have
appeared to level out, uh, the
license request. I don't know
how many we average, but I do
the retailers are the ones that
I.
I watch closely. I do know the
gentleman to my, to my left.
He's been in several states.
They're around a lot of states.
They've seen some things that
are working and things that
aren't. We're still in,
honestly, the infant stages
trying to get this right. So,
um.
Uh, so I don't know if I have a
strong, strong opinion on that
as I have on some of the other
stuff.
Um
One final question, Madam Chair,
is, um, and it can be provided
to uh Madam Chair, um, what can
you tell me what percentage, um,
our microbusinesses, the
integrated microbusinesses.
Madam Chair, uh, representative,
um, we're looking at from the
numbers that we have, um.
Micro integrated producers or
integrated businesses, we have
about 323 licensees of the 1500.
About 231 of the microproducers.
So you're looking at about 13,
maybe just a little bit more,
which would be a microproducer
or a micro integrated cannabis
business currently.
Thank you very much. That's the
end of my questions, Madam
Chair. Thank you.
Thank you, uh, Senator Maestas,
thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, presenters, uh, just a
couple, couple comments the um.
You know, as you know, the, the
state police had a division,
special investigations Division
SIT, and I think the SID was
rolled into just good old
fashioned state police
apparatus, but they were charged
with regulating the alcohol
industry, you know, and so that
was their function, that was
their job 24/7.
And they would do, you know.
Advised, you know, good idea or
bad idea, they would do stings
and have teenagers try to buy
beer and try to bust people and
stuff. But that was their job is
to regulate alcohol and then
also the local police and the
local sheriffs.
Didn't hesitate to enforce
liquor laws, um, you know, back
if somebody was selling liquor
on Sunday back in the day when
it was illegal or obviously
regulating a drive-through
liquor or so my question is, uh,
you know, what would, uh, I
don't, what is the law today if
someone had a
Moonshine.
Device in their backyard, you
know, that would be legal, it
would be seized, um, and so we
got to kind of apply that logic
to the cannabis industry, the
um.
We did not create an SID for
cannabis when we legalized it.
We did not.
Train officers on how to on on
what the cannabis laws were and
what was legal and illegal and
so, and, and I think there's a
cultural resistance to enforcing
cannabis.
Laws because it's like, hey,
well you guys legalized it, you
know, you deal with it type of
stuff, um, so I, I, uh, normally
don't want to create more
prosecutors, more police
agencies, but I, I do think we
all should support the request
of RLD uh to create, uh,
You know, these inspectors and
these law enforcement agencies
maybe down the road we can fold
it into state police or
whatever, but it's absolutely
necessary because this
department knows the cannabis
laws, knows what's enforceable,
knows what's.
In regards to uh
Representative Rehm's question.
We, we can't, obviously we can't
go down that road of liquor
licenses being bought and sold
in the private sector, and I
don't think this would do this,
I think, uh, we certainly do not
want to tie cannabis licenses to
population that that's just bad
public policy. If we were to do
a moratorium, we should, we
should, the, the bill should
have a sunset provision in which
the moratorium in one vote
begins and ends a year down the
road or 2 years down the road.
I'm not advocating for a
moratorium, but if we were to do
that.
Uh, I don't think it would
create a crazy like the liquor
license deal, you know, 50 years
down the road, and then, um,
with regards to the micro uh
cannabis shops.
Having uh
Tax incentives to to thrive and
survive that's actually a pretty
cool idea. The uh.
I don't know if there's an
excise tax. I know there's a
surtax so when someone buys
cannabis, they pay GRT and then
they pay an additional sales tax
we call it a ser tax, an excise
tax, I think is different, but
you may have meant syrtec, but
I'll.
But I'll learn more about it,
um, but the actual sale of the
cannabis, uh.
Should have GRT just like every
other commodity and should have
a surtax in my opinion because
of the social cost. Granted, the
social cost of cannabis is way
less than the social cost of.
Of of alcohol and liquor, but I
think, uh, but anyway, I'll look
into that and see if we can
incentivize the smaller shops to
uh.
To thrive and survive. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Uh, Representative Lujan.
Madam Chair, thank you for the
opportunity to speak. Um, so
many things, so many things that
we're learning today or maybe um
we actually had insight to some
of these issues when we were, we
were proposed, we had proposed
legislation in front of us. One
of those things that we keep
hearing over and over is a cap
on licensing. So it's my
understanding, Madam Chair, that
the, the cannabis um
is that the commission? uh
chamber, excuse me.
Has some jurisdiction over that.
Is that correct, Madam Chair?
Madam Chair, Representative
Louhan, are you asking if the um
uh.
Cannabis Chamber of Commerce has
influence over a cat. Yeah, or
I'm sorry, not the chamber. I'm
sorry, the, the board that we
created through RLD my mistake,
I believe the CRA acts as an
advisory committee but not as an
official board in um capacity
like they do with the other
boards and commissions that RLD
regulates. Thank you, Madam
Chair, but it was under the
creation of our statute that
they would have influence in
recommendation when we would see
these sorts of things coming at
our license.
and all these other things that
are out of control. They'd have
a strong opinion and
recommendation as to when to cap
and when to, you know, set
forward some recommendations.
Have they done that, Madam
Chair?
Madam Chair, Representative, uh,
at the, uh, meetings that I've
attended and been a part of for
the uh um.
Uh, cannabis regulatory advisory
Committee, there has not been a
lot of conversation around
capping the licenses.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I think
there needs to be that was
actually, Madam Chair, something
I proposed in the legislation
that I put forward. And now
we're seeing the consequences of
us not having um enacted some of
those those types of uh
Policies or work together to get
those across. The other one, as
you mentioned, was the FBI
background check and that
failing another time this year,
I think that we really didn't,
um, we really didn't come
together and work.
In a, in a
Well organized way and I'll just
remind everybody this was during
the COVID time when we were
putting forward these
legislation, so it was really
hard. It wasn't, it wasn't a lot
of access that we had with each
other and really conferencing
and and really working together
to get this as if you will,
right as we could, uh, and now
we have these the consequences
that are in front of us today.
Um, I do support a cap.
On licensing and I did
initially, and I think we need
to really look at that and see
what that, what we can do with
that type of policy, Madam
Chair, um, as far as the FBI
background check, I'm happy to
work with you yet again. I made
that, that commitment to you. I
hope we, we come to the right
language and get it, you know,
really, really correct this
time. Um, we're seeing
consequences because of that. We
say we want a credible industry,
but without these, these things
in place and check, we cannot
have a credible
um industry.
And that's just a fact. And the
alarm has been set and been
raised not only by myself but by
other members. Uh, and I think
that this is a very serious uh
industry, a very serious
situation that we, we have in
front of us today. I appreciate
the conversation and I
appreciate the the committee
bringing this forward, um.
One thing we have not talked
about, Madam Chair, there's so
many things I have circled and
and the weaknesses that we've
been talking about in our
legislation. Um, we do have an
increasing tax. I just want to
make sure you understand that.
That we did not, we had a cap on
the tax and now it's going to be
increasing for the next 5 years
or 3 or 5 years. I'm, I'm not
quite sure. I was trying to read
through the, the amendment we
put on the bill. So that's going
to increase. We need to look at
that and if that is a request
from our industry, we need to
take that into consideration. We
also worked with uh
New Mexico, um, finance
authority to create small loans
for our microbusinesses.
And so we've, we've done a lot
to help and encourage a credible
industry. But this is what has
fallen in front of us today and
these things that we're talking
about, but there are some
lights, and I appreciate that
you're giving some, some light
to the conversation here and
some things we need to do, but I
wanted to remind the committee
that there is an increasing tax
and we need to either amend that
or cap it or decrease it or do
something with that. If that is
the intention of our body. Um,
and we're listening to
To industry microbusinesses in
particular. Enforcement, we know
we need that. I don't know if we
need a special investigation
unit, but it sounds like it's
something that you're, you're
really pushing for, um, with
strained resources we have with
our law enforcement, um, I, I
strongly suggest we work with
them to really figure that out,
uh, if we were to put a unit
with um RLD. I'm just making
more comments now. We can talk
about this later, ma. I try to
get through this. One thing we
did not talk about was
Water and water usage, and that
has been an ongoing issue for
this industry, um, you know,
from the get-go, I was very
concerned about and another
reason why I wanted caps on
licensing and all these other
things was was in part by our
water usage and how we are going
to regulate that, if at all,
because it is, it's they.
The industry uses a lot of it.
And we know that. So Madam
Chair, I'm just putting that out
there. I'd like to, you know,
have that conversation offline
because we don't have enough
conversation left in this.
Extended hour that we're we're
meeting. Um, but those are,
there are a lot of issues around
this, and we're trying to be
careful, but I don't think we
were careful enough when we
wrote our legislation, and
that's part of us, you know,
coming back and being able to,
to amend and and work through
what we're, we're learning from
it, but there was already a lot
to learn from. And I just want
to say we didn't quite pay
close enough attention, and I
hope that we really look at what
we need to get done now. Uh,
this is an important
conversation and I am willing.
happy to work with you, um, on
any part of this as I have in
the past. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I appreciate the time.
Thank you. Representative
Herndon.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I had to
speak.
Clarifying questions as I look
at your uh at your presentation,
um.
Superintendent, you indicate
that uh when NCAs are issued
that the maximum fine that could
be collected is up to $10,000.
My question to you is, where
does that $10,000 go? Does that
go into your budget or does that
go into the general fund?
Madam Chair and Representative,
it's, it's 10,000 per violation,
right? That's how we get up to
$1000 or whatever. Uh, it goes,
and I believe I'm right, it goes
into school education fund and
any any of the, the items with
any of the moneys we take for
for uh regulatory Correction
action, whether it's CID image
or wherever it goes into the
school fund or it does not go
into our budget. All right,
thank you. And Madam Chair and
Mr. Superintendent, when these
hearings occur with respect to
the NCAs that are issued are
those
Hearings before a hearing
officer or before a, a board.
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative, the, the
hearings are in front of a
hearing officer.
Now the TROs and all that,
that's in front of an actual
judge usually district. Well,
Madam Chair, and Mr.
Superintendent, the reason I
asked that question is if you
are going to be asking to
increase your compliance officer
inspectors by 10. I'm thinking
you're gonna need more hearing
officers. You asked for only
$5000 but you asked for those in
relationship to what I can tell
is the 7 special agents and 10
compliance officers. Are you
going to have enough hearing
officers to hear the additional
NCAs that are going to be
you
Well, Madam Chair and
Representative, the hearing
officers, we do that through a
contract. Uh, obviously, I'm
keeping the budget I've been
requested and, and.
You know, my
Oh, the Senate Finance, right?
We're supposed to come in as
flat as we possibly can. So
absolutely, do we need more, we
always need more. I think we can
handle it or we're going to do
the best we can and, and you
know, it was like gentleman next
to me said, we need 30. Well,
maybe next session I come back
and ask for another 10 and show
what I've done. I've got to
produce if they're gonna give me
anything, I've got to produce
and show that what you're doing
for us is working.
Well, Madam Chair, Mr.
Superintendent, I'm, I'm asking
you to ask for what you need.
I'm looking at what you're
bringing in $1.3 billion and if
you need more hearing officers,
and I'm, I'm saying don't just
keep the blood budget flat. Ask
for what you need so that you
are productive in what you're,
what you're doing. So I, I do
ask you to do that. One last
thing I asked you, Madam Chair
and Mr. Superintendent, when I'm
looking at your enforcement
actions that are issued, I'm
looking at the fines that have
been issued and I'm looking at
the
collected. There's a substantial
difference between the two.
Madam Chair, Mr. Superintendent,
why is that so?
Well, right off, Madam Chair and
representative, apologize for
that. Right off the top, we've
got two of them, these illicits
that are 1 million each. That
that's, that's 2 million of it
right there. Uh, we can find
them, we can put them out of
business.
But they can sure enough not pay
us and we don't have any
authority to push it where other
than where we're at. Now, we, we
do in fact have some on a
payment plan, right? Some of
them are coming back through,
some are totally out of
business. But finding them and
collecting it for us is two
different things because what do
you have to hold over their
head?
You know, if you, if you had a
license and, and you could take
the license away that they pay
it, that's one thing.
And some of them are, are going
to appeal and you know, I
encourage him if somebody
doesn't agree with what we've
done.
Absolutely, go to appeal, so
we'll collect some some more of
that, I'm sure, but, uh, right
now there's uh 2 million of that
right off the top is.
With two individuals that are
out in the Orange County.
All right, thank you, Madam
Chair, Mrs. Superintendent,
you're, I'm just understanding
that you don't have the
authority to put a lien on any
property, anything to collect
these, if indeed it's upheld
that the funds should be
collected.
Madam Chair and Representative,
that's correct. All right, and
one last question, Madam Chair,
and this goes to Mr. uh, I think
that's Mr. Die. Mr. Die, I just
want clarification, Madam Chair,
you have made the statement more
than once that we have all of
these individuals who are in
cannabis operations, but they're
not paying their taxes. How do
you know that?
Uh, we have
There is a report of those
licenses that haven't paid taxes
or
Head of government affairs back
here pulls that works with the
state. Dan, is that.
All right, thank you, Madam
Chair, and thank you very much.
Yeah, that's not my data,
that's.
State data.
Alrighty well thank you all for
the presentation today. uh, very
informative. I appreciate, um,
you updating us and it sounds
like we have some, uh, we, we've
got some work to do on, on this
subject. So thank you all for
being here. Appreciate it. Um,
we are gonna take a 15 minute
break. There is lunch in the
back, um, and then we are gonna
start back again. I, I am the
taskmaster and I, I, I, I don't,
uh, I don't apologize for that
because uh we're gonna keep
working, um, but have 15
minutes.
If not, bring it back to your
desk. So, uh, we're gonna stop
with that. So thank you very
much.
I.
