Good morning everyone I call
this meeting to order the
economic role
and development committee I want
to begin by thinking of the
mescal error a patch you tribe
for hosting as you're on their
beautiful homelands especially
for those of us that got to see
the show last night what a treat
that was and were deeply honored
together in this place of
cultural and environmental
significance i'm senator angels
harley chair and I joined by
vice chair representative
and before we begin i'd like to
ask
vice president doing
indefinitely offer us a prayer
as we enter the community of
miscollara.
Thank you vice president let's
have a quick round of
introductions of our legislators
this morning and will go had and
start on the side with
representatives
thank you madame chair members
of the committee audience glad
to be here in miscollect or
today my name is martin somora I
represent house district sixty
three it covers the south half
occurring the north have a
roosevelt county all of the bok
all of god looping at touches
thank you for hosting.
The.
Well yes my name is devil malley
and um and the representative a
district thirteen and now but
only county all the cookie
itself an area that includes
some some rural rural parts of
the north valley in alba courty
and also are some of the older
historic neighborhoods
like but I lasted martinez
toward parts of downtown i'm
very pleased to be here.
Good morning madam chairman vice
chair members of the committee
and everyone here good morning
president and vice president
it's good to be here
i'm sure a little little I
represent house district sixty
eight rate in northwest
albuquerque
and I a so appreciate being here
and the food that was provided
today thank you so very much and
looking forward to.
Hearing about the things that
are happening here and
appreciate all of the input for
movie when here thank you.
Thank you madame chair and think
you must glare for hosting us
today i'm representative josh
were hernandez I represent
district sixty which is the
south and west portions of your
look forward to everything we're
going to hear today
good morning madam chairs pice
chair my name is no call chavis
I represent district thirty one
in the far northeast heights of
albuquerque thank you so much
president vice president for
hosting us it's beautiful it's
nice to be in the fresh air so I
will enjoy in the next couple of
days.
Good morning I am doring gagas
district fifty two down in a
southern new mexico very happy
to be here today I would like to
think our host for providing
this beautiful scenery this
beautiful location are breakfast
but to welcome us last night
with that wonderful drone show
that was incredible so thank you
for that I look forward to
hearing about this community and
how are how what the recovery is
looking like last year when we
had planned our committee here
you were in the middle of fires
and floods and so I really have
kept an eye on what's going on
in this community because I
think that we we continue to
want to do better for our
constituents and for our state
and you all are going to help
lead that way so thank you for
for being able to provide us
with that information today.
The.
Good morning manager president I
yeah i'm bill share on the state
senator from district one which
is most of farming turn west to
the external honest.
The.
Good morning manning chair
steven air just senate district
two and san when county I i'm on
the side that the sun comes up
and it finally gets over to his
district so I get the sun first
thank you for the hospitality
appreciate.
Good morning madam chair
last year
members of the committee and and
audience my name's payout bone a
represent district senate
district twenty seven over on
these side I have a northern
part of shavish county southern
part of current counting all of
the book county northern part of
lee county in all of roseville
county
appreciate being here in this
wonderful facility in this great
place and have attended many
meetings here over the years
with different entities and have
always been treated very nice
and I appreciate being here
again today I look forward to
what we're going to hear and
what we're going to work on
today so thank you.
Good morning madam chairs thank
you miscollar offer hosting us
here I always love coming to to
this area I love the facilities
beautiful beautiful facilities
here my name is gale armstrong I
represent district forty nine
house district forty nine which
is a quarrel county valencia
county sierra county and
catching county none of all of
those counties it is the largest
house district in the state very
rural new mexico more counts
than people thank you manager.
Good morning madam chair madam
vice chair president vice
president.
I'm the lucky one I represent
this area and my name is harlen
ventor I represent district
fifty six linking in a total
counties and
I just wanted to throw this at
your about a month ago month and
a half.
Miscalero are partners and we
had a unity meeting and a unity
gathering in red also and we
wanted to make sure that miss
glarel knew that we're yoked
together by the neck and we're
partners and if you don't do
good we don't do good and if we
don't get do get you're not
going to do good and so there
were partners and i'm really
proud to serve this area and
thank you for let me crash your
meeting today thank you.
The.
Thank you a madame chair and
made a vice chair members
president vice president
appreciate the the gracious host
as well I really always lead to
be here it's it's a familiar
drive from damning which is my
home I represent district thirty
two i'm jennifer jones and that
is done yeah he don't go and
luna it's the southern most
district and as long as we're
bragging about send the sun I
get to enjoy the sunset longer
than any of you
on the east anyway thank you so
much enjoyed being here.
Thank you madame chair madame
his chair i'm catherine collin I
represent a district fifty seven
up in santa bar county the
northern part of rear rancho and
thank you so much for having a
serious fee.
The.
Thank you everyone
i've got a script here as i'm a
try and stick to it were right
on time this morning committee
which is wonderful and just a
little reminder that I will wrap
up today about four thirty in
there's the dinner for us
but first they want to welcome
president for a whilst per dear
and vice president doing defeat
of the mescalero apache tribe
along with deputy secretary isa
car mirror from the economic
development department
to our gracious host thank you
so much for welcoming this to
your community and for your
generosity um in addition to the
meeting accommodations today
committee miss glarel has also
do needed all of our meals to
nourish our bodies as we move
forward in these conversations
including that dinner tonight
which will be out by the big
windows where we'll be joined by
a miscale tribal council uhm
dollar f thank you so much
the first panel committee is
going to ground us in the
economic vision and realities of
mescaler a patch you tried and
the broader regional
developments
and so with that i'd like to
hand it over to our panelists
for introductions and to begin
thank you.
Good morning thorough wells
peder president of the mescal
area per tribe.
Madam chair woman members of the
committee my name is doing duffy
vice president for a message
I want to welcome all your here
it is a pleasure to have you
here in our home lands of the
method for a patchy people while
you're here there's anything
that you need please let us know
where you know we we always brag
about being a phenomenal host in
sill we want to continue that
tradition so there's anything
that we can do to make your
state more comfortable more
relative by your here please
don't has to to ask
you know I will appreciate the
opportunity to present in front
of the committee and
just give some inside on what we
are doing as a try what we are
doing with our neighbors in
linking county and reader and
read also as we rebuild and
recover and so definitly looking
forward to the conversation that
we will have to do thank you.
Good morning everyone is great
to be in front of you all again
it seems like it's been just a
little while since the session
is a criminal debit card
secretary for the economic
development department looking
forward to giving you a little
briefing on some of our
quarterly economic summaries for
linking county and then letting
you know what's going on with a
lot of the new economic
development legislation that
you've all passed as passes and
where we're going in the future
thank you.
Well we'll go ahead and get
started there is a little better
than introductory part within
the the presentation here and so
the mescaler or patriot
reservation was established and
eighteen seventy three so about
two years ago we did celebrate
the hundred and fiftieth
anniversary of the reservation
being established here it was
much larger when we started and
it kinda got whittle down over
the years through various
executive orders and so forth
but we currently have four
hundred and sixty three thousand
acres and approximately five
thousand four hundred and five
thousand four hundred tribal
members and out of those we we
do have three bands of a patches
here the mescal air which this
is part of our history at home
lands of the character cowar and
the lapen so I am myself a lapan
and miscale just so you know.
The.
In other mountain guards here
was established in nineteen
seventy five so if you've been
around and the the resort here
the last you know last evening
or so and and saw the the drone
show where celebrating our
fiftieth anniversary I did have
the pleasure of working here
starting in nineteen seventy six
and so I worked while I was
between the high school in
college and then a bit during
college too so you know that
this has a lot of memories for
our tribal members a lot of us
have have started work here and
and gone on to do other things
so I just want to thank you for
coming here it is a very
different resort than when it
first opened it was a very
rustic cabin looking kind of
place not not like a log cabin
but like a really nice high tech
kind of cabin but it was very
beautiful and it had various
walking paths and and so one of
the things they did when they
established this new building is
to be sure to make it more fire
resistant we have beautiful
cedar shakes all along the sides
and and the roofs of the
facility and and now
we we took a lot of that out but
trying to still keep the
original character of the
interest amount regards that
started here.
One of the things we are working
on since we had the fires.
We had.
It's been approximately two
thousand twelve when the the
same ill last shut down it kind
of was going through some death
spouse and sort of and
approximately two thousand eight
it had closed doomed to market
some market problems but **** of
some process in efficiencies
within the mill and and some
policies we needed to change
but.
After having gone you know from
two thousand twelve two now
we've gone thirteen years
without doing any major logging
and it became very apparent
during the fires that we need to
get back on that track that is
our first line of forest
management our first line is to
do lagging and then we follow up
with various like hazardous
feels reduction thinnings and
and
for a stand improvement things
just things to improve the
health of the forest so we are
working on that through the new
mexico legislature thank you all
we did get two million allocated
towards this project and we are
now working with the national
level economic development
administration to seek the other
seventeen point five million
that we need to get it open so
it'll be approximately twenty
million dollars to
open the sale mill we are
looking at developing a fairly
new building that's at the sale
mail it's it's maybe fifteen
years younger than some of the
other buildings.
Ok so we are looking to develop
i'm not sure
okay alrighty we're we're
looking to develop that building
and with the old salmon we are
in the process of seeking
people we have some companies in
brazil and some other countries
that are actually interested in
some of the older same ill
equipment and once we
liquidate those assets you know
open up that same building we do
plan to seek out a manufacturing
facility that will use that
would product so where we're
trying to do it right this time
in some of the feasibility
studies we had done probably in
two thousand eight to two
thousand ten we had done several
different feasibility studies
that was the result the the logs
that the boards would get us
into the break even point but
taking that and making a value
out of product that's what's
going to get us into the the
profit margin so that's our
course right now and we're
working steadily towards it.
We have many other economic
development projects we are
working on I will let the vice
president duffy talk about
renewable energy that is his
four tape that he's been working
on so I let him talk about that
and thank you madame president
and manager all members of the
committee you know.
Energy independence energy
sovereignty is many a huge thing
for myself in my you know
political career and so we have
any opportunity when it came
back in two thousand twenty
three to really look at the
issues that are facing or try
when I realize that one of those
issues is energy in the cost of
energy a you know we learn a
very rural area and it's not
just here in my scholar it's you
know within linking county or
terrible county
neighbor surrounders we we all
see the costs of electricity
it's going up and so one of the
ways that we want to address
that you make life easier for
our citizens and of course
reduce costs here at this
magnificent facility
steer reduces costs with
electricity so one of the things
that we are looking at is a
solar project and and so the
first thing we it is going to be
phased out you know start very
small and we're going to grow
and so one of them are key areas
that were going to focus on is
our resort here at the moment
guards a across the hill casino
a patchy and then the skiria to
cut those costs here get behind
the meter and that would
represent approximately at three
point five million dollars and
savings for the tribe you know
electricity costs next thing we
want to do was focus on the
community you know build up at
infrastructure to drive down
those costs meet you know life
for for our our citizens much
more easier than we want to go
even larger actually become a
power producer and so we're
looking out at the east side of
a reservation you know we are in
talks with you know p and m with
the your terror county coop and
we want to be able to you know
export that energy to our recent
partners here to help and of
course help drive down those
costs
also tied with that project we
are looking at the possibility
of the development of e data
center and so this is just you
know looking at what we have
laid out in front of us it's the
least in the renewable energy
market.
It represents hundreds of short
term jobs in hundreds of long
term jobs because we will need
to you know maintain this
infrastructure yeah you know we
see the benefits to everybody in
this region with those
electricity cost going down and
so
you know anybody whose haggles
conversation when it comes to
noble projects specialized so
you know it's not a conversation
I hate we're gonna do this let's
get going you know this has been
three years in the making an
antispirally start to see you
know the fruits of that labor
really the foundations being
lane it's it's amazing you know
a part of that we did also
you know for our tribal offices
and for us for our school
you know we were working with
the company right now
in we are gonna be setting up a
winter bins to offset their
electric trustee costs even
sooner than the the the solar
project and so for our school
that's you know that's
imperative as we as as it is a
beer of indian education school
we are seeing cuts on the
federal level to you know
funding for indian education and
so anything that we can do to
reduce their costs it's going to
help that school you know
survive and thrive and so I
think you know when we are
looking at the energy costs for
the school at least with when
turmings is going to save them
approximately two hundred fifty
thousand dollars on annual basis
so that's money that they they
can year towards you know
teacher salaries or other
educational equipment that
they'll need and so you know
we're trying to be innovative of
you know the of course the
future
we've had other conversations I
I know that the president is
very much
well aware of the conversations
we've had when it comes to and
what is it cold generation you
know you bill mass and so
they're they're we have a great
opportunity now
that we've just had the fire
service a lot of material here
that can be utilized to create
energy and so there's there's.
I other opportunities outside of
what we've already started in so
you know i'm i'm hoping that
once everything goes through we
lay a model that can be picked
up and transplanted to other you
know role communities are the
trouble communities that can be
delighted to
as a way to generate a rowney
through a solar project so.
The.
So along with that you know we
are working with our partners
eastern new mexico university
rear does the campus they are
providing various types of
trainings already so even for
this facility we are doing some
leadership and training.
Um kind of classes for for so to
help our staff to develop the
the leadership capacity so they
can start so hopefully some of
our tribal members can start to
move in to some of these
supervisory and managerial
positions but also along with
what vice president duffy talked
about we are seeking training as
far as how to install solar
panels and in we will be working
with them on the wind her bins
that will be putting at the
school and at the tribal office.
And a long with this we have
quite a few community oriented
projects so we do have the
veterans memorial park that were
opening hoping to open in about
two weeks that's down in
masquelaro so it will have a
veterans recognition component
where we can have place on the
wall and so forth but also play
grounds basketball courts
volleyball courts and then
there's a really cool little
empathy there area yeah it's
beautiful where we could have
like power wells or arts and
craft spares is really neat
because they have these little
covers their permanent kind of
cover structures and then they
have plug ins where you can you
know put in lights but also run
the little credit card machines
and so forth so we are looking
forward to that opening here
soon along with that numerous
playgrounds were trying to we we
started out you know we have
heard housing we started out
with small playgrounds in in
many of these community areas
and over the twenty five thirty
years they've been in place
they're needing repair and
renovation so we're putting a
lot of effort into the play
grounds to provide for our young
people and and give them more to
more opportunities instead of
just running what helps
also along with that we're
looking at a health and wellness
center so approaching
wellness from all the different
aspects providing
you know exercise but also some
some opportunities for mental
health kind of counseling
even some spirituality things
like.
Doing yoga but where we're going
to put in a patchy twist on it
so so different things like that
that we're looking at to to be
to to bring parts activity into
our our family's lives we are
very interested in building
homes we recently had a housing
assessment done and we had a
presentation just last week and.
Over the next ten years it's
estimated that we'll need more
than a thousand homes where
about four or five hundred homes
behind with our current
population but we have a very
large population that are
they're coming into that age now
where they're going to be
wanting homes and that's where
we're seeing the huge growth so
that's a lot at home to build
that the huge order but were up
to the task and we're looking
forward to it and hopefully with
the sound mail that can
contribute towards that effort
also.
So some of the other things that
we have gotten planning and
design funding through the new
mexico state legislature so we
are looking at building a new
tribal store general store food
and so forth
a new head start facility a new
library a new fire station and
also at new tribal
administration building we have
a a building from the sixties
which it's a very nice building
but we would like to incorporate
more transparency into our
leadership functions and so i'm
really looking forward to having
a new administration building so
we can have a larger camp
council chambers and work
towards open meetings or at the
very least live streaming
meetings and so forth and
allowing public interaction with
the the tribal council.
Also we have been working in
partnership with our communities
lincoln county
reado so read of so downs but
also to the to the west working
with oteral county so one of the
things we do have strengthening
economies together which is a
root real regional excuse me
economic development plan but
since the fire is we've already
started we have a lincoln
county.
No not know the whole name it's
changed a couple times
okay so sierra blank a regional
recovery task for is it it's had
a couple of names so we got it
right but we have been meeting
ever since the fires after the
the big type one team's moved on
and left us with with the work
that we had to do we've been
coordinating all our efforts we
have even hired the contractor
that is doing like the
settlement removal work in read
also in lincoln county so that
it's seamless from the
reservation going out and what's
really been nice about that is
the the engineer that runs that
company has also been hiring
tribal member contractors and so
it's been a really good
partnership and and we're
getting a lot of work done
together but along with that
that task for us is looking at
trying to get a regional
training center i'm not sure if
any of that got funded during
the legislative session but
we're working to develop our
firefighting capabilities
together and and just keep
working together it it's.
It was very good during the
fires you know it could have
been kind of.
Adversarial I think with with
you know between lincoln county
and mascular but it was good
that we came together realizing
that we're all in this together
and and together we have to make
the recovery in the healing
process happen so we we've been
working together quite a bit
with their partners.
So mescaler is actually for
lincoln county we are the
largest employer through the end
of the mountain guards and some
of the various facilities we
have and then in otero county we
are the second largest employer
after the military so we are
working quite a bit it
anything that happens to this
facility affects quite a few
people I mean the tribe as a
whole employees about a thousand
people so that's all of the
different you know scary into
the mountain gods
you know the tribal office and
so forth so there there is a lot
of people we employ and and.
I believe sixty percent of the
people that work appear a tribal
members but a very large forty
percent are people outside of
the reservation and we have
people coming from as far as
rosal and alamo gordon and even
i'll pass the going back and
forth work appear some do stay
with friends or whatever during
the week and go back home on the
weekend so we we do employ quite
a few people throughout this
region.
Do you want to talk about about
things
wherever
manager all members of committee
obviously you
you know there's quite a bit of
it be in a moment god's here is
our main red and butter this is
worth when you arrive hundred
percent of our government
operation funds other than those
funds said we received through a
federal brance or state rants
and so
stain
continued to be innovative with
our communities and what we
offer a guest to ensure that
they contain return and we
attract me guess has been a top
priority you know we do have a a
number of humanities listed in a
power point in of course uh
you know what we work to expand
those abilities we've had recent
changes to you when the stay
cows
they've upgraded their menu I
think we're the only
entity in this region probably
this southern part of the state
it is offering cabinet service
over anybody like scab your
please go go to your hearts
content
but you know I was always trying
to be responsive to you to what
our customers you know want if
you look at page ten
you'll see exactly where we
derive a lot of our customer
bees you can see a lot of our
customers come from southern new
mexico and western texas and so
it's very
it's important to us to protect
that up to to protect that
market you know there's a number
of threats to ending gaming in
the state that are have been
coming up but I know that we
will be the coalition in the
maximum gaming tribe will be
approaching a number of the
legislators you know we are
there with the administer of
internet gaming you know there's
a number of companies have
started within the state without
a you know going through the
legislature without going
through the governor's office
and which are violations of
these state travel gaming
compacts and so these are things
that we are going to have to
address.
You know a huge thing that's up
right now is to see if tc's
where they're using place and
sports bets as comma these
futures trading and so I you
know I don't really understand
it i've read some material where
it's you know there that is the
uh a threat to the game in
market here in the state and a
clear violation of the game
estate travel gaming compacts
and so that is something that we
are going to have to work to
work together to address I don't
know that's the end of that will
be legislative fits or that
something that we work with the
judiciary but it is something
that the tribe is the gaming
tribes are keeping the eye on in
that are very concerned I know
that there are letters that have
been sent to the attorney
general's office and to the
governor's office you know lain
out the concerns with what we're
seen
happened nationally I mean it's
not just new mexico you know
arizona's responding into it
mass maryland new york all these
states are you know especially
when it comes to the cftcs you
know they see this as a
violation of their states in a
gaming revelation since other
right now there's a number of
legal battles that are ongoing
and so just to keep your uh put
it in your ear that that's
something that you know we will
we may be coming to legislature
to try to remedy at going
forward
part of our
operations here in among guys as
they said we have to move gots
here we have casino a patchy on
highly seventy and then we have
the ski ski apache
and skier patchy is this
southern mosquito in the
confidential united states um
as we're seeing with with our
climate getting warmer and dryer
we are seen in reduction of
snowfall I think this past year
we are the schere was on an
operation about a month and a
half percent total or so open
and so we just didn't get those
early snowstorms wouldn't get
those january snowstorms and so
we were able to keep operations
it until spring break when we
get a lot of visitors and so.
That's having an impact on only
on the tribes bottom dollar but
it impacts everybody lincoln
county in red also in in the
terror county so
you know we're hoping that we
are a we do you get a return to
some normal snow patterns just
coming winter but again if we
if it continues to be heart
continue dry you know the future
of the scherio you that's a
question that we are going to
have to a conversation we will
have internally whether they're
not that's continued to be
feasible to keep that open
and sell I mean when it's open
and we have all that snow it's
it's great
issue said when there's no snow
there's not a whole lot to do if
they're recice amount biking in
the the gonna rights and so how
we we always hope for best we
pray for the best and you know
like said we want to see a
return to you the snow practice
no patterns
you know what the other operate
emerges that would you have
there if you guys are have a
little bit of a wild side and
seek advantage we do have a zip
line up there and if you want to
write it please let us know I
think that first span is almost
a mile long you get going
approximately like sixty miles
an hour so but you can control
your speed
way.
And so moving on to some of our
other tribal enterprises one of
the one of our more successful
enterprises the mescorn gas
company you know we offer
residential propane and you know
anything from and let it to
premium to diesel
you know we
we have approximately two
thousand thirty nine customers
under reservation there's approx
two hundred twenty one
commercial and then we are
starting to service after
reservation and so right now we
do sort service
seventy five commercial
customers after reservation as
continuing to grow
you know we get a four delivery
truck sign
you know a week just shows you
that when you go to the travel
tribal plaza I think the gas
price has to be about thirty
forty cents cheaper than you'll
find here in town and so it's a
good alternative especially be
doing that commute between alamo
grown read also and and so we're
seeing we're seeing that
that operation goes one of the
things said you know in our
conversations with the manager
there we do want to start
offering red diesel because we
have a lot of your rule people
round as he they can use that
redisalender farm truck sir the
ranching vehicles tractors you
know whatever that be any
equipment that the utilised and
so that they're that's another
option that we are looking at to
offer that service to those
people round us another
enterprise we do have a similar
squirrel cow called
you know right now we are
raising a
what do you call it in the
angels herford read and we do
work with labat and other
distributors so there are times
of year when you can actually
get a mesquire a patchy steak or
a burger here in our restaurants
and so right now we have
approximately two thousand had a
cattle and as we continue to
replace and improve our water
infrastructure to the
reservation that will grow
you know back in the.
Eighties and nineties when I was
a young kid I remember the
recattle all risk reservation
and then but I think at that
time they just had a different
breed and when the market shames
you know but we don't change to
breath and you lose out and sell
our cattle managed now has been
looking at the markets they've
been watching what's going on
and it's been better responsive
to work you know what we need to
do and
regard to our read and what we
need to change and you know
we've had it there it's thriving
in it's it's you know we're seen
we're seeing growth out there
the other thing that is we're
working on that we're doing
right now
I know they don't want us to
call it drown insurance but you
know it's like a lack of
participation insurance which we
started taking now and so we're
starting to see those returns
because of how dry it is in and
that's all that funny goes back
to help support our cattle
operations you know buying off
feed during the winter times in
ensuring that you know realizing
that funding to fix fences to
expand our water resources and
so there's there's a lot going
on with that operation in you
know a huge thing that that i'm
proud of that you see out there
is that they're also getting the
youth involved so these these
youth who they they may not want
to go to college they don't want
to get learner trade but they
want to write a horse and so
they can go out there and learn
what it takes to run a ranch you
know they do everything from the
branding to you you know
dehorning the stairs like they
everything and so in these kids
like it you know to get some out
there in your summer and get
some away from home and they get
to earn a little little bit of
money all the route here and so
you know we are training the
next generation ranchers and and
they're enjoying it and so
that's one thing that I really
like about what the account
managers are doing out there.
So we also have the mescalero
care center it's located down in
the main part of masquelaro so
it is right next to our elderly
center so the elderly center is
a day use kind of facility you
can go have lunch there is
sewing machines they have been
go there is like an arts and
crafts room so there are plenty
of activities for elders to
participate
the care center itself though is
a forty bed skilled nursing home
so we do have approximately
thirty residents their right now
during covered the assisted
living part did shut down and do
to changes moving around of
buildings we had some new
buildings and so forth coming up
we ended up using the hoses
offices it's amazing what you
can do
with different facilities but we
are hopeful to get all of the
officers out of that area and
and restore the assisted living
facility we do have eight beds
in that particular part of the
the care center.
We do have the mascular old
patchy telecom inc that has
approximately thirty employees
it opened officially in two
thousand one but approximately
four years before that the
planning did start on that god
free and january who is a tribal
member runs that program and he
does a very good job they like
like he said we do have a work
that's done off the reservation
with that.
Most of our casino funds that we
receive does go towards
governmental operations so we
have many programs that are
assisted and supported through
that effort are child support
some of it also with a blending
of grantson and six thirty
so we do have the child support
enforcement offers the wio
program which i'm hearing is
going to become master the make
america skilled again program
violence against women we have
the foreign directions treatment
and recovery center so that is
alcoholism reabilitation
facility
we had our program reviews
internally about a month ago and
I I know the the tribal member
who directs that program very
limit as she is actually saving
up the medicaid reimbursements
we get to to build a new
facility which I thought that
was really cool I asked her if
she wanted to put it on capital
outlay and she's like no we're
going to save up and build this
so I thought that was really
nice one of the the few programs
that is not relying on the
ground so much.
We are also looking at expanding
our cultural center and museum
so and along with the language
preservation program and the
library what we are developing
right now is a cultural campus
that will be adjacent to the
mesque a patchy schools and so
that will house head start we
will have the library there
tribal historic preservation
office but also classroom spaces
like were elderly can put on
language preservation classes
and then allow them to interact
with our youth bringing our
elders and our youngest people
together.
We also have chr health
education departments diabetes
wellness center and the mescaler
prevention program.
The.
We do have quite a bit of youth
programs like
vice president had mentioned we
have the cradle growers the the
cattle association but with that
we also have a very active for
each program we do have tribal
students that are able to get a
AAA cow a cattle whatever
through the program and they are
able to show in the oteral
county life stock fair so we we
do have quite a few students
that that participate in that
we have a great deal of
partnerships throughout the
community like I said we are
strong partner with eastern new
mexico university and read also
so are miscalero patchy high
school does quite a bit of work
with them and this past year was
one of the highest graduation
rates like everybody else had in
the state but we had.
At least five or six students
that were getting door credit so
they were also graduating some
of them with associates degrees
or with vocational capabilities
like in the welding program and
so forth so i'm really excited
about that opportunity to have
our youth graduate from high
school with a employable skill
something that they could hit
the employee point market right
away with an in.
Helping to keep that apart to
you work at the going quite a
bit.
We have toys for tarts we've
partnered on senior olympics and
different for each sponsorships
oh yes and one more thing a new
new program that we have and
this is through our general
manager here for the end of the
mountain gods he during one of
our board meetings had brought
up that the racket city funds
center and alama they had put
out a request for proposals to
reopen the facility so the.
The tribe did put in a proposal
for that and we were selected
and we expect to have a soft
opening I believe the
seventeenth yeah I know there
was a seven and the seventeenth
down and all the megordo so we
are venturing outside of our
reservation boundaries and we
are looking to do economic
development outside of the
reservation another part of that
we are looking at a piece of
state land in the last cruces
area also to start reaching out
and do economic development
outside of our reservation lands
you know if we we
remember when I first worked
here in nineteen seventy six I
was.
Told that this is a destination
resort so people have to really
make an effort to come here you
don't just wander in off of the
highway so we're trying to look
at other kinds of businesses
that we can get into where we
take advantage of location you
know this is a beautiful
location yes but to bring in
more economic development night
by looking at other pieces of
land so that's about all I have
for right now and we'll be
talking later about the fire and
so forth but thank you
thank you so much island i'm
sure you'll dead that's that's
excellent oh so first why just
wanted to take a moment and and
think our hosts here one of the
thing that I wanted to mention
is this out a couple months ago
the economic development
department pushed their annual
retreat you know team leadership
and mister frizzle here who's
back there
for thank you
he provided some excellent
guidance to our group and one of
the things that the department
is focusing on is making sure
that we're including and getting
these programs and initiatives
and opportunities out to our
nation's tribes and public
partners and specifically around
the site readiness work that we
are getting started and i'll
talk about that here in the
moment but I just wanted to
acknowledge that and and thank
you all for your leadership in
that as well oh couple things
that I wanted to chat about
today just to give you a couple
updates one of the other items
that the economic development
department puts together on a
quarterly basis is our cornerly
economic development update
reports per county and so if
you're ever curious about what's
happening in your district or
your country's these are
accessible to you so I pulled
the one from lincoln county
today uh and representative
instead i'm happy to send us
from to you
so couple notable items first of
all the this is between
one of f twenty five and you.
Of f twenty five there is no
increase in match taxable
grocery seats tax of thirteen
million which is a four point
three percent increase and then
year over year growth we saw the
most significant jump in
construction which makes sense
considering exactly considering
everything that's happened in
the past year or since last
summer additional significant
increases came from the
agricultural forestry fishing
and hunting industry wholesale
trade mining coring and oil and
gas extraction.
And construction showed a year
over your increase of twenty
five and a half million dollars
and that's up from that bit from
eighty one point seven million
now one hundred and seven point
two million uh in construction
so I wanted to show that and
representative I will happily
sh- send this email this to you
so you can have it and again
these are available cordly on
our website our economist team
pushed this together regularly
and since we're here also one I
know that there's
a lot of discussion around
what's happening are there
economic development
opportunities here I don't want
to take the mayor's thunder he
might talk about this later but
one of the projects that were
excited to see happening is the
partnership between the city and
a company let's see their
called.
Independence power usa llc and
the purpose of that company in
the facility that they're
building is to accept and
process biomass including
agricultural residues would
waste organic materials and turn
them into commodities like bio
chart diesel fuel sim gas for
commercial sale and distribution
so we're seeing companies like
that start to emerge and we hope
to see those skill in this
community specifically and
anywhere else to help mitigate
prevents and and help.
Areas affected by fires and
flood.
One of the other items that I
brought is a very simple two
page hand up front and back
right here is the ed
so I also wanted to provide an
update on so a lot of the
initiative that you'll enable us
to do starting last tuesday
since the start of the fiscal
year but this is just a summary
front front back page of.
Pretty much all of the programs
that ed managers operates
facilitates overseas etc and all
highlight a couple as we go
through this this is really just
a a reference point for you and
will make sure we have time for
questions as well
so first of all we have on the
left hand called their the
economic development division
that are food hunger and
agricultural program so this
year starting last tuesday july
first a new fiscal year we have
a new bash of funding to
distribute for grants for a
healthy foods
and some examples of fro-
programs that we've helped or
companies that we've helped are
buying refrigerators walk and
refrigerators to help keep keep
refrigerator over food fresh
tractors you know we've helped
for a farming equipment pretty
much anything where there's a
gap we can provide support and
grants throughout the state
and I mention this to mali
earlier we're also in the
process of redeveloping our
website that we we feel it's
important for any group company
entity that receives edity
funding uh to force to know
where that is so we're gonna be
working on a layered approach
where you can see alright what
what's happening in you know
your community you're district
and your click on the button and
see what kind of grant it was
what kind of what what what does
it was received with the company
was product all the information
you have we're working on making
that regularly available we do
have that for our trills plus
program so all of the telstra at
the state you get the
opportunity to see that.
I'm a skip around a little bit
oh one of the other things I
wanted to mention about healthy
foods as we hosted our first
ever healthy food conference and
this is prob- this we're hoping
that this is the start to keep
that confidence conversations
going and interact in engaged
stay called us throughout the
state both business my profit
and government entities to make
sure that we're clobbering to
provide the healthy foods
especially in communities
affected by food deserts that
lack the opportunity and access
to fruits.
For.
What one other item I want to
highlight is are ssbci
collateral assistance program
this one is a program so
previous time my role here at
eighty eight I worked as a
commercial real estate broker
and this is my favorite one to
highlight one of my favorite
highlight because this would
have saved me so many headaches
and deals if I had known about
this program that he had and so
now I do my best to shelt from
you know as flower as I can
about this program there's
actually two opportunities here
the first one is this helps and
owner user business that's
looking to acquire real estate
and they don't have enough
capital to qualify or maybe a
lender says hey your business
point looks great you have all
the financials you need but you
just don't have enough capital
to get you over that hump
will take out a certificate of
deposit to help finance the gap
and make that blender feel
comfortable to finalise the
underwriting of that deal
and it's it's a it's a federal
program but we administer it us
we're in our second tranch of
these funds and again this one
is the best one for any small
business in your community
that's looking for access to
funding that's it and there's
really no dollar basically if
they qualify for SB a financing
they can qualify for this is the
is the blue of them there are
some other qualifications but
that's a general.
There's another piece here for
investors so we're talking about
housing housing is a big
conversation right now and we'll
talk about this more I know
throughout the interim.
But let's there's another for
investors there's a cap of five
hundred thousand dollars loan
amount but you let so you
identify a piece of land that
you can acquire or you just own
and you say I want to put a home
here on to put four plucks here
or some housing.
This program can help finance
the gap again is just the gap
peace so we're looking at ten
percent down type of payments
the special program will finance
the difference of your down
payment requirement and then you
stop to negotiate with the
lender on everything but it's a
really phenomenal program to
help accelerate housing growth
or even commercial development
so if the retail center or an
industrial center you can use
this fund for that as well
creative industries we have some
new funding thanks to the
legislature you all hear that
we're gonna be.
Initiating for creative industry
grants throughout the state
where playing around with how
that's going to look
specifically there might be some
infrastructure components here
but we really want to focus on
the the creative economy is
there an additionally some of
our favorites which we see
throughout the state the trials
plus scrap program out of equity
fund those got some renewed
funding this year ten million
plus there's some formula
funding that we get as well to
deploy and we've already a neck
we've already started to accept
our fy twenty six funny
proposals for those and we
usually builders in four grant
rounds.
To plenty of opportunities
for those
circle back around here again I
don't want to take up to much
time we have our new initiatives
i'll start with the technology
and innovation office so by the
statute this is called the
technology and innovation
division but we felt that tiered
was to commonly used in nor as
it doesn't just roll off the
tongue like something else so we
have kind of privileged the
branding of it to technology in
innovation office with a focus
on recruiting businesses in
space air space clean energy
clean water
science buyer science and
advanced computing.
And with everything happening
with data centers and so on
where we're starting to see that
one of the other things that we
just finish or will be finishing
and then this week or next is
the legislature also provided is
two special preparations for
fifteen million dollars each
thirty million toral for
the venture studios and
infrastructure for venture
studios focusing on quantum
twenty five million of that will
be focused in that segment and
then the other tan will will use
for other type of interest
studios but we should be
finishing up that rfp because
we'll have one year to use it
and to deploy it and so we
wanted to get a jump start as
much as possible and so we're
working on that as well and I
think that will go to you know
my slow here who's looking at
data centers and seeing what we
can do the to provide support
there as well.
Because we have a new division.
We have where we were hiring six
new
staff we're looking for a
manager two support and three
folks who are really in the
trenches recruiting and going
after those uh sector specific
businesses and areas so if you
know anyone who is looking to
apply or looking for a a an
opportunity to work with
please send in my way would be
happy to connect with them we
just close the hiring portal for
the manager but we're just
getting started for the other
five uh we should have plenty of
opportunities for those again
happy to enter in questions
around those then we move over
to our site read in this
initiative this was a huge push
by economic development
department and thank you to
someone in this room that helped
us get that through
we're excited about that we have
actually already closed on the
rfp for the initial sites that
will be going through the
characterization
so we we did a competitor p to
find the contractor who can help
us with that it's the same
contractor who helped us put
together the pilot last year
which i'm blanking on their name
right now I apologize but I
think we have about two dozen or
so sites that are going in that
initial hopper for
characterization once they get
through the character as a will
continue to have the hopper open
our next step as to establish
the board it's about a nine or
ten percent board and we'll be
looking for legislative council
service to help a point five
public members to that and then
that's but i'll also include it
in that are the economic
development division director um
animal
department of transportation.
And a couple of others so it'll
be a pretty manageable board
about ten people and we're we're
also hoping to look that into
our trade ports on you trade
ports initiative
those border almost identical so
it seems like it might make
sense to have the membership
overlap for efficiency purposes
as well and they kind of go
ahead and have sight readiness
trade port development which we
have fifty nine dollars to
deploy through public private
partnerships
and for both of those where also
looking for one more staff
person to help us manage all of
the.
Paperwork managed the board put
all the agents together move the
the paperwork to make sure that
the contracts are moving make
sure that the funding is moving
as appropriate
and that's what we're really
focusing on rate now and I think
though oh one last thing
moving over to office of
military based planning and
support that is a administrator
of the attached agency to ed so
we provide support to them water
authority space pork uhm those
three state agencies but
specifically I wanted to focus
on office of military base
planning a support the new new
fund was established with them
it was not funded uh however
we're working on the
infrastructure of that and I
imagine that there might be some
request that comes through I
just want to prime everyone here
for creding.
Infrastructure surrounding
pieces is really the the premise
of that one and i'm happy to get
into the details of anyone has
questions
and megan cornet are director
there has been excellent new
addition to the team since
about.
I think she started around
november or so but those are the
kind of the highlights of what
it is up to right now and in the
future and we look forward to
giving more presentations as we
come to our budget hearings and
the legislature with more robust
updates with these programs but
thank you so much happened
answer any questions.
The.
President vice president deputy
secretary thank you for that
opening or what of information I
know my word for but holding the
space together with abundance
and that was an abundant amount
of information
and when I had before we move
into questions I give a little
bit of space than time for folks
who just joined us to give
introductions and we can start
with senator pinto.
Northeast dalva cricket
good morning i'm represented
linda sterado and I I represent
the south side of santa fe and
has district forty five I think
you were welcoming us I was here
you know just before the buyers
and really incredible seeing how
much the recovery will done it's
it's amazing
i'll be in landgrounds committee
next week and we're gonna be
looking at their burns car as
well so i'm really appreciate
all these sessions we have to
really understand how your
recovery is in the dedication of
committed to it thank you.
The.
Good morning madam chair based
chair members of the committee
those in the audience and those
watching i'm better easier royal
cover yet on a represent house
district thirteen which is the
first south was quite kind of
all the cookie and i'm happy.
To be here with my sister.
My brothers are from escalator
we've been together for time and
memorial so thank you for
acknowledging us and madam chair
if I would take a moment of
personal privilege
for us to take a moment to
acknowledge.
That this is dear area.
We're a young seventeen year old
elijah hadley.
Of this tribe.
Was met his fate was murdered.
Um.
And.
His cases are.
Been taken through the court
systems right now in the person.
That in law enforcement that
killed him.
I will be facing his day and
court.
So it was the waste.
Of any lie any human being to be
lost.
Is terrible but this young man
was seventeen year result and he
was a member of the mesque
letter try so i'd like to take a
moment of silence right now.
Thank you madam chair.
Thank you
well we have senator pinto first
for questions
thank you chairman members of
the committee so deputy
mr rimero so of these
we are expectation is out of the
special appropriations even the
new divisions in the new funds
that were created will still
hold after that because of the
federal budget that's been
passed
madam chair representative
it less the legislature sweeps
them that's correct
secretary I think that might be
one of the things we're going to
have to do because the cuts that
are coming down but you have no
idea right now of how much of
all these programs listed here
on federal
manager representative none of
these are federal programs
ssbci is the sspca program I
mentioned that one is federal
program so are you expecting
that if there is a commitment to
that anybody in that program
they will receive the money
madam chair representatives of
the way that program works is by
a drawed down so we have three
tranches we've completed our
first tranche and we've accessed
our second transfer it's
basically means the money has
been transferred from the
federal government's account to
our account and I don't think
that there's a way for them to
take that back
but there's a possibility that
we may not have access to that
third truck if they'd make a
change.
So the since these are all state
programs are expecting we just
have one budget cycle unless we
go into special session and
sweep madam share representative
so a couple of most of the funds
that were created to see the set
reading of this fund
trade ports development find and
the arden defund those are all
funds that were funded by
special appropriations initially
but they are non reverting funds
so they will remain in the fund
the special appropriations
however are I I believe all but
about three of them are one your
specials in responding to have
you ever been through a special
session
madam share representative when
I work for the legislative
finance committee in two
thousand and sixteen yes thank
you
president and mister duffy
all the programs from eighteen
you have a power point listed
here eighteen p d
twenty twenty one can you tell
me any of the programs that do
not relied on federal grants or
any kind of federal
appropriation or planned
appropriations from the federal
government.
Most of our natural resources
program are supported in some
way through the federal
government so in FY twenty two I
was still head of the division
of resource management
protection so we did do indian
self determination contracts
public law ninety three six
thirty eight for both forestry
and natural resources.
We have received
a good chunk of our fy twenty
five funds and and so i'm hoping
with these things geared towards
forest thinning
preparation of logging units and
so forth that that's something
that looked upon favorably by
this federal administration but
we are anticipating some cuts to
some of the house funded
programs the prevention program
community health representatives
so forth but we haven't received
any notifications yet of those
programs being cut so what we do
have what isn't funded through
the tribe is probably funded
through the federal government
in some way umm even our court
system are rehab program some of
those kind of things are funded
through federal funds
madam sure woman instead of a
pinto if you look at page
eighteen
all but the four directions
treatment recovery center the
mister patrick cultures and
resume the language program and
the elderly center are all
federally funded programs
are elderly center they get
statements and that's how they
operate it seem with our
language program the cultural
center museum that's a funded
unit the tribe and for
directions they do receive some
federal rollers but the majority
of their funding is medicaid
medicare each reimbursements if
you look at page nineteen
all but the my squirrel travel
education department and
they must or for each mess for
boys and gross club are
federally funded programs and so
you know a huge concern for said
it right now are the cuts that
were seen again within the beer
of any education and you know it
is a
there is consonation as you
what's going to happen with our
school.
You know are we lose teachers
are we gonna have to cut back on
hours or you know what what are
we gonna have to get lean in in
order to ensure that school
continues to remain open you
know oh I know we had talked
about
prior to this prior to the
session starting or just as it
was started we had conversations
with the governor's office and
secretary per dear
you know if we see a total cut
and funding to head star and to
you to the indian education we
you know what are some fast
track
actions that can be taken to
incorporate tribal schools into
the new mexico public education
system to ensure that we
continue to educate students and
you know we're not going to see
that that breaking education and
so we've already started looking
bills you know having those
conversations you know a mate
the main thing is we want to
continue to keep our kids and
school contending to provide
that education that learning for
them that you know we the school
we've built
under president bush at number
two and so it's not that old you
know and so we don't want to see
a shell to sit in there with no
no students can educate in there
and so you know we are looking
at it we are doing our best to
plan ahead and a consider all
the american possibilities out
there and an insurer that we are
continuing to have this
conversational section they
covers office and now with our
legislators in case that we do
have to take make some rapid
changes to ensure that you know
those schools don't close down
so something you know that we're
keeping in the back of our mind
i'd like to just come out with
quick
we did a turn the state tribal
leaders summit in there was
presentation of the indian
education act funding so one of
the things we did learn.
One of the things we did learn
during that conference was that
nine separate grants were
consolidated into the indian
education act funding so these
are the language program grants
you know like with the the
native language programs and so
forth and and it's a little
broader what it funds that we
can also fund things like um
tutors and and specificial needs
kind of courses for for some of
our children that have those
needs and so with that for from
escalate our part is a little
less than a million that will be
allocated but it definitely is
not enough to make up for all
the cuts that may be coming
where we are working internally
to do
an internal sort of like a grant
process so the the different
programs that had tapped into
that funding we're having them
all come together and and come
to the tribe to present the
different options so we are
going to be managing that
internally even though there's
no requirement to do that
because there's going to be many
many needs based on the cuts
going on
thank you and I understand to
that not all our programs to are
six thirty eight I had that
process in followed and also
that they that funding to there
are some restrictions on it as
far as he couldn't buy but then
because they said you have to
buy buses but we know
there's a lot there's I mean it
is abroad in subsense but
there's some other state still
restricted but think you can
think people.
Thank you senator pinto
and the were a little bit over
scheduled so I just want to make
that announcement as we're
asking questions but will keep
going representative somewhere.
The.
Thank you madame chairman and
thank you for the great
presentation so one of my
questions is it sounds like
we're speculating that there's
gonna be cuts for the for the
bae schools.
Is do you have any numbers or
anything or is it just chatter
we're hearing or or where we're
getting that where we get that
assumption that this is gonna
happen.
The.
Manager made chair and
representatives of more
so the conversations that are
taking place or based on the
draft.
Federal budget that's been
released
you you could see the
cuts in the bia the
the bie and indian health
service now we are working with
our federal congressional
delegation to ensure that if
there's going to be occurred
it's knocking to be as drastic
as a numbers are shown in my
apologies I don't have those
numbers right off my head we're
we're at my desk it pulled it up
right now but these aren't a
soup numbers these are
is
presented by the administration
with regards to the federal
fines.
Okay thank you for that matter.
So is is there a number that in
your head that uh a five percent
ten percent or is it drastic or
or what is it
man chairman and representatives
of more right now we're looking
at their estimates anywhere from
twenty to thirty percent I think
with the
office of justice service they
were at like he forty percent
decrease and you know we are we
are
you know it's a concern for us
here in miss glore because we
are a direct service tried when
it comes to lawn forcement so
the meaning it's the federal
government's responsibility to
write that law enforcement
service and so we see a
reduction in force
you know it's gonna be you
you'll see the upticking crime
you know we just federal
government just built a brand
new detention for silly on our
reservation and they're still
trying to staff that in if that
if the you know the question is
artills federal cuts are the
unique effect whether or not
going to be able to open their
facility and so you know that
they will have a federal
facility sit in there and the
shell bacon's until they can
fully staff in and so you know
those are are quite in our
questions yeah a huge thing that
we are that we are hearing there
is going to be an elimination of
have start all together and so
you know that pre key education
were seen that once you start to
educate the our students you
know early it shows that they're
gonna have long term success
we're looking at we are seeing
that there's going to be in
elimination of which helps our
elders saying those people who
are under a poverty line for
their propane their electricity
you know we saw the we're
looking at the reduction in I
just funding that the last I
thought was approximately like
twenty percent but also doing a
reorganization we have no idea
what the rew organizations look
at
you know things like traditional
healings you know we're seeing
funding cuts for a traditional
healing those being zeroed out
in the federal budget.
And so
they said you you go through we
haven't even seen the release of
the interest budget to see what
that looks like we did go to
consultation on that and so
we're we're we're looking
forward to the budget to see
actually see where we are tribes
are how we respond to those cuts
whether it's to a federal
delegation are working with our
state partners to you are you
know try to fill in the gaps
were going to see the current
services
and so I I don't want to add
anything yeah and I think to
help put it in perspective we
have four hundred and sixty
three thousand acres and rbi our
number of bi law enforcement
officers to be fully staff to
six.
So any kind of cuts going to
really have impact and we we do
you know it's difficult to try
to you know.
Stretch those resources over the
twenty four hour period that we
we have to protect our people
with we do have are tribal
conservation office that is
geared moratories game and fish
and in code enforcement kind of
activities so.
Even that I mean it's it's not
enough for the amount of land we
have huge problems with.
Outside entities trying to come
on poe cheering we have a lot of
cutting offense that goes on we
have seen when when I used to be
with our forestry program we
would go into some of the areas
to do sitting like in turkey
springs and and you could see
where the the fences have been
dropped and an you know in the
right time of the year you can
see tire
tire tracks coming on to the
reservation like from a tv's and
so forth so it it's.
It's not just within our
community but we have a lot of
land to protect and and keep
track of and so any kind of cut
one officer is huge for us
and manager presenters so do you
rely one hundred percent on the
federal government for your
life.
Okay ok so i'm going to change a
subject a little bit here now
and i'm going to go to the.
The.
To the solar projects and mister
romet I think you made a
statement that you're gonna save
three point.
Five million dollars in
electricity costs if you put in
the solar panels was that
annually or is that.
Uh
per decade or what was the type
of
annually I believe for the end
of the mountain guards I went I
did the solar energy feasibility
assessment and i'm pretty sure
it was an annual cost that's
huge all these electronic things
and the lights and all that it's
a huge expense so
but we are looking at.
So madam chair and presenter
you're telling me you're
spending three point five
million dollars in electricity
costs here in this facility.
Manager who represented the more
that's a car says this facility
the ski apache and casino
patching travel center on the on
the other side of the hill so
doll three entities combine
annual basis is three point five
million dollars.
While that that just floors me.
The.
Ok and then and then I want to
talk a little bit about solar
panels and put in solar panels
in
I want to go real quick to
a.
A little test to money that I
got from.
From a constitution mine and I
want to read this real quick if
you'll allow me
so it says we decided to put a
solar in and twenty twenty with
a company based out of
albuquerque
they evaluated the power usage
and we settled on put in a seven
hundred kilo a power which would
recover ninety percent of our
power bill after going through
all the regulations that took
eight months to get approval
from the power company we
thought we were on our way we
decided we would finance the
project
ourselves so they wanted ten
percent down then they
as they finished finished each
phase so we were about ninety
percent done when they would
show up anymore
finally heard from them there
this they decided to close up
shop after ninety percent was
fine is still needed in parts it
took two months to find
the parts and we were missing
that we're missing another three
months another three months for
them to check worrying
on the solar system i'll send
down sixty percent over budget
delayed about one year and
finally received
grant money for twenty five
percent of the original purchase
price then we had a hail storm
so in months ago and had to
replace twenty percent with new
panels but it was had to go back
to engineering because they
don't make the panels anymore
that we bought originally
so we're currently looking at a
solution to replace twenty new
panels and trying to salvage as
much as we can from the other
eighty percent that are still in
tact
so I would
caution people when they go into
the solar panel business that
there are some.
Advantages and disadvantages to
going to
I like the clean energy but you
we have to take everything into
consideration as we go and
I need to confess that I
that i've talked at other people
and what the business is one of
the things that they've run into
is using out of state
contractors and when we use the
united states contractor we is
legislators probably need to
look into whether there's a law
or not about out of state
contractors being bonded where
or if they don't do a good job
for you at least we have
something to fall back on and
that's something that I was
going to look into at one time
and then I have found my job and
I didn't I didn't research it
but I think we as legislators
need to be careful about
bringing in add a state
contractors and them not being
bonded
and I think that's all I have on
the solar panels
and then
madam chair mister rometo you
were talking about
about the cattle business and
in the drought insurance that
you purchased
purchased for your forge on on
the on your ranches here where
your grass lands
I was the one that carried the
what we call the weather station
bill
so madam chaired and mr dramato
and and presenters.
If you feel like you don't have
enough
weather stations and med to
measure the amount of rain here
you can clock call your state
claimatologist his name is deed
while he works out a new mexico
state university and he's
actually run in the program and
takes care of it whenever it is
all put up and set up
it it'll give you real time data
and you'll be able to watch
what's going on with you with
your insurance policies
we had an issue in the state and
you mexico where we didn't have
enough weather stations
and there was people not being
paid for their their
compensation from the insurance
claims and as far as I know
everything's working good
everything's clicked in right
along and that's another thing
that I hope in the future of the
state a new mexico that the
legislature legislature will
help the university fund this
program cause it's very
important our farmers are
ranchers and making your cattle
business successful it's it's
another tool in the tall box to
use to to help us in case of
drought in in the hard times
that we file upon with the
weather today
you've done a great job on your
presentation I really appreciate
it and and hopefully my two
cents or help in in helping you
along with with what we're doing
and I hope that the the cuts
aren't as drastic as we're we're
assuming hopefully it this will
all settle down and end and we
don't have those type of cuts
thank you manager and thank you
presenters
figure representative
a couple more people and I would
just ask us to be mindful of the
time once again representative
of the leader i'm sure
thing came out of chair and
think you all for your
presentation i'll be quick into
the point I usually don't beat
around the bush.
Too much
I want to comment you for your
the same ill the the treethening
you all have done a fabulous job
patch nation doing all of those
things and I think that the
federal government is very
supportive of that i'm not a
hundred percent sure that the
state and mexico has been very
supportive of that and so I
think they're changing their
mind and seeing the tragedies
that are happening across the
state in new mexico and knowing
that we need to do a better job
offs off of the you know you all
take that on yourself so I I
think that
I have catch in county where we
do a lot of thinning and and we
have some saw meals there and so
I think people of the urban area
need to understand our rule way
of life and that is economic
development for us in the in our
rule new mexico along with
hunting and guide now fitting
and our cattle ranches that
being said do you have the
mexican gray wolf on the mescar
or patchy nation yet not yet but
we are
in the process of developing a
wildlife management plan so one
of the components we are
considering is the eventual
spread of the wolf aren't to
tribal lands so we're we're
factoring it in I
i'll just shut up about my
thoughts about predators but I I
fully support the kind of things
you are talking about it's
horrifying for me to see that we
haven't logged heavily in
thirteen years and to see the
huge build up we your you know
as you drive through the
reservation you'll see there's
many trees dying we have a lot
of work missile toe down here
because we are so far itself and
with that that reduces the the
ability of the trees to thrive
but also make.
Since seceptible the things like
bark beatles and and other
insects and diseases and so for
me
when I look out on the landscape
by I see the beauty of it but I
also see that it's getting out
of hand when your trained as a
forester when I took advantage
of culture that's one of the
things that you intended to
mimic what nature does we've
taken the natural fires out of
the system so
good lugging and thinning is how
we intend to replace that and
that's how we've been able to
keep our land safe for many
years but we're kind of getting
out of hand right now without
having the same the same mail is
critical to that thank you so
much thinking madame chair thank
you for your your kind words
it's a it's good to hear and
it's some and it's not I just
want this committee to remember
that it's not just in this area
it's across the state of new
mexico and so wanted to make
sure that you are preparing for
the mexican gray wolf to come in
i'm glad to hear that because
it's devastating several of my
communities across
in my district including me
personally
also I wanted to make sure that
uh I had a question for
deputy secretary on your
economic your certified economic
development organization do you
have off hand madam chair how
many applications were put in
for that and how many you
approved
madam to represent I believe
there were.
Last fewer than twenty maybe
around fifteen and I believe we
were proved about
eight of them break get you some
more details on that yes thank
you so much i've i've had an
issue with one of my counties
are applying for two years in a
row and being denied and a lot
of it has to do with the the
region we have the regional
representatives in the area and
and I would really really really
from the bottom of my heart
appreciate you looking into that
because i've brought it up to a
tiny bit to the the new
secretary but the previous
secretary and I really but it
heads over that and and it's an
issue for small rural new mexico
to be able to get this
certification and it is
something that really really
really needs to happen and it's
mines concerning the middle real
ground economic development
association and the
certification and the cost time
energy and effort that's put
into that process and then to be
denied twice in a row
is is really harmful um is there
any kind of of training that
goes on to the regional reps
that on the scoring
on those applications
madam chair representative so
that's it see
if I was very similar processes
as everything else
receive all the applications
they're greeted by a committee
and then ultimately awarded as
funding allows and on the
ranking system and so that's
more less the process that's
followed okay thank you for that
I would also like to see a map
of the economic development
entities that were approved
i'm i'm just feeling a little
bit like sort of southern new
mexico is a little bit left out
and so I would I would really
like to see a map of those
entities that were approved.
With this site reg readiness you
said that there have been there
was up a process put out you
have some sights available to
you
is it the are you you're in the
process of picking the sites
right now is that correct madam
chairman representative so we're
gonna be accepting any site so
if anyone wants a site submitted
we're accepting those from both
private entities and public
entities
but for our first round just to
get the contractor started we
have about two dozen or so that
are in the initial pipeline
these are fifty plus acre sites
throughout the state okay that's
that's good to hear that is
there throughout the state
that's the key word I was
looking for so thank you for
that
the other question I had was.
Can you tell me madam chair and
and deputy director what the
small business regulatory
advisory committee i've never
heard of that before and I I
just is that something that's
new
madam chair representative no it
does not knew it has been in
place for at least ten years
probably more like fifteen years
and it is a group that meets
and we are actually been working
on this for the past several
months
the purpose of that organization
or committee is to
review state rule that are being
proposed and their effect on
small business there the city of
albuquerque has their own aspect
we have ours and the purpose
again is just to review
state rule making that may
affect small business and madam
chair and and right deputy
secretary do you
voice your opposition of certain
rules that come down or do you
just talk about home or how how
does that work like i'll give
you for instance the new heat
rule proposal that spin coming
down did you all put in a letter
of opposition or how does that
work madam sure representative
so in that specific instance
that was a very
very disk highly discussed topic
and so the secretary of the
officer the secretary
and the governor's office and
others were involved to have
this conversation earlier
earlier on before the
rule really had the opportunity
to come through the that process
okay thank you for that I I just
I don't know why I didn't know
about this but you know the
regulatory
claim it in the state and in
mexico is very burden some in my
opinion to anyone wanting to
open a business.
And so
and this is coming from someone
who owns an operator eleven
different businesses in the
state of new mexico so I believe
believe me when I say that it's
difficult including a cattle
ranch
including a gas station
including a construction
business and so
it even a hotel tiny little bot
hotel in magdalena new mexico
and so
doing business and the state in
the mexico we can do all of this
this all looks really great and
I appreciate it all but the
regulatory side of the state of
new mexico is putting the mail
in the coffin for economic
development across the state of
new mexico so I appreciate
everything you're doing I would
love to talk to offline to make
sure that we were you know we'd
all like to move everybody in
the same direction and and make
it a great place to live or can
play here on the state of new
mexico I was born in race here
and I am not leaving so thinking
manager
thank you leader i'm actually
gonna go to share and give you
the clothing um questions we're
in your distr.
Senator share
think madam chair
something that came up earlier
was a sports bedding in this
confused me a lot actually cause
I was around when we did the
compacts and I didn't understand
what we were doing then I don't
understand what we're doing now
um
but it seems to me that the the
tracks to off reservation tracks
they didn't they said no no no
we don't want anything to do
with this and then I thought
that the the tribal casinos
didn't want anything to do with
this and now people are I think
you're doing final
don't know for sure have sports
betting and now there's the
internet
sports betting
what's the solution to this
because I don't think we can
stop the internet
madam chair and and sinner share
so this is if you remember
remember back to the estate
travel er carpacks there is a
section in there that talks
about online gaming and if there
is clearly states that if
there's going to be AAA
discussion about online gaming
on a state level that it's going
to start with a tribes and there
are two working with a state we
will leave the foundation of
what that's going to look like I
mean you're absolutely right
that we are not going to stop it
it's coming and seen it's
already here but we have to
insure that you know and and I
know that
we just had a great conversation
about the regulation the
relatory side of the state you
know and how awful that can be
but in order to stay complaint
with the compaps there is gonna
have to be regulations in place
to state ok
you know the racinos and travel
casinos this is what it's going
to look like with for you guys
to engage an online gaming
outside entities company and
this is a process that you're
going to have to follow this is
this me you know you're gonna
have to work with these
individuals.
Whatever that conversation is is
going to be you know I don't
know what the solution is I just
know that
you know we have to have it a
conversation and it has respect
you know those gaming compacts
otherwise the revenue share and
go so we you know I stay
overcycles where all these
things that we work so hard and
and we've had very heated
discussions over you know they
all go away and so we have to
ensure that as tried to each of
the public that we are great
working with our partners in the
state legislature within you
know the governor's office to
ensure that you know where those
outside entities company in
there they are following e
process that respects the gaming
compacts
so madam chair and and
understand I don't want a
breakfast compact I just could
all of a said now seems like
it's
a new reason to fight i'd rather
not
management center share a a an a
totally understand where you're
coming from and I don't think
it's a reason for us to fight in
the state it's too protect what
we have here in the state
because the the major players in
the online are I game in
industry are beast out of the
state I think the when we talk
about the commuter the the
commercial or commodities future
trading
sports betting you know this is
a company called culture who is
leading this charge and I
believe they're based out of new
york
I I would have to double check
that and I don't understand i'm
still trying to figure it out
myself how you can claim a
sports bed as a commodity
because you know you know you
have a disruption in any
commodities kind country it's
gonna have drastic facts on our
economy and you know our our
citizens but a sports better how
to set effect anybody you know I
saw i'm still trying to
understand how they're they're
willing to way around that
but I think we do one of the.
Well we'll take the state law
for example they were doing
online cells and they were using
a company called jack pocket and
so we did raise the issue with
the attorney general's office
and like if you're making a lot
of repurchase you're essentially
you know place in a better
online you're using a courier to
go pick that take it up and come
back and out you know we stated
where that was illegal under new
mexico code we show that you
know that it's a violation it is
online gaming and so the turning
general did agree with us and
the jack pocket has sense er c
said operation when it comes to
the online lottery cells but we
have like draft kings and all
these other companies who are
doing essentially the same thing
and and so the question I pose
to the attorney general to the
governor is like okay what's the
fix here do we need to start
working with the legislature now
to come up with your some
regulatory scheme to ensure that
they're not violent in the
compacts and they're not by
living state law and there's you
know room for everybody to
do business
madam character I believe the
compact serve are mutually
beneficial I think that the
sharing credit goes both ways
talked about the amount of
capital outlay money that the
state gave I mean if we wanted
to go down that we could really
find reasons to heed each other
that's just not not something
that i'm interested in frankly
but maybe if and I don't
understand this maybe have you
talked to the to the other
the racinos that are not tribal
I had any kind of coordination
with any of them or anybody else
for that matter because it for
us it would be much better if
the two sides were sitting at
the table this is the deal we
love it let's do it as opposed
to making us decide okay so son
ray is in my district.
But northern edge casino is like
three feet from my district
so i'm it may be it's a third of
a mile and a little bit further
now but it's not very far
in so now you're going to make
make us make a decision like
that in that in so if we could
figure out out it would be
better than
mentoring the finish share while
I can't speak specifically for
the resinous the partners that
we do have in the industry
you know the conversation we've
had I said they're against it as
because they can't even do it
you know there is no mechanism
that exists right now that
allows a tribes or resignals to
you engage in I gaming internet
gaming and to have these outside
entities from outside the state
doing that you know it is it's
taken out of our pockets sending
it out of state in the world a
lot we don't have to ability
then to reverting share to a
full potential.
Thank you senator representative
thank you madame chair
appreciate the time.
I'm gonna go ahead and get
something off my chairs to so I
get it off my chairs but we keep
talking about
the federal the federal budget
cuts but all i've heard madam
chair is is in a case
and we do the same planning.
Through the state that we're
talking about all in gas and one
of these days only guess it's
not going to be as good to us it
might be gone and we are trying
to figure out a way to bridge
that gap
and ask him to lead me into this
segway right here if the cuts do
happen if they happen.
Would you tell me what your data
center you mention the data
center what is that look like in
how will how will they'll be ran
so with repair madame chairman
representative instant with
regards to the danner's data
center this is you know we're
looking at it being placed on
the esan reservation
you know we have wide open range
land out there or we can put the
solar rain with you know we have
plenty of water and so when it
comes to data center yesterday's
going to be a a you know
hundreds of short term jobs so
once against operational you
know it's those data centers
pretty much run themselves you
have to have people going in a
small group of people going in
you know checking temperatures
ensuring that you know waters
running insuring that
electricity is going and so it's
it's going to be very minimal
human interaction once that
starts going and you know the
reason why we are looking at
data centers is as everything is
going on line you know you need
places a store all this online
information
and we we are smacked down in
the middle of of canon holland
fortless white sense and so you
know we viewed as in very
opportunity it's an opportunity
time to get into that and you
know construct that so
you know with regards to the
data center
once it gets up and going like
said is there's very very
minimal human contact and for
you would probably have a crew
of anywhere to five to ten that
actually maintains that
they came out of charity my next
question is
for the president so I alot of
our priorities this last session
how to do a thing and saw meals
and temperating and everything
timber because we have such a
problem with insurance.
Are you guys experiencing
insurance issues here in muscle
yes that's why we're doing the
new fire stations we're trying
to bring our isl ratings down
and the costs that go with that
also so yes we we do have that
we probably do a bit more than
england is done on the outside
so I don't think we're affected
that way but it's still you know
response time when we have a
house catch on fire if you're
not right there within a couple
of minutes it's basically gone
so that that's what we're trying
to do is to improve response
time we have a pretty broad
public you know where where are
people live you know so all the
way from the west boundary
appeared to the rear does a
boundary and and that's
quite a bit of ground to cover
so that's why we have the summit
fire station is kind of in the
middle of that we have a new
substation going in directly
down in masquelaro and we're
looking at replacing one here in
the cresal area just to increase
that response time you know eat
that's completely separate from
anything that might happen from
a forest fire where we're
looking at increasing response
times for us structural buyers
madam chair
chair and represent vincent real
quick also a just keep in mind
that ninety percent of the homes
under reservation are hut homes
and so insurance for those homes
are already covered through the
federal government that ten
percent of privately own homes
you know talking to some of the
home owners it's always been a
challenge to get a home insured
on reservation and so a lot of
those homeowners have gone
decades without purchasing home
you know home insurance and so
you do have a small.
So that ten percent you probably
have maybe three percent who
actually have home insurance and
you know some of them they're
their policies have remained the
same and then we have seen
obtexts in the others and so
when it comes to the a question
of what is insurance look like
on the reservation that's it's
kind of hard to talk about you
know just a private home owner
and it as I said it's always
been challenging to get
financing to build a home to buy
home replacement reservation and
to ensure that home just because
of the the legalities when it
comes to these companies either
repossessing a home or or or
pain out of insurance claim it
when you know they're adjuster
may not be able to come on for
whatever reason and so it's
it's it's kind of it's really
difficult to answer the question
of what it's looking like here
on the reservation when it comes
to home insurance or even
commercial insurance
thank you madame chair and you
know the good positive thing
about this binning is a
bipartisan thing we can all get
together and run it whenever I
get a chance to take a win
if I can get in we're going to
win together if we can continue
to think and we have to fantant
them and we have to rebuild
these homes and we have to be
smart about how we rebuild them
so that archer digital insurance
will start to come back to the
table and people are not paying
double what they used to pay ten
years ago and you know I know
some families that are they
don't have the money to be
paying four thousand five
thousand dollars a year for
insurance such as crazy talk
because it used to be seventeen
or eighteen hundred now they're
paying forty one hundred.
And we are trying to get it
because they can't get a policy
written right now we're trying
to get the stay in the fair plan
to write those policies because
that's what what that's what we
should do for new mexicans that
can not get rewritten because
you take a
you take a family that's got you
know four kids and mom data both
work in and they're doing the
best that they can and then the
insurance company calls and
cancels their insurance will
they have a home that's financed
amount of chair guess what
happens when you have a home
that's financed and you can't
get insurance they foreclose on
you
and you might be in ten years
deep into that and you can not
get insurance so in order to
bring that traditional insurance
back we and that's why i'm glad
i'm part of it up with you
president because I know you're
a thinner year a logger you like
doing that and you do and in its
evidence that you've done a good
job in the past and I know we're
going to do some good work in
the future and we have to take
that risk away from the
traditional insurance for it to
come back where we can get that
those insurance rates down and
get people insured thank you
manager
think a representative every one
work comment and then we are
going to transition out of this
panel think you made insurer and
want to make this quick and it
is to follow up on it
represented since then tonight
heard last week and last vegas
about fair it was a very
concerning to her about what's
happening to families and the
risk that they take by not a
foreclosure of their homes very
aware of what happens in our
travel communities as it was
explained that there's a lot of
families who have inherited this
homes so as they changed hands
that the what was established at
the beginning whatever
protections were in place such
as fire insurance and home
wonders insurance sometimes
lapse.
Um for many of our eighty
different reasons what I want to
point out they were really
appreciate representative of
instant madam chair bringing
this up because one of the
things that we also understood
was that the sport is being
reestablished and they they are
looking for membership my sense
is it might be very helpful to
help have a trouble perspective
on this and that uh the uh the
experiences that have been had
not just here but in other
trouble communities that have
been affected by buyers as well
and home owners the home owners
and properties properties and
businesses that have been
affected by them it might be
good to have uh a representation
from that with that perspective
on the board so I have the
information with me I saw the
agenda and I wanted to bring it
down make sure that you'll have
it so i'm happy to show it with
you if you are not already
familiar with it but thank you
thank you madame chair
think you representative I think
you panelists what um
great transition has our next
panel and we're actually going
to talk about a community
response to natural disaster
as I drove in yesterday as many
of you drove in yesterday or
earlier today you probably
signed drove through with a burn
star and this community is deep
and recovery and so it is the
timely conversation and one that
is pivotal to economic
development and so as we
transition to that deputy
secretary
vice president we're thinking
for that
next we will have with a once
again president thorough
who brings with her a wealth of
knowledge this is her expertise
area and sell
thank you for staying with us I
would also like to welcome to
the panel table a marilyn
crawford from the village of
riodo so.
And rick bar general manager
rodeo so down.
The.
Not so great
committee and panelist let's go
right ahead and take our seats
and get started
we do have a little bit of time
to get us back on track this
afternoon
a lench will be served here in
the room
and while we're waiting for a
president to take her seats
let's go head into introduction
thank you for being here with us
thank you madame chair and
committee for having a sear
mayor lincroffered village bread
also.
The.
Can get
the right.
Now go
can you hear me thank you madame
chair and rick ball the general
manager read us downtrash track
casino.
And once more thorough the
president miscollect repatchy
tribe thank you
thank you all for being here
with first today we'll go had
and turn it over to you and ask
members to take the receipts and
let's get going.
Okay if you
sorry we didn't have this here
much earlier but you all have a
hand out here and this is just a
talk from the village rude also
perspective on what we've been
working on recovery housing
economic for boundsation and so
we point out here to some of the
devastation numbers we always
get as numbers on why it was
lack so you can see from june
seventeenth of the south work
fire how many acres all of that
down the total structures
somebody moves through some of
this pretty quick because we
have some serious questions to
ask and hopefully your alaska
some serious questions because
you just heard the rain that's
going on right now so we're
going to begin a right now and
we almost were watched out at
the track yesterday we were
watched out in midtown yesterday
so some homes that have not been
damaged or getting damaged
because we've run out of money.
And we're gonna and that's the
serious questions we want to
talk about so just disaster
response to multi agency
response you can see the village
of those so d h s em has been
great working with those case in
our cs and we have numbers
actual numbers on properties the
millions of dollars that have
been spent have they been spent
working with linking county in
female
and is so confusing to
understand what is familiar not
do what is in r c s do not do
and these are things that have
really we've made a lot of
progress as you mentioned madam
chair it does look really good
but we're so vulnerable and
today we're experiencing it we
experienced it yesterday bills
rude also damage assessment and
project formulation you can see
that we had four hundred and
ninety eight female eligible sat
assessed.
Organized into twenty seven
projects based on facility top
and location in each one of
those when we say projects that
could be ten roads far bridges
can be twenty five coverts
different streets all of those
those are then san into fema for
approval okay and then right now
we have I was just told today
that just the end of the last
week we are proved for seventeen
of those projects that have been
in the works all of this time
those m w they were waiting on c
r c approval through fema which
were in district six which is in
didn't texas and we know what's
going on in texas so though
seventeen have been approved
that I mean we get to draw down
on the money that you guys
appropriate for slash year and
we can talk about that later too
why haven't you access the money
because every done that the
village has had access to that
we could spend we have deployed
it we have highly motivated
contractors the staff is highly
motivated to get these jobs down
and you can see that we've done
a lot of work but now we're at
another juncture where we need
to be refunded.
Nut money given back but funded
that's what I should have said
fema estimated utilize twenty
nine million dollars that's what
fema engineers came in and
originally said we think it's
going to cost around thirty
million dollars now estimates or
five times there
so that was the money that they
set aside that we think it
engineering and all of these
guys appear can tell you gets
very frustrating what's in
approved project so it has to go
through all of the steps were to
proved then we send it off to
the district in in dint and
texas for them to approve it
this one's going to be paid back
we will pay you back to money
which is the agreement we have
with you the state in a mexico
that you attended to fund us up
front a week you get these
projects done the language in
house bill one held is up from
that because it had to be theme
approved then you came out of
senate bill thirty one for the
hundred and fifty million
dollars there was supposed to be
a gap a loan program that we
could din tie into that we've
since been told by dhm that
we're way down the list on that
there's other communities that
are going to be in front of us
for that so we're still relying
on the twenty two million that
once we are able to spend that
down then we can go through the
other twenty two million that
you have the forty four this is
out of the original hundred
million that you set out in in
house bill one sold i'm just
trying to set all this up
because if i'm confusion you're
right now you're going to be
totally walked out in about five
minutes
okay I don't want she has good
questions
yeah so you can see the HB one
funds can be utilized once
female proof that's the key and
it's under the fema project
summary the expected approval on
a lot of these is twenty twenty
six.
So what's happening right now
you can see that female.
Has already spent uhm trying to
find the figure in here but
roughly in our c s you can see
the d h s c m progress.
D r c is a wonderful company
that has been overriding a lot
of these things they're right
now his finance out of their
pocket over a hundred million
dollars to pay local contractors
some of those were setting rate
behind me here.
They're still over two hundred
million dollars semimentate.
Eleven hundred and ninety four
assessments have been completed
by d r c that's the company two
hundred and thirty nine
applicants have been have opted
out and that's mainly for
insurance reasons.
That they're still fighting with
the insurance company how does
it going to be taken down can it
be repairable is it in the flood
way flood plan.
Female was going to take three
to five years to get the new
flood way in full flood plane
maps out the village went
through our local cog and we
received some funding to start
that off with the company called
copinly we have sense received
money that we're going to get
back from famous to do the all
of the watership so we have an
understanding of what it's going
to take to repair with the h
studies hydrology had drawicks
on the obsessing of coverts the
digging out of the of the the
wider ways bridges all of these
things streets that need to be
redone all of that go through
this project this program
eleven hundred and six clean up
to complete all the burned homes
that were cleaned up scraped up
the then then he had people that
decided what debris goes where
were we had to find out where
all that debris was going to get
in contracts with the dumpsites
the property that could hold it
epa approval the mexican
environmental departments being
great dhm has been great with
the tools that they have in the
move forward so a lot of that
work is already been done so now
we're at the rebuilding stage
securing hardening in preparing
for the run off that were
expected to experience her today
so the debris removal is ninety
nine percent complete debris is
not selfie decelting.
The decent the cell thing is
what's coming in the river then
when we have a good little what
it's not even gully washer is
just a good sprinkle so what
we're having.
There will end up with two or
three more feet of silt in the
river which think because it's
problems for the next ones and
that's what we're experiencing
we clean up get ready we run out
of money now we're having all
these flooding events that are
coming that shouldn't be very
big we have people that are
prepositioned by people I mean
our staff we have contractors
that we have on agreements that
we can call them out on a
minute's notice and they show up
so all of these check points
that we have throughout the
community one is right there to
corner of saturday the meeting
where the adobe plaza was so on
every facebook page across the
country and on the news that got
taken out by the flood that is
one choke point area that it
comes down off a brady canyon
and perk kenyan which is not
even listed on femers flood
playing maps because it never
was there before so now to prove
that we are now having that look
that so it can be added to the
flood map.
So we have flooding there are
staff is there with anything
with the thumb and reach on it
to reach and pull the brieder
that river to keep the bridges
from getting blocked the
coverage from getting blocked
but it does wash up onto the
road so we have those cleaned up
another area are the bridges
that we've been trying to get
replaced in repaired and this is
an old song
from two thousand and eight
floods that we've just patched
we've repaired we've never been
able to get the funding to
replace them with a clear span
bridge so every time they clug
up yes we have material people
and equipment there to pull that
out of the river but sometimes
we don't get it to get it there
quick enough for their too much
and for safety reason we pull
people out so all of these
things you can see in our cs at
the bottom of the page has spent
fifty million dollars and these
are pretty rough estimates
because there was finding that
was said in there we go.
That's it a daily occurrence we
like to call it ptsd or my case
it's rbs because it gets to you
every time this is the little
local joke that we.
The n r c s is putting in fifty
million dollars to date but the
bone rate on this money that
comes through we've worked with
such great contractors they were
paid by the load that have
gotten after the work and been
there work in six days we can in
some cases more than that that
they've gone through that money
pretty quick so that's why we've
gone through our budget waiting
on additional funding we asked
the state for four million
dollars to go for a twelve
million dollars match you'll see
on the bottom of the in our cs
page that in our cs told us
we've got twelve million dollars
if you come up with your twenty
five percent you'll have sixteen
million dollars we can finish
desilting the river not just
there but on seventy as though
the rain which what is what's
worrying me right now is on the
salt fire the south burns car
which is right over here off
seventy so this is up bear
canyon so this comes right now
and have way seventy so some of
this money is looked to be a
bill detention police clean out
the the waterways to run off
areas so that we keep it out of
the businesses we don't wash out
the lumber yard anymore it
doesn't make a rot in hit to the
track take the track out again
and then on down to speaky flats
one down to the wastewater
treatment plan and then into the
valley.
So all of these things are they
said we had it if you have your
four million.
So we call the governor because
she said i'm getting in front of
this we're not gonna make you
wait on money back from fema
cause there's no way we can wait
we went through the broad fire
three years ago now and it took
this over two and a half years
and we had to keep regular going
back after the funding the money
that said it would probably be
approved it was approved in the
turkish almost three years to
get the money so that's what
we're looking at came so in our
cs said you got the four million
we got the four million now in
our cs says the fundings froze
so we can give you the twelve
million dollar matter if you get
the four million we're not doing
anything so we have contractors
that are standing by ready to go
get back to work because we're
told you're your money's just
read there just right there and
we don't ever quite get there
and if i'm a little animated
it's this makes me pretty
nervous I just want to let you
know yesterday was
tell you here in a minute it was
pretty nervous force housing
development and let's talk about
some positive things it's not
all doom and but we've done all
this work you guess have spent
sixteen point eight million
dollars on the property down at
the track it's been a lot more
money on the silting river
replacing these cleaning up the
debris removal getting ready for
rural so two point oh for
rebuilding the community so we
have been working since the
might broad far on housing
development metro medicines up
in running you can see on the
right side we called it a
cocktail of funding a couple of
years ago now we're calling and
stacking to how how did we get
the money put together those
things are full continuously we
have a long list of people
wanting to get in housing six or
three metres were very proud of
that and i'm not going to talk
trash about my friend in the
back with penium but we finally
got her.
Stuff together and we got that
wired up so now that we have ten
homes up there the tin families
will be able to move into
hopefully in the next thirty
days
okay that's just the.
So it's almost complete on your
way out of town drop out take a
look you can't go in there right
now because it's going to be
somebody you'll get stuck but
it's beautiful modular homes
that we bought right here new
mexico.
Elkmados is right down the
streets where we're going to
start our seventy two union
apartment complex we've been
working on this for almost six
years.
They get the funding it's a it's
a nine percent tax credit
program that's offered through
the federal we have a partner so
you're looking at the investment
there that's already ground has
been broke building but that's a
eighteen month project.
The.
So we still have to have people.
Homes and we should on the very
first a second patrol we have
tombat were twelve hundred homes
down so where are those people
at my business I usually employ
about ninety five people in the
summer i'm down to forty six
people most i'm draft from
telerose then in the valley
they've moved any spare house
they can find a capital.
And they drive so that's a not
only gas prices but time
windshield time all the other
things so that's what it takes
to work in the village right now
so it's imperative that we get
this homestem we're working with
sector new year
and work for solutions on
funding that is available there
legislatively yeah you guys have
put in there that were able to
draw down we have several when
shovel ready project one is
pretty close
that's going to be built in you
can see the housing new
opportunities is as eleven ten
metro drive a twenty five unit
project the land is there we've
made the contacts were real
close i'm moving on that we've
been talking to built was you
may be familiar with the on the
contra- a company at a browser
new mexico that bills the homes
out at the airport to a
fantastic john
on huawei seventy we're looking
at a project that we can put in
50 units that's a thirty two
point nine million dollar
budget.
Uh proposed budget so there's a
lot of things it has been in the
works for a long period time
there is finally come into three
red tape you've already
discussed that i'm not going to
beat that dead horse.
That is drastic everybody knows
how difficult it is economic
recovery you'll flip over here
this is an amazing page.
Because we came to you guys and
asked for help on a recovery on
g r t to help make up the
difference in you guys were
considering that what we've been
able to do and this is due to
destination taxing thank you for
putting that in to force ever
many years ago that that all the
work that we've talked about the
millions of dollars that have
been spin in this community to
the contractors the ville if
it's in the village limits we've
gotten our g r t that's why
we're back to twenty twenty four
numbers the problem with that is
their money's run out so we're
not going to be having that
money coming back in our
hospitality is holding its own
because a lot of the contractors
are staying here thirty days at
a time.
Cabinet art that puts our lot of
our largest tax down we're down
about almost eight hundred and
fifty thousand dollars in larger
text which is what we use for
marketing and quality of laugh
issues building or walking
trails all of those things.
But it looks good on paper where
we're at we're just not
comfortable were standing on
sand with clay feet
the claim fee or get wise direct
way every time that we get a
sprinkle and it's just a
sprinkle that's really all the
decision so we're looking at how
do we continue on with
additional funding bringing
revenue into the community we've
got a lot of economic
development stuff that we've
worked on for years against come
into fruition extera most of you
have heard of exterior it's an
international event it's coming
here in august for the gold
championship we have contracted
for twenty six twenty seven and
twenty eight for their world
championships it's a
international events who will
have the eyes of the world some
even you are young enough to
remember the wide world of
sports the thrill the victorine
agony of defeat well that's the
kind of video footage that we're
going to have right here in ten
and not only we're going to have
extera but now we have iron man
have you all heard of iron man
will have both of those here
twenty six twenty seven twenty
eight not only is there coming
back to this first time they'll
be in the mainland the united
states we out be it outworked
other people are crossed the
country to get this.
To big deal and so they're
coming to our community the
first time the stadium of mexico
was going to hold it so these
are things that are working
really good in south east new
mexico and so road also is a big
part of that.
So i'm moving to the race track
development that was a big part
of that people are wondering
still how in the world that this
happened and it was just working
with the governor secretary
serna the economic development
edd folks were here earlier
but we were looking at the
infrastructure because believe
it or not the sewer line for the
village of road or some.
Read or sit downs in indeed the
end of the mountain guards.
Palmer the the misclare over all
goes to the sewerland which is
in the river.
And so when we get flooded out
down into track we had a lot of
damage last year to our sewer
lines to the intake where we
actually had run off rain waters
coming into our plant which then
went into the plant and hit the
headworks the headwork said it
the front of the were all the
water comes in it takes later
the solids and stuff out the
water process cleaning start
that was damaged so that costs a
several million dollars and we
still haven't got it the new
equipment because they don't
make that and set it on a shelf
it's all
what's the word so sourced so
we've got it repaired and we've
gone through in repaired for
money that we have been got
received in grants in our cs and
some female stuff.
That we've repaired that so we
don't have the infiltration into
the sovereign land.
So that's why that is such an
important strip we were able to
with recure in his folks talk to
the miller trust who owns that
property they did that that
acrids over less than twenty
acres to the village of rudolso.
We worked with the county root
also downs to take that in there
because there's obligation with
that too.
We were able to get to sixteen
point eight million dollars to
go in there put in the new
culbort system dig out the
detention pound clean out the
wider way rebuild the east and
western of the track protect the
area down to rudole saddam's the
terms but getting flat area and
you go through there and it's
just land with hescale basket.
The only way to escale basket is
I wish my name is tesco because
i'd be really rich right now
because there's thousands of
home everywhere there there are
load of man with the fork lift
their fill with rock sandwicher
most of the green and they can
stack on eight feet tall so when
you drive around like paired us
can in you'll see these walls
and that's to protect the homes
what's left of the homes and the
ones that haven't been damaged
that is all the way down the
speedy flat that down per
spaghetti flats is ranchers
people that known property their
property has been damaged there
are sake is have been damaged
there's processes that are
trying to be repaired for the
people in the valley in the
into protect the waste what a
treatment plan which is now
valued in over fifty million
dollars yes we applied to the
waterboard water trust board
which now has money not only for
water projects but for
wastewater asset on the
president of the new mexico
minus believe so as a mayor and
working with my neighbors we see
the things that communities have
to deal with every day so those
are things that we're trying to
incorporate through the
municipal league and so I
appreciate you guys seeing their
taking that impassion there so
all of that said.
We've done a lot of work the
money that we have been given
well you've only spent four
million dollars of that twenty
two million dollars mayor.
Well the reason we haven't spent
is because we can't get to it
because the village ruded also
if we start contracting and
spending that money down and
it's not approved but female
then I can't pay the state back.
And then I put my village in
bank repsy on a thirty plus
million dollars debt.
That's why I haven't spent the
money.
It's because I can't do it in
good faith you wouldn't know
so
that's what i'm here to talk
about and I know what these guys
are going to talk about but
before they get into it we
talked about hard questions in
heart answers i'm here to answer
any question you are in my
question is to you the governor
in yall intended house bill
wound to get in front of this
money so we can finish these
projects there was language in
there that was tad to approval
that's what telled it up senator
bill thirty one was to help that
but it doesn't include linking
county and rude also because
we're already got money coming
but we haven't been and would
get to it so in your minds I
know you meant that this was a
fix so between you guys the
governor somebody I got to find
somebody that's going to run a
promisory note.
There says spin that money may
we've got all of these projects
already in the seventeen
approved right now we still have
another almost twelve to
fourteen waiting in that
to get approved by fema and
those have been setting in there
a long time I was shocked when I
just found out that these
seventeen got approved so maybe
they're going to start rolling
out but that we can start moving
this forward because right now
the ppdr program personal
property debris removal program
is done it when it was over june
thirtieth so just like right now
all the stuff that comes down
through the river the debris pie
needless twigs saw some propane
tanks I haven't seen any hot
tubs this time in the end to
track.
There's no process program money
to go clean that up right now so
right now down to rick track
he's got a turn a debris.
There needs to be cleaned off
now
and so we got to figure how do
we how do we get that money how
do we get that cleaned off how
do we get ready for the next
rain.
Because it has been handling it
we got within just a couple of
feet sunday of it going into the
track.
But it's been working we need
funding to go ahead and finish
desulting the river the whole
way that sixteen million dollars
I talked about the four million
from you guys the state twelve
million from in our cs they told
us were to finish the rest of
the desulting the river in
helping us bill some detention
points
but we get five inches of ring
and that will and that's on the
salt
so that comes right down seventy
boom and that's what we're
saying that we know that that'll
take to track out all that money
that spent so anyway that's all
that had enough get some
pictures of the current flooding
of the track that was just
yesterday hopefully your
pictures are better than I am
but it went right to the limit
and then after the flooding
events over all of the water
started receiving and went on
down the river.
And that's what we got to have.
Okay.
Thank you.
I don't go on the home
particular.
Excuse me just one minute
as the mayor said yesterday.
We almost lost the track
yesterday but i'm i'm not
sitting here just as the track I
sit on p and c and part of the
task force i'm part of this area
and with that rose track it's a
hundred and fifty million
economic impact this area in
little did we know and and I
want thorough numbers out but I
know when the track had to go to
abercurcy last year that had
devastating fact on the amount
god in madame presidents area in
all of her businesses
and with the detention base and
it was built in the end field
that's not for us they did hard
in the coverts which I guess
we're going to found out here
pretty quick if they're going to
stay or not
uh but it there's no flood
mitigation for the roast drive
when in our cs came to the mayor
and said you've got to get your
four million and we've got to
twelve me a match that we can
build detention basins upstream.
And we did and then somewhere
got started we heard numerous
stories about who stopped it but
nobody really knows why.
So we're so vulnerable right now
I mean i'm just at the end of my
rope i'll be honest with you I
don't know what else we can do
or how else we can get it done
but if if the i've got any way
you can help us we need your
help.
Thank you
so as far as the work in
mascular were
kind of got to save story we we
did get nrcs emergency watershed
protection funding and we have
spent
the majority of that doing
significant amounts of debris
removal but also putting in
trash regs we did do a little
tour um a few weeks ago to show
some of the
the our neighbors you know that
the trash racks that are in we
have quite a few in those
canyons off of highway seventy
but we have some steep
candidates back there and and we
have a lack of snowfall that has
happened this year we've haven't
had much snowfall at all in the
past few years and so what ends
up happening is we don't have
much vegetation on the ground so
we are having flooding even
outside of the fire outside of
the burned areas we had the
seven springs fire occur
started done the exact same day
that the salt in southwork fire
started
we had flooding coming up hill
from that fire coming down so
this isn't just the fires that
were looking at but it's also
the impact of of not getting
much rainfall or or snow where
we're getting greenfile now but
the the big thing is that the
snow is what gradually
implemented treats into the
ground it doesn't run off the
way where when we get the summer
month soon so there is a lot of
things going on here it it's yes
the fires but the climate is
contributing to this as well
we are also in the same state
with the female funding we just
recently have gotten
our line items identified
there's one huge one that still
hasn't.
Funded yet and that's the
cherokee bill area which is just
before the water here are long
highway seventy it goes through
that area and then goes on to
the read also lands that has not
been funded we have proposed are
natural resources director
requested.
I believe
a little over twenty million
just to deal with that area
itself taking down the week
we've had flooding for many
years here you know different
fires different reasons not just
fire related but you know
hurricane dollar two thousand
eight these other kind of things
so we've had a lot of build up
of settlement over the years in
some of our dreamage ways and so
cherky bill were proposing
taking four to five feet depth
of settlement out to help
restore capacity for holding
back the waters we have done
quite a bit as far as to limit
the debris the logs the the
bernt logs and all of the stuff
coming off the reservation but
that does not stop the water
there there's a lot of flow
coming after these lands right
now and and we have the the
cloud burst or sitting there you
know not moving.
I don't know what to say about
that you know it is just a wide
of water and it's
a lot of burn scars we have
multiple burns goes contributing
towards this both on the
reservation after reservation on
the lincoln national forest so
this is the accumulation of many
years worth of burns cars and
and were really filling it now
we have gotten
requested hb one funds to do
some watershed work a above are
eagle creek cap ground which
comes in are more on the rear
read also side of things up on
the the the app or parts towards
alto in that way we are looking
at installing what they call a
lubial fans which is that
natural drainage kind of system
and it doesn't it's not only
designed to
cap you know to to help maintain
the land form but ask them to
help capture the rainfall and
get it to infiltate trade into
our groundwater
this spite all of these rains we
have been seeing are well even
on masquerade with all the thing
and logging that we've done over
the years are our groundwater
wells or
drawing up we're having two dig
some of our range wells we had
started this round in the mid
like two thousand five two
thousand ten we saw a lot of
drop in our water table we had
to increase the depth of a range
wells by a couple hundred feet
while we're in that same boat
again now another couple hundred
feet deeper so we're worried
about trying to capture some
others rain and help recharge
the ground water so there
there's all kinds of things
going on it's.
You know it seemed like we have
a lot of water but it's not
going into the groundwater table
so those are things we need to
work on long term or where we're
going to be in a huge fix once
once all the rains kinda start
that's all i've got to say but I
am open to questions thank you
thank you panel and before we
move on to questions they just
want to think you offer your
leadership in your fortitude for
what your community is and
you're constituents have faced
representative incentive
thank you madame chair and III
think I have a question for all
of them but.
We were in if anyone in this
room especially on the committee
lives in an area like we live in
here
it's very important that you
listen to what's going on
because the money is a huge
problem and we were in las vegas
good to see again
we were in las vegas and
it almost made it look like the
the seventy million we brought a
hundred million I want to give
you a little bit of the back
story on it so the hundred
million ten million of it went
to miscale ten million of it
went to entered ten million went
to dhc and seventy million came
back to linking county and in
our meeting they asked why has
only four million dollars been
drawn down on
and what it makes it look like
ladies and gentlemen that these
folks are not they're not
getting things going and that's
not the case and when the mirror
gave you that whiny voice while
ago that was my windy voice that
he was talking about cause when
I come back i'm like you all do
it how can you not drawn down on
this money and makes it look
like we don't need it in his
eyes roll back a little bit and
he kind of got on the by and
then I called commissioner
fister from the county are you
why are you guys not drawn down
in this money it makes it look
like we don't need it
that money has already been
spent
but we're waiting on
engineering
so there's not a line of
engineers standing in line
waiting for the next project to
come along you you get the
engineer that's available you
get the firm that you can they
start engineering the project
and.
What i'd like to do is mayor
would you would you
can have explained what that
process looks like one project
let's just pick a bridge you
want you want to get an
engineering firm would you run
us through that process we have
several bridges in this goes all
the way back to oe that's one so
complicated the first you have
to get that somebody to take
whose bridges you know who's
going to pay for it so you got
through that whole process is it
city state city then we talk
about them so it's famous bridge
and so we go to female so we
have to get in a per pleminary
engineering report on what
that's going to look like they
came out look at it or they
don't come out a you know since
somebody else we get the process
going for the bridge and this
has taken months already and
then you have to do a historical
surveys environmental surveys
all of these other things that
all take time in one don't start
till the other one finishes in
so on and so forth this is a red
tape and in all the stuff that
you guys were talking about
earlier so all of this process
starts taking time building up
and then he finally get the
engineering and then they hand
it to units like this isn't even
going to work because you know
we don't know that property
doesn't hear so you have all
these discussions and then
there'll be a real design and
this is not hypothetical this is
what's happening and happened so
then once you get the final
design on it in an estimated
cost then you send it off to
have fem approved and then it
goes through the whole process
and then they need another
survey is some kind they always
pop up in it's already expired
because so much time is going so
you have to go back and redo
that survey
and then you have to get things
like ride of the entries because
to get in there didn't you have
to talk to the army corporate
engineers as they're in charge
of the waterway
and so all of these things next
thing you know you're two years
down the road.
On a bridge they come back the
original process now doubled
the bridges that we were talking
about that we did do a few
million and a half dollars is
now was three million
and we need you know we're at
seven bridges so you go through
all of these super processes and
brides you think that you're
about to cross the finish line
you have a administrative change
somewhere somebody retires moves
on and you would come then they
send out a new crew you have to
go through the whole education
process again we have folders
that we sent all of our federal
representatives we've met with
all of them we've gone to
washington dc there are familiar
with the process to get these
things done and then guess what
you run out of time and it's the
obligated you know what that
means never like it never
happened you know it's the
obligator so we go through the
obligation process what do you
mean is the other get we've been
doing everything possible to get
in front of all of you you've
agreed now then you have to
green you have to agree will now
then you all have to go back and
agree and it's this ring around
the rosy thing that's happening
through the the red tape of
female and so in the end result
is it's just another manning
process the meantime we're want
to spend the money but still
waiting on district accepts
their prove that money
it's going to be spent now
because it's double triple what
it was then and then now then
they got a new person in there
doesn't lack the design the last
person as so down then we had
the company called age to him
he'll come out spent two million
dollars and then they don't like
that one that what that
engineering firm did so then we
had to go through another
engineering firm
to get the process and that's
just a part of it
and so we're ready to move
forward believe me I would love
to not get the phone calls you
know I would love to have clear
span bridges as what what we
need but we can't get him we're
still alright now we're putting
together.
The box covered because we had a
bridge taken out just last week
the mcdaniel bridge it's only
the third time it's been taken
out in the last few years but so
we've never been able to get a
final and with fee mother's
temporary repairs
and then there's permanent way
to get to the permanent stuff
yet and so that's a perspective
and I can tell you these guys
can add to it i've left out a
ton of stuff
because your house will roll
back you head you a far I said
fart and follow over
your faith in fall over
maybe for it but the point is
it's maddening folks is
absolutely manning so I hope I
answered your question but the
process is not a lack of and
we've had professionals
engineers we don't have all the
engineers on staff for small
community
so we go to sma sudden miller
associates anybody that has
engineers that has one available
and they send him up here to get
on the my manager deputy manager
they're on these people this is
an every day all day job and yes
we're losing people because of
fat
I don't work to start anymore
i'm quitting i'm moving
somewhere else
so thank you for that so matter
what what I was trying to get
that that's one project we have
hundreds and I see what that is
like in and just a far fact is
at work for the village for
twenty five years and I know
what that's like and it is it is
burn out it is fatigue it is you
know if you're an employee and
you look well i'm gonna be on a
call i'm gonna carry this page
or i'm gonna be not call and
every time that look buzzer goes
off just like you just heard I
don't care if it's an
anniversary a birthday whatever
you gotta go to work and start
clean and bridges out and you
know that's going to happen for
the next five years.
And then there might be a little
neighboring community that they
don't have floods over there I
think i'll just go to work over
there so there's there's a
personnel issue there's well
there's always that that issue
in town debt
we can't please everybody
and we're supposed to get things
done perfectly right every time
and that's why wanted this to be
I wanted this to be open because
it's not like we've only drawn
down on four million of those
dollars the money the projects
are in play
but I went through personally as
a fire achieve the two thousand
and eight floods those bridges
are still manager center and I
still kid about that
because like the mayor said that
almost didn't happen now we're
on the hook for all these
bridges in those bridges or
three four five six million
dollars
that nobody has and now we still
have temporary bridges in there
so I really wanted that to be at
the forefront
the p p d r.
So when you're clean it up
properties why would that
mature right in the middle of
marsun season that is not
forward thinking to me at all
well it's cleaned up once and
now then we have the term
cascading cascading events from
the fire will now then the new
for head that's moving in
doesn't won't have cascading
which means the fire started the
process and in the flooding and
then the subsequent floods are
part of the original the same pw
no we're not doing that anymore
and so it's a maintenance issue
and so we're not going to be
we'll wait till the indomit soon
to come in and clean up by then
everybody's wised out
and so that's an issue there
thank you out of chair and
do we have maintenance budget so
I you know we had a declaration
put on lincoln county and o
otera
and it was not only a state
declaration it was a
presidential declaration
and
we know that just to give
everybody perspective when we
had the little bear fire for
every acre that's burned twelve
to sixteen tons of material will
come off peraker so twelve to
sixteen tons just four year you
know figuratively is a tin will
doctruct for so per acre that
much is coming off into the
river and it's going to silt
everything in
and that's going to happen for
the next five maybe maybe even a
little bit longer than five
years
so it all winds up down at the
race track and madame chair you
would notice this right now but
the manager the race track right
ball he's usually has a lot more
vigorous to him and I don't know
huts wrong with them right now
you don't look
we don't act right.
And I do know why is not right
because a man that's over sixty
you're to be getting six or
seven eight hours asleep at
night and I know you've only
been getting a couple two or
three and it's on your mind even
when you go to sleep i've drove
by the track to check on and
they're run in twenty four hour
cities and we just have all this
work done at the race track
any add teenagers despair
yesterday before it started all
over again
and we didn't even really get it
a down for it was just a little
bit so
turn that frown upside down a
school be okay we're going to
make sure that it's okay and I
know that we're tough here in
lincoln county I know your tough
at the track and I know that
everything's going to be alright
and and manager the last thing
that I had was
you mentioned mayor that you
didn't want to bankrupt the
town.
And I wish dhm was here right
now because i'd like to ask you
this question in front of the
arm
and a lot of the HB one I
sponsored that bill and through
the drafting the drafter and a
couple of legislators in myself
I don't know why categories a
and b which is debris removal
was pulled out of that bill but
i'll take full responsibility
for it and that's why sender
completes and I had ran center
senate bill thirty one which is
a hundred and fifty million
dollars long program
and it covers categories a
through g
now
now that i'm thinking about this
we need maintenance budget this
silt is going to continue
and did we mess up again and do
we need to run another is
anybody want to run another
hundred and fifty million dollar
bill for maintenance budgets
because if this happens in your
community you're going to go
through it or that water will
come out of the banks and it's
going to devastate people's
properties so do you have a
maintenance budget
no sir you know
that's all you have say i've
done that
I think representatives center
pinto.
Think you member chair and with
the call there's no weather into
tea then the native americans
that know better about to hurry
up and we so that so something
we know as far as domanic
automatic tribes we knew very
well in those areas that they're
we're going to be weather
instances that would arm
because we're relocation I see
that new homes were bought where
they relocated out of the flood
so
yesterday's nothing that's being
put back in or whatever that's
in the flood planet flood zone
if there were some that were
able to be rebuilt they have to
be done to the standards which
is put up on stilts and things
of that nature but not the race
no not the restract.
And do we have an idea of how
many households along this area
will be affected by an increased
inflict insurance.
The.
Well we lost four hundred but
there's way more than that I
don't have that accurate number
right now like put out but they
will all be affected
so we do not know madam chair
that if
they were already paying flood
insurance
manager
senator somewhere but some of
those that have been affected or
not reason we're not previously
in the flood way of flood
playing and so they wasn't
available to and now they with
the burns cars they are in the
flood way so bad i'm chair you
have you had a
collaboration with the insurance
companies on how to alleviate
some of this cost as far as to
the homeowners absolutely madam
chair senator yes we have we've
met with course our supporting
of insurance
we've met with the major
insurance companies we do on
fire hardening in things that
that nature where we're making
you know we we have a feeling
process we have a forestry
service here in in the village
so we have a forestry management
defensible space all of that we
are doing hardening measures for
areas that are still close I
just got a email i'll be happy
or textile happy to show you
that some of the measures that
were done they're saying thank
you it's saved my house and the
rivers just blow and buy it so
we are working on those things
again we're a small village
you have two hundred employees
we need more those were the same
ones that are before but working
with the contractors we've been
able to make a dent.
Madame chair do we know who is
this
responsible for having this
opposite opinion about cascading
if I may
though we that's my deputy
manager I can't remember the
guy's name is supposed to be
taken off
okay that theme no we don't know
that person's name we've just
been told that there's a change
of opinions because we this
cascading we were part of the
same event they're saying that's
no more and we have found who
that persons so that would be
someone that would have played
by the president to this certain
department
agency or whoever
we don't know I know that the
femas had some changes we don't
know about that yet
so I can tell you.
Thank you senator of
representatives rather
than you so much chairman thank
you everyone for coming today I
just had a couple of questions
for mr bell
um so you mentioned earlier that
one of the concerns is having
retention fields or a higher
above where the restract is I
know in previous conversations
from during session that you had
mentioned that
you're your flood insurance that
you would have previously was
taken away here at at the time
and and you were not on a
flipline previously bag out that
correct having these retention
fields with that help
regain that kind of insurance or
what would also put the race
tracking a better position and I
understand putting what the
future looking I understand but
excuse me managed your
representative
I can answer their question
that's going to depend and as
the mayor described earlier what
engineer what happens further
upstream what happens you know I
mean there's so many
things that would come in to
play on that all I know is that
if the tension basins above
streaming and we had to stop
using the term retention because
of the water compared to the
state of texas and in mexico so
there was another thing that
that the the mayor we had
everything ready to go in in
region six out of dallas stepped
in because the compact in the
designs had to be changed
because we we were retaining
water and we can't do that we
can only detail so back to the
parts upstream with garden to
have to protect race track.
And when I say that you know
there again is not just about
the track it's about the
community.
In in and what it does you know
to bring people to read
elsewhere
think about him chair thank you
for that response as well
and again just just to hope
myself in the in the could you
understand so so the reason was
built before the flood plane was
was determined is that well it
was the flood if that playing
then it went to flood way.
So that was a new flood way map
that the city manager could tell
you when exactly came out of
because of the events in the
fires and so forth and so the
lack of having flood insurance
was out of your control and
sharing
and I I think that's really
relevant I appreciate my
colleague
representative vincent really
bringing forward this issue I
hadn't you know what I think a
lot of us are getting a real
deep hundred standing on female
you know
more than ever before and so
hopping along those ways so
again as we look forward and as
we're looking at legislation
that will impact this community
understanding how that insurance
just gets ripped away so so
suddenly and right before
a flood occurs matter chair
representative in as what
happened in texas as well I was
managing solemn parking and I
came back to read or so in
twenty one and the river had not
been maintained at all and from
the free previous fires and so
forth as representative of then
pointed out in the silty had
just continued to build up and
build up and we had no river I
mean I I had the original topos
the top graphicals from the
design of the expansion track
from eighty five in the river at
the race track itself just there
what I knew he'll silten in over
eight feet
and we stayed all over in our
cs
thank you
make a common on that as well
we see they had a lot of
masquerade too we have if you go
down all the way down if you
walk the high week corridor and
you look at all of the coverts
that go under the highway
in mascular their below grade
several feet
so that that's the thing even
like eagle creek are natural
resources direct.
With the contractors here that
we work with as they started
digging out all of the
settlement in there's a little
pounds four layers of burn
throughout that so that's many
years of accumulated settlement
and it's it's bringing like I
said you know just like with our
coverage they're below great now
it's hard to clean out a culture
when it's below grade you know
there that it it takes a lot of
restoring the capacity for these
flood ways in the mountains
every drainage is considered an
intermittent stream if you look
at the the original top of
graphic maps all of these
dreamage ways have daughtered
blue lines so that means when
whatever the if the the
vegetation is removed or we have
another hurricane dolly kind of
event you know we we have all of
that flow happening there's no
where for it to go in many years
of female projects we've had
many years of of different kinds
of a burned scar as we've had to
deal with hurricane dollar
whatever and all they do is
restore to pre fire predisaster
conditions well that's based on
build up and pilled up of of
saddam it so
it's time to take it all the way
back to where it should be and
we we have too much settlement
up in these high elevations and
and that's where the problem is
like like rick mentioned many
years of build up it's it's all
over in these mountains.
A madam chair i'd like to
something that the matter
president said that resonated
with me
when you look at our fourist and
what needs to happen with the
forest and then you speak to the
ground water in this area in
madame president put it so
elegantly each tree is a straw
and ever green at one ever green
how many galance w.
And she quoted me when I
escalate it I mean it was it was
phenomenal the amount of water
that one every it's seven
seventy gallons per day for one
ever.
And and not mentioned we need a
boundary around his community to
protect it from the forced and a
forest needs to be managed
so I want to add one more thing
so I i'm I still have work from
being natural resources director
that i'm finishing up and so one
of them is the forest management
plan in that for as management
plan there is a spec section
specifically on the soils and I
had an opportunity a couple of
years ago to meet the guy that
roy wrote our soil survey our
plan for the the soils and there
was a comment in our management
plan and I never really thought
about it I didn't really think
about the soils but there is a
section in there and it talks
about in mescaler most of our
soils are more cells so I asked
him what is that mean and he
said mile sales are usually
grassland soils
then you combine that with the
idea that fire maintain these
forest is very open not at all
dents like they are now and
we've got all kinds of studies
that have been done in our cs
and in different governmental
agencies you know these
mountains were very open less
than a hundred trees breaker
back in the day.
It was a forested grass land
now we've got these forests are
so thick
the the water table is unable to
support it we're having problems
it's supporting so many animals
you know we have huge
populations of elk were trying
to maintain businesses like a
cattle branching business you
know it it's it's a huge
thing to consider you know we've
we've got years of soil movement
years of fires happening you
know this land is not in its
natural state anymore and we
need something to jump jump that
and and take us back a little
bit further in time to be able
to maintain living in these
mountains it's a huge difference
from
the nineteen hundreds I have
photos from around nineteen
hundred between nineteen hundred
and nineteen ten and mescaler
own very few trees on the hill
top those flood ways were wide
open areas you know even down in
masquelaro we had a civilian
conservation core project done
in the nineteen thirties part of
the make work programs during
the depression well what they
did as we had huge wetlands up
south to the road the canadian
which is the next canyon off of
highway seventy so they
terrorist and drain the wetlands
we are dealing with that now
mescal error was developed we
were told that you know that's
where the agency they had done
all that draining and that was
safe and all that but now those
wetlands are returning
and and it's the same thing I
think going on and read also you
know we've had so many years of
not having these flood ways
active and now they're becoming
active again in that that's a
huge thing to overcome
and allowing the river to be the
river is really hard right now.
It is because we have people in
property in harms away.
Uh thank you were going to go to
representative lukan and then
cause out with I sure vehicles
thank you mountain chair
thank you for your having us
again here in rodo so I was here
much of the same presentation
last year water enough to
resources community.
Thank you.
I'm just gonna give a little
information and why i'm
this is very heavy and last week
we were a bin and I was vegas
new mexico talking about these
very same things and what's
going on with the communities
there i'm a bit closer to those
communities as my family is from
that part of the state.
And allowed my work was done
there but you're experiencing
the same things you've been
you've been through this a lot
though.
Um and very valid questions I
just want to comment you know
all the work you're doing but
madam chair which really
concerning to me is that in
heartbreak can to me too little.
Not nervous i'm just upset and
you seem a little shaky and my
voice because.
In this
federal administration and
primarily cut about one third of
its work force nearly two
thousand full time staff.
They've targeted dismissals
that anybody working on climate
resiliency your climate change
anything without those efforts
which we know
there's a bit of history but
also there is a warming of our
atmosphere.
Claim it send your staffing via
females cfo and several finance
officials were removed in
february mid brighter purchase
efforts by dodge.
A leadership change came in
hamilton was dismissed after
voicing opposition opposition to
agency elimination and replaced
by I think it's david richardson
is the name of probably trying
to come up with.
His sign tighter receipt federal
costume
the budget for the fy twenty six
that we're talking about there
is the proposed six hundred and
forty six million cutivima
targeting multiple ground
streams are the brick grap
program canceled for fifteen
eight hundred and eighty two.
Million dollars and finds pre
disaster mitigation grads
reduced by sixty one percent.
Hazard hazard mitigation graph
program and other preparedness
grants scaled back or frozen
flood mapping nfi p support and
had cdbr dr face steep cuts or
complete elimination I can keep
going on madame chair but i'm
not what i'm saying is if we
thought it was a slow process to
deal with female and a federal
government.
I don't know what we're going to
squeeze out of them we have the
twenty five percent match that's
been in place.
We're trying to do our best on
the state side isolated house
appropriations of finance
amongst others that are on
finance in this very room.
It's heartbreaking.
That these are the things that
we have to face and tell our
communities that we are working
on the uncertainty as
representative vincent talked
about we don't know exactly how
we're going to mitigate for the
state we're working on that but
I want you to trust us the
state.
My insurer and as you look at us
and and the things are coming
down upon you I did have some
questions I think some of them
have been been answered and
maybe i'll talk to you more
about the soil I have many more
questions about the soil reusing
and does those types of circular
economies that do exist and how
we can make a negative a
positive as we are the economic
development committee but if
you're any hopeful or wisdom
that you you can share with us
and those hopes of maybe those
types of looking a real value
waiting are your economy here.
If you wanted to make or say
anything about that and how it
I think we need some hope.
Venture.
The.
We're not giving up
this is our home lands
in a will stand by our home
lands forever but.
We're trying to think outside of
the box.
We are heavily dependent on the
race track I will admit that we
are heavily dependent on the
race track for our summer
business here at the end of the
mountain guards.
And.
The flip side.
The whole community is heavily
dependent on the scarier.
In the winter time you know it's
it's a tourism based economy.
And so given that the weather is
not cooperating to support these
economies.
We do have to think outside the
box work else can we do at the
scarier.
Or or even the things they have
brought up earlier about you
know stepping outside of our our
little mountainous area are sky
island here and and looking at
economic development but that
that's you know it.
It's not going to be easy.
But that's why we're looking at
economies that are less based on
tourism and disposable income
you know bringing back the
silent but doing it in a way
that it actually makes money you
know.
Using the products from that to
to make
another product so
I I think the main thing is are
bread and butter all these years
has been tourism and we're
trying to get past that.
It's not gonna change it's it's
still going to be our bread and
butter but we investing in doing
other kinds of businesses that
are not so dependent on that
kind of income.
Manager.
I went born here and we've seen
the same reports in the science
on the soil content knowledge
that so for some years we've
been working on what can we do
to have a circular.
And we have that we have letters
of internet we have private
investors that are coming into
the community i'm just not
really able to tell the name of
the company and all the stuff at
this particular point but we're
going to take slash panels trees
that aren't being able to use
for timber horsemanner
are all these things we're gonna
turn amanda fuel bowed fuels
wider that's the bad product
electricity char in so we've
been working on that for years
and it's just come to the way
how do you get that putting into
it how do you get the money and
so it's through a lot of the
things that that I have already
been in place with tax credits
things that we've been available
that we're coming available that
we didn't understand that we
spent a lot of time in research
so we are there and we're just
about ready to announce it so I
guess I just did
but I did I wanted to have a big
to do over this and we're very
close we're working within the
mexico environmental department
sick too kenny's been great his
folks have been great their
economic development we're
working with those guys also
working with secretary black and
executive rock roper over it
economic development there we've
been talking to those case for a
long time so it's not in that we
don't understand it it's getting
people to understand and invest
in us.
Does this is outside investment
that's coming in that creates
jobs okay it's good for the
environment low impact on her
natural resources that we've
always thought that we wanted to
make sure anywhere were there so
on that's there I should say
because uh heaven publicly
announced it into you guys and I
know how you all keep secret so
there to be a write
but we're excited about that
we're looking at other economic
development things that are
tired to these things we have
now has speed internet that we
have throughout the community
there were bringing in a company
that does a lot of tech stuff.
So those who think that we are
working on so that we're not so
dependent on tourism we're not
so dependent on the weather all
the time
but yes things are changing and
in two thousand and I can tell
you who the president was.
I don't even know I can't
remember I just know that them
has not worked since i've been
involved two thousand a two
thousand thirteen none of it it
didn't work during the
mcbradfare they de obligated
said you're not getting paid
back all this money after they
told us we were and it was
working with you guys the
squeeling that we did with
anybody that would listen that
we were able to get that two
million to million dollars back
so the process is broke in you
guys have tried to come in in
help us get to the point where
we're at today and you have you
know it's that that what was
intended to charles past somehow
we've got to access that money
to be able to get started and
i'm a little concerned right now
because everything is shut off
till thank you
matter chairs something else I
would like to bring up this is
for you know this is going to
happen somewhere else in the
state.
And in all they have some of you
were some of you concerned to
come up here this week.
That's what that that is a big
fat that we're going through
right now to get people with
cars now you have to go against
social media.
And then you have the people
that want to
just be labor the fact of the
fires in the floods last year so
then they see something on their
phone or they're out paid the
arm put that back up so then we
start getting calls are yell
flooded out or I heard there is
another fire.
In in of course memorial weekend
at three thousand
but
we were ready.
But that's something as the
tourist area that we're having
to find is getting people back
up here and I mean these two
myself and we were on it all the
time.
To get people to come back to
read ourselves.
So keep that in my for your
districts if something happens
you're going to have to get out
ahead of that as soon as you
care.
And I don't want to say it
surprised us but what did
surprises was hello large the
effect was.
We knew some people were going
to be that way.
But it had a thing that he had
to fight it's just like
yesterday meeting had water on
it.
If it's flooding sits deal for
twenty minutes we are these
people that'll see water and all
of my driver do it may channel
three there is yesterday.
And it but you know just.
Everybody take a deep breath
it's going to be r.
But it it's amazing what social
media start against that hurts
on things like this
thank you for the time out of
chair maybe of us will need to
commit to posting on social
media how wonderful it is it can
hurt thank you mind.
Thank you madame chair and I
just wanted to join the chair
women when she started off this
morning in acknowledging your
leadership.
Which you have taken this
community through this last
year has been amazing and I just
really want to take knowledge
that one more time
and and say thank you and I I
know that a year ago we had to
and what was happening down here
and you have been it seems like
continually fighting the storm
whether it's the firestorm or
they the flooding and you get
you know to inches and then
everybody starts to panic again
so I I hear that I think what
you did though today in which
you're your message it needs to
continue to be till legislators
especially is why you can't
access the money because I think
in many legislators minds is all
we've we've thrown money at that
and we've we have fix that
problem or player they not fix
in that problem and so I think
it was very important for you
to be here today and to continue
to be a committee meetings to
make sure you're telling
legislators that you have not
been able to have access to that
money it's really important I
i've known it for from different
sources but I would think that
most of the legislators may be
did not have access to that
information
I also want to.
Comment on you know many times
people support why would you
build in a flood zone and I
think it's also important that
you are educating us again as
you know twenty years ago wasn't
considered a flight and so when
it mean it seems like common
sense now right and so keeping
us informed keeping legislators
informed is so important so once
again I thank you for that as
well and I wish you in the
community the best of I see how
this community has come together
and have locked arms and have
just held each other up and you
don't always see communities do
that and I think it's going to
make you stronger in the long
run so once again thank you for
your leadership and I hope that
we can help
up lifting this community in and
getting us out of the situation
because like you said it will
happen somewhere else and I
think we need to usually walk as
a blue pet print uh to move
forward so thank you madam chair
thank you very sure think you
cannot list once again i'll just
close out by thing that I
represent a community and a
people for that matter
that have embraced this idea of
resiliency
that um to the point that that's
all we are were resilient and I
dream of the day that my people
can move past resiliency and it
sounds like you all are thinking
that we now you're being
innovative you're thinking of
the future and thinking how to
move past your own resiliency
for what you faced and sell it
is an inspiration and I think
you for that
committee our food is here we're
actually going to start our next
panel at one thirty though gata
stratch be a back at one thirty
