All right everyone let's take
her seats and get started with
our afternoon
we are going to welcome this
with our two be determined this
is going to be a very quick
presentation on
them around the mother
understanding between lincoln
county and the message of had
you tried we are blast once
again to have a president
here give us that an overview of
what this looks like for her
community thank you president
for death stand with us all day
thank you very much so
simple years ago
we you know and in school we do
have an indian health service
funded facility and several
years back we experienced budget
curtains as you know these were
broken back
at our hospital it was a full
service hospital babies could be
delivered there and all those
kind of things but it was
downgraded to a clinic.
And do to our rural location we
do have a hard time getting and
keeping trained medical staff
and this includes doctors and
it's up to mattress and even
registered nurses and so forth.
One of the problems we have this
we don't even have enough
housing for our own people let
alone trying to provide for the
h s medical staff so there are
approximately five or six little
houses right across from our was
hospital and and but they
they've become out there
very.
Mid century kind of look at
stuff under black houses and
came out of pink and all kinds
of pastel colors anyway they
haven't been updated for quite a
while and that's because you
know indian health service has
had ongoing problems with
funding and budget cuts and so
forth.
You know.
And
trying to look at other places
to house some of these staff
that would come here.
Homes and reared also before the
fires were already expensive and
now they're almost not an
existent since the fire is that
there's very few homes or
apartments or anything available
and read also.
And then down an alamo garden
i've tried to place even some of
our natural resources to happen
and it's hard because you're up
against the military families
there and.
You know as people transfer out
they they have their own board
there at holland so you know you
gotta go on the board to get
into the houses and so forth so
it it's been a struggle here to
maintain medical staff.
So we were very fortunate to
have new mexico department of
health reach out to us and ask
if we were interested in
participating in a pilot
project.
And yes we definitely were so
this is is we do have a
memorandum of understanding with
the medical side of things I
didn't i'm not really good now
to resources of my photo so i'm
not really good i'm all the the
medical side of things but we
agreed to do this and and part
of it since last year and this
was even before the change in
and federal leadership we were
having severe problems with
medical staff so at one point
last year for several months we
only had one doctor at our
facility
we didn't have a denter I think
the optomatress came out we had
one and then left and then get
another one and left and again
the same problems you know
housing and and so forth so what
happened then as indian health
service started lowering the
service hours they provide so it
went we already have monday
tuesdays half a day wednesday
there's they on friday they
started cutting the times down
even more there was absolutely
no evening service they they
used to offer a service up to
like six o'clock or so
nothing on the weekend either so
it was really hard for our
people to even get seen by the
doctor and have have income
through covered that I mean it's
really important we had several
people during that time that.
Develop cancer and so forth then
they weren't able to the goat of
the hospital during copied so
we're we're trying to keep on
tap of that keep our people
going in to get seen and and get
things that might be more
serious detected so this was a
great opportunity when new
mexico department of health came
along they
they went ahead and opened a few
well I don't know was it already
in place to remember but they
know it wasn't so they did open
a new clinic and it's up by the
library here and also it was a
little difficult to work out the
land kind of things they're in
masquela so and III think that's
a great compromise anyway we do
have several quite a few people
that live in rated also and if
they don't live in the rear does
that they live in this part of
the reservation the careeso area
which is just a little ways here
from in at the mountain guards.
And so we also have a
fairly sizable now the whole
population that lives in the
bounds area they had come with
one of the highway seventy
expansion projects and that was
done in three phases over many
years and so they they just kind
of stayed after the contractor
moved on so it it seemed like a
win win for both mask liro and
for the the resident population
appear in in riodos of downs and
so back in april the end of
april they did have a soft
opening and what they decided to
do is work with our community
health representatives and these
are the c h rs are funded
through the indian health
service also and so they provide
outreach to the community they
will take people to appointments
in in the local area but even
like taking people up the
albuquerque and so forth and
since they already had a a
pretty good database and a good
knowledge of the people that
needed this kind of help they
were facilitating connecting the
the patience to the health
center so that was really nice
that that's how they started out
now they are taking a pointments
and so forth and so it's not a
full blown hospital by any means
but it does help support
supplement the hours of service
they provide to tribal members
later in the evening so I think
like I said tend to seven
tuesday through friday and then
on saturdays under five which we
had not have that kind of
service for quite a while.
And so they did on board a nurse
practitioned a registered nurse
and a medical assistant and they
also have it were they can do
online visits with the higher
level medical staff as needed at
this time they do not have
anything like that an emergency
room or providing any kind of
services like that they do you
have to work on things like
referrals to labs for the
pharmacy and for clinical
equipment orders but it's it's
really help meeting a need and
like I said we are you know are
residential areas very all the
way from almost down the till
erosion up here to near rooted
also so for our people that live
more up this way it is actually
closer to go into read a doubt
something than to go off the way
down into mescaler so it's
definitely filled the gap and
i've heard very good comments we
did in
I think it was amazing seventh
we had a a meeting appear with
the staff in indian house
service staff offset
participated but trying to get
it out there to the community
were fully open now and
providing services and
it is a bit of a different
experience than going to indian
house service you know we
as much as we worry about losing
federal programs you know the
federal programs don't
necessarily provide
good bedside manner and and
there have been concerns about
confidentiality and so forth and
and the tribal members we've had
several of the older people that
are visiting this facility and
an it helps for you know
updating medications and so
forth and they say that the
staff are very polite very
helpful and in.
It's just been a nice way to
fill that gap between our indian
health service funded facility
and then providing additional
service this way.
So how about any questions out
answered to the best banking.
If you president senator
you made a chair thank you very
presentation what happens with a
mergency uhm procedures are
emergency so
this particular facility does
not do emergencies and that is
something they're trying to work
out and I think there is a an
agreement being worked on with
the county medical center
presbyteria that's in red also
but as far as are indian health
service facility
they will provide transport we
do have an escalator fire rescue
when we have ambulance services
so they will provide transport
either appear to lincoln county
medical center or down and
eliminate all christopher it
used to be drilled champion
medical center but it's
christmas now it's a different
provider
so it is a distance I mean
at least almost a half an hour
either way to tell you the
truth.
Don't manage but it's not like a
trauma one or anything like that
I think in indians is they have
to be flown to yes and we do
have people made a factor and
just one a couple weeks ago that
is a problem living in these
mountains that
you know that kind of care is
not available locally
and that's too
so sometimes sometimes last
cruises but depending on what
kind of medical condition
albucker key then would be the
higher level please
yeah
hold is the correct clinic
the department of health one
you guys are house pretty I
think the one in the I don't
know probably the real early
sixties they are currently doing
a renovation so it's kind of
hard because it's not a very big
facility in honestly my daughter
is a pharmacy technician at the
facility of
where do you go
the partners is a little tiny
thing that held for it by people
that one ship and medicare
president because games went
through the renovation and you
go to the e r room and there are
no cap access you have to
practice we hold the door open
to we'll charge in the e r area
any door you have to hold the
door and the sort of ever asked
you when you were instead of
pushing the heavy cap access and
have it not been aren't a badly
so makes a renovation
you know that eighty eight
compliance yeah
very much followed
to make sure committing members
to understand that too even
though
we would like to think it would
be a failure to to date i'm
thinking of insurance thank you
pres.
Thank you senator representative
thank you madame chair.
The president
so I I missed a little bit of
your presentation i'm sorry but
on the medical men memorandum of
understanding is this location
in right also.
Yes that's up at the library
over by the that whole
administrative complex yeah
madam chair so I was talking
with the with that over you the
rants link accounting medical
center and he he had some really
good ideas about having a
facility possibly over here and
making
a brand new one over here.
And I don't know we all have
doctors we all love our doctors
but I love the practitioner just
as good a really light
practitioners and if we were
discussing some of the op
rates and there's a lot of old
beast of over here and you might
you know if you had a facility
over here and do so do we do we
re have hs.
I don't know I don't I mean you
just I see the look on your face
maybe maybe not so much better
rehab in that we build a brand
new facility and put you know
two or three practitioners over
here because the practitioners
are super and get it and a lot
of people that I know they as
they would just as soon see a
practitioner as they have a
medical physician because they
know that if you need to get to
a higher level of care they're
gonna send you and even in red
also as far as the level one
staff you know I was an empty
for twenty five years and we
they're sent people they'll pass
on our curriculum
and guess where they send people
now basel albuquerque or love it
is the same thing we do offer
some some more stuff but
I hope that you are able to get
it with mr over you and you guys
formulate applying because he's
got a really good one and I
don't even talk about the plan
because I that's your business
not mine and you you get
together with you and see if you
can make something like that and
I think it would be outstanding
so I did talk to the mister over
you
actually we started talking last
year the end of last year and he
had made comments he he does you
know being a doctor and seeing
what kind of
cases come before him when when
coming from escalate he didn't
mention that we do have a lot of
high risk pregnancies and this
is primarily because our young
women do not go to the doctor
and and are not taking you know
he have to take those horse
items and all that kind of stuff
you know you have to eat
properly in take care of
yourself physically and so we do
have and i'm i'm amazed.
We do have a lot of that and I
don't know if some of it is
because we also have
contributing factors like
diabetes and so forth so that
those create a problem but that
is how he started the
conversation
what we were doing as we had
brought indian health surface
into the equation also and.
We were okay up until a few
months ago when all the
craziness was going on when they
weren't sure what the was doing
and so forth and so those tax
corner came to a halt because we
were trying to connect fuse the
two and maybe
maybe that not is not going to
work so
internally and this is not
anything at all approved
officially by tribal council but
we're kinda considering we might
six thirty eight contract the
facility itself and then we
could talk a partnership like
that bringing that kind of
funding to the table and in
doing a better facility I think
appear because that building
they're trying to make livable
is still it's never going to be
eighty eight compliant or
anything because it's just so
small just based to do that kind
of thing I have we visited
some of the other tribes even
it's letter
down and i'll parcel they did
sort of a joint venture using
interest and some private
funding which would not be
unlike what we're talking about
here and it's amazing the
facility that they built they
built it to be faced in
specifically so like the
upstairs they they stopped out
all the plumbing in the roof but
they didn't build the upstairs
yet which is really cold you
know so they're preparing for
the future and and the idea that
they will get funding later on
so i'm really sicked about
something like that and in
that's.
Definitely something I myself
and am interested in moving
forward in.
Thank you madame chair and and
thank you president so the
reason that my beard is so great
if I got some deliver one of
them
here and I would love to see you
have facility right here to
learn we didn't have to do that
thank you.
Thank you representative I don't
have anyone else for questions
president think you still might
I I did want to mention the the
this idea that you have I do
believe that this is a possible
solution for health care and
developing those economies and
role in the mexico is the unique
partnership between tribal
communities and the border towns
that this straight outside of
them because tribes it's one of
the areas in new mexico that
that health care is expanding we
are continuously hearing and it
is true that health care is
scarce especially in roll
community and we're facing the
shortage but where that is not
all is true is we're trying to
take their shares out of it or
six thirty eight developed their
own health care facilities and
then begin to develop and can
serve outside communities and so
I think it's something that we
need to continue to focus on to
learn more about and to invest
in as a state because it is a
solution and will continue to be
a solution for our role
communities who need access to
health care and all that comes
with living well thank you so
much add a president.
Okay well moving on where a
little head schedule which is
nice everyone i'm we're going to
welcome a few folks up to the
table with us and we have a
packed panel economic pathways
through forest restoration and
water management please welcome
secretary
office of the seat engineer
elizabeth anderson or mccarthy
are state forester william
foster for estimate gets
coordinator from heard as a
criminal again from ed and
dennis romero
from water protection division
department of environment.
We have about an hour and there
are quite a few of you so i'm
just going to ask that we keep
that in my end as you're giving
your remarks and I know we're
gonna have a lot of questions
because of the wealth of
information that you all bring
but will go ahead and start with
introduction.
The.
Madame chair i'm a card the
stick forester.
This.
Manager wouldn't foster the
forest market score
madame chairman elizabeth the
anderson the state engineer
in in case you'll forgot manager
to come to german secretary for
the economic development
department could see you again.
Thank you all for joining us
today we'll go ahead handed over
to you to get a start
madam chair if I may i'll go
ahead and get started again
elizabeth anderson the state
engineer I have a presentations
I think that are being handed
out they look like this year
because i've got a couple extras
if you need anymore but I can
also give him to my fellow
participants if you want to
follow the line um i'll try to
keep the short because I know we
don't have a tenant time today
and because I want to be plenty
of time for questions but I
think what we have laid out here
in this presentation i'll help
me kind of guide through this
discussion I want it emphasis
today the importance of water
infrastructure and drought
mitigation for economic and
rural development so.
That afraid the the priority
here is you know water security
we have to have water security
in order to support any kind of
development within the state the
governor's fifty year water
action plan insured that new
mexicans will have clean water
now and into the future so there
are our economies can continue
to grow in thrive i'll get a
little bit more into the details
of the plan later in the
presentation but I think it's
it's really key to not that that
plan is in place and in action
and it really does we have a
great path for policy with
information for water in the
state
also our agency I represent the
office of the state engineering
of the interest eat stream
commission with director rightly
wait and who could be here today
but i'll speak for for both of
us and saying that you know we
work creatively with other state
federal tribal and local
partners to ensure what our
needs are considered when
identifying opportunities for
growth and key areas for that
include conservative existing
water resources developing new
water resources and protecting
water quality and water sheds as
to the three areas highlighted
in the fifty year water action
plan and there they really do
provide a nice broad
encompassing way to look at the
needs for water in our state
also when we could speak about
about infrastructure water
infrastructure that's critical
to our water supplies water
storage reserve words paperlands
wells strong water convenience
of stems in maintaining river
channel corridors are examples
of infrastructure projects that
must be developed in maintain to
protect water supplies people
don't think about our natural
environment as part of our
infrastructure and I think
that's something that all of us
here on this panel can release
speak to the water sheds that
the water comes out of our
mountains are forests are all
part of the infrastructure that
brings us the water that we need
to.
To support life here in the
state of new mexico.
Fifty or water action fantastics
elements through laid out here
on the page two
I have not gone to go to read
that they said I wanted to try
to this pretty quickly but I
think that this is a nice nice
way to like look at the way that
that it's broken out into those
three sections
and there's there's certainly a
lot of elements better
incorporated in that that will
speak to you later on
the drought persists in new
mexico slide three I just I feel
like the weather lady here in
new mexico my job is the state
engineer I I honestly feel
guilty when I can't tell you
that i've brought you rain but
luckily today here in read or so
we're getting rain
we are still in an extreme
drought here in the state this
is the latest drought map that's
joining here in the slide and
you can see particularly in the
southwestern region of the state
there's a lot of areas and in
the middle regrand area that are
in extreme exceptional drought
all of our state is experiencing
the lowest no pack this past
year that we've ever had
anywhere on record dryers soil
conditions which are terrible
for forest fire potential and
also for run off you know super
dry soil means that that water
doesn't absorb into the soil it
runs right off you get big flags
is there some really big issues
and I think all of you recognize
and how important these issues
are for a state so appreciate
all of the being here and asking
me to kind of participate in
this panel today also the group
governor issued an executive
order on may twenty second for
the drought that can be in the
drought task force
this is in recognition of our
hotel dryer future the current
drop conditions but also and the
fifty year water action plan was
built iron the foundation of a
leaber had analysis that looked
at water conditions here in the
state for the next fifty years
and found that we anticipate
twenty five percent less water
in our.
Water systems both surface water
and then that water infiltrating
down into our ground water
significantly less water
anticipated in the next fifty
years that comes in the form of
extreme weather events with
flooding but also less water
overall to support our
communities so we all have to
work together to find creative
ways to took pretty a
sustainable future and vibrant
feature.
So we worked with through the
direct aspects for working with
other agencies and local
communities
but also particularly on
emergency responses for fire and
post firefire
run off and relief efforts and
the governor's executive order
was a like a said was issued may
twenty second
it confirmed drow and while
prior risks it was we can be in
our first meeting on may twenty
eighth and we have another
reading june twenty seventh will
have another one in july this
isn't just for the sake of
having meetings I love meetings
don't get me wrong I spent
almost all my time in meetings
but but this is too convey and
to have other agencies with it
within our within our government
or state government convenient
to share ideas and resources on
how we can provide relief to
constituents and people all
around the state so that the
findings from the draft task
force will help to provide
resources and communicate as
resources effectively to people
throughout the state.
There is a slide here I number
five that shows the current in
future and impact city mexico
and this is all coming straight
out of there the leap I had
analysis that I reference that's
also shown here it was done by
the new mexico of geology and in
our mineral resources and rated
by a number of water experts
around in mexico but it's it's
total climate change in new
mexico over the next fifty years
and impacts on water resources
so this this is the foundation
that we're building all over our
planning documents from twenty
twenty two when this is written
forward and there's an huge list
here that again I said I would
try and that take too much of
your time and leave time for
questions but ultimately this
bullet lists that you have here
is a great reference for
showing how all of these
different pieces of the puzzle
fit together i'm sure we'll be
talking to her about also flight
six this coming into the agency
I am I had the opportunity to to
work further state engineer for
a year before I actually took on
the role of state engineer and
one of my rules in the agency
was strategic planning we did a
lot of talking into people
throughout the agency and coming
up with ideas on how to what we
really needed to do to do better
with make more do more with less
and so i'm after spending a year
of talking to staff and then be
in buckingham after to get us to
do this job and started working
as the state engineer in august
of last year coming up on almost
a year now
when we started kind of wrap it
when I started wrapping my head
around what the focus areas were
and what I wanted my priorities
to be these were the top areas
that that we came up with so
modernizing water management our
agency is a great need of
modernization we need to utilize
twenty first century water
management tools that I couldn't
dive into more detail on that
i'll try that to go too far down
the river hold that there's a
lot of needs that I have wait
out in future slides.
And that I can probably want
don't do too much detail on
right now but modernization is a
big area of emphasis we need to
invest in the real grand that's
not to say that there is not
huge needs all over the state
and our focus is is broadly cast
throughout the state but we do
have an immediate needs on the
real grand right now with
compact complaints issues and
implementation of what we hope
to be a very amsterdam coming
settlement with texas and on the
texas being in mexico
which we were we're moving
forward with and and we're
looking for it to implementing
that set on it when it's signed
later this year
and then planning for our water
future which is just all income
the same of so many different
things are indian water rates
that are meant certainly fallen
to planning for our water rate
teacher the regional water
planning that we're going to be
doing as an agency falls within
that category these are just
ride casting needs as I try to
describe all the things that are
agency is that water management
agency for the state
needs to deal so on the next
couple slides like I said I said
I try and attack type to you and
it much into details i'm not
gonna cover these lights i'm
going to go ahead and let those
just be there for information
for you we will be sharing these
talking points with you at other
meetings as well but that enter
the I steps i've watered
management and investing in the
real brand and planning for a
water future there are some more
detail here for you that you can
and I hope do rat friends and
can we just talk about some of
the foundation all reports that
are guiding us so starting with
the water task for us report
that was created in december of
twenty twenty two I was blacking
in enough to be on the
governor's water task force at
the time that this was written
make hammer.
Previous state engineer convene
the water task for us along with
a sea director
and I record rebecca roosese
that governors adviser for
infrastructure and water
convened a group of a stick
holders from around the state
experts in water management
various aspects and they came up
with seventeen recommendations
and one hundred and six six
strategies that really are all
encompassing and we're brildly
supported by people throughout
those different interests is a
really interesting group and
from based on that you know we
we also updated the new mexico
state water plan we do that
every five years that was
completed and twenty twenty
three and then the governor
issued her fifty or whatever
action plan in twenty twenty
four which again pulled from a
lot of those recommendations
from the water task for us
report so we've had a lot of
bearing informed people studying
water issues in new mexico and I
think that the direction that
we're moving right now is i'm
supported very broadly uhm
just lastly here I wanted to
highlight the collaboration with
state tribal local and federal
partners
some examples of i'm going to
infrastructure projects to
respond to out economic and
rural development opportunities
include the work that's being
done on the real grand for
eleven reserve
looking very closely at the lake
levels this year and working
closely with the local am
constituents to make sure people
understand what those like
levels are going to look like
it's a federal rest of work so
the state doesn't operate it and
it provides water downstream but
we are working very hard to get
more water into eleven people
reservoir and that's part of
what I talk about when I say
that we're working on the real
grand in our compact compliance
we hear looking at convents
improvements along the real
grand and ways to get more water
down in television view more
efficiently
in the lower regret there's a
lot of infrastructure needed for
the settlement.
That is and that is under way
right now we have a term sheet
that's agreed to by the
settlement parties but that the
the some is still confidential
we're still working through that
but we do anticipate having
something completed here in the
next few months
never hope gallop water supply
pay plane project is a great
example of infrastructure that's
going to supply the naval
reservation with water and also
the city of gallop and that
project is inconstruction right
now and the eastern new mexico
roll water pay plane is also a
project and there what on the
eastern side of the state that's
coming from you reserve a going
down to close and port out and
other small communities and
those are great examples of
infrastructure that support our
rural communities
and and support water
sustainability throughout our
state some additional ongoing
programs that contribute to
water security include
negotiating and and implementing
our indian water rates
settlements which will be
talking more about and as you
progress towards the session
critical for the state to get
those indian water rate
settlements complete the
addressing damn safety needs
throughout the state there are
with drought comes unfortunately
comes floods as well so
the damn infrastructure is in
critical need I was told by d m
safety engineer that there is
over a one billion dollar need
and damn repairs throughout the
state
lot of work to be done there and
as always need for expanding our
secure programs and that real
communities that rely on them as
well so with that matter chair I
will stand for any questions I
don't know if we're going to
hold until the end of the panel
okay thank you so much
for you
chair members of the committee
i'm gonna be talking about the
timber reading act i'll start by
thinking representative of
instant.
For being the sponsor of that
bill helping us get it past and.
The state engineer pretty much
laid out the problem statement
of wired we needed a temporary
grading act out and that is that
the drought conditions the
catastrophic wildfires are here
in so and elsewhere across the
state probably in almost all of
your districts and as we are
promoting an accelerating are
made of tree cynic we have a
wood utilization problem and
currently even though we have
around eighteen functional small
star bills and with processors.
They are unable to sell their
products as for you in home or
president or commercial
construction and specifically
the star mails that are doing
dimension number or if they are
processing
and beams those products cannot
be used in construction unless
they are greater and the
braining requires prior to this
bill the greeking required the
owner of the saw to higher
somebody from out of state pay
all their travel expenses by a
subscription to their grading
service and then and only then
could they product be certified
as construction level material
so what house bill five fifty
three did is authorized our
state government the forest
redivision within energy
literals and natural resources
department to set up an instead
structural grading program the
act itself and the authorities
it provides or based on what for
other states have already done
those being tennessee new
hampshire with scotson and
alaska and there are some what
similar to us in that they have
a lot of forest but not a lot of
really concentrated large scale
industry so for them like for us
bringing in the out of state
temperatures just is wasn't
feasible
I have four slides the if I go
to slide three so it's on the on
the back page I list the
authorities that are provided to
us in that act so it creates the
instant structural timber
grading system it allows the
forestry division.
To provide the program or to
partner with any of our posts
public post secondary
educational institutions we've
already had interest from you in
our towers and
the eastern new mexico
university here in adose i'm
sure they'll be others
it requires us to probably get
rules and we are at the starting
gate for that quite yet it
allows us to charge a fee
although it would be our
intention not to do that at
least at the beginning of the
program it up the the last two
bullets there are really the key
component of this program so
somebody who takes the training
and become certified can then be
qualified to label the
structural timber that this
processed at the saw mill where
they that the year owned or work
at and then that label may be
provided to the vendor say you
know whatever the the sales
outlet is whether that's
director third party that label
may be used in blue of a great
stamp for use in residential on
commercial buildings so this is
a dressing the demand side of
the timber production the fourth
side is just an update of where
we are right now so we are
working on the timber grading
handbook that's our first step
we did not receive an
appropriation for this work
however we are fortunate that a
partner organization called good
wood that did work on this bill
somewhat has a federal gram in
hand that they were only about
four months through and one of
their deliverables for their
grant is the handbook so that's
going to work definitely to our
advantage as a partnership.
They are in the process of
reviewing the content that the
other states that have already
done this have created and will
be using as much of the relevant
content as possible of course
making adjustments for the
different tree species that we
have in new mexico will have a
workshop where we that the
handful of with some of our
local experts for example there
is a person uh who is in
residence of not too far away
from here who has in the past
certified timber greater when
new mexico at big sawnills and
that person will be involved in
our peer review process we will
need to do a room making that
will take some time will making
can barely be accomplished in
under six months and so
I don't want to promise a start
date for when this program will
be fully effective because we'll
have to get through that
however with the great funding
there will be the first training
event sometime between day and
october of twenty twenty six and
finally if the word innovation
program which is a federal grant
program that so far nobody in dc
is talking about cutting that
program
if that program does exist in
twenty twenty sixth we will
apply for funding so that we
don't have to see an
appropriation out of chair with
that i'd like to turn the turn
this over to my colleague
william foster and I just want
to prefer he's going to share
with you that we are bringing a
set of ideas to you today they
are not fully developed this is
kind of on purpose when we saw
that you were having this
hearing today we thought it
would be a great opportunity to
really use the interim process
to have some dialog around the
ideas.
And from there it would be our
intention.
Feedback to us today to guide
our work as we finish that up.
So with that matter mature
alternate to william.
Made of the chair of members of
the committee
as lower said i'll be speaking
on the financial memorial one
although senior job memorial one
is a non binding and unfunded
legislative memorial imnort and
partnership with the economic
development department chose to
act the urgency of the wildfire
crisis and the opportunity to
build a rule climate smart
account we could not wait for
ideal commit conditions we were
already working on initiatives
online with the goals of senate
joint memorial one in note have
begun internal reviews of force
work force capacity by your mass
utilization challenges and how
to support land on a
participation in force thinning
senator memory one became a
natural extension and accelerate
if you will for this work
we also recognize that new
mexico has unique assets state
hearted banks research
universities rule cooperatives
and tribal partnerships that are
ready to help us bill solutions
now this was about meeting the
moment.
It current state treatment
levels for new mexico remain
well below the pace need it to
meaningful meaningfully reduce
wildfire risk or catalyse long
term role economic growth
are forest are overstocked not
only with fireprone fuels but
with potential.
Under you the last biomars from
small diameter thinning and
restoration by products is
pilling up.
But this material is
increasingly viewed as a high
value resource and possibilities
for value air.
Buy a waste of becoming a new
oil.
Globally recognizes a renewable
input for next generation
climate solutions this presents
are rare opportunity to turn a
while fire liability into a
rural economic injured.
For new mexico that means the
chance to build a new generation
of firms from biobase
manufacturers and forest tech
innovators to low carbon
logistics and rural
cooperatives.
These enterprises could anchor
jobs investment and illegational
property in communities that
have historically been left out
of industrial booms.
The.
But realizing that potential
requires more than thinning it
requires policy investment and
public private alignment to
convert by products into
business models.
The finish on memorial one
report includes hundreds of
ideas proposals and innovations
contributed to by conversations
with the diverse network of
stake holders from force
businesses and land owners to
economists university
researchers and tribal leaders.
But out of the broad landscape
of possibility we identify
options that stood out for three
reasons they are budget friendly
offer high return on investment
and can be implemented quickly
with minimum legislator for
administrative left
these include rule cooperative
would you breach financing for
land owner thinning forced based
innovation grants tax and
centers and work for us
expansion tools.
Each was told then that just for
its merit but for its ability to
generate jobs reduced fire risk
and bill momentum in under
twenty four months.
We are presenting these not as
mandates but as ready options
for legislative budgetary or
administrative action depending
on appetite and timing.
Several of these policies are
already partially land with
existing tools like the local
economic development act the job
training is sin of program and
new mexico finance authority
lending programs
we've constructed the empty
complement not compete with
ongoing state strategies
including the comprehensive
energy transition strategy.
We invite the committee to see
this work as a menu of
investible directions whether
that's work force infrastructure
or market building this can be a
rostingle strategy as much as a
wildfire strategy.
Madame chairman members of the
committee on slide three you
will see the eight options that
I was mentioning i'm in each one
of them addresses three main
priorities that the forester
economy in the state faces and
that is labor supply and work
force or or capital excuse me
labor supply and capital so
those of the three main
challenges that we have in each
one of these addresses one of
those three issues are what the
first one is flexible for street
labor partnerships so often in
terms a lot of our force
contractors they may have a team
of fifty four job they requires
a team of seventy but these are
permanent jobs but they are jobs
that were those who are under
employee or a student workers
who need flexible work schedules
this is an opportunity for them
to earn income and for those
contractors to have an
additional workpool so it
addresses the labor issue fairly
directly
in terms of things like the
force logistics tax credit
option one of the major
challenges enforced is
transportation cost a lot of
thinning is done in remote areas
when areas where transportation
cause make the economic
feasibility of the projects
break down for a lot of our wood
processes so many saw meals in
the state will tell you what's
they go beyond twenty miles for
their supplier the project
become a loss for them and so
they choose not to engage
projects beyond that which means
you don't see the thing in those
type of areas by providing
things like this we would see
non forestry businesses for
instance a netflix who want to
subsidize some of their tax
liability to the state investing
in transportation subsidies for
these projects
cause your collateralization
this is a dressing a capital
issue many of our land owners
don't participate.
In our thinning projects so at
the federal level they're
cautious programs where a land
owner can let's say their
project cost a hundred thousand
they would get reimbursed for
eighty thousand the problem with
these programs is the land
owners asked to fit the hundred
thousand up front and so when
you're in a state where you have
land rich but cast poor land
owners on the whole it means a
lot of them will not participate
this particular option allows
for our state banks to have a
new means of lending and what it
would allow the land owner to do
is go to the state bank and say
I have a call share program you
can lend against and so then the
the bank would like them the
hundred thousand dollars and
they would be able to collate or
lies that car share so this
would introduce a whole new
level of supplier and this has
been one of the programs that's
been most well received by not
only our forest businesses by
buyer landowners as well they
see it as an opportunity to
unlock a lot of the supply we
have and in in areas that would
make it much more economically
feasible I have a cooperative
woodyard's model this would
allow some meals to
basically become places this is
one of the big challenges we've
been the force where do we put
the wood.
And so in historically what has
happened as we've left that
would on the force floor as you
imagine that's not really solved
in the wildfire problem it just
moves it from a vertical problem
to horizontal problem so this
would allow companies and
businesses like saw meals who
need secondary levels of revenue
to participate as cooperative
with your so that that would
have moved off the force floor
and into a shared cooperative
which art it would allow them to
potentially have contracts or
leases with the county or state
and so again generating more
stable and income for saw meals
and those who want to engage in
in this type of business the
force climate long guarantee.
It's a the wording for that
could have been better but it
it's basically for our force
businesses so just like our land
owners a lot of our force
businesses in the state also
face capital restraints that
may get a contract with a county
or state for a thinning project
as a contractor but that we pay
them over time during their
project well they have to hire
they have to buy equipment those
are a lot of couple intensive
issues that they may not be able
to have a ford right away again
they would be able to take the
contract they have with the
counting or state take that to
one of the state chartered banks
and bar against it again
buffering the eco system that we
have both our banks businesses
and land owners all went in this
situation.
The four is the innovation grant
opportunity.
As I mentioned earlier bio waste
and biomass are becoming I get
more calls now for what are you
guys doing with your bio waste
what are you doing with your
bomb has and all those companies
I can tell you from out of the
new mexico so so this grant
would be how do we get more
companies to develop here in the
state of new mexico we've had
some really great projects with
new mexico technology check
already um and one coming up
with eastern and sippy where we
are hoping to get more of our
are young talent interested in
force entrepreneurship and but
it does not help to develop that
interest if there's no capital
waiting on him to spur
innovation also what do we do
with the small diameter would
while traditionally not
interested uh it is becoming
more more popular and so having
entrepreneurs who look at ways
to explore what it can be used
for I have but university of new
mexico to think about creating a
bicycle at a junior per we'll
see what they come up with uhm
and that thing our volunteer to
write at first but but it's that
type of innovation that we need
for is drones we have a great
start up company in albert you
call firescape that is actually
using a I to model wildfire risk
and so things like that is what
we need more of to develop more
firms here out the wildfire
donation incentive it's a tax
credit for contributions to now
profits conducting fire
mitigation or provided
scholarships so we have
organizations like the four
store gill who already do wild
fire mitigation this is
essentially to provide them
another tool for private donors
to say to them you will get it
at an a bump in your tax
incentive if you donate to these
causes so essentially we're just
looking for a way to generate
more private capital to these
organizations who are doing this
amazing work and lastly than
this was another one of the ones
that was very well received was
the home owner instead of
pathways.
Uh this is an insurance attacks
and center for per active
private land owners so one of
the things we've been working to
do in the forced the vision is
really to get our private land
owners to be more proactive and
nat wait for us to come to them
with them to take the more
proactive approach of making
sure their land is properly
defensed properly fant and so
this would provide something of
a subsidy for those who are
proactive in in their thinning
or while fire maintenance on
their property and we give them
something of a break on the
insurance as we know which is
rising rapidly due to wildfire
risk so.
Thank you.
The.
Unities that are in need of
infrastructure improvement so
i'd i'd like to focus on three
separate items with respect
infrastructure and economic
development
one is infrastructured
development capacity are
deputy cabinet secretary romero
will probably the first to tell
you that unless a community has
infrastructure that is ready to
go with capacity.
Attracting industry attracting
businesses is extremely
difficult if not impossible so
that's the first thing that we
allow a week we can offer is
funding for infrastructure
growth infrastructure capacity
and improvement the other item
is resiliency with respect to
infrastructure and i'm i'm glad
you're having this meeting in
rudos so because as I was
driving up I was diverted a
couple times because there was a
flash flood warning and treak
started flowing right as I was
driving over it so I I got by
just in time and I was diverted
one so this is just on a a
really great example of how an
emergency situation caused by
drought caused a forest fire and
now you basically have issues
with respect to surface water
treatment plans what have you as
well as water should restoration
we offer programs that can help
finance recovery from that
the other item I wanted to bring
up is although i'm going to go
for about five or six programs
that I offered great financing
for communities none of them
have an emergency option none of
them have an emergency response
capability the first program
that will go over as the rural
infrastructure program this is
about as close as we can get to
emergency response within our
bureau the rural infrastructure
program allows for two million
dollars per year per applicant
with up to a five hundred
thousand dollar grant component
for communities with populations
served less than twenty thousand
people or counties with
populations of less than two
hundred thousand people and what
I mean by being able to respond
with this is respond quickly we
don't have federal requirements
I need a state environmental
review process and danger
species this is really goal is
quick as you can uh the
community that I like using is a
poster child for how quick we
can move it santa rosa and the
example of that is.
Uh two days before christmas so
december twenty third santa rosa
discovered a leaking sword line
suspended that suspended over
santa re creek they took
measures to make sure that that
sore line you know was rerouted
they called us two days later we
filled out an application for
funding for that repair a day
later
there was approved and we had to
wait for the city to pass a
resolution approving the loan
and the contract that took
another four weeks but within
one week we were able to offer
funding and make sure that that
community could move forward
with emergency repairs and we
basically followed up with
paperwork but that's how quick
we can respond it's not an
instantaneous response but I
think you'll all agree a week
that's pretty good timing with
respect to getting an emergency
repair out there and allowing
the community to go through
emergency procurement and get
somebody on the ground moving
and repairing the pretty
critical sore line that it was
suspended over a tributary to
the packless river we also
offered two federally based
programs the clean clean water
state revolving fund which is
administered by our bureau
within the environment
department in the drinking water
state revolving fund which is
administered by the new mexico
finance authority uh so going
back to rip we offer those loans
at one percent interest over
twenty years with the clean
water state revolving fund our
loan packages go from zero
percent deserve point zero one
percent advertised over twenty
to thirty years on there are
some federal requirements with
that those funds are federal in
nature drinking water state
revolving fund goes to two point
two six percent interest of I
always get this question will
wait a minute federal government
is cutting back programs funding
left and right oh magash we got
to avoid this here is what I
would tell you under the first
trump administration this
program did not see a cut and
funds.
It's on increase and that's what
we're seeing this year we saw an
increase in our state a lot
meant it went from five million
to twenty point five million so
i'm here to tell you that there
are funds available we are
looking for communities that do
want to borrow these funds
from the clean water state
revolving fund you can use us
anything from flood control to
nine point source pollution
mitigation elimination I e water
shed restoration you can also
use them for wastewater
treatment plants and wastewater
collection systems the drinking
water state revolving fund you
can use that for water treatment
plants ground water wells
distribution systems
transmission systems what have
used pretty flexible again there
are federal requirements with
respect in need a like processes
there I will also let you know
although I don't work for the
water trustport or the new
mexico finance authority this
year the water trustpoar is
going to allow and entertain and
fund wastewater projects in
addition to drinking water
projects water storage projects
so that's queen up this year uhm
so once again i'll tell you
where we're here to help we
really are I mean you always
hear the corning line were from
the government we're here to
help that's actually literally
the only mandate of our pure
here to help or not you're to
regulate we're not here to come
down on you a matter of fact if
you have a community that's out
of compliance in the regulators
or niper nation comes what will
help them find a solution we
also handle capital outlay and
and representative as what if
you'd like to take a minute or
two after this session I can
update on the curry county water
line package that's going
through but our point is we're
here to help and the idea here
is we're not just here to handle
the environmental side of
business the social economic but
we're also here to help out with
economic development because
like I said if you don't have a
robust resilient infrastructure
you're going to you're going to
find it next impossible to
attract.
Business industry and
development into the state so
it's not just about the
environment although that's
immensely important we're also
here to take care of people keep
those rates down and we're also
here to help with economic
development thank you very much
all turned over to duppy cabinet
secretary of mirror
thank you dars
so i'll building off of what was
just discussed you know I wanted
to kind of highlight a couple of
leader projects and programs
that we've worked with in the
past and you can see the
discrepancy between the water
requirements and water needs and
how you don't drop me affect
recruiting those types of
companies to new mexico so for
example maxian was a a company
that came in years ago and their
water need was
at least a million gallons a day
or more that is a tremendous use
of water which you know impacts
other users residential users
and other commercial users
without the water a company like
that is hard to recruit on the
other side of the spectrum we
have
companies who actually
contribute back water to the
community so for example we're
working with a group in
portellas called natives global
they are
an ethernet production facility
and they use dairy by products
and other organic by products
for developing and creating
ethernet
and actually but through that
production do you actually have
a net positive water production
as well um and so that's an
interest that those are two very
distinct companies that we're
working with but we need to be
mindful of both right as we're
working to recruit these
companies to new mexico
a couple of the other key
studies that I wanted to discuss
are what I mentioned earlier.
Through our trails plus program
we've had a a couple of projects
that that hope mitigate in
address you know drop concerns
in some ways so one is a company
in center field county real
grand return
the car trials plus program
provided a ninety four thousand
dollars grants and this grant
helped provide funding for
excuse me
green storm water infrastructure
analysis and designed and
planning restoring sections of
the senate a river trail through
replanting it of conducts and
will species and reinforcing
repair and health and it builds
on a multi year replanting
effort since two thousand and
nineteen to stay by soils and
improve water retention
a second what a second item that
receive a second recipient of
our grant funding was cavern
city trail keepers this was a
sixty one without and this was
in eddie county sixty one
thousand dollars recipient this
was installation of eleven
cattle guards and a question
gets to manage access and
prevent erosion on popular
background county trails and
this links existing trail
systems including weather repair
ridge national recreation trail
this helps prevent erosion
entrenching preserves trail
integrity and nearby water
courses support soil
conservation and runoff
management in high use areas
keep protecting watership
function and dryland.
So again just one of the
highlight some of the work that
is already doing one of the
thing that I wanted to mention
is in previous in past years I
believe is in halfway twenty
three the economic development
department actually had some
other state funds that the
department was able this is long
before I started but the
department was able to leverage
these other state funds to
provide my programs to business
has affected by the fires in las
vegas and other parts of the
state and this is where you know
twenty five thousand dollars if
not smaller just to help this
companies get back on their feet
um and we we the decision making
at the time was.
What we have the capacity we
should pro- we should try to
help which try to help this
companies and
since then female gone involves
and we're actually looking at
receiving
basically a reimbursement for
those funds we're still working
through it about two years later
it's a total of around nine
hundred thousand dollars and
funds that will be getting back
moving forward however.
We were only able to access
those funds via some specific
budget adjustment requests
language that was in our budget
that was not renewed for fy
twenty six but we hope to have a
conversation with uh all
everyone here to help us get
that back because that is one
it's not a solution but it is a
in immediate bandit that we can
apply when needed and we'd like
to have a more robust
conversation around uh.
That and what we can do to help
businesses get up on their feet
immediately after these types of
fires and floods
occur so you know because of the
implication of the bar language
were wanted to move forward on
what we can do into the future
um but that's all I have to
disturb to mission today uh a
lot of great projects that were
working on and we look forward
to continuing our collaboration
and working forward to a helping
develop economic development
throughout the state thank you.
The.
The.
Thank you everyone
sell will open it up for
questions and first we have
senator pinto.
Thank you member chairman
preserve a committee.
The lifespan of the projects do
we have an idea
I don't know who would want to
comment about that the shortest
lay spend of the projects in the
longest I don't know if you have
you have an answer for me now
where you later
madam share representative are
you are you asking about the
financing
projects that dennis was
discussing you saying there's
several projects and some sense
so would still like spend of
those
madam chair and representatives
so the two projects that I
mentioned uh so maxy on is
actually exiting the state and
the other is.
Native is global so there there
were both leader recipients so
maxian leaving there's going to
be some clawback provisions
there and then native as global
there there'll be a leader
recipient also which
implies that they're going to be
here permanently were the states
putting up funds to help them
acquire infrastructure madam
chair and music think one of the
things we didn't really consider
so much use to some of these
economic development projects
especially when we legalize
canabas
is very interesting now we're
trying to enforce stumble this
stuff now
been even the borrowing some of
this these listed when you talk
about wait swatter I mean our
taxpayers I mean I think it
should already be a given and
that but are entities are still
having to borrow and you're
saying there were to increase
the funding but that's.
Increased the money they can
borrow is that may I guess or
not madame chairman sender pinto
that is correct so with each one
of these clean water state
revolving fund projects there is
the capacity for subsidy with
respect to that rather than
writing a check what we do is we
give what's called principle for
given us now let's say for an
example community comes in and
says okay we need ten million
dollars for a project what will
say is okay you're going to get
ten million dollars but of that
ten million dollars one million
is going to be principle for
given us so they're only going
to have to pay back nine million
dollars of that ten million
dollars funding but you're
correct now the thing is
utilities are supposed to be set
up so that their self sustaining
enterprises within each
municipality within each entity
so whatever they're doing I e
equipment maintenance ah
personnel costs what have you
those car as well as capital
outlay long term capital outlet
replacement vote should be fixed
in with their rates now by
virtue of the fact that we're
offering zero percent to zero
point zero one percent
loans over twenty to thirty
years basically that's free
money when you think about it
yes they have to pay back that
money but they're paying back
principle and when you think
about it the consumer price
index is going to rise roughly
anywhere between point date to
about one point eight percent
recently it's private higher
than within that with inflation
but traditionally that's been
about what it's been at so if
they're borrowing it zero
percent interest over twenty
years and those costs are
continually rising about one
percent per year there are
actually making out on that the
the other thing that all point
out is our projects also allow
these communities if you well to
to get money back we had two
projects within a different
waste water plants wanted the
town of towels.
And one of the city of santa
rosa whereby part of their
project involved putting up
solar raise so that they powered
their wastewater plans and and
wastewater plans no matter what
municipality you're town you're
in those are some some
electricity hawks you you just
can't get around it when you're
pumping that much earned to
waste water so that that was
waters treated you're spending a
lot of money on electricity well
santa rosa for example that
solar array their pay back or
annual payment on that sore ray
is twenty five thousand dollars
per year to pay back that loan
they're actually generating
forty nine thousand dollars work
the revenue so they're making
out about twenty four thousand
dollars a year by putting up
that sorry same thing with the
town of tows the town of touch
is also recently approached as
he said hey guys we love the
solder rate but we now want to
put a battery storage project
there so that whatever we're
generating during the day and
the grid can't take we can't
take we're going to store it and
then we're going to sell it back
to uh the cars and electric coop
during the evening so we're
we're on board with that and
we're entertaining their
application we want to see a
little better scope of work from
them but the the idea here is
it's not just about saving the
municipality or the water
wastewater system operating
costs and capital costs that
should be passed on to the
consumer as well in the form of
their rates but like I said they
are loans you're absolutely
right I can't run from that nor
will I run from that because
you're absolutely right but the
bottom line is the terms are so
attractive that these minutes
power is the systems can
actually make money on cost
savings on operation savings and
what have you.
Thank you ma'am thank you and
the said we have federal
reservoirs do we know how many
of those dams in the mexico are
federally.
For federal
um madam chair senator pinto
that's a great question the
ownership of dams there's
there's a lot of dams in the
state and
you can think of to some of the
larger winds are the ones that
are federally operated
here in reservoir ovado reserve
or about you reserve a elephant
be resort a couple of those
and then there are number around
the state that are locally owned
and operated and then those are
though the downloads that I
regulate and matter so the
maintenance talk about
maintenance fun earlier
do we do we expect the federal
government to maintain those.
The federal federal reservoirs
have operating contracts with
with local parties there is
different ways that those are
maintained and funded for
maintenance but but yeah there's
there is different different
methods that they get maintained
do you know if those contracts
go to purpose.
That's a great question madam
chair senator pinto though
that's a good question I don't
have an answer for that and the
water rates settlement.
Especially when we talk about
the gallon water pipeline
because I always get this back
and forth back and forth it's
not funded it's not fully funded
still needs more money that's an
email we're okay we're not ok
but gallop needs water as far as
any other community do we have
an idea a madam chair senator
pinto that that has been a
concern that I know that the
project is moving forward it
needs more funding in it needs a
longer authorization I believe
in that something that is one of
the settlements moving through
congress right now but as it
stands right now the project is
still moving from it and being
constructed in manager so the
pupping of water into abu down
from never hold them is that
included in the indian rate
settlement.
Are you a madam chair senator
pintor you're free to the same
language project my
understanding is that there is
water being pumped to about damn
from water I guess up in the
forecaster area
to that resist for and I was
like well that also fixed all of
our into t slower as far as
water rates that's a great
question there is a project
called their sand line channel
project that that takes water
off of tributaries to naval
reservoir
upstream up in colorado end of
rich those through a series of
tunnels that get to deliver to
here in reservoir from here in
reserve where it goes downstream
through albato and into abeques
of work in that serves a lot
water to a lot of the water
users in the middle
it's a federally operated
project and it's incorporated
into the water rates you know
management within the same one
and that's better.
That's a federal project yes so
do is suspect these water rights
settlements on the federal level
will be impacted by the budget.
A madam chair senator pinto I
hope not the there's there's a
lot of uncertainty right now and
we're doing everything we can to
support the
progression of their settlements
through congress but you have
not seen anything that manager
that says that these are safe to
say that funding is copying our
way and that sets.
Many adam chairs ended her pinto
that I don't have any reason to
think that it's not going to buy
I think that it's a challenging
time we don't know what to
expect
there's certainly settlements
that have already been completed
and then the settlements that
are in congress right now we're
assigned by the governor
and still need confirmation by
the senate thank you thank you
manager.
Thank you senator
represented a vincent
thank you madame chair
mrperiod foster on the bile
plant.
I'm going to get an excited
about listening but this build
plan because more we feed it
the more it's going to do good
and we're taking a lot of this
fuel out of our forest but you
mentioned something about a
twenty mile
trip so I know that um in red
also there in negotiations right
now on a bill plant would it be
feasible for mescaler two share
and that mile plan or it would
that be too far because it's
about that
fifteen to twenty mile range.
Madam chair represented a
vincent
right now and I would say yes
one of the
I guess you can chicken her this
part of the conversation
as the supply grows mascular
coming back line would be really
beneficial to the infrastructure
around our summer or so
absolutely
I would also say the fifteen to
twenty mile.
Is more in line with some of our
smaller saw meals in the
majority of our son bills are
small at this point my dad have
conversation with ublock or some
real vets in southern colorado
they are able to go up to about
seventy miles so it's not a
hard infant rule in terms of
distance avoid say it's it's
dependent on the firm size
thank you madame chair.
Representative of hunt.
Thank you voucher thank you for
the presentation is great great
presentation all the information
and I think i'm following a
little bit of what senator was
talking about.
All the things that were we're
hearing about but
i'm regarding the
revolving border fund how we
reply that working with our
local banks there's a lot of.
You know it's it's really geared
towards our local economic
development is we don't take on
really big.
Um projects or economic projects
unless i'm missing something is
there an example that we are
able to leverage all the
the things the investments uh
that we have and then the gap
and fill in the gap to like in m
fair with in your local
government and those are sort of
things where that like the
bigger picture are the bigger.
Investment projects that we have
going on
madam chair representative line
thank you for the question all
actually if it's okay with you
all go to your backyard of santa
fe
so we have recently negotiated
and the city of santa fe has for
the second time they had to
clean up their first ordinance
past alone ordens so rather than
giving them one loan for a
hundred and fifty one million
dollars we're giving them three
loans the first loan is for
nichols reservoir we are lending
uh the water enterprise funder
the water utility seventeen
million dollars for a nichols
project resort the
rehabilitating nichols reservoir
to meet you know with respect to
meet the office of the state
engineers requirements and to
make it a lot more functional
and extend the service life of
that resource so that's
seventeen million dollars the
water trust board is vehicles
and grants are contributing
three million dollars so there's
that one idea of cooperative
funding the second project with
respect to the city of santa fe
want to say it's three million
dollars for an administrative
building for their environmental
services enterprise or utility
which is basically their solid
ways to pick up for the city of
santa fe so they're going to get
a brand new administrative
building a yard for their trucks
maintenance what have you the
third one is a a combination of
projects a hundred and seventeen
million dollars is going to the
wastewater utility for the city
of santa fe they've been having
some issues and uh they are
negotiations for a settlement
with the surface water quality
bureau for some stream water
violating violations so were
hopeful that the combination of
funding we're giving them
they're going to work on
wastewater collection system
they are going to build a new
administrative building for the
waste water plant and then
they're going to reabilitate
several processes within their
plant to the tune of like I said
a combined one hundred and
seventy million dollars.
Uh they are getting zero point
zero one percent interest over
twenty years if they can show us
that the service life for those
projects is greater than twenty
years we can go up to thirty
years so that'll spread that out
they've also asked for smaller
payments upfront and then
increasing their payments
towards the end they just wanted
to have shut out a last cash up
from which is perfectly fine
that's that's one of the things
I wanted to point that is were
flexible remainable and we
really do want to work with
communities were thrilled the
work with the city of santa fe
and with anybody else that would
like to step forward and and
work with us.
Thank you manager I I really
appreciate that because the you
know foundational fundamental
issue around water is economic
development doesn't happen
without it and you know we we
need to be very versed at how we
are going to be
looking at these projects and
that they are might my point is
what you're talking about with
this one does it is for you know
or leveraging local governments
projects and economic
developments and I just want to
ask to really come home in on
that what that water revolving
fund does in very appreciate if
I know about these project I
think we had capped it out late
requests and have contributed as
well as legislators are my note
next question is about the land
of in chapter fund as this goes
in this is kind of brought goes
into you know the general.
The in respect to how we are
being you know looking towards
its you know water and an
economic development how is out
working alongside with I mean we
have.
The whole list of the things you
probably talk about this morning
so I don't really want to get
into but I don't think about the
land of enchantment and some of
the projects and how were we're
using that also with our state
engineer.
How it's available the funniest
available and how we're using
it.
Madam chair and representative
on I think um each of our
agencies has received some
amount of funding through the
land of enchantment legacy fund
i'll only speak to the funds
that went to emerge of and
specifically half of it is for
the forest and watership
restoration act and the other
half is for the natural heritage
conservation act taking them
then in reverse order with nhca
funding
we
decided to.
Uh put that funding out through
an rfp under the existing rule
that had been created in two
thousand and eight when and each
ca was first passed and we
discovered that that rule is
deeply flied and so as a result
we are still working through the
process of getting that funding
out to the four projects that
the naturally protection
committee selected.
On the forest and watershed
restoration act funding we were
having we have not sent that
money out to projects yet that
changes that the legislature
made through household when
seventy five thank you again
representative of instant for
sponsoring that
have now uhm created the ability
for buffer projects around
communities to be funded with
that land of enchantment legacy
fund.
And um pad we had our vacancies
filled on our advisory board we
would have been a lot further
along we did just a few weeks
ago get the letter from the
senate protemp and how speaker
selecting are nominating uh
persons are to be to fill the
public.
The vacant public member
positions sending that to the
governor's office it's quite a
process and I now understand the
challenges with that process so
um representative what i'm
really saying is we have not put
that money out on the ground yet
not proud of that wish that we
could have moved faster but um
you know dot the eyes crossed
the t's that's what we're
required to do.
Thank you
madame chairman representatively
one so our segment of that fund
goes to two pots one is the
trails plus so where is we get
ten million dollars for fi
twenty six by a special property
uh we get an additional bump
from the land of an chairman
fund the other part that it goes
to is our outdoor equiry fund
which funds youth programs.
The.
Thank you manager and I just
stood out there the outdoor
equity fund has to let I think
of
two point two billion earth no
it's over three billion dollars
right now that we've seen in
growth because of their appetite
would refund can you come in on
that manager
manager and representative I
would have to get looking to the
specific outcomes of that but
yes we have been able to see a
significant impact economic
impact throughout the state from
the from response
thank you matter when i'll look
more into more conversing.
Thank you representative or
leader option.
The.
Oh wait now it's working I guess
I press it too fast thank you
madame chair
I think you for your
presentation always learn a lot
and
just a lot of knowledge sitting
there at that table and I
appreciate it I wondered
laura if the process for
speeding up the forest then
thinning and actually being able
to get started on that has been
up at all I know in new mexico I
have a
company that works in new mexico
and arizona and when they get
the bid in arizona they can go
to work the next day and in new
mexico they wait about thirty
days before they can start the
work so have has that sped up at
all.
Battle chair and leader
armstrong
no it really hasn't sped up and
we are.
Putting our our best foot
forward to.
Navigate the procurement code
and
the.
Essentially we find yourselves
as an agency in a situation
where the
processes we have in place are.
Sized to the amount of money
that we used to get and now
thinks to the recognition of the
scale of the problem there's
much more money available and we
are working on rejigering our
processes to be able to move
faster because otherwise we
won't be spending that money in
the timely way which is our
objective I will say that two
years in a row we had a fiscal
year transition problem where
are contractors who were working
in the woods were not able to
work from the first of july
until in some cases into august
that was unacceptable and um i'm
happy to say that we problem
solved that this year thinks are
to some collaboration with the f
a and the state controller mark
malhough we figured out how to
adapt our processes so that that
won't happen again so that's one
positive of the ledger is still
on the negative side
and um you know we're committed
to working through it one
barrier at a time until we get
to success.
Thank you so much for that I I
can vouch that you are committed
to that and and I really do
appreciate that it's just
unfortunate that.
The bureaucratic process gets in
the way of the livelihood of
rural new mexico specifically
rural new mexico who are trying
to stay alive and so I
appreciate you being committed
to that.
Um.
The
indian water rates settlement
when did that start do you
happen to know madame state
engineer.
The.
Madame chair
representative armstrong the I
that's a good question I don't
personally have a long history
with that there's a number of
indian water rate settlements
that are already completed and
the airminent settlement up in
the center for area the tassette
on there is the nava ho
settlement that that but then
there's additional settlements
on top of those there's six of
them right now that have been
signed by the governor and are
moving through congress and
hopefully moving through
congress awaiting a waiting
confirmation from the set it
senate but the
those this is this governor has
been uh more productive with the
and water rate settlements and
anyone before this is it's
incredible to have a six right
now moving and through through
the federal and.
Federal actions that there are
many more left to be done so I
guess the answer to your
question is is more that there's
there's been progress made there
is progress left to be made some
very big ones and that six
middle rio grand public
settlement is something that
just federal team is been
it signed and we're just just
beginning that one and there's a
long ways to go and there are
aspects of that that require
state funding in the legislature
has been generous and and has
had four sight in funding those
those aspects of it there the
the funding that we get from the
state leverages worried amounts
of federal finding I believe
right now there state
contribution is two hundred and
fifty million some that's needed
to be accumulated to leverage I
think it's over three billion
dollars in federal funding and
that's just on the settlements
moving through congress right
now okay thank you for that I
think you madam chair I was just
curious because I know they were
some there during the previous
administration that the previous
administration didn't get
through and so I I just get kind
of tired of hearing all about
that it's all trumps fault
the other part that I wanted to
talk a little bit about is um.
Elephant built so that is
federal that is a federal uh
park that is is at least or how
is it work for at the state
level
madam chair representative I am
strong that's a great question
there are multiple parties that
function in that space the
federal project is the damn
itself and the operations of the
damned that functions to serve
water to their contract project
contractor contract ease I guess
downstream which is the
irrigation districts so the the
levels of water that moved
through that reserve were have
to do with the releases to the
project and that's operated by
the federal government there are
state parks that operate around
the reservoir
and so those those are all you
know operated through state
agencies with endeard.
Thank you for that I just I know
madam chair the elephant
beauties the number one
producing park in the state of
new mexico for feeding the park
fund but I also know that elf
and beauty gets the least amount
of money.
Ah and is a kept up very well
even though it brings in the
most money to the state parks
find and so I am.
I am really happy to know that
you're paint such close
attention to elephant view
because I get a lot of
complaints I represent part of
sierra county I don't actually
represent alphabet but
the water way to get there I
represent a lot of from valencia
to sacro to sierra uh the middle
real ground so i'm curious to
know if you have been
contemplating do a doing a
minimum poor in elephant but
because it is really the only
lake that doesn't have a minimum
pool requirement if I I think
i'm correct but I may be wrong.
A madam chair representative i'm
strong that's a great question
it's a complicated answer
there
reservoirs don't typically have
minimum pools they have a dead
pool that's more there to
protect any while in the
reservoir and then there's also
minimum operating levels.
This.
But yeah like that like I said
there's it's a complicated
answer i'd left to talk with you
more about it offline if you're
if you're interested I would
love to hear that so i'm a
believe that's all my.
Oh one other thing really
quickly.
I wondered.
Dennis remail
if on the coop in the the
selling back of the of the
from the solar panels to the
coops not I just I mean we talk
about it madam chair like it's
something simple.
It's not something that as that
simple because I have a co op in
my district that doesn't buy
back.
Anything from solar they've
chosen to not go into you know
to not be part of that I think
that's changing with new
administration there but
it's not always a simple I we
tried to put up a couple of
solar panel in a in a project in
valencia county pm has not
capacity.
For it to to be able to sell it
back so I just wanted to make
sure that people knew it's not
as easy as it sounds and there
is a lot more into it and it's a
very expensive as well so I
didn't know if you wanted if you
wanted to add anything think
amount of chair
madam chair represented warm
strong thank you for the
question i'm thrilled because
that this tells me you're you're
really up to speed on all this
as i'm i'm actually thrilled so
with respect to the town of
towns they are their service by
coop that's extremely um pro
sold or they I mean kit cars and
if you think about it they they
make a great deal of saying they
have a concert every year at
their park that's fully solar
powered uh they have a radio
station they worked with to
become fully slower powered so
in that instance for them it
really was that simple but
that's mainly because the coop
was that pro solar in that that
interested in getting that done
same thing with santa rosa but
you're absolutely right and when
you start talking about the grid
we could talk about this for
days but basically you have to
look at thain studies capacity
studies and yeah the grid the
grids one of those pieces of
infrastructure were not covering
today which you're talking are a
need for upkeep of the grid
modernization of the grid and
when you go from a centralized
model where you had a power
plant that generated all the
power it fed it out to a region
now you're talking about
distributed generation so it's a
different way of thinking and
you're right you're going to
have to have different times
whoever owns the transmission
dread or lines a few well
they're going to have to make
sure that they can accept that
and that it's not for lack of
attempt it's not dirty power and
what I mean by that is
not from a faster fuel not from
a pollution perspective but
dirty power is powered that
little fluctuate slightly rather
than be a nice study a source of
power so you're right it it
isn't as simple as that.
However counter telstra lucky
they have kit cars and electric
co op that's wanted to make that
work and and had a few structure
in a terrible structure that
would absolutely work with their
their customers to make that
work and same thing with with
santander's apartment but you're
absolutely right on that but the
nice thing about the wastewater
plant sour ray is they can cut
back their power bill by hosting
the sore area on their grounds
and if nothing else if they do
they do nothing else but power
their area for example their
oxidation ditch the what have
you and and the reason that so
important rather than getting so
graphic after lunch with respect
to wastewater what you're trying
to do with waste water is your
basically errating it you're
bubbling small error bubbles
through it so the stabilizes
with respect to nitrate it's
it's converting the amonion into
nitrate the nature which doesn't
make it a an oxygen gen grain on
any receiving water so if
nothing else that's a huge power
grain and if nothing else if
those solar rates powered
nothing but the waste water
system it's still an incredibly
efficient bang for the buckman
thank you
representatives.
I think you manage your thinking
presenters I just have a current
question both for mr foster and
I think mister remeras well um.
Great presentations lots of
logic I really enjoyed mister
partisan this just brainstorming
we're thinking of you mentioned
I lose the car show
collateralization pathway um
and it seemed to me that might
be something
like using working capital so
they could use it while they're
kind of building up and the
reason I mention that is that I
I look to mister and your
program the clean water state
revolving fund is under the
animal fa which often times will
utilise.
Working capital and i'm just
wondering if that's kind of the
easier fix that it can happen so
introduce you to that would work
in madame chair represent his
sorrow thank you
what it what I can't tell you is
laura as we do this reporting it
was six to ten pages is what she
requested in that ended think we
ended north of ninety so there
were there was a lot thrown
around in it in terms of the
reason in terms of the nmfa so
my proposal there would be it's
part of this is increasing the
capacity of our state charter
banks so the nf this can be my
fourth meet the finance
authority um would serve as a
backstart to the state charter
banks so obviously as I
mentioned one of the issues in
the state is capital we've lost
a lot of the regional and
national banks uhm and I
will say that it is important to
make sure capital stays in the
state in order to do that you
also have the increase the
opportunities for state
chartered banks and the credit
unions for lending and so this
was designed the culture program
was designed to both support the
land owner and support the
growth of our state chart banks.
Madame chairman representative
satellite thank you for the
question all i'll point out a
couple of things so it's little
confusing particularly with all
the acronyms this s r f s or
state revolving funds the
finance authority manages
administers the drinking water
state revolving fund the clean
water state revolving fund
that's the environment
department we administer that so
it's a little different book but
it's alphabet soup quite frankly
and we all work together prior
best it now with respect to non
point source pollution clean
water state revolving fun can
handle that can finance them we
actually were approached by
emergency with respect to madrid
there's a flood control project
and a restoration of mine
restoration project there there
are about two three million
dollars short of putting the
entire project out to bid so
their phasing it and they came
to us and said he we'd like to
work with you here was the
stumbling walk forward or the
obstacle the state revolving
fund it's it's literally like a
bank we we lend money out but
it's got to come back in so
whether's borrowing has to show
that there's a source of revenue
to pay that loan back and eminer
while they get a federal subsidy
while they get state
legislative grandsor or
appropriations they don't have a
revenue source that could show
that they could pay that long
back so what we recommended they
do is discuss the project with
santa fe country and see if
santa fe county would be willing
to operate as the borrower in
this case in an eminer could
manage the project bid the
project out they've already got
the design done and quite
frankly it was a really
impressive project when they
showed us the plans it handled a
lot of if you've driven through
madrid which i'm sure you have
you'll see the tailings on the
hills there the black and stuff
and then you'll notice that it's
basically has a grain age going
through town and it ends up
hitting the miners field the
whole historic ball park where I
guess then twenty seven yankees
played in and be.
The miners there by one run
course the minor say they they
keep it but but I don't believe
that I believe the speeding but
that the thing is if sanity
county was willing to act as the
borover and they could show for
example either a gross receipts
tax on the businesses in madrid
or if they could attach some
type of property tax at it
wouldn't have to be a whole lot
I mean you're talking three
million over thirty years
because i'm very sure that they
could show that the service life
could be stretched out over
thirty years so you're probably
talking
off the top of my head your
place talking a couple of
hundred k revenue is what they'd
have to generate to show that
they could pay that long back
and in addition we could
probably throw in some subsidy
which would be a little easier
for that them did I just thought
but that's the whole point is we
would love to work with
emergency are are revolving
funds both drinking warner state
revolving funds we can lend
money to different state
agencies we just have to be
assured because of the way that
the revolving fund legislation
set up on the federal level
we've got to make sure that that
money is going to come back and
that there's a revenue source
for those long payments but we
would absolutely love to work
with different state agencies we
would love to work with
different counties and again
it's one of those things as long
as we see that there's some sort
of revenue coming in we we can
work with folks we can even work
with private borrowers for
example the border plucks down
and lost cruise to scan the
santa teres area if they wanted
to put an infrastructure and
they had a credit worthy bar
where the could show us they had
a revenue coming in we could
actually work with them to
finance the sewer waste water
and on the drinking water side
they could work with the
financial forty could work with
them to finance the drinking
water side so it's it's a really
flexible settle programs just
you know thank you both for the
the clarification on both of
those points I appreciate that
again last you mentioned the
after two we all kind of operate
under so that's also helpful and
there's also a wonderful
playground right by that field
by the way that I have to shut
out too because that's always a
fear please to go after lunch or
yeah I do and ask one of the
questions from that you had
mentioned.
The concern that you had was
that in your list at your
programs never had emergency
funding that was a possibility
is that a simple legislative fix
that we were brought in with you
know the welcome shipper what
else would hear is what i'll
point out the revolving funds
the clean water state revolving
fund
the environmental protection
agency has a memorandum of
agreement with female whereby c
w s r f funds can be used to
repair waste water
infrastructure here's the caveat
for a presidentially declared
disaster so the last
presidentially declared disaster
we had in the state was rosable
roswell had three sore lines
that were you know again not to
be graphically cracked open they
they had all some screams of
things you you really don't want
to look at
but we work with them we work
with female the pa under the
similar we fronted one point one
million dollars for roswell to
repair these damage so lines and
the reason we did it is a city
like roswell is is a very
healthy fiscally healthy city
but throwing out a million
dollars at the drop of a hat
that's going to hurt anybody so
what we did as we fronted the
million with a one point one
million dollars and we took a
risk we basically dot at all
highs crossed our tease to make
sure that female when they
looked at the project could say
okay
you met all the the need a
requirements you met all the
endangered species act
requirements all the
consultation requirements so we
did that work up front with
roswell were still at risk
because female has not said okay
we're going to pay for this this
is a qualifying project so we
package that as a loan so that
it would be eligible for female
to say okay it wasn't a grant
because if it was a grant
femorra said you've already
handled it we're not showing out
any money so we handled it as a
loan with the understanding that
a female says no that's not a
qualifying project.
We're going to take the head on
it we're not going to put
roswell in a bad position but
that is something we do have
emergency authority and
emergency authorization to do
under our program the rural
infrastructure program we don't
have that but for example there
was a smaller community loss of
us a mutual domestic up near the
channel area and they had an
outage I want to say about
second week of july worked with
them they ended up get bringing
a contractor in and we work with
them on rip financing to the
tune of about fifty thousand
dollars for that fix for their
system so they could get the
water flowing again again it was
one of those things once the
submitted an application it took
us a day and a half to approve
it and I know that because I was
the approving authority the
other thing i'll point out is um
when I tell people please submit
an application they think of my
god this is going to take a
month to write this it's we got
to get a grant writer
when santa rosa filled out their
application it was right around
christmas everybody was on
holiday the gentleman I work
with was visiting family and
dallas here's how we filled out
the application he called me on
myself we played phone tag we
got together the application
took ten minutes to fill out
that was it the c w s r f
applications could take ten
minutes to fill out that is it
there's there's some other
things we want to see financials
audit reports would have you but
the initial application it's
going to take ten minutes to
fill out and if the community
doesn't send us their financials
as long as they have an article
online at the state office of
the state augur we're going to
use that to look at their credit
worthiness so it's a literally a
ten minute application so I
wanted to point that out as well
but but there is no emergency
authorization for say within the
rural infrastructure program and
that's authorized by the rural
infrastructure act what we are
doing because we're seeing an
increase in need.
Communities coming forth and
saying oh we've got a listing
that's out and if we don't get
this fixed quickly we're going
to have a lot of sewage backing
up all over the city all over
the town obviously we don't want
that or they have a well pumped
it's going out will work with
them they can do their emergency
procurement will start working
in the background on this
application again the limiting
factor in this case isn't the
state of new mexico the
environment department it's how
quick the municipality can meet
the governing body the council
can me and say yes we're going
to approve this ordinance we're
going to take on if there's a
loan component and if there's
not a long component that's fine
we often give out grants with
respect to a rural
infrastructure program for
example in sino
three months ago they asked for
presentation because they want
expand their water distribution
system are they just didn't know
where to start so what I
suggested they do is ask for a
hundred percent grant of about
seventy five thousand dollars so
they could hire an insuring firm
to do a scoping planning
document figure out what they're
best options are so they applied
course they apply for a full
five hundred thousand or grant I
said no no wait a minute let's
let starch off at seventy five k
to one hundred k get an insuring
firm figure out what you're
going to do what it's going to
cost you in which your
alternatives are getting
preliminary during the report
that's a hundred percent brand
so the point is we we we do our
best to to accommodate everybody
but no there's no emergency
authorizing language within any
any of these programs are wish I
I don't want to step on the home
and security emergency
management stores so they might
have some programs I know the
board of a finance I believe has
some emergency financing powers
what are our infrastructure
programs at this point do not
save a vmo between female and
epa for the clean water state
revolving fund only for
oppressionally declared
disaster.
The.
Thank you thank you and our last
question is representative
robert
thank you madam chair and think
you also much free presentation
it's around some topics of my
particular interest
and i'm going to start it with
the state engineers
hand out and on page five
but before I do that I just
wanted to quickly address.
What representatives that are
does line of questioning was but
also your responses and I think
that if we can remain
with at melbourne mind and
entertain once again the whole
idea of public bank a stayed on
public pank actually it's not a
state on its own by the
taxpayers I think that that is a
wonderful way in which we can be
building capacity of our local
banks i'll not to be threatened
by a state on bank or taxpayer
only but see it in light of
building capacity and not
putting anybody out of business
but by collaborating we build
our
financing funding and monetary
ownership and keep it in the
state of new mexico rather than
with our national banks so
that's my one point I wanted to
just take the opportunity to
speak on wrong quickly another
point is that things in our view
right now madam chair seemed to
be
fast enough in in many ways and
I want to just recall us that
had we.
Begun to mitigate.
The impact of climate change.
Forty years ago fifty years ago
when we first understood.
Um.
All of the science around what
we were facing.
Then I think we would have been
a step ahead and we wouldn't be
waiting
for a things to kind of leave
and so I just want to still
remember that because we're
still in the age of denying that
we're in a climate crisis or
that we're in a climate chaos
situation and we still want us
to.
Continue business as usual when
we can't do that anymore we've
got to be looking at fast
tracking all of the alternatives
available to us the natural
alternatives that we have
especially enriched in the state
so with that online and page
five I have a couple of
questions
let's see I want to start with.
I have been seen i'm sure all of
us have been seen that we have a
growing seismic activity growing
in our state of new mexico not
just in our state but I are
neighboring states colorado
nevada arizona have been seen
increase in size med get tividy
so in seeing that
i'd like to ask how we are.
Well I guess start with the
question how do we monitor the
climate impacts what tools
instruments who are we
partnering with what national
resources do we work with to
help us miniture of the overall
impact of.
Of these claimant changes
whoever would like to answer
that first and then it'll dove
till to the next question.
Um madam chair representative
cabinet thank you for the
question I bet all of us here at
this table had something to add
to that question um there are a
lot of different agencies
monitoring the impacts of
climate change and different um
experts reporting out on that
rate so like locally for ice a
big one has been the us
geological survey with the
stream flows
and then there's snotels in or
i've been there the mountains
measuring the the amount of
snowfall that we get um does it
that that's probably the biggest
ones for the office of the state
engineer else own no with the
temperature and forecasting but
I don't know if others want to
add to that.
The madam chairman
representative robol comma thank
you for the question what i'll
simply say is within the
environment department we
actually have a climate change
bureau whose focus is to look at
climate change issues to look at
the vehicle emissions what have
you they interact a lot with
their quality there actually
interact with us quite a bit uhm
one initiative that the
environment department has
recently started taking on is
developing methods for leak
detection water leak detection
within communities and that
involves a little science
fiction kind of sounding thing
but it really isn't it's looking
at a satellite aerial photos and
using
artificial intelligence methods
to pick out lightly points where
there are leaks within water
systems and by doing that your
narrow down areas where you're
losing water and then you send a
local team out there with the
old hydrophones and the
microphone and you look you
listen for sound and you pick
those leak south and what you're
doing with that is you're not
only saving water you're saving
a whole heck of a lot of money
too because you're not having to
replace a thousand feet of water
line perhaps should we got a
replace a hundred feet of water
line but here's the other thing
that all pointed out it goes
back to that concept of
sustainability yes the
environment is absolutely
important yes public health and
welfare is important but there's
a third component that I think
people often miss out on and
that's the economics behind
it because if you think about it
fixing those water leaks you've
just saved the utility the town
a whole heck of a lot of money
from producing the water and
wasting it and you saved all the
rate payers that money because
they're not paying to produce
water and have it leak out over
over you know all sorts of
places so that you've really got
a tie all those things in
together when you do that I
think what people will find is
yes you can be great to the
environment you can have a great
social typ.
View of things but that economic
lynch been that just brings all
home together and everybody
benefits from that so that
that's what i'll put out but
that that leak detection our
secretary is all over matter
fact i'm i'm passed with finding
communities that are that maybe
open to this and that wasn't I
would like to take credit for it
but I can't
that was the head of our
information technology a
department and she actually just
did a beautiful job working with
private entities to develop this
technology and we're testing it
out and it's so far we've saved
a billion gallons of water from
being licked out wasted over the
past six months so out that
helps that that does and so but
it raised another question and
that is that
we recently are monitoring
obviously what's happening and
devastating texas right now and
one of the criticisms of the
federal government was that they
cut back on now know as
capacity.
Work force all of that and there
were a lot of other cutbacks
that are already taking place to
we have.
In place for the state of new
mexico are a preventative
method.
That is similar to the
forecasting the forecasting
element sold my question was how
do we forecast ourselves within
the state how do we empower our
state to be in the position to
forecast these not just the
natural disasters.
But also that you just mentioned
mister metal and that is the
leaks and other kinds of things
that that are would be saving
money in the long run but also
preventing
the acceleration of any types of
disaster sure problems
associated shirt so I will
partially punt to the statement
your holidays to count it in new
mexico state because that person
would be a much greater
technical resource than us what
i'll also say is you have next
red stations out there you have
available data I will personally
say i've worked with no and the
national weather service
meteorologist as well side all
just for the past or gash since
two thousand two two thousand
three there are great people
from a technical perspective
their top of the wine um on a
soft fish not all so say when we
see in the environment
department we see federal
agencies or national labeling
people off we make conservative
effort to reach out to those
people and say you know what
please come we'd love to work
with you we can offer
competitive pay we can offer
great benefits and we can offer
a great working environment so
we're trying to best to make a
lemon aids lemonade out of
lemons we don't want people to
lose their jobs but if they have
those skill sets if they have
that knowledge we absolutely
want to come work here we make a
concert of effort to recruit but
as far as a conservative effort
within the state I don't know of
one that's why I I kind of want
to partially punt to the state
meteorol just like I hope i'm
i'm not stepping on those but
i'll leave the floor open in
case anybody else wants to
respond but there's technology
there's as long as you have data
their systems out there where
you can do a lot with that data
and dad I think it's just
becoming invaluable right now
you know.
So thank you madame chair and
thank you so with that in mind
and having what you just
described in terms of the
advances of the eye on having to
tap until more and more of our
own resources that we have with
the labs and of course we have
our institute new mexico tech
and we have all kinds of
valuable resources.
Are you including in your budget
requests
funds.
For on a recurring basis that
will assist in building that
i'll even more in the
anticipation of what we may be
facing in the next ten to twenty
years that's number one that
would also include work force
because you're going to need a
trained work force to be able to
help mitigate first track first
they have to track the impact
then they need to set up the
systems to mitigate and then we
have to set up the response
mechanisms so with all that in
mind I will
be anticipating that there be
arm recurring budget requests
beginning to increase now is the
time to do it not wait until we
have a catastrophe that's my
next question thank you think
your representative and i'm
gonna ask the panel to be brief
in your responses thank you.
Oh did i.
Oh can you hear me now
madame chair
representative coming here thank
you I will be brief in this in
this response that's an
excellent question I think that
the legislature a couple years
ago they passed the water data
act and that to me is one of the
most exciting pieces of
legislation as you know a long
time it really puts a face to a
lot of the work that we're
trying to do within the agencies
i'd love to talk with you more
about it offline to talk about
it like if you have questions
about where a different data
comes from and and what we're
doing to make sure that we have
the rate data to do the work
that we need to do here in the
state but I think that that the
short answer to the question is
yes we have a lot of plans for
and funding needs a particular I
mean I could speak homing from
my agency by the office of the
state engineer there's a ton of
work that we need to do and not
all fits within the monitoring
station concept that I put out
there and would love to talk
with you more about.
Thank you madame chairman just
because it is a budget I think
we need to start putting it in
more sooner than later and so
that was my my purpose and we
can continue to talk about
familiar than good and the same
familiar with your systems to a
large extent will be touching
based with you thank you very
much madame thank you and will
close out senator linear thank
you ma'am chair and I will be
briefing if I cut you off it's
only because we're trying to be
tino to be brief I I think it's
very important to point out that
how important it is that each
one of you were setting there
and working together and having
that communication because it
does all come back to economic
development and that's what
that's what this is about
you i'll have to get along and
you need to communicate matter
fact it might be nice if we had
a few other the agency setting
her so we could work with them I
do have a I do have a couple of
questions deputy romero that the
trail program
can you like just a real brief
you made it sound like it was a.
Uh very expanded program is it
is it expanded or is it pretty
narrow.
Uh.
Madam chair senator linear
so the program i'd say it's a
little bit of both its it's
building trial infrastructure
at the first for state
throughout the state so for
example there's a group in.
And galp that's looking to bill
that we got they received five
hundred thousand dollars in f
twenty five to get the project
started for building out a trail
the the most likely apply for
another five hundred thousand
this coming white twenty six
current first clear to continue
that projects move forward
but it's really trial project
trail infrastructure
and i'm happy to put together
some bullet points and get those
over to you so you can see
what's happening in form in the
in your district if if that'll
be helpful yeah and then that
work I mean
been we're given what we're
talking about I I think that
would help so we would know
exactly kind of where that falls
falls in line yeah oh so III
think okay I think I know where
you're going with your question
now it is more expensive than
just trails.
Water
you are setting next to the
state engineer
so it with that.
The.
We we do have every committee
that we set in we talk about we
kind of streamline the
bureaucracy we have to get
things done the state engineers
office we've listened for years
and years and years and
listeners you know how much I
work with water and and how we
need to
move things along we we get
projects started we have
problems that they come up with
their twater rights or whatever
and it takes it for ever to get
out.
How do you think we can solve
that just out of the state
engineers office can we just
like.
Move things out faster do you
need more help do we do you need
support from the legislature
what do you need to make that
work faster
madam chair senator lane here
and I thought we were france
at that way I really
I think that it's a great
question how could we move
things faster through the agency
and through all of our agencies
and I think that that is a
that's something that we've been
looking at really closely in our
agency were both that you know
what is it that we need to be
able to the systems that we need
to put in place the statute that
we need to put in place I can
tell you a big one right now is
the enforcement bill and we got
so close to passing that through
at last session but modernizing
our enforcement capabilities in
the state is that real need I
think every water user in the
state can appreciate that if
they have a water rate they
don't want someone to illegally
using water before they get that
water rate so so that's that's a
big one statutory updates we do
have a need for more funding for
staff um that's that's a huge
area of need both turbey to pay
the staff that we have more and
retrieve fruit recruiting
retainer like the best people to
get things in the agency and
move things through faster we
need to update a lot of our
databases so going back to the
wider data act and the great
question from representative cut
the euro like we we have a huge
need to update
and modernize the it
infrastructure in our agency
once we can do those things we
will be able to move things
through faster and we have great
people who are really dedicated
to to do in good work every day
and they they really do they're
very very knowledgeable and
specialists in what they do and
I think some of the things that
we're looking at in the near
term updates to our website.
We want to be able to get
permits you know and receive
information online
electronically if you can if you
can cannot cut some of that at
the
written peace out you know the
extra the manual transactions
out of the puzzle we can we can
do more with less so we're
certainly looking at that and
they really appreciate the
question cause we
all those things require funding
and will be talking to you or
more about that as we get ready
for this budget session and this
next legislative session with
the budget but there's there's
definite needs and there's a lot
of progress being made right now
with the funding that you
provided in the last session so
thank you
thank you good answer and laura
I know we just were together of
two weeks ago or whatever it was
and so some of these are kind of
repetitive but I think it's
important for everybody to hear
when the mitigation start would
we we're talking about
the carson national force.
You were talking about how we
had several contractors that
would like to go in and do the
work but it was taken so long to
get the paperwork ready and out
to them to get them actually on
the job so you know I think
that's something we need to work
on is how we can help you
streamline that.
Do you do you use any of the
the work pisa folks to come up
and do some of that in the
seasonal work.
Because I think in carson you
dear but i'm not a hundred
percent
madam chair and senator the
contractor who was there for a
switchness does use the
to these program for his
employees.
And in your opinion just does
that seem to be pretty
effective.
Ah madam chair and senator I
think that it is not for our
state government to prescribe
what the contractors choose to
do for employees and that
particular company is quite
large for a new mexico based
company and it it works up for
that company to use
workers who are not from the us
on the other hand we also have a
number of contractors on our
state white price agreement who
are very pleased based and their
employees are coming from the
town that they live in and on
both models work.
Right thank you and my last one
and a promise
madame chair it's a little more
pointed on these solar type
projects mr romero.
If.
If says substitutes went away
would they exist if we didn't
offer them would they ever
start.
Or is this going to be a.
A business that.
Can substain itself and build on
its own
madame chairman senator linear.
I want to make sure that that I
clarify what I said so we don't
finance solar projects just
because their sour projects we
finance sore projects that power
wastewater treatment plants.
That's literally what we're
sticking to uh that's what our
mandate is under the c w s r f
act at cw s r f program however
if they generate access
electricity they are free to
negotiate with their co op with
their utility to see if they can
get credit either renewable
energy credit or sell that back
so we don't say okay this town
this utility wants to put in a
soar farm so we are going to
finance that that we will not do
however if there is for example
such as the town of tows that
says we have a waste water plant
where the electric bill for
operating the waste water plant
is too high we want to put in a
solar rate so that we can power
our wastewater plant and provide
the electricity from solar race
for our waste water plant and if
we have access we can sell it
back to the coop to kick cars
and work for coop that we can
finance but it's strictly
limited towards under c w s r f
those projects are limited for
wastewater treatment plans I I
hope i'm clear now and i'm sorry
for not being clear earlier and
madam cherson.
With that how many.
Treatment plans to we have that
are fully functional off of
solar to my knowledge the two
that we've worked with that i've
mentioned that's what we're
looking at right now I want to
say and I don't want to step on
anybody's tells I want to say
rude dossors looked into it I
don't recall if if we financed
that a project such as that for
them but quite frankly any waste
water plant out there that's
using erician that's an
activated slow plant and most
are for any midsize of
municipality service area on up
they're going to use an
activated sludge process that
requires areas in other there
are wasted water going through
treatment those would all be
eligible as long as they have a
footprint that could support it
so it's really entirely
incumbent upon the municipality
or the of the utility to take a
look at it but work were more
than willing to work with people
all right thank you and thank
you
thank you panel for joining us
today that was a lot of
information I encourage folks to
reach out our final presentation
today committee explorers energy
development in his kind of a
primer for those of us joining
tomorrow so I want to please
welcome reback star director of
energy conservation and
management at m nerd and
yeah this is our last
presentation.
People can test you have a
court.
I'm of before we get started
director
I want to entertain a motion to
approve the minutes from our
june fourth twenty twenty five
meeting somewhere
who have a second thank you
and if no one objects will adopt
those thank you.
Okay thank you for joining us
thanks for having me and thanks
for this opportunity to talk
about electricity and rural you
can development rule
opportunities and very excited
to be here my name is rebecca
puxter and on the director of
you can energy conservation and
management division at emnerd I
think it's the most acronimic
time government
and to these presentation I know
that i'm the last of the day
also know that we're running a
little late so i'll try to move
quickly and there's two haves to
this talk the first is ideas and
concepts in the second is ways
to pay for those ideas and
concepts
so I see you have
the print out on first will talk
about what new mexico has to
offer in their energy expansion
both to ourselves and to others
so once
three or see i'm insured this is
familiar to some of you
we are ranked in among the top
ten states for a wind potential
to go to the next slide we think
were ranks number six in geo for
more potential and I can talk
about that word think if you
want me to.
And then we I will say we're
number one and solar potential
arizona will argue with me about
that they do have more arabians
but we are higher so the panels
are cooler and therefore they're
more efficient so i'm in a claim
number one for us
and then interestingly if you
move to slide six you'll see
that we apply at the inner
section of the three national
grids
why is this important it's
important because as you as you
heard in the prior panel were in
the middle of changing what's
called the topography of the
grids meaning we're moving away
from a spoken hub model of a
central electricity with spokes
reading and out to distribute a
generation and in some cases
distributed storage and so we
need to build big interconnected
webs
rids that are bigger than the
weather so if you look at the
united states of america older
blue is in all is interconnected
all that green is interconnected
all that yellow as texas and
lucus sets at the intersection
there's really only two states
there's texas and there is us so
if the united states of america
for interview security for
abundance reasons wants to
interconnect the grids it's got
to come through new mexico so
there's a huge potential for us
and to host that and to make
sure that new mexico benefits as
well as providing a service to
our countrymen
okay moving on that's what we
have to offer
moving on the number two how new
mexico can benefits
rural and tribal new mexico i'm
now on slight eat until drum and
move fast has the potential to
power itself which means we can
save money on utility bills as
you heard in the prior session
bolstering tribal saver
increasing electricity
resiliency and i'll say that's a
particular note here in riodo so
with the fires are my department
was working over a time
coordinating with the fire
department to figure out which
where to send the trucks to
protect which lines to keep
which sell phone towers
operating so that are.
First responders could
communicate with each other and
were hopefully working towards a
great again with distributor
generation distributed batteries
so that if the grid has to turn
on an off at various points or
unfortunately gets burned down
in various places the folks can
still operate and our first
responders and and other
infrastructure can continue um
so energy resiliency is
interwoven into our
opportunities here.
Um rural and travel new mexico
are so has the potential to
power others are earning money
selling our renewable
electricity and both within the
state and as you saw potentially
to the the entire rest of the
country and the demand is huge
as you've heard about everyone
needs electrons there are not
enough of them
and I will say
we are entering how to say this
a sort of shift in how
electricity sets in are a
economy so the last eight year
hundred years electricity was
fabulous it powered late bobs it
kept your fridge cool it powered
you know steel or powered um
infrastructure.
That's all still true and now
what's and bits are almost
interesting what does that mean
that means the more electricity
you have the more computers you
can run the more ar you have the
more cheers for cancer the more
wildfired prevention the more
mapping of methane leaks and so
we are moving from a world where
you would sort of figure out
what is the maximum load and
then build to that and we're
moving into a world where if we
choose however much electricity
you want to generate is however
much economic development you
will have and however much
intelligence you will have and
cures and computation so it's a
different way of thinking about
electricity I call it
infrastructures infrastructure
because
electricity comes first it
powers the water treatment plans
it powers are first responders
making their walkie talky cause
it powers are police and
everything else so
we're in the middle of this
transition where electricities
playing a very different role in
economic development.
Um right now i'm told by new
mexico partnership put new
mexico partners who tries to
bring companies to the state
then one and three companies who
want to come to new mexico
ultimately do not because of a
lack of electricity or a
slowness in the inner connection
which you also heard about in
the prior panel.
Um so we have an opportunity to
either be left behind or if we
move quickly.
We more than most other states
have incredible potential to
just explode in all kinds of
great ways with electricity and
economic development.
Okay i'll move on to
one example so now on slide nine
the wind farm which you're going
to see tomorrow in which I saw
last week very glad you get to
go see it the hvdc converter out
there by the way is the first of
its kind meaning it's the first
in the world out there and it's
here in new mexico we should be
very proud of that it's really
impressive what you'll see out
there and what that has done for
corona and the accompany in the
community around there is on the
slide so for example they have
seventy more new housing units.
They have new recreational
facilities and corona basketball
courts
discount there's a new deli
grocery store there's a new
laundry there is a new hardware
store most residences if you
drive by and encourage you to
look when you drive through the
town are renting out their front
and backyards to our fees
pulling in income for the the
temporary build out and that's
they're getting a good penny i'm
hearing it's like eight hundred
dollars a month per slight and
someone that were hosting two or
four fees in their yards
wherever they can fit.
Um those arranges that have it
or selling college for all the
roads that are being built out
there and the corona school now
has a hundred and thirteen
students it no longer needs
special financial assistance
from the state and there is an
entirely new school in the works
so that's an example I call it a
win win win of what electricity
can do for our real communities.
Okay moving on to
had now that was the ideas
portion now we're gonna talk
about how to actually effect
and move this i'm in a run very
quickly through the programs
that my department overseas for
rural and travel communities
most of you were familiar with
big chunks of the some when I go
fast and we can circle back also
because we are received thirty
five different programs
totalling about half a billion
dollars and some sort of
incentive around clean energy
and it's helpful they think to
see them altogether also because
they can combine in stack and
break in different ways.
Um.
Okay so current grant programs
we have from the federal we have
an energy efficiency revolving
loan fund this just launched
last week it is not something
they can be clawed back by the
feds and it is up and running
five point four million but of
course as it revolves we hope it
becomes ten and then fifteen and
then twenty nine
um on p
side twelve we have the energy
efficiency and conservation
block grant also federal also
deployed that's funding for a
large variety of energy
efficiency improvement like
municipal projects building code
improvements and renewable
energy generation one point
seven million sorry is already
committed and moving out the
door
then on the state side we have
the geo for more projects
development fund thank you very
much this is about to go to
really good use this is funds to
advance you for more projects in
the state we are making the
choice to focus on advance to
your firmware because of the
state's potential and the
economic potential as I just
mentioned in terms of more
electrons um it is now twelve
point five million and the
ultimate entities are tribes
universities and political
subdivisions of the stee there's
also a loan program which you
know
then the seed and moving on
slide thirteen the seed
grants the systems for
residential energy efficiency
improvements there was first to
ten million appropriations that
an additional five then an
additional fifteen thank you the
first ten million is committed
and out the door and because
that program is not set up the
additional twenty million should
flow shortly after that
and eligible entities or local
governments usually working in
partnership with community
organizations.
Then on the federal side we have
the power grant these are grants
now to the grid to elect a grid
operators storage operators
energy generators it is a five
year program from the feds we
are in year three we think here
three is all we're ever going to
get
the totals of the three years is
now fourteen million
and some of those are moving out
the door that this one takes a
while and to the senator's
question about why things take a
long time I can answer that it
has to do with the fact going to
what I said earlier that our
systems of lawn or systems of
money in our procurement code is
all built for the at way of the
world and we are trying to build
it different world and with a
different structured
and so we're sort of stuck
between between where the money
wants to go and need to go and
what we can do and the speed of
that
okay moving on to slide fourteen
and this is the sister grants
the here and her rebates forty
three million dollars each
point of sale rebates to improve
home energy efficiency for low
income new mexicans and they we
should be very proud as a state
I pushed the staff very hard and
we were the first state to apply
for both we were the first state
to launch retail meaning it's
happening now a new mexican can
go online to a website get a
coupon for anywhere from six
hundred to eight thousand
dollars take that coupon too
lows or home depot or whatever.
Retailer is participating and
get that money off at the point
of cell which is solving a
problem that you heard about in
the prior session which is
having to front the money and
then wait a period of time so
here in new mexico we're
targeting that program
exclusively for low income
families cause there are the
ones who need the most help.
I'm happy to circle back on them
we just launch heat pumps and
water heaters last week very
excited.
Okay then scramp program moving
on firm to other grant programs
a solar for all it's a federal
grant a hundred fifty six
million again for loan income
residential solar including
single family multi family and
shared solar were currently in
our planning year we're just
finishing that up and we're
moving towards deploying some
big projects across the state
and then the grid modernization
fund this is steep money i'm
sure you all are aware of it
seventy million grants to cities
county's tribes universities and
munice for grid modernization
this are flag because this is a
good example of a sort of being
awkward the car between the old
way of doing things and the new
way of doing things so seventy
million dollars is fantastic to
do grid modernization however
cities counties tribes
universities don't own grids for
the most part so we're having to
do a little bit of gymnastics to
get the money to the polls and
wires where it's needed we've
got some solutions.
It's gonna add some time in some
steps.
Moving on to sixteen this whole
page is work for us this is
training for a clean energy jobs
unfortunately the bottom to
the trek competitive and the
energy other training I think or
dead their federal
we have just had radio silence
since inauguration day so we're
moving ahead with the first one
one point five to train new
mexicans how to be residential
energy contractors.
I'm living on two seventeen and
i'll move faster because these
are mostly state tax credits
which are broke so you know
about them the solar tax credit
uh sustainable building tax
credit which is actually two and
one it's for building and for
products the clean car tax
credit advance energy
manufacturing tax credit and
then at the bottom half a pitch
twenty this is now federal
what's called elective pay or
direct pay I still alive as of
about being passed on monday or
friday
but on life supports this is
basically a tax credit available
for entities who don't typically
pay taxes like tribes cities
counties governments churches
schools charities all the fiber
one seas was away for them to
participate in the tax credit
world.
Um page twenty one or side
twenty one or two g author more
tax credits one for ground
ground coupled heap pumps and
the other for electricity that
one generates with deep gear
thermo.
And then put on page twenty two
this is where it gets really fun
this is starting to be the
stacking of breeding a little
bit so we also have an escalate
program which I think is our
dark horse at you can.
In many cases you've may have
noticed the cost of the
transition there's a large
initial upfront cost and then
after you've made the transition
your costs on the back and are
significantly less but how do
you find that initial upfront
cost of installing solar panels
etc this is where asking could
come in a company can basically.
Pay for it and then you pay them
back over twenty or thirty years
with the savings that you have
from your lower utility bell
this pairs really well with
pretty much all of our programs
and between the two of them you
can sometimes end up paying just
ten percent of like the cost of
a solar project and reapping the
benefits on the back and we are
a seffie i'm gonna skip that
because I learned on thursday
that that is also basically no
longer an existence on the doe
long programs officers been
essentially shutdown those
staff.
I spoke with them on their last
day on thursday essentially it
may
stay around for just a handful
of projects notably to your
formal and nuclear so we have a
deal for more project in that
paperline to get a really cheap
blowns were basically the steep
puts up one dollar and gets a
hundred in return in terms of
cheap loans we'll see if we can
be forward with that gear from a
loan and then last just starting
a couple weeks ago in my office
is a green finance partner who
sort of sits in our office and
hops as combinal of this and
they have their own capital they
could do green loans the advice
on stacking and breeding and
combining grants with tax
credits and etc and that is um
their services are available to
any entity in the state of new
mexico.
Page twenty three you also aware
of the innovation in state
government fund this is for
state agencies to create master
plans and increase capacity or a
climate change policy we too
have a climate change bureau
and oh.
Planning for the best ways to
spend the two point five million
that was appropriate
and then of course you're worth
the local solar access fund as
well we are tasked with helping
me they write the rules which we
are doing.
Um and then i'll just say is I
close and take questions that
this is a it's a lot to put
together and so in order to be
more user friendly we've got
three strategies
you notice we changed our
acronyms from econday can
because he comes easier to say
and it's easy to put on the side
of a bus honestly it's easier to
remember
we also have started you should
see on the last page they are a
one stop shop website clean
energy dot and i'm talk of which
is the one place where anyone
can go developer home owner a
landlord to find out what
they're eligible for and apply
right there it's midstream and
being built out and then the
third starting later the summer
is we're hiring energy coaches
which is an actual human being
that you can call if you have a
question you say hi i'm a church
and I want solar panels what's
the best way to fund it finance
it what size session should I
get so will have that service
available as well hopefully late
summer
and with that I will.
Stop in the effort to try to get
you to coronar tomorrow quickly.
Thank you
first we have center control.
Thank for your presentation and
be careful to see that you
shouldn't see tribes do not pay
taxes I think we pay in a
different way in that sense just
making a comment there
and my understanding to one of
the bigger entities the great
mondation is that they're
passing that along the lines to
the
to the rate pairs.
That I think we're still in this
kind of limble with one of the
bigger entities
chair center to print up my
apologies to your tribes do pay
some taxes they are also
eligible for direct pay so
apologies for the statement.
Yes that is the challenge with
the energy transition is that
the grid that we had for the
last eighty to a hundred years
the spoken hub model.
Sort of sat and had very little
mean it didn't need much well if
it did it didn't maybe didn't
get it or under it and now not
only do we have in some cases of
a very old and brittle grid but
we have an analog grid that
needs to be modernized and
updated and that is the question
is who pays it madam chair
members that committee.
Because some of these
transmission lines run through
our tribes nations and public
lands and those leases too were
like pinis on the dollar versus
the making millions of billions
of dollars in which they
probably should have
modernized a great themselves if
they wanted to keep going in
business in perpetuity
some set some businesses
actually win under and just kind
of to file deep bankruptcy and
left in and left it up to
somebody else but you did
mention the geo terminal dollar
to a hundred dollars where does
that money come from.
That.
Chair senator the I think of the
hundred i'm talking about the
safety loans so at the does loan
programs office the lpo there is
any new category of loans that
they started giving out under
the I r a where if a state
identifies a project that is
good for the state the state can
partner with that developer the
state puts in a little money
this is where the one comes in
anywhere between one percent up
to ten percent of the project
depending and together the state
and the developer go to the
loans programs office to seek
below market rate loans for that
project and we are in talks with
the geothermost developer for
one of those ones and matter
chair members of the community.
Uhm talk about the corner
project.
The wind i'm locally who
benefits from that I mean do you
have all these entities the
housing union's facilities all
on demand hardware do they
receive energy from this.
The swing form.
Chair senator greek question so
obviously they received benefits
there's payments there's rents
as you mentioned for permission
to have the infrastructure on
ranches there is lines that go
through and there's a rents paid
for that there's also property
taxes p which is hence the
school and that um the actual
electric distribution of the
electricity.
That's what pn manages and what
goes into the balancing
authority so sometimes yes
sometimes no you'll have to ask
them and this is the kind of
question that that i'm getting
out and also the questions of
transmission is.
The old system of who aren't
what who gets to charge for what
who gets to benefit I think it's
worth taking a second look at
especially as new mexico we are
known in a position to be an
enormous exporter of high
quality renewable electrons that
everyone wants and wants to pay
top dollar for but we need to
think carefully about
structuring the system so that
the dollars for that and the
benefit of that accrues to new
mexicans and doesn't just leave
the state
some medical chair maybe that
was a mistake that we don't as a
state owned all these
transmission lines there are
shares
there are some steets in some
grids where the polls and wires
are owned by the state sort of a
kind of the highway system and
then the electrons that travel
on them are sent to and fro by
different entities there's lots
of ways to structure it
texas is one of them yes texas
actually has more solar more
batteries than any other state
and by the way
last week the estimated speaking
of blackouts and good brasilians
they estimated that their risk
of summer blackouts dropped from
ten percent last summer to one
percent this summer because of
distributed solar and
distributed batteries
and and chair members of the
committee if through that great
if the state owned it then we
probably wouldn't have all this
issue for.
I guess in some sensitive
distinction.
An even moving some of these
lines through and update again
having this delay and providing
energy to our own people in
mexico.
And could you tell me the spam
of the winter.
The lives it chair senator faced
chair my holidays
the license of a win turbone to
day the one so that you'll see
tomorrow ask them but I think
it's twenty ish years
it's changing very quickly as
the technology is changing
out of chair of ice cream I
think one of the concerns was
about the disposal of it has
that been alleviated.
Um vice church and early asking
questions
the disposal of the blades has
been partially solved I think
new mexico would be very wise to
look in to becoming a blur or
incentivising blade recycling
facilities because we are a
state that has a lot of bleeds
so a recycling facility is going
to locate itself obviously in an
area where there's a lot of
blades are not going to look at
themselves in the middle of
baltimore
and we have a lot of leads
north of court i'm antenna this
would be those would be places
as well there obviously will
need many of them to recycle and
also they're looking into ways
to um engineering them to be
broken apart better right now
they're made with particular
kind of resident which is very
difficult to recycle and
actually takes a lot of high
heat and ironically a lot of
electricity the newer ones and
you should absolutely ask more
about this when you're in there
tomorrow the newer ones are made
with a different resident that
either decomposes when you add a
certain chemical or or melted a
lower temperature so they are
easier to repurpose.
Representatively hunt
thank you thank you make sure
thank you for
me thank you for being here
you're you're quite amazing and
other things that you're you're
giving back to us
my question is I guess i'm going
to go back to.
I would keep on the topic of
grid modernization and the cost
of the is pretty extraordinary
but
one of the things it's and if we
are even bringing this up we're
talking about that is the the
acquisition of the name energy
with piano is there is or any
kind of a conversation going on
and emirate about that or what
that could why that could be
needed for this for the sta.
Chair representative behind you
talking about txmn or the
blackstone and blacks are both I
think they're they're working
together as my understand or
maybe not yes I think this this
proposal offers us as a state of
really great opportunity to
think about again as they said
who owns what what is and should
be a monopoly in other words
what's what's remains to be a
natural monopoly what may no
longer be a natural monopoly
what is the best way to
structure the ownership more a
free market monopoly other grade
system and member a good system
has four elements which
generation transmission
distribution and now storage and
I think each of those merits its
own conversation because it's
got its own economic drivers
and.
I think it's a great opportunity
to have that conversation thank
you venture I appreciate that
and you did mention about the
storage in the the capacity the
the build our in taxes with with
storage how far or how much more
do we.
Need conceivably I guess to do
in that serve and that round for
new mexico that that makes us a
little more efficient.
Cheer representative movement
that's a great question i'm
gonna give you three different
answers because it's a depends
so going back to what I said
earlier the old model was you
look at your load today and you
build to that load so if you're
looking at building to what
we're using right now today on
monday that's one answer the
next answer is that economic
development question which is
the more you build the more will
come and also if you want more
intelligence you want me for
cancer you want more ai helping
improvement wildfires then maybe
you built more electricity than
you need today because it will
be used so that's a different
answer and then the third answer
is will how resilient do you
want to be so the grid is right
now that the topography of
greatest sheep sort of like the
veins and arteries in your
system there's a central trunk
and then as it goes out it
branches smaller and smaller
smaller and the question is and
at each intersection you can
place batteries the question is
sort of.
Well the further up you need
more batteries the further down
you need smaller batteries and
it's just a question of how
reasonably do you want you do
you want to be do you want
batteries that every single tip
in other words at every single
house.
That would be maximum brazilians
but also maximum cost batteries
all the way back up at the
actual power plant is probably
the cheapest but it's not very
resilient so for the
conversation seems to be it well
at the feeder level at the
neighborhood or the sort of
transmission feeder seems to be
the sweet spot for batteries um
and that is then a utility
question then the utilities
would only manage the batteries
that's that that that's what
would make sense to me i've
recently visited um kick cars
and opened house if you actually
a couple times and that's
actually they do have a map
being of that and would that
look like for the state I I will
conversation with with kit
carson and and kind of like how
they are they're looking to be
resilient in that nature i'm
sure
um cherry represented yes and so
a new mexico we fruit only talk
about the grid but in new mexico
it's more like grids we have
about twenty different grids and
they're all interconnected or
not in different ways
so an answer for person
doesn't necessarily affect
excel electric
set well not not completely i'm
just wondering if the state is
looking at the way that they are
their putting that together with
that plan together because it
goes back to
you know the position that
we have now.
That you talked about i'm trying
to look at on my notes the plan
say the good modern issue uh
find you said there's a new
position for.
I know a payg but the new
position is there that are they
the planning person because what
i'm what my concern is one of
the the bills that I had for
this last session was too
creative aboard
an energy board if you will and
and really put those components
of a planning together is that
with the the hope is about
position manager
share representative bluehood
actually what you talk about is
much bigger than that position
yes we're hiring for a grid
modern position grant
coordinator tust to handle the
just the seventy million but not
the other thirty five programs
but this legislature did
appropriate two million for a
comprehensive energy transition
strategy which is under way at
emned it's at the office of my
secretary and that is exactly
what you describe which is a
comprehensive energy transition
strategy for the state that
looks at not only electricity
but how electricity
affects the gas to reminds and
effects the broadband and the
cell phones and the
the water treatment plans what
is the status called right now
where we brittle where we were
selling it where where the costs
what needs to be replaced what
needs to be modernized what
needs to be made smart and more
efficient and so that is under
way thank you manager and that's
really important but that's at
the state level and just as you
mentioned what happens up and
kit cars and is it going to
affect you know other parts of
the state because of the
different co ops and in the
different agreements in the
different term uh yeah just the
the different ingredients if you
will how how is that work that
you're doing their emired you
know in an estate agency going
to really bring everybody to the
table for this planning moment
cher representative blue on you
getting rid of the part of the
matter which is the new
topography that we probably
should be heading towards a
shaped like a fractal agreed
within a larger group within a
large larger which immediately
asked the questions that you're
asking which is who's
jurisdictions that who regulates
it.
If p and m is connected as a
balancing authority in into her
card or intercase over into the
eastern connection who regulates
that what is the cost of
electricity when they send you
know new mexican wind to power
potentially connecticut homes if
that were to happen
how does the payment work who's
regulating the electrons and if
it fails.
Whose fault is it so these are
all you normally questions that
we need to be wrestling with and
we are working at our level with
of course the municipal
collapses you know is best we
can but these are um really
structural questions that need
an updated system of lawn and
updated system of money in
finance thank you manager that's
that's exactly my point that to
the point the legislation would
to to really reach that ground
and to get that done because
this is this is so integral
absolutely integral this is
infrastructure of our future and
without it we don't grow as you
said as well
I guess my last question is and
I I could we could talk for
hours I mean that goes into
grimanders station in rto and
working with their six and then
that we're going to bring the
federal government into the
whole ground of everything and
they kind of rdr but.
As far as the funding do you
know how much money we're going
to be losing from the federal
grounds yeah from just what you
mention today.
Share representative loophone in
terms of economic and only
speaker cam in terms of you can
my staff worked very hard last
year and we hustled her transfer
far and got them all across the
finish line so every grant that
you're seeing here is fully
obligated
however the tax for the federal
tax credits are different story
and the execution of the grants
on the ground.
Is a little bit uncertain but
legally my stuff worked to make
sure that all the money is
actually is obligated to the
stating think you bounce that's
it's just incredible and thank
you for doing that I know you
know to your team and everybody
but I really want to know what
gets me is because we are you
know the data and everything the
driver of why we don't have
enough energy in our state right
and earn the united states for
that fact
is a crypto current the crypto
mining that's in the state
something that we really don't
bring up but I think we need to
have some little bit more
conversation how much do you
know how much energy they're
there they're needing right now
cheer representatives
them giving two answers the
first answer is now and the
reason is because that
information belongs to a private
entity it belongs to to piano
excel
you could file a rate case or
you can you know to the filing
or discovery and try to get that
information but it is not
totally not
but I think the second question
you may bring up is we may want
to think about a new regulatory
structure for large loads um
they're unique it's it their new
in the
electrical world that if we've
not had enormous loads whether
it's cryptocurrency or ai data
centers plunking down almost
where ever they want to on the
grid very quickly that is a new.
Kind of customer and me require
a new kind of rate maps and I
just really want to bring that
up because what happened in
texas last year when they did
have their the room black out
the.
The crypto uh industry made I
don't know hundreds of millions
of dollars because they power
down because it got paid to do
so so that then they can be
power back onto the grid now we
need to really look at what
these these these large loads
and into puts point of what's
really going on in our state and
if this is privatised
information I mean because
they're so contracted with with
a private industry or is the
regulation where we going with
that and I think it's really
well worth the conversation
thank you very much thank you
for your time.
Thank you representative little
think you madam chair thank you
for the presentation of this
afternoon
at mentoring
i'm wondering it was last at a
at the one form and just after
the ground the ground breaking
took place right around that
time there is a lot of
information that's out there
that's going to be available I
wanted to ask madam chair is you
might have.
Three suggestions on takeaways
from our visit there because it
can be overwhelming there to get
all this information and maybe.
Just some thoughts on the most
some important considerations
cause each of us will come in
with our.
Thoughts ends but might be
important to us but i'm curious
to hear of what.
You might suggest thank you
madam chair.
Cherry representative little you
ask questions.
I think the first one it senator
pinto was getting at which I
have lead this discussion with
which is.
New mexico has an abundance of
riches especially in the
renewable space were in the top
ten for everything who's gonna
benefit from that.
And who should.
And who can.
Those would be my questions.
The shoulders isn't as a you
know moral and ethical question
that we have to discuss together
in a democracy rate and there
may be multiple answers maybe
more than one.
The other question of who can
goes to this question of laws
and rules that we've got
currently set up.
And I would inquire into those.
That's a matter thank you thank
you representative robot
coverage closer sound.
Think you made insurance and
think you're nice to see you
have just a couple of questions
on page nine when you talked
about the good one as a wind
form i'm.
On the collitious sales for
roads.
Are they making their own or the
how are they.
I'm interested only because are
we buying you mexico or we make
are we in powering a local
entrepreneur.
Question one terror
representative yes question one
yes so that some local branches
that have called are selling it
to the wind firm developers so
the windfarm developers can
build the roads out to the
various turbites so yes new
mexicans are benefiting directly
especially rural and local or
rural branches thank you very
much that's incredibly important
because as you know
between the indigenous
populations
hispanic but they know
populations where experts on
garage
make sure that we tap into those
resources and that's because of
our histories and having to so
um and my other question has to
do with.
The.
Hah
so i'm interested because i'm a
strong proponent of renewables
and are in my district knows
that very well they're often
times a lot of questions that
come up about um.
Home owners for example why need
a tap in to resources and in
their mostly low to
moderate income families that
are first time home owners
getting their you know wanting
to project
a more madam chair
cost efficiency way of living so
that they can handle their
mortgages for thirty forty years
whatever it is so I am
interested in knowing how.
The department is monitoring.
Um the installers for example
what kind of oversight is there
under all of these grandson the
reason I bring that up is
because we have already had.
Um
the district legislative
assistant or we've already been
hearing from our district about
arm.
Homeowners feeling gouged by
installers for example they'll
come in.
Before they got wind of tax
credits and example in the price
was quoted at a certain amount
then they find out that there's
tax credits and before
they close on the deal the price
is gone up and so
it it.
It has ended up costing the home
owner because they really wanted
to
have solo installed for the cost
effectiveness long run but they
ended up paying more so how do
we ensure that's one part of
that question that then there's
a second that that were
monitoring that process so that
it doesn't disillusion our
homeowners and
reduce the level of access which
is what we were trying to
increase is access and
opportunity for as we said low
income so that's one point.
Chair representative robot cover
the we think about that question
all the time and the answer is
really is going i'll give you
three answers
in the programs that are under
our control we can control that
is best we can within the rules
of the program and what we can
and cannot spend money on so for
example in the sister rebates
the the here in her rebates we
are actually rode into the grant
and we hold contractors
accountable to the prices that
they sat and we have visibility
into those prices and we check
those prices against what they
were doing the years before the
program now it's not a hundred
percent because supply chain
changes labor class change rates
so just because the price goes
up doesn't mean it's ill
spirited or it's gouging but we
do have the mechanism and we are
watching those process in that
program
the second answer i'll give you
as this is why we are hiring
energy coaches and we're using a
little bit of whatever we can
get from general fund we're
little bit from this grant that
grant we sort of pulled together
three different six different
funding sources to pay for this
and hopefully I can keep it
going for a while but a human
being who's a third party.
Who can come into a home and say
we think in your home in your
situation you your installation
is good but you could use solar
panels and a battery of the size
and swap up and they are the
ones who sort of can write out
the shopping list and the
knockets handed to the
contractor to execute that
shopping list in other words to
the one who's installing making
the decision is not the same one
who's installing it so that's
the role that the energy coaches
can play now I can't as the
state getting everybody's
business and tell him what to do
but I can make that service
available.
The third is a bigger the third
answer is a much bigger question
just about consumer knowledge in
the education which I would love
to do more with if we had more
dollars so that's where we
started the clean energy done
and have documents.
But just as an example so we all
remember when these came out and
when something when it was
something like three g came out
and then four g and then five g
I still to this day do not know
what a g is but as a consumer I
know that five g is faster and
therefore if they want to pay
more I can get faster I can get
five we need that level of
understanding among consumers I
was at a
like an earth day event and
there was two search members I
think they were serious common
mercer talking to each other and
one of them had a little app
that showed how much his house
is solder panels were generating
and he leaned over to the other
bunning he said the company
quarter I received look I saved
a lot of he didn't know what a
killer what our was but he knew
that saving quarter was a good
thing and right and so there's a
level of consumer education than
hopefully my department can help
with
just so that folks know the real
basics that seem enquiries.
Thank you
that is really important and so
associated with that question
is the website and how user
friendly the website is and so
this is
a language question and then
also just the user friendly
question because often times you
have.
Motor moderate income.
Who were struggling with keeping
several jobs family members
variety of reasons and so if
they want to get things done
quickly and move through the
website as efficiently as
possible but if they get stuck
and they have to call or they
have to whatever they need to
do.
And it's not friendly enough
then they're going to give up
and we defeat the itself to
feeding so.
What are you doing to ensure
that it's language um accessible
as well as user friendly
accessible do you have someone
that monitors that safer example
is like the secret shopper on
the other end and they often
think all of it you can seek
departments need to be doing
this we need to have someone who
at least two or three times a
month maybe goes onto their
particular websites because we
can all say all it's a wonderful
design website but if we're not
using it regularly as a consumer
then we're not aware of what the
pit falls me be so how do we how
do you monitor that because that
was the other part of the
question from the from the
constituents that it wasn't as
user friendliest the anticipated
and they just lost patience with
it and may have even lost an
opportunity
chair and represent it can be a
royal mobile company yes we
think about that all the time
one of the very fresh things I
did when I accepted this
position less than two years ago
was I hired a communications
coordinator
who is by lingual and who
actually ran the one eight
hundred quick now campaign and
we built that website from
scratch it is very much a work
in progress and I can't and
waiting for the next round of
general fund to kick in and
hopefully later this summer we
can add more faqs more a little
drop down menus and more
guidance however it's
complicated I have thirty five
different programs the
definition of low income is
different for all of them so
there's no way that I can just
ask someone how many people in
your household
you know what you which your tax
level or how much which your
income and then here's the
programs you're older before it
starts to get exhausting there's
a lot of questions and then some
programs will allow certain
pieces of the paperwork to prove
that other questions are other
programs are much more draconian
so we're doing everything we can
and we do monitor the the users
the viewsit's absolutely a work
in progress and if you're
getting feed back from your
constituents.
I would deeply appreciate that
feedback because we are building
the plane as we fly it and it's
new nobody knows what a quote is
so weird we would love feedback
and as we continue to build it
out we appreciate that madam
chairman and the feedback we
will give you because we're
getting it on our end from the
constituent so we want to
communicate that one final thing
real quick paid on that same
page you have and shared solar
page fifteen.
What is shared solar mean that
lot of people are saying is that
community seller or what do you
what are you referring to is
shared
sure and representative robot
cover yellow cable euro or I
should call egalis
you are correct.
Shared solar on the ground if
you drove by would look like
community solar it's about that
scale and size however community
solar now has a legal definition
because of the community solar
act and so this is outside of
that so we decided community
solar is sort of already
covered.
Arm but that's for the ious and
the muni's in the co op's really
struggle to participate or can't
in some cases participate in
community solar so we decided to
fund to aim so for all at that
scale of project but in the
communities that got in and
britainly left out of community
solar so we had to invent a new
name and we call it shared so.
Okay that was creative however I
don't want it to well there's we
can continue talking about how
it's going to unfolded thank you
madame chairman thank you.
Thank you and thank you everyone
thank you a director for joining
us today and forgiving us all of
the information that I think we
need to start out tomorrow
committee we will be meeting at
korona are the addresses on your
agenda's at ten am
a reminder to wear a close tow
shoes um and they and finally we
do have a dinner tonight
provided by the message had you
tried at five thirty
so I hope you all can join us
down there.
And for those of us who stayed
here you all are the real ones
thank you
but this is the group so I
appreciate you while staying for
for this for those folks who
joined us online thank you
