Uh, we do have a couple of
members that were not here
yesterday, um, so we will start
with Representative, um, Ream if
you want to introduce yourself
and then we'll go to our tenses.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
representative Bill Ream,
District 31, the far Northeast
heights of Albuquerque. Thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee. I'm Christina
Ortiz. I represent, uh, House
District 42, which is most of
Taos County, and I'm very glad
to be here. Thank you. Very glad
you're here, um, we'll go ahead
and get our presenters to come
up.
Good morning.
I'm sorry that we're starting a
little late. I, we want to be
respectful of time, but members
were a little late getting here
this morning, but we'll, we'll
get you caught up and we do
appreciate you, uh, your
patience. So if you would both
introduce yourselves and then go
into your presentation.
It's OK. Good morning, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
uh, my name is Wesley
Billingsley. I am the
infrastructure division director
for the Department of Finance
Administration.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Hayley Brown. I'm the
bureau chief for Capital
navigation and funding
assistance in the infrastructure
division.
So, um, today we're gonna
discuss um the new division, um,
and kind of what we do within
that division and so you all
should have the slides in front
of you, um, and so I'll go to
the first slide, um, before I
get to, to the, the, the meat of
the slide. Um, I want to thank
the sponsors Representative
Hochman V. Hill, Representative
Dixon, and Representative
Armstrong, um, for putting this
bill together and for helping
with the passage of this bill. I
think it's going to be a good,
um, a good division within the
state of New Mexico for helping
move.
Infrastructure, um, projects
along, um, within the state. So,
um, I appreciate that and so
this is the House Bill 232 is
the infrastructure planning and
development division bill. Um,
the goals of this, of this
division, um, primarily or to,
to help move infrastructure
projects um throughout the state
and so we're gonna do that by
receiving and reviewing ICIPs,
the infrastructure capital
improvement plans, um,
historically those have been
within the local government
division, um, the local entity
ICIPs and then the state
agencies within the
the Bureau of the Department of
Finance Administration, and so
we've combined them all and now
they're all going to be coming
through this one division.
So do this one division um
within, within DFA. And so, um,
what does that entail? You know,
we're going to gather all of
these infrastructure capital
improvement plans, um, review
them, uh, make sure that all of
the information in these plans
um makes sense, um, and that
they have, um, projects that
are, that are ready to move
along um and and get funded. And
so we're gonna have our team
review those and make sure that
all of the information is there.
We're also gonna add some
additional information to the
ICIPs. Um, one thing that's
missing from this information
right now is
Helping these entities move
forward with federal funding,
and so we're going to add some
fields and some criteria within
this um infrastructure capital
improvement plan to help them
apply for federal funds and get
federal funding. And so that's
going to be part of the, the new
process of the ICIPs.
The next piece is the is to
provide funding and navigation
assistance and so with one of
our bureaus, um, they will
assist the entities and state
agencies with finding
alternative funding sources,
whether it's state funding,
other local funding
opportunities or federal
funding, um, to help fund some
of these, some of these capital
projects, I'll get into more
details um in that with um some
future slides.
Um, the last thing is we're
going to assist with grant
writing and technical
assistance. Um, the Federal
grants Bureau will be doing that
and um there's only 22
individuals within that bureau
now, but hopefully we can expand
that, um, and grow that and help
with more opportunities for, for
grant writing and that
assistance. Um, and then lastly
leverage state dollars to
acquire these federal funds, um,
which I'll talk a little bit
more about that with some future
slides.
The next slide we'll, we'll go
over is the mission summary. I'm
just going to kind of read a
little bit. I don't, I don't
want to read the whole thing.
Um, the division will provide
planning and funding assistance
for all capital projects, um,
listed on the infrastructure
capital improvement plan. Um,
the mission is to assist all
entities with fully funding all
capital appropriations. Um, so,
so those projects that are on
the ICIP and not on the ICIP um
we'll be here to help, um, help
them with their funding
assistance. And so we're gonna
do that um through 3 different
bureaus within our division. Uh,
the first is the capital
planning and policy.
Bureau. Uh, the second is the
capital funding and navigation
Bureau, and also the Federal
Grants Bureau has moved into
this new division, and I'll go
into details with each one of
those bureaus in the future
slides.
The next slide is the capital
planning and Policy Bureau. And
so this bureau will help with
the planning of capital projects
as I mentioned earlier, kind of
reviewing, um, and, and, and
assisting with the ICIPs um for
these local entities. They'll
be, they'll be doing that piece
of it. Um, and so there will
also be responsible for
preparing the executive capital
budget, um, which entails going
through an ICIP hearing process
through the with the state
agencies, um listening to all of
their projects, all their
capital projects, and then, um,
scoring and ranking those
projects and then submitting
recommendation um for the
executive um through the budget
process. Um, so they'll be
helping with that, um, also
helping collaborate and create
the capital bill, uh, more
closely with the LFC and the
council services, um, with the
with the collaboration to create
that, that bill.
Um, and once the session is
over, um, they will also help
with the questionnaire process.
So all these capital projects go
through a review after they are
appropriated to ensure that the
projects that they're wanting to
do the scope or meeting the
legislative language and law
language, um, so our this
division will be helping this
bureau will be helping with that
questionnaire process, um, in
addition to that, they're also
going to be helping with the
audit Compliance Act, um, right
now, the local government
division um actually does all of
the audit compliance and then
that goes to the capital outlay.
um, to, to, to hand out and, and
give to all the other state
agencies with the audit review
and to make sure that they are
compliant and to be able to
receive their grant agreements.
Um, so this division will also
be handling that as well, um,
and as well as creating the
final budget list. Um, not every
project is budgeted immediately.
Um, some projects aren't ready
to move forward as we find out
through the questionnaire review
process, um, some, um, have to
deal with anti-donation issues,
not many, but some of them do.
And so, um, we have to help get
them through that process.
um, as well as that auto
compliance. So that budget list
will be created by this division
and will be sent to the state
budget division for um budget
upload into the, the share
system.
Um, another, another important
component of this bureau is to
monitor the capital projects
monitoring system, um, right
now, all of the entities and
state agencies report all the
capital projects into that
system and so one task of this
bureau is to ensure that that
data is getting into that system
correctly or as correctly as
possible, um, some of that's
gonna be helped, um, helped with
the new system, um, we did get
some funding as well for a new
capital improvement system and
so um the ICIP and the CPMS
processes will hopefully in the
future go through that.
new system, um, we're hoping the
ICIP part of it will be up and
ready by March of, of next year
and then the reporting piece of
it will come soon after. Uh, one
goal of, of this division and of
the capital um of the whole
capital system is to create a
capital system that can follow a
project from beginning to end,
um, as you all are aware right
now, there's different
appropriations for different
projects, um, some projects have
multiple appropriations. So the
goal of this system would be
able to create that project
through the ICIP and then follow
all the funding.
Through that project all the way
to the end, um, when the project
is complete and so that's going
to be the goal of that new
system.
Um, and lastly, with this
particular bureau, um they're
gonna help create an update
policy. Um, some of the policies
and procedures have been created
already, um, because some of
this, uh, some of this was, you
know, already overseen by other
divisions, local government
division and the state budget
division, um, but we need to
update it and create new policy
for new tasks that this division
uh will, will oversee. So that's
that first bureau and it's a lot
of information and a lot that
that bureau is going to be
doing, um, and right now there's
222 individuals within that
bureau. One is the bureau.
Chief Scott Wright, and the
other is um a coordinator,
Marianne Maestas. So, um, we, we
were hoping to get more funding
um this next session for, for
future growth, um, within that
bureau, um, and we look forward
to that. So that's that bureau,
um, I'm going to go on to the
next bureau, which is on the
next slide.
I have to keep switching out my
thumb and my finger.
The next is the capital funding
and navigation Bureau, um, the,
the goals of this bureau is to
assist all entities with finding
funding, um, and so they're
gonna coordinate funding
opportunities, work with cogs
to, to find those opportunities,
um, but one piece of this, um,
which is also gonna be included
in the new system is when that
ICIP is created in the system,
our goal is to have a list of
funding opportunities within
that ICIP. So, um let's just say
they select water as one of
their categories within the
ICIP, um, the system will
automatically pull up.
All funding for water
opportunities um within the
state and within the federal
government, so, um, that is one
goal of ours and in addition to
that, we're also hoping to have
a catalog um of local assistants
again like we used to in the
past, um, the goal is to put
this online so it can be updated
online. So every state agency
can update all of their funding
opportunities from the state
side and as well as keep it up
to date with the federal funding
opportunities from the federal
side. Um, so we're gonna have
that as well. Um, another,
another component of this bureau
is to administer the New Mexico.
fund, um, the New Mexico match
fund was um appropriated during
this last session to help um
locals find their, their cost
share opportunities to apply for
federal funds. And so that is
one of the other um items that
this bureau will be overseeing,
and I'll let Haley get into a
little bit more with that. Um,
another piece of this, um,
division of this bureau is, um,
you know, we, we have the rural
and equity, the rural and
frontier equity ombudsman, um,
within this, within this bureau
and so their goals is gonna be
going out into the communities.
um trying to help the, the rural
communities, um, with all of
their, their capital needs, um,
from funding opportunities to
assisting them with finding, um,
hopefully finding accounting
firms to help with their audit
compliance. And so they'll be
out there communicating with
them and then we'll be working
with them from within the, the
bureau and the vision to try to
help them get past those hurdles
that, that they're currently
seeing. And so a part of their,
their jobs is to, to help, um,
help these regions organize and
get funding to conduct complete
comprehensive asset management
plans.
Again, this is primarily for
the, the unincorporated
communities in the rural
communities, um, helping them
with all of their capital needs.
Um, so that's the primary
functions of the capital funding
and navigation Bureau.
And then lastly, the Federal
Grants Bureau, um, you know,
from, from the information
provided by the, the capital
funding and navigation Bureau,
if there are federal funding
opportunities out there, um,
those will be transferred to the
Federal Grants Bureau, um, so
that they can assist these
agencies and local entities, um,
with those federal funding
opportunities. Some, some
entities, um, like City of
Albuquerque or some bigger ones
might not need that assistance.
They just might need to know
where to find the funding, um,
some smaller communities like
mutual domestics or Eseias might
need all of the hand holding
throughout the process, so.
I'm not only helping them find
those opportunities, help
provide the technical assistance
for them to apply for those
opportunities and then also try
to find the assistance to help
them administer those capital
projects and so, um, one of the
goals of this division is to
help do that from beginning to
end, right? So, um, and again,
that's going to be through the
role and equity ombudsman as
well as through all of the
bureaus that we have within our
division, um, they're also going
to, like I said, aid with those
federal grant applications, um,
and then anything that's, any
issues that are holding the
entities back, um, we're gonna
Try to help them um get their
federal funds.
Um, the other opportunities that
the Federal Grants Bureau will
be overseeing, um, is there also
going to be managing the
reporting of the state and local
fiscal recovery funds. Um,
they're doing that right now,
but, um, as you all know, the
state and local fiscal recovery
funds, uh, must be encumbered by
December 31st of this year and
then expended um by December
31st of 2026. So our goal is to
help uh manage those and if
there's any issues, try to help
the entities and state agencies
find opportunities to move those
funds forward, um, and then
lastly, they're going to oversee
the direct pay process for
State agencies. Um, so any state
agencies that have the
opportunities to apply for
direct pay or rebate programs um
from the federal government um
in regards to clean energy, um,
solar energy, um, they're gonna
help them apply and, and get
those direct payments, um, back
to the state. Um, we're also
going to help with the local
entities and, and help them with
their opportunities. Um, we
don't know what that looks like
yet. We're starting with our
application and our prefiling.
Uh, we did prefile our first one
last week and so once we get
through one of um our cycles
which
as prefiling and filing by, I
think it's um March of, of next
year, um, we'll be able to have
a, a really good understanding
of the process to be able to
help local entities do it on
their end as well.
So that, that concludes the
three bureaus within that
division. This division um has a
lot that they will be doing a
lot, um, and as you, as you
heard the, the, the, the, um,
the current mission, um, you
know, we're, we're really gonna
try to help successfully, um,
you know, with the ICIP process
and, and get some funding to
these entities, and I think the
future mission is to kind of
help from from beginning to end.
So I'm not only helping with the
planning and budgeting, but also
with grants administration,
project management, fiscal
management, reporting and the
out of all capital
appropriations, um, is the
future mission and goal of this,
of this division. So we don't
know what that really looks like
yet. Um, we don't know if that
means having other agencies,
other capital Alley, um,
projects come through this
division or not, um, but right
now, um, to get started, our,
our first and primary goal is to
help get these projects on an
ICIP and help them find funding.
Um, that is our primary focus,
um, that we have for this fiscal
year. Um, and so I think that
concludes my part of this, um,
presentation.
So thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. Now
I'm just going to talk a little
bit about kind of the landscape
of infrastructure and economic
development to contextualize
some of the work that the
division's going to be doing,
um, on, on page 9 of the slide
show, you'll see I included two
pie charts that come from the
Center on Budget and Policy
priorities. As you can see,
local entities own over $10.6
trillion of infrastructure
assets in the country and
obviously New Mexico is just a,
a part of that pie chart, but I
share that to say that.
Um, as you all, I'm sure are
aware, there's a high demand for
capital funding for local
government infrastructure
projects since they are owning
the vast majority of these
assets. The second pie chart
shows how infrastructure funding
is allocated with the vast
majority of infrastructure
funding coming from state
government. Um, the latest
figures I could find on this
were from 2017, and as you all
know what happened in 2020 led
to a lot of issues related to
construction inflation, project
cost increase in a wide variety
of different issues that have
led to project estimates being
really out of scope with the
cost of an infrastructure
project. So I share that pie
chart to say that this state
while state funds have
historically paid for most of
infrastructure projects. It's
important to begin discussing
how New Mexico can diversify
funding streams for capital
infrastructure projects
considering the high demand for
um contractors and construction
related services in the
associated price increases that
have come with that.
Onto the next slide, one of the
main ways in which our division
will be promoting alternative
funding opportunities for
capital projects and
infrastructure projects is by
incentivizing and encouraging
entities to do what is called
the capital stack approach. So
on the left side of the slide,
you will see what a traditional
financing for a municipal
project or a local entity
project looks like. Perhaps they
have a grant and they have some
local cash that they are
contributing to the project or
if they issue a bond, they're
using the bond proceeds with.
Local cash to complete that
project. A capital stock
incentivizes an entity to
consider a wide variety of of
financing opportunities for
their capital projects,
including cash, including
grants, but also including
federal grants, bond proceeds,
loans, any other kind of
different funding mechanisms
that exist to complete the
project. Um, it's a funding
structure that combines multiple
sources of financing to complete
a project and the difference
You know, capital stocks can be
the difference between a project
moving forward or a project
stagnating. And so that's why we
find it to be really important
to encourage entities to move
towards a capital stack approach
for their infrastructure
projects, we're able to achieve
the project goals and
deliverables faster and maybe
even ahead of the timeline for
the project by identifying a
wide variety of funding sources.
We're able to streamline the
project timeline and make sure
that they finish a project on
the timeline they initially
anticipated, as well as avoid
some pitfall.
that may come with the capital
outlay process like getting a
delay in executed grant
agreement because of how an
entity responds to a
questionnaire or their
preparedness to, to enter into
an agreement for the Capital
Alley fund so it can help move
that project along faster
without some of the, the delays
that are associated with that
process.
On the next slide, um, I posed
the question in what order do we
prioritize infrastructure
development versus economic
development, and we have it as
two arrows pointing towards each
other because you obviously need
infrastructure improvements, um,
that can, that can then pay off
economically for private sector
investment, including
productivity growth, job
creation, and sim stimulating
development in a lot of our
communities. So by incentivizing
communities to braid funding and
create capital stocks we're able
to complete a project in a more
timely manner and incentivizing
and stimulate economic
development and community, so
there are really two arrows
pointing towards each other.
As Wesley mentioned, one of the
big projects and ways in which
the division has already been
able to incentivize capital
stacking is through the New
Mexico Match fund, which was
passed in the last session with
an initial appropriation of $75
million. This grant program was
broken into three distinct
grants. First is the matching
grant, which covers the local
cost share requirement
associated with the federal
grant. So if an entity applies
for a federal grant, has a local
cost sharer matching
requirement, they're able to get
the entire, um, local cost share
covered in a grant from the
state.
We have fully allocated the
$62.5 million in matching
grants. And for every $1 in
matching grants awarded, we, it
has translated to $4.26
returning to New Mexico in
federal funds, which is a great
return on our investment.
Once an entity is able to obtain
a matching grant, they are then
able to apply for a project
implementation grant, which will
support them in executing the
federal grant and the matching
grant on
Contractors on grant
administrators, on any other
professional services they might
need to get to a successful
project completion, and we
anticipate that these project
implementation grants will be
able to support a combined $150
million in federal and matching
grants to ensure that the
project in administration and
completion is done in accordance
with local, state, federal, um,
guidelines.
And then lastly, the 3rd grant
program that was created out of
the New Mexico Match fund with
the Federal compliance offset
grant program, which was created
to offset costs associated with
various federal compliance
requirements, for example, the
Buy America Build America
domestic content requirements
that require certain items to be
purchased in America, and that
has caused increased project
costs for a lot of folks, um,
who, who scoped out their
projects before that requirement
existed. And so there was $3
million set aside for that grant
program that was awarded in.
Grant to the village of Los
Lunas for um cost increase
associated with Buy America
requirements for their I-4D
interchange project.
I think a few program highlights
for the New Mexico Match fund
more broadly, is that over 55%
of this funding has landed in
rural and frontier communities,
which we're really proud of. And
you can see on the chart at the
bottom of the slide that it's
really proportionally
distributed throughout the
state, um, and has has impacted
and touched every region of the
state. We've been able to fund
infrastructure projects, energy
projects, emergency response.
This was a very, um, this
program was very adaptive to the
needs of communities impacted by
wildfires.
And the local cost share
requirements associated with
grants that were responding to
the impacts of wildfires and
flooding in Lincoln County and
Mescalero Apache area, as well
as public safety projects and
then some more general projects.
Um, we'll move on to the next
slide, which is about direct pay
and elective pay, as Leslie
mentioned, this is a provision
of the inflation reduction Act
that allows tax-exempt entities
to access clean energy rebates
that have been available to the
private sector for decades, but
have now been allowed uh tax
exempt entities are now allowed
to access, and these can be a
really great way to incentivize
um capital stacking because they
allow for you to obtain up to
60% of your project costs back
in a rebate from the IRS.
So, as Wesley mentioned, the
state just completed our first
pre-filing process and we
anticipate this to be a great
way for local entities and local
public bodies to recoup project
costs on clean energy projects,
particularly if they're
electrifying their fleet,
electrifying their public
transit systems or investing in
other, um, energy production,
such as solar energy.
Lastly, I'll briefly touch on uh
how the infrastructure division
supports site selection and site
readiness. The idea that, you
know, there are certain factors
that are going to determine the
optimal location for a project
or economic development project
in a in an area, and as you can
see on the chart, which is kind
of small in the printout, um,
the top two bars are showing
that utilities and
infrastructure are the two main
needs when site selectors are
looking at sites to identify
where they're going to place the
manufacturer
c t ur ing plant or another, you
know, economic development
project in the community. And so
the infrastructure division is
key to supporting this because
we're able to provide funding
navigation to support site
development projects at local
public bodies identifying ways
that you can fund site readiness
to ensure that utilities and
infrastructure are leading to
these sites, um.
Obviously access to the New
Mexico Match fund if part of
that site readiness project is
funded by federal funding so
that they can meet the local
cost share requirements
associated with developing these
sites. Um, and, and also
liaising with the rural and
frontier equity mbudsman who are
able to support particularly
rural and frontier communities
and navigating site readiness
and infrastructure assets for
economic development as well as
we're working on future efforts
related to um geospatial mapping
and layering of existing
infrastructure maps, so that
we can readily available what
readily availably see what
assets exist at a site, so that,
um, not only legislators can
make more informed decisions,
but also private sector
investors can make more informed
decisions about infrastructure
assets. So that's some of the
efforts that we'll be doing to
kind of support statewide site
selection and site readiness
efforts. Um, the next slide is
just the contact information for
all of our members of our
division as of today as well as
a QR code that goes to our
website, which was just launched
last week.
I will yield the rest of my
time. Thank you.
Thank you, um.
We've got Senator Hamlin first.
Great, thank you both so much,
uh, for being here. One of the
things that I like to do in my
community is do a capital outlay
workshop because we have a lot
of nonprofits, um, and there's a
lot of kind of confusion
sometimes as to what people can
do and what they can apply for
and, and I think many of our
smaller communities are, are
very much like that. Um, and so
in our case, our nonprofits
develop a fiscal relationship
with the city of Las Cruces or
the North Donana County, um, and
So, and I think it's really
important for them to know
because it's, it's their money
and we want to be able to help
them. So I, I do this every
single year. And I'm wondering,
This has kind of been the theme
is, is how can our state
departments get the word out to
our communities because there's,
it seems to be there's limited
capacity and it's like, you have
to have somebody who knows.
The insides and outs, and so I'm
glad that we have your contact
information, but how are, how is
that information getting to the,
like, for example, the city of
Las Cruces and Donana County.
Um, because I love the idea of
the stacking and because I think
many of us want to make sure
that our money goes as far as we
can.
And so
Can you share with us how you're
getting that information out.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, um, vice chair,
yeah, so one thing that we do
and what we've always done with
DFA is we do these ICIP training
workshops, um, they start
roughly March of every year and
then kind of go through the
June, July, maybe into August
sometimes time frame and so
those are geared towards giving
all the information related to
capital to all the entities that
are able to do it. They're,
they've been virtual training in
the last few years, um, ever
since COVID. Prior to that, um,
we didn't even have those
trainings. So we did start that
a few years back. Um, we're
gonna continue that within this.
Division. Um, we're also gonna
try to get out into the
communities more. I think one
thing that we've talked about
doing is going at least
regionally um to each region of
the state to try to, to get the
information out there and get
the word out there. Um, now that
we have 2 and, and they're
actually sitting up up top two
rural and frontier equity
ombudsman. Um, they'll also be
assisting with that, um, getting
the word out as well by working
within the communities and so um
that's, that's one way that we
can do it. Um, also, you know,
one way we can do it is try to
schedule more, more, um, time
with, with
All of the legislators too. So,
so the legislators can also
become aware of some of the
processes and, and things that
we have that we're putting in
place within our division, um,
but I think just getting out
there is one thing. I think also
when it comes to capital
projects, um, trying to
schedule, um, more, more
hearings and, and listening to
what those projects and what
those needs are. Um, I know the
cogs do that already and so it
might just be getting with the
councils of governments to, to
be a part of that process and so
that, that our division also
understands what projects and
needs are out there so that we
can work closely with the.
to get them all the information
they need.
Madam Chair, thank you very much
for that, because we just had,
uh, a meeting with one of our
cogs, um, you know, because it's
like getting all of us together
is like herding cats. And so
when they're able to do that,
it's like they want to maximize
that impact. Um, I would love,
and I think it's a good idea, is
to work with the local
legislators because we can go
ahead and reach out to our
constituents and the people that
we're working with that are
asking us for money every single
year. um, and help really
facilitate that relationship.
Um, but also it helps us be able
to talk about it.
a little bit more, um, because a
lot of this is overwhelming, and
thank you for simplifying what I
think is probably a very
complicated process. Um, and so
please, please reach out. Uh, I
would love to work with the city
of Las Cruces and Donana County,
bring you out, bring our
nonprofits because we have that.
We have many who are providing
services that work with the city
of Las Cruces, Missy Valley
community of Hope is one of
those, um, that's near and dear
to my heart. And so, um, in the
in the encouraging capital
Um, that's fascinating, but it's
like, I appreciate because it's
really stretching our money. And
the idea of the Federal grants
Bureau is, thank you, because we
do want to make sure that I, you
know, my colleagues, we've all
had this conversation of what
other monies are available.
And I've always told my
constituents, if you can find
other money that shows me that
you're trying to stretch those
dollars as much as you can. Um,
the town of Massa, the mayor
there is one who's been doing
that, Russell Hernandez, but not
everybody has the cap
capacity to do that. So thank
you very much for doing that.
So, um,
Any of the PR stuff, please work
with us. I think it's safe to
say to work with, with our
colleagues because I think we
want to get that information
out.
Um, and so I'll give you my
contact information so that um
we can do that because uh we do
a workshop, I do a workshop
every year with the city of Las
Cruces for our constituents. So
thank you very much for doing
that, and I appreciate it.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Madam
Chair, if I might add, Senator
Hamlin, the other thing I think
would be important to highlight
is that the, the bureau that I'm
in charge of the capital
navigation and funding
Assistance Bureau, which really
is promoting the capital stock
approach with local entities
will be engaging communities in
two different communities of
practice that we're currently
working to set up one
particularly with focusing on
rural and frontier communities
that the ombuds will be in
charge of, but another that's
for capital project managers,
grant writers, grant managers,
um, anybody at the local level
who's involved in
decision making around capital
projects so that we can ensure
that there is uh capacity
building and technical
assistance as this is a pretty
new concept in New Mexico in
particular to ensure that we
are, like you said, stretching
those dollars all of the way.
Thank you.
Thank you. All right, next we
have, uh, Representative Ortiz.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Um.
Thank you for this presentation.
It's really helpful and I think
really super timely that this
division exists and we can
leverage all of our dollars
that, um, you know, from the
federal government, but also
from philanthropy and make these
projects go a little bit
further, um, I have a question
about how this division is going
to work with all the other state
agencies in particular, uh, the
Indian Affairs department. I
represent two publics in my
district, Tas Pablo Piccori
Pueblo.
And I, you know, I
I'm looking at lots of their
capital outlay requests, so I'd
like to understand how this
division will be working with,
um, with Indian affairs.
With regards to capital outlay,
um, oversight of the existing
projects into um
intergovernmental agreements.
Madam Chair and Representative,
um, yeah, so, um, I actually
have a really close relationship
working with um Secretary of
Indian Affairs and Deputy
Secretary. I know that they are
getting fully staffed with their
capital projects, folks, and so
as they continue to get their
staffing up, we'll continue to
work with them to try to help
them move their capital
projects. I think one thing that
we're gonna look at doing, um,
not only for tribal communities,
for all communities, is kind of
going through the current list
of capital projects, seeing
which ones aren't moving and
trying to find ways to help them
fully fund some of these
projects.
That have not been fully funded.
I think that's a big piece of
some of the stagnant projects is
just not enough funding to
complete the project, so one
goal that we have is to kind of
get that word out there that
we're going to be here to help
them try to find out additional
funding, um, and then in the
future, our goal is to use the
ICIPs to kind of help guide the
funding opportunities instead of
doing it on the back end, um, we
want to do that on the front
end, try to find federal
opportunities, other
opportunities that have
capitally be the last resort,
not the first resort.
Great, thank you. And I follow
up question to that is whether
this division in the future is
going to handle.
These capital outlay requests
and and IGAs. Madam Chair and
Representative, um, it's
possible, um, I think that's
something that we're talking
about doing. I think the goal
for this fiscal year is to kind
of get up and running, um, get
everything going, and then talk
about, um, which, which agencies
out there, um, could potentially
move their capital programs to
this division, um, it's not
gonna work for everyone. I think
there's certain agencies out
there that have a good control
and good grasp on the capital
projects, um, and, and, and
working through the
process itself, um, I think DOT
is one of them where they have
state funding and federal
funding that they have tied to
it and so bringing them into
this division might be
difficult, but there are also
agencies, um, such as Aging
Long-term Services and IED as
you mentioned, that could
potentially benefit from
something like that, so I think
we're gonna have to have those
discussions and figure out what
the best, best, best path
forward is. Great. Thank you so
much. It's very helpful.
Thank you, uh, Senator
Stefaniks.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you to the presenters, um.
Could you clarify, are the cogs
eligible to receive state
funding and to receive
assistance in the match.
Madam Chair and Senator Stannis,
yes, they are eligible. OK. And
um could you
Speak more about how the rural I
represent quite a few rural
areas. So could you talk about
how the rural ombuds people are
specifically can assist those
communities.
Madam Chair, Senator, yes,
absolutely. I'll start and then
maybe Haley um can add on a
little bit to it. I think one of
the goals is to, to get them
out, to get them out into the
communities first and foremost,
um, letting them know that
they're available to help them
and that they're they're here to
guide them. Um, I think it's
also working closely with the
Council of Government in that
area too, I think um probably uh
the approach with both of those,
um, I think would be ideal. Um,
and part of it too is the reason
why we have two of them is
there's also one that's gonna
also help with some internal
functions.
Um, which is maybe contacting
the state auditor's office, um,
helping them through their audit
compliance issues, um, as well
as trying to work closely with
the funding and navigation
Bureau with Haley and Ethan to
try to help them find the
funding, um, so they're gonna,
they're gonna be out in the
communities and they're also
going to be working um within
the, the bureau itself to try to
help um with all of the issues
that they're facing, and I don't
know if Haley wants to add on.
Madam Chair, Senator Stefaniks,
I will just add that the onboard
position is really meant to be
an agile position that can
respond to the needs of a
community as
arise. And so the position is a
little like nebulous because of
that, but we are trying to
formalize some of the structures
that are associated with how you
receive technical assistance
from the on bed position, so we
will be launching a public
platform in which rural and
frontier communities can submit
technical assistance requests
directly to their office to uh
receive support with a wide
variety of services and um
programs that are defined in the
statute that created that
position. And so we anticipate
having that on.
online portal, uh, set up on our
website and hopefully the next
month or so would be the goal
before the legislative session,
um, in addition to that, the
community of practice that I
mentioned in response to Senator
Hamlin's question, will likely
be a hybrid model, so with
monthly online meetings.
Trainings, listening sessions,
but also with regional in person
meetings.
Probably coordinated like Wesley
said in conjunction with the
cogs, but they're also able to
attend meetings on an as needed
basis, if any of the communities
you all serve are interested in
having an on but attend a ribbon
cutting ceremony event, a public
meeting, please reach out as, as
we're able to be really agile
with how they travel through the
state and get them into those
public meetings and settings
where we think it's really
impactful to have them listening
in those rooms. Thank you.
Thank you. And Madam Chair, if,
uh, for those of us who do, um,
newsletters.
Um
I don't. Do you want us to refer
people to a website to the you
both, who do you want referred
to?
Madam Chair, Senator sophonics,
um, I think for now, um, have
them refer to Haley and her and
her group, um, so it could be
Haley Brown, it could be um
Jason Quintana, who's one of the
rural ombudsmen, uh, Michael
Gilmore, who's the other one, as
well as Ethan Branch, um, any of
them could, could assist with
any needs that they have, um,
again related to anything
capital that stems from a
compliance all the way to
finding funding.
OK, and Madam Chair, thank you,
uh, one last question, um, do
you take the role.
Of ever advising a community
that they're asking for too much
or too little.
Yes, Madam Chair, Senator
Stefaniks, yes, I think that's a
really critical part of the
funding navigation process. Part
of that process as we have it
set up now is doing a needs
assessment with the community
that's that's, um, looking to
identify other funding
opportunities for their capital
project. Part of that needs
assessment is understanding if
they have a well-founded cost
estimate for their projects,
which can lead to conversations
related to whether they're
requesting not enough money to
complete a project or too much
money. And so part of our
process
is really identifying that they
have the resources and technical
assistance to scope their
projects appropriately, come up
with evidence-based cost
estimates so that they can then,
if they're participating in the
capital outlay process, make a
really well informed request of
the legislature or, you know, if
they're, if the opportunity is
best suited to pursue federal
funds, they then have a really
defensible budget for their
federal grant application. Thank
you.
So Madam Chair, on that point,
um.
Let's say a community does have
a backup professional uh
analysis and planning and a
project manager.
And the amount of money that
they're asking for.
You don't believe can be fully
Uh, matched in the time period
of the project, will you let
them know that? Yes, Madam
Chair, part of our process too
is identifying if a project is
better suited to be a phased
project as opposed to a one-time
project. I think historically
there's been a lot of uh
interest and eagerness to obtain
all the funding for a project at
one time when it actually might
be more suitable to phase a
project, split out the design
and planning of the project and
the construction of the project,
or, or so that you can better
prepare your cost estimate for
the construction.
phase. So, that's part of the
conversation too that we're
having with entities when
they're approaching us to do
funding navigation and receive
technical assistance is whether
or not it makes more sense to
phase that project out over
different distinct phases so
that they can then achieve a
lower dollar amount for each
phase and possibly fund those in
a more timely manner as opposed
to having it be all wrapped up
in one request, uh, that may be
burdensome to get funded on the
same timeline.
And Madam Chair, I think it's my
last question, uh, that time
frame that you're talking about,
are we talking about probably 3
to 5 years?
Madam Chair, Senator Stefaniks,
I think it really depends on the
scale of the project. I think
for most capital projects, yeah,
3 to 5 years is a pretty
realistic timeline, um,
especially if we're approaching
it when a capital stack and
breeding funding situation where
we're able to identify multiple
funding sources to get a project
complete. I do think there's
instances in which there's a
little bit more nuance,
sometimes, particularly around
water rights and some of
projects related to water
systems that will require a
little bit more strategic
planning, but that's also one of
the goals of the division is if
planning documents need to be
created as a.
part of that process that our
division is directing them to
technical assistance providers
who can help them, um, with the
planning documents that may aid
in in uh better situating these
more complex projects.
Thank you so much to the
presenters and thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you. Uh,
Representative Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you so much for the
presentation, uh, uh, picked up
quite a bit of information and
uh and.
trying to present this quickly.
There might have been a few
points that I missed, uh, Madam
Chair, um, and so I'm gonna ask,
I have a couple of questions for
clarity I think that I hope that
they'll be brief, um, you
mentioned early on on page 6,
when you were describing the
federal grants Bureau, um, that
there would be assistance. Did I
understand correctly assistance
in terms of of people that could
be available, the idea is to
provide a.
since not only with the
application but in reporting.
Requirements because I see
that's where a lot of entities
get stuck. Is this recording,
reporting requirements and if
they, in my experience if they
are not able to provide those
reports, they get stuck and
they're not able to move to that
next step, so are there going to
be uh individuals available to
assist with report completion.
Madam Chair, Representative
Little, yes, that there will be
um currently we have two Federal
grants Bureau, um, individuals.
One is Anna Neruda Moya and the
other one is Leandra Garcia, um,
and so we're we're hoping to
expand on that and we're going
to try to hire a coordinator
here within the next month or so
and then of course we're
requesting more funding for the
next session, um, through the
next session for next fiscal
year. So, um, they will also,
um, that will also give us a few
more individuals within that
bureau, um, in addition to that,
we're also trying to contract
for the
Technical assistance services,
um, so we are going to go out to
RFP and try to provide um find
providers who can help with that
assistance as well, um, and be
on call to be able to help these
communities.
Madam Chair, if I might add also
just say that we've had a really
big success in helping entities
report their state and local
fiscal recovery funds, in
particular with the Federal
Grants Bureau. We've been able
to engage with a wide variety of
communities, particularly the
entities of government that got
their funding through that as a
pass through through the state,
um, and helping them identify
how to access the reporting
portal because we want to ensure
that that funding is preserved
for communities that received
it. So just to highlight a win
of the bureau.
already has been really
mobilizing communities to meet
the reporting requirements for
that funding. Thank you.
Thank you in a quick follow-up
question to the response. Thank
you so much. That was very
helpful, um, how many are you
looking at or ideally what are
you looking at the number uh of
uh.
Additional stuff to to.
Madam, Madam Chair
Representative, um, I think as
far as staffing in our bureau
itself, um, we're looking for at
least 2 more, um, in addition to
the three that we're hoping to
have this fiscal year, so that
would be 5 total, um, and again,
part of this is also working in
conjunction with the cogs, the
council of governments. They
also have the ability to do some
of this as well and so um we
want to just work closely with
them to, to get all of this out
there. Um, in addition to the
contractors, because we do know
that there's nonprofit um
entities out there that also are
qualified to help.
And so that's part of what the
contract is for us to find those
providers to, to assist as well.
So we're kind of approaching
this from all angles, um, and
trying to, to, you know, not,
not over overspend, overuse
state funds, um, and trying to
get too many, um, providers
within our bureau itself but
also use the resources we have,
um, in the councils of
governments and nonprofits to
help as well.
Thank you, thank you very much.
Uh, my final question would be,
uh, regarding, um, the, the
segment on page 10.
And this has a lot to do with
the capacity again, um.
Uh, is, uh, a clarification,
Madam Chair.
Um, you described the capital
stacks versus the traditional
funding opportunities or the
approaches rather and uh.
Then those individuals that we
were just speaking of earlier
would they also be able to
provide assistance if needed to
apply for to determine how.
What's other sources might be
available and how to go about
this process of stacking. Yes,
Madam Chair Representative,
that's a process that we're
currently piloting right now. So
if you're aware of a community
that would immediately benefit
from that, please send me an
email. Um, we're hoping to have
again similar to how we're going
to have the uh.
Other information that the rural
and frontier Equity Ombudsman
are going to be providing on the
website in the next month, we
have the same deadline to
provide, um, access to this
technical assistance process
through our website too on that
timeline, but the process we've
created is it doesn't initial
intake with the entity that's
done over a video call where we
assess um the project, the
capacity of the entity if they
have any compliance issues, um,
what other funding sources
they've already identified for
the project, what plans they
have in place to support the.
projects and then our funding
assistance navigator whose name
is Ethan. He'll go through with
the answers he identify funding
sources that are a good match
for the capacity, not only the
capacity of the entity, but the
project type that they're trying
to fund. And so he'll then
prepare a memo that goes to the
entity that catalogs those
opportunities and then based on
a system that we've created
internally, it ranks them from
most impactful to least
impactful, so that they know how
to prioritize which of these
funding opportunities to then
pursue.
So once that memos created, we
send that to the entity. They
then spend a few days with it.
We schedule a follow-up meeting
with them to review the
information, uh, go over any
questions they might have,
identify next steps, for
example, a lot of entities at
that point might need to
identify grant writing resources
to then apply for the funds, so
then we'll we'll link them up
with other technical assistance
providers either in the Federal
grants Bureau or externally that
are able to provide that service
to them. Um, and then if there
are any other issues, for
example, audit compliance or
other
compliance issues that are
preventing them from
successfully receiving other
funding for that project will
then identify resources to uh
fix those compliance issues as
well. So it's really a holistic
process um where we can be
engaged really at any stage of
the process of a project, excuse
me, um, to identify these
funding sources to build that
capital stack.
Thank you very much. I'm sure
that might have been a review
for some, but this is very
helpful to me thank you so much.
Thank you, Madam Chair my last,
that was it.
Thank you, Representative
Martinez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
I appreciate the monumental task
of standing up.
This bureau
Um
I want to follow up a little bit
on Representative Little's, uh,
question.
Some of the smaller
municipalities sometimes have
audit compliance issues.
Um
And it, it doesn't seem to be
Across the board.
Some people seem to be able to
get their capital funding
without any problem.
Same issues on another
municipality.
They are
singled out
Uh, I'm talking about one of the
municipalities that I represent,
town of Berne Leo.
2 years in a row, I appropriated
capital funds.
For public safety purposes.
Uh, one of the issues, 11 of the
appropriations took 18 months to
get resolved.
Um, your new bureau, is that
your audit compliance.
And, and, uh
Assistance that's gonna, is that
gonna help solve these issues
because
I, I try on some of these.
Uh, capital outlay
appropriations. I want to do the
whole thing.
I, you know, for years I've seen
25 here, 25 there, by the time
you raise enough money, it's
tripled in.
Cost
So what I try to do is I try to
find a project fully funded.
But this project took 18 months
and it was, it was not.
A very complicated thing. It was
to refresh their
The police vehicles.
It took 18 months to get that
resolved. Is this gonna assist
with that, or somebody can go in
and sit with
The finance director of a small
municipality and say, OK, these
are the things that we need to
focus on. We need to fix things,
so.
Following year when I get
another.
Uh, appropriation for a fire
truck, it doesn't take another 6
or 7 months to resolve.
My concern is that these, these
small especially small
municipalities do not have the
budget to go out and hire these.
Big dollar, uh, firms to come in
and try to look at these things.
Are they gonna be able to get
assistance from your bureau.
Madam Chair, um, Representative
Martinez, so I think, um, you
know, when it comes to reviewing
the auto compliance, um, I think
DFA has been, um, I, I think
it's taking a little longer than
expected as, as you know, um,
with some of the process,
especially with the town of Born
Leo, um, one of our goals moving
forward is to identify some of
these things, um, upfront, um,
so it doesn't take as long. Um,
I think in the past what we've
done is we've issued letters,
um, to these entities uh whether
they need a fiscal agent or
special conditions, and we kind
of wait to.
hear back from them, um, and,
and again, not to, to make
excuses, but there's been
turnover um and and and in our
department for one, I think one
of our goals is to, to meet with
them prior to sending those
letters out, um, so once we
actually determined that they
did have all the issues, um, you
know, meet with them upfront and
then try to, try to help resolve
all those issues, um, to where
it doesn't take as long as it
has, um, I, I think, you know,
with the town of Bernalillo,
that one did take a while last
year and this year as well and
so we are going to be correcting
that.
I think it's a combination of
this, this division, um, as well
with all of the other um members
that are at play, I think the
local government division
actually reviews the audit
first, um, and then it goes to
our administrative services
division who, um, with our CFO
reviews it as well and so we
kind of have a committee, um,
and so we're gonna use that
committee moving forward and,
and try to make these done more
streamlined, um, so that we
don't have those into the
future. I think there's also
legislation that might be going
out, um, codifying the executive
order, that might help a little
bit too, um, in regards to.
Some of these concerns and
issues, I think part of it too,
um, I know that you brought up,
you know, Bern Leo maybe had
some issue and maybe there was
another entity that might have
had the same issue but didn't
have these, these same
requirements and so we're
looking at all that as well,
trying to take some of the
subjectivity out of it, um, so
that it's straight lined and
streamlined all across the board
for every entity. So we are
looking at that.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I, I
appreciate that answer because
at the end of the day, we're all
trying to do the same thing.
We're all trying to make New
Mexico better. Uh, I will
comment on some of the language
in the letters that go out or
extremely vague.
So the municipality thinks
they're doing the right thing
and then.
You know, 56 months later they
find out, well, that's not what
you meant in the letter, so I, I
would take another.
Swing at the, at the language in
the letter, but I appreciate you
working hard to get this stuff
resolved, um, and I look forward
to, uh,
A much brighter day in getting
these things done.
Out in the community because
ultimately it's the people that
we work for.
That we want to make sure that
we're getting the biggest bang
for the dollar because as things
go on, things get more
expensive, prices rise.
Um, and, and especially for this
last round.
I was really starting to feel
panicky that we hadn't
appropriated enough money to get
the job done, but I, I
appreciate you working with the,
with the people of the town of
Berglio.
to get this resolved. I
appreciate the fact that you
were willing to sit down face to
face and
Get this done and
Hopefully, uh
You know, we see less and less
this as we, as we move forward.
But again, thank you for the
monumental task of standing this
up because
I can just imagine, uh,
Your headaches versus mine.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. uh, Representative
Lujan.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
apologize for being late. I was
listening to the presentation on
my way in on my phone, um.
It's hard to be in two places at
once, but we try, um.
Man, I want to thank them for
the presentation and this has
been ongoing, um, and I just
really wanted to follow up kind
of.
With what represent a little and
Representative Martinez we're
talking about in that.
that executive order that really
affects our local governments
here in Santa Fe, Wesley, you
know that you and I have had sit
down conversations over the the
last few years and trying to
figure these things out. I don't
believe that a law codifying
that executive order is what our
state needs.
And to be truthful, I think we
need to go to the table and and
really figure this out in a
different way. Maybe other
states are doing this
differently. And with that, do
you know of other states that
really um
Address that sort of um.
The, the, the audits and the
which we want, we want, uh, we
want accountability, but are you
aware of any other kind of um
process that's going on in other
states to help.
Adam.
Madam Chair Representative Lu
Han, I actually don't, um, I, I
can do some research and we will
look into that to see if we can
figure out what's going on in
other states, um, but right now,
um, we, we, we haven't looked
into it, um, and I think I agree
with you that codifying the
current executive order, um,
would not really be helpful. I
think what we're looking at
doing is trying to put something
into code that um that, that,
that makes sense. Um, we, we do
know that they need to get their
audits in. So I think making
sure that their audits get in is
part of it, making sure that
these entities have
their budgets in and that their
budgets are in timely, um, but
when it comes to, you know, the
repercussions of that. I think
that's what we need to look at
doing. And part of what we're
trying to do with the
codification, at least, um, what
we've looked at is maybe
creating a committee, um, that's
made up of legislators, um, the
executive, um, and, um,
municipal League, the Mexico
counties, and trying to bring
all players to the table to
figure out the best path forward
in some of this, and so that's
what we're looking at doing um
with our qualification, um, and
so it would be a committee that
makes these decisions on what we
should do moving forward with um
with the capital projects for an
entity. Um, so that's kind of
what we're looking at and again
we're open to more suggestions
as well. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I think that's an excellent
idea.
And I, and I would, I would just
echo some of the things that I
caught you saying um in regards
to this issue is that what is
the cost of us waiting and, and
what are the costs, the
opportunities that are missed,
and that is, that is an
unfortunate place to be, and we
know that the costs are just
going to continue to go up and
we missed the opportunity to
stack some of these things that
I mean this is a lot of work
that you're putting into. I
wanna, I want to commend you for
that, Wesley and for your new
position in this office, um.
But yes, I think we really need
to take the our opportunity and
come together and figure that
that piece out because it, it's
not just hurting Santa Fe, it's
hurting a lot of, uh,
communities, especially our
rural communities, um, I've been
up in Mota. I've been up in some
other um other counties and
trying to help them with some of
the issues, especially when it
came down to, um, the emergency
funding in some of these areas
and, and you work diligently
through your office to DFA I
want to commend them and really
um helping, uh, stream.
uh those uh those fundings that
we had in place because there
was some misunderstanding due to
that executive order.
Madam Chair, um.
Let's see what else I wanted to
ask here.
Let's see, that was the main
one, want to catch.
Um, and the stacking, um,
I want to say you did talk about
our cogs, you did talk about,
um, this opportunities, the one
and and I just need
clarification.
Um, there are opportunities to
the New Mexico uh Finance
Authority as well. We even heard
yesterday with one of the, the
requests that we're gonna hear
this session on the $50 million
for solar. Um, how are you
working with them and
integrating some of these uh and
stacking these opportunities and
funding, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, Representative
Lujan, yes, that is a critical
part of um creating capital
stocks for most of our
communities, particularly for
water projects with the Water
Trust board, um, in the colonius
region and the other, uh,
earmark programs that run
through NMFA. So that is a
critical piece of funding that
we're looking at and ensuring
that communities are highly
considering when they're
developing capital stocks for
their infrastructure projects,
um, especially because we know
that it's making state dollars
work um in favor of these
projects.
in developing the infrastructure
out in these communities.
Oftentimes these larger, I'm
particularly thinking of water
and wastewater projects that are
causing a lot of um, you know,
that's the impacts where we're
seeing a lot of issues with
construction inflation, a lot of
issues with rising project
costs, um, and so sometimes,
unfortunately, even those
programs are not going to be
able to fully fund the water
project, um, yesterday we were
actually in a working session
where we were talking about a
project in Glorieta, that was,
uh, it's taken since 2012 to
properly develop the capital
stock.
to complete a construction of a
well, and part of that was
funding from the Water Trust
board. Part of it was a federal
grant and part of it was capital
outlay. So I think, you know,
those are a critical piece of
the puzzle, but sometimes we're
still going to have to identify
additional funding sources
because the cost of these
projects are so high and, and
frankly, the nature is so
critical.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um, and
through the infrastructure um
conference that we had last was
it last week or?
week before, I'm, I've been to
too many things. Um, a lot of
the conversation going towards
the funding and and really that
astronomical amount of things uh
are cost, it's gonna, um, that
we're going to incur, um, and
doing this sort of thing is, is
so valuable to our state and I
can see how this, how that
conference in some of the the
work uh groups that came
together and having the
different conversations.
But infrastructure being
Everything for our economic
development as far as I'm
concerned. Where's broadband fit
in here, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, Representative, um,
I think, you know, when it comes
to broadband, we're going to
work closely with um, with Drew
and, and their staff over there
to identify potential funding
sources. I think they already
have lots of funding source
identified. I think there's lots
of things that are going to be
going on this next, um, this
next calendar year, um, that,
that they've already set up,
which is great, but we'll, we'll
work with them, um, I think, you
know, when it comes to
infrastructure, I think that's a
critical piece of it and so
we're going to try to find
different funding opportunities
for the state and
For all the local entities with
their broadband um needs and so
I think it's just working
closely with them. I think um
next year so they have the they
have their conference or their
summit at the same time as our
infrastructure conference and,
and I've already been in talks
with Drew to kind of combine
them, um, next year so that we
can actually come together and
and tackle this um as, as a
whole. Thank you, ma'am, because
I think we are talking about
infrastructure without broadband
and, you know, without, with all
the funding that we have for the
EV programs and everything else
and just um
disparity that we have across
rural New Mexico, we're going to
have to really focus in on that.
They do have a $22 billion gap
of funding right now for that
middle mile, um, and that's
gonna be for me that's critical,
um, on many levels, and then
also you, you mentioned your
sight readiness, are you all
working on the site readiness
bill?
Madam Chair, Madam Chair
Representative, not directly,
but I was able to attend the,
the governor's economic
development conference and had a
lot of really great
conversations with the group
that is working on that because
I think the efforts of our
office are going to be really
critical in ensuring that
they're able to launch a really
successful site readiness
program should that legislation
pass. So while we're not
directly involved in the working
group. I've definitely been in
touch with all the members of
the working group and been
staying abreast to their
conversations about the
legislation as I think it has a
really, it's a really um
important conversation for our
division to be plugged into. The
other thing I'll just quickly
say in response to the question
about broadband. Is that the New
Mexico Match fund has actually
matched, I believe 7 grants for
broadband, which has been really
great. We've, and in
particularly in tribal
communities, so that, that
funding source is really
critical to ensuring that we
meet the funding gap for the
middle mile.
And, and diversify the funding
streams, particularly through
federal funding opportunities
for broadband in local
communities and then using the
New Mexico Match fund to to meet
the cost share requirements. So
that program has really been
able to help answer the call in
some ways for broadband, and so
I, I anticipate it will in the
future should it get more
funding. Great. And my last
point and question here, Madam
Chairs, as we have an
infrastructure office, uh, we
are still piecemealing, um,
projects and, and
The point of having an
infrastructural office is really
to really consolidate these
efforts. I mean, we have um
Amner that that, you know, have
all their infrastructure, um,
projects and we're running
through them. How are we going
to really consolidate those
efforts and really have that,
that focal point being with a
true it's, I shouldn't say true,
but a better organized
infrastructure office, Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair Representative Lu
Han, um, I think that that's a
future goal of the division is
to kind of take some of these um
outliers, um, if you will, some
of these other state agencies
that do infrastructure and
capital and bring them all under
one umbrella. Uh, we don't know
what that looks like yet. Um,
we're gonna have to kind of do
some, some initial um work of,
of, of communication and getting
with these agencies to see um if
it makes sense. Um, I think one
piece that we can do though is
created a new system, a new
capitality system that can help
track projects better and, and,
and make sure that
we're actually fully funding
those projects, um, from
beginning to end on a project
level, not an appropriation
level, and so I think that's
really where we're gonna be
doing it, um, like I said, I
think I said this earlier, um,
you know, some of the agencies
probably do need some help and
some guidance and, and maybe
even be put under this
division's umbrella, but some of
them, um, can do it fine on
their own, and some of them are
doing it, um, doing it
perfectly, um, if you will, and
so we just need to make sure
that the ones that need the
assistance are getting it and
the ones that are doing it, um,
continue to, to thrive.
Right, I appreciate that answer,
and it is critical to have an
infrastructure office for our
state and I just want to say
you're doing a great job so far
and keep it up. Thank you.
Thank you. um, we don't have
anybody else on the list, but I
just want to thank you for your
presentation. Um, I think you,
um, this is exactly what we've
needed for years, um, the
question I have is, so.
Capital outlay projects that
have that are from the past.
Are you, are they falling into
your division now? Are you
gonna, uh, how is that?
Unfolding.
Madam Chair, so Capital projects
from the past, um, that have
been funded but just don't have
the full amount of funding. Um,
we're gonna be reviewing that
list of projects to see how we
can help, um, identify the
funding needs um for those
entities and, and try to get
them fully funded. That's gonna
be our one of our primary tasks,
um, and then, you know, once
these new ICIPs are developed,
um, this next calendar year,
then we'll take that information
and try to help them fully fund
their projects upfront as
opposed to on the back end, um,
so we're gonna kind of do it
both ways. I think I'm
To begin with though, it's
trying to fully fund these
projects that have already been
appropriated, um, that, that
still need additional funding.
And Madam Chair, if I might add
another strategy in which we're
employing to do that is to make
sure that we have really
accurate information to group
projects so that if a federal
opportunity opens for, say, um,
critical road infrastructure, we
can then catalog all of those
projects, um, reach out to those
entities and understand if it
would be important to them to do
a consolidated application to a
federal program to capture that
funding for multiple
communities, so that's another
avenue that we're pursuing to
make sure that we don't leave
federal dollars on the table.
When it, when they can find
maybe, you know, 10 to 20
projects in different
communities.
So I know that some of the, um,
feedback that I've had from my
community is they've put in for
a project and then by the time,
um, the funding comes through
because it's, you know, several
months later, it's almost 6
months later that, you know,
supply chain issues and, um,
costs have gone up. And so then
we have that, that shortage, um,
do you think that'll help, I'm
assuming it's gonna help curb
some of that, but do you think
it'll help get it going faster.
Madam Chair, yes, I, I really do
think it will help, um, getting
these projects done more
quickly. I think, um, you know,
with the ICIP process being
basically almost a year prior to
them receiving funds, it does
create that that issue of fully
funding, and so I think part of
it is identifying that upfront
and saying, hey, look, you know,
you're not gonna get this money
potentially until the next
fiscal year. Have you built in a
contingency amount for that
project, so that you're not
finding yourselves with the, you
know, you think it's 500,000,
but it's really gonna be
750,000. So I think part of
what, what we're gonna
doing is identifying those um
and making sure that they are
asking and requesting the the
full amount that they need in
addition to finding other
funding sources so that you're
not having to actually fully
fund that project, um, you know,
maybe you only need to fund a
piece of that project.
And so I, what I'm hearing is
that you all are taking that
into account and when you're
working with say the cogs, um,
are you building in some type of
training to get everybody up to
speed on that.
Madam Chair, yes, we will, we
will definitely um put some
trainings together. Um, we don't
have any right now, um, we're
working on trying to develop, as
I think Hayley was saying
earlier, you know, um, we're in
pilot programs trying to make
sure that what we're gonna be
doing will work, um, and then
once we've identified that it is
working for some of these
entities, and we'll start
developing that training um to
make sure that all the entities
and all the cogs throughout the
state um have those same
opportunities.
And when you talked about the
ombudsman that I'll be helping,
um, will those be regional? Um,
how will you or just everybody
has.
So many, how, how is that
working? Madam Chair, right now
there's 2, so, um, we, if, if we
do get more um more funding in
the future, we would like to
have one in each region. Um,
right now, I think the goal is
to have one out there in the
communities, um, you know,
getting gathering information,
um, collecting the data, and
then the other one potentially
being within the office and kind
of analyzing the data and
helping get all the
opportunities to those
communities. Um, there might be
kind of like a hybrid approach
to them, um, some of them, one
of them might do it one time and
another one might do it the
other time.
But I think part of it too is we
do have other staffing within
the bureau and division to kind
of help with those funding um
navigation um tasks. So
eventually I think we'd like to
get them both out there into the
communities, um, doing the work
and trying to get with, with the
communities so that they
understand um kind of what we're
doing and, and how we can help
them.
Very good. So I, I guess my last
question is I know that I had
seen dates that were, um, put
out that, you know, for, um,
ICIP to go on the list. Um, are
you working?
Are you on the ground working
already with those with the ICP
list.
Madam Chair, yes, I think um
what we're trying to do right
now is finalize the ICIP from
this, from the 2026 to 2030
requests, um, we're we're
working on getting that list
published, um, hopefully by the
next, by, by the end of this
week or early next week, um, we
publish that every year on our
website and then kind of
beginning the process for the
next round of um ICIP funding,
um which will be like the the
FY20 um 27 funding, um, I think
part of it is trying to close um
the current system and opening
the new system um and
trying to develop these new
fields and the new criteria that
we're going to be asking for
with the new ICIP. So I think
you'll see us primarily focused
right now on trying to get what
we currently have out there, all
these capital projects completed
and funded and then in the
future, working on getting
funding for projects upfront so
that I'm not in the same
situation again in, you know, 3
or 4 years. Very good. No, I
think this was an excellent, uh,
presentation and I think this is
information that, uh,
As legislators, we, we need to
know what's going on because you
know we're constantly being
asked by our constituents, um,
you know, what happens to my
project and it just seem
sometimes seem to go into, uh,
the abyss. So this is great. I
look forward to working with you
and I really appreciate your
presentation today. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you.
Alrighty.
I think everybody wants to get a
card. I'm gonna give a pause for
just a, a sec, a few minutes.
Yeah
Before we get going, uh, we were
supposed to have breakfast
burritos. They've just been
delivered, so I guess they're
brunch burritos, but I want to
give everybody the the
opportunity to get them before
we start our next presentation.
uh, we'll get our presenters
seated and and the handouts
passed out and we'll give
everybody just a couple of
minutes. Thank you.
Uh
OK
That
that
Yeah
that
Are you sure you don't want to
breath? Yeah, there's plenty
after, after the prison.
All righty. The burrito break is
over.
Um, if we can get our everybody
back to their seats.
We have our presenters ready to
go if you all would introduce
yourselves and then go into your
presentation. Thank you and
thank you for being patient with
us.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, I'm
sorry, our backs are to you, but
good morning. Um, I'm Stephanie
Chardon-Clark, the cabinet
secretary of the Taxation and
Revenue Department.
Good morning, Madam Chair
members of the committee. My
name is Aisha Mora. I'm the
deputy cabinet secretary. Thank
you for having us.
All right, well, thank you so
much, Madam Chair and members
for inviting us to the
committee. We were asked to, um,
provide an overview of the types
of support that text and Rev
provides to businesses in New
Mexico and so we put together a
new slide deck that we hope will
be informative, and we look
forward to any questions or
follow-ups that you may have for
us. So, um, starting on slide
one.
We just provide an outline of
what we'll cover today. We'll go
over tax and Rev's mission and
strategic plan overview.
Thank you, um, we'll cover some
of our customer experience
initiatives, uh, talk a little
bit about how the department
plays a role in tax policy
development, um, a brief update
on recent changes to the
Metropolitan Redevelopment Act
and again just a brief overview
of our upcoming 2025 session
priorities.
So skipping to slide 3.
Um, tax and Rev has kind of
leaned into strategic planning
since 2019. We updated our
strategic plan in June 2023 and
just to give you a high level
overview. It's organized around
core values, a vision statement,
and then 3,
big umbrella goals under which
all of our strategic initiatives
fall, so the three broad goals
are customer experience, team
excellence, and operational
excellence, and you can kind of
drill down in as much detail as
you want there, um, and.
To, um, you know, what
specifically that means for us,
but we do update the strategic
plan for performance measures
quarterly. It is submitted to
the LFC along with our budget
request, so, um, and that,
that's available if anyone would
like the full copy of it, I'm
happy to send it.
But, um, the core values we
think are really important are
our employees are put in
situations every day where
they're kind of put between
different, um, priorities like,
for example, um, do I prioritize
your customer uh service or
integrity and following the law
to the T, and those two cannot
always go hand in hand.
Sometimes we have to deliver
answers that people don't like,
but it is the law, so we, uh,
provide these to all employees
so that they can lean on them
and consult with them when
they're.
a difficult situation.
Um, some of the customer
experience goals are organized
around expanding our outreach
and education to taxpayers to
expanding the number of options
that are taxpayer and driver
customers have to access our
services, like putting more
things online, more things on
YouTube, we'll talk about that a
little bit more and then trying
to simplify our processes so
that customers have a better
chance of being able to
understand their obligations and
just voluntarily comply so that
we can all do this the easy way.
I'll turn it over to the deputy
secretary.
Thank you, Madam Secretary.
Here's an example of how we
prioritize customer experience
our taxpayer access point is a
secure and efficient portal that
is available 24/7. It covers all
40 tax programs you can do lots
of things in that portal, for
example, you can enter into a
payment plan, make secure
payments, um, check the status
of your returns, uh, read FAQs
update facts information, and we
even have our own snazzy little
AI.
Hotpot Speedy the Roadrunner,
so, um, we're always very proud
of our innovative approaches to
customer service.
Um, and more recently we've
implemented many uh YouTube
videos we have an average of
2000 views per month, which is
really amazing. We're really
trying to meet taxpayers where
they're at and as we know
there's a lot of people in the
virtual world as post COVID and
so we've done a really good job
of um creating a lot of videos
to help taxpayers move through
some of the challenges where
they might be shy to contact us
contact us from other methods,
um, for example, you can watch.
a video on how to file your GRT
return, how to apply for a
business tax ID and how to
navigate all the difficulty of
reporting all the locations and
deductions that we have.
But we also try to meet um the
entire taxpayer base where
they're at on slide 6, we have a
new business workshop that we
pre COVID used to do in person,
um, and we do this in in
conjunction with other entities
when possible, uh, we try to
make sure that businesses really
understand, you know, how to
apply to be a business, how to
get your business tax
identification number, um, what
is GRT? What are, what is
destination based sourcing all
of that's very complicated to
navigate.
As the secretary said, our, our
laws are very complicated, so we
do a really good job in this
presentation of really kind of
just um trying to talk about
that in in plain talk and and
take away the ambiguity that
sometimes the law creates for
them and a barrier to them
staying in compliance. We also
promote the use of our taxpayer
access point, um, we talk about,
uh, non-taxable transaction
certificates which that can also
be challenging for some
taxpayers and we talk about.
The difficulty of collections,
penalty and interest, those
things are very challenging also
once the taxpayer does fall
behind and we do have to work
with them. Um, it's hard, it's
hard on, um, their finances for
them to get kind of out of that
rut. So we talk a little bit
about that to prevent that from
happening.
Um, we also promote our manage
data program, which is helping
to keep them in compliance and
provide contact information.
Um, another area on slide 7 that
we are really proud of is
working with our sister
agencies, Department of
Workforce Solutions and Workers'
Comp Administration, um, we
actually collect withholding
returns and workers' comp
returns, um, on behalf of uh
workers comp Administration, um,
the, the workers' comp anyway,
um, so there's a lot of
difficulty here. This is a
subject I'm very passionate
about for businesses to navigate
um as you might be aware, they
have to file many different
terms to many different
agencies, um, whether that be
monthly, quarterly, annually,
um, it's, it's a very
challenging, um, mechanism to
navigate so we talked about
withholding and filing and how
to calculate withholding, what
are those due dates, again, how
to use our taxpayer access
point. What is workers' comp
insurance, um, what are the due
dates, uh, unemployment
insurance with uh UI claims with
DWS we try to incorporate that
and we uh we have a uh.
Joint partnership agreement with
all three agencies, we exchange
data to make sure that we can
stay in touch and a
communication to make that uh
process easier for New Mexico
businesses, especially with
employees they're the backbone
of our economy, so we do
everything we can for them.
Um, and more recently one of the
difficult subjects is employees
versus independent contractors,
uh, we're hearing a lot about
this, uh, in the industry right
now where employees are being
issued 1099s instead of W-2s, so
we're trying to do everything we
can to navigate that and help
the employees or you know the
the individuals are being issued
the 1099s who sometimes are
employees, um, and work with our
sister agencies to navigate
those difficult situations.
Another thing that we really
pride ourselves in measuring is
our call center performance, our
call centers are really the
backbone of our agency in terms
of how we measure communication.
So on this slide on slide 8,
you'll see uh on the bottom
graph a really a a natural curve
that kind of happens from
January to April. That's our
personal income tax filing
season that's our largest
taxpayer base over about a
million taxpayers and we have
quite a peak in our call center
as they struggle to navigate how
to file a return and what's
happening with the return.
And then, um, more recently with
rebates you'll see that there
was a huge spike in calls where
it was very challenging for us
to deal with, uh, we had to move
many employees to the call
center away from audits away
from collections because as the
secretary said customer service
is our priority, so we, we made
that a priority, but it really
kind of took a toll on our call
center, so some of the things
we've done to improve that the
challenges we dealt with in that
period of time are pushing
towards the more active.
uh management role, a
dashboarding this is actually
coming from our dashboard, uh,
metrics of decision making, um,
we also have a contractor that's
helping us with tier one call
answering and they also trained
all of our uh supervisors on how
to navigate these situations and
we also created culturing to
have uh different tiers go to
experts so that you don't just
get the non-expert, it's
impossible for employees to know
all 40 tax programs, so we're
now sending them to different.
experts in different areas of
the agency and then uh we're
also making process adjustments
based on these dispositions so
if you would have run this
report, uh, 6 months ago, you
would have seen that all of our
dispositions were returns and
return processing and now at the
bottom of the curve to the right
of the graph on the bottom we're
starting to see more of our
natural communication, which is
just navigating how to file and
tap how businesses having
questions about filing about
collections, so that really
helps us make sure.
we stay in tune with customers
where they're at.
Another, uh, opportunity for,
um.
Businesses in New Mexico as
procurement preference
certificates we issue preference
certificates for certain
businesses there's several
different variations of this,
some, some new, some established
the resident business
certificate uh offers 8% points
awarded if the certificate is
produced and uh the procurement
side we also have veteran owned
business preference certificates
that allows for 10% points
awarded and that that that
certificate is valid for 3 years
from the date of issuance, and
then we have
also a Native American owned
business preference certificate,
that's 8 or 10% points awarded
if that's produced, um, so state
and local agencies have the
self-service option to verify
that's a certificates, uh, that
the certificates and the entity
is in good standing and our top
taxpayer access point, that's a
new, um, thing that we recently
rolled out as well.
Another big change to help
businesses and another with
another sister agency is making
sure that um our licensees are
in compliance, so we made some
changes to liquor, cigarette,
and cannabis licenses so that
the taxpayer has to be in
compliance with those excise
taxes and gross receipts tax
just to make sure that they're
staying current, um.
That wasn't standard before,
that took a lot of work to get
that standard and what we do now
is we have a portal that our
regulation and licensing.
Sorry, can log in and verify
whether or not the taxpayers is
in compliance, we used to do
that manually before. It was
very inefficient, um, not
secure, and you know with all of
the concerns we have with data
and privacy and security, we did
everything we could to make sure
that that was a secure interface
and then also just making sure
that these taxpayers are, you
know, paying.
Delinquent debt or that they can
post security to stay in
business, you know, we're really
trying to make sure we can be
creative about how to keep them
in business but also keep them
in compliance and keep them
filing their returns as many of
these tax programs have
distributions that other
entities are dependent on.
Um
And with that I'll turn over to
the secretary.
Thank you, Deputy. Um, I'll take
up on slide 11 and um highlight
some of the role that Texan Rev
has in trying to make New Mexico
as business friendly and as
inviting and easy to do business
in as possible, so of course a
state has many different
strategies they use to recruit
and retain businesses to grow
businesses, just one of those
strategies is using the tax code
to try to incentivize business
growth and development and and
recruitment.
So tax and Rev is, is pretty
central central to that. We
administer, um, several tax
credits and deductions that are
targeted towards business
friendliness and I've
highlighted just a few here on
the right hand side, we've got
the credits that we administer.
Some of these we administer in
conjunction with another
executive agency, um, there's
the Angel Investment Personal
income tax credit, of course the
film tax credit that uh is the
largest tax credit in the state,
high wage jobs, tax credit,
investment tax credit, uh,
there's a
lab partnership with Small
Business credit that
incentivizes our two national
labs to, uh, do business with
spinoff, um, businesses and, and
their suppliers, uh, rural jobs,
tax credit that does what it
sounds like an incentivizes
creating jobs in rural areas,
tech jobs and R&D tax credit and
then a fairly new tax readiness
GRT credit also known as
trigger, um, and so, uh,
basically our role in those
varies, um, often there's
another subject matter expert
agency that certifies the credit
and then
just simply process the payment
of the credit at tax return
filing season and then in some
of them we actually um certify
eligibility for the credit, like
in the angel investment credit,
but we work um together with a
lot of different agencies
including economic development
department, energy and minerals,
uh, there's one with CYFD,
Department of Health, a few
others. So we're always working
on MOUs and data exchanges
securely to make sure that the
administration of those credits
flows smoothly.
And then um onto the deduction
side, they're much more
straightforward administratively
than credits tend to be, um, a
deduction really is, is, um,
the, the claim of a deduction is
initiated by the taxpayer on the
taxpayer's return, so they
determine which of their
receipts are deductible, they
file their return claiming the
deduction, and we may follow up
with questions or we may audit
the return, but basically they
flow through much more, um,
smoothly and, um, with a lot
less administration than
credits. And then there are a
few other areas of
Um, related to business
friendliness and economic
development that are still in
the tax code, a couple of those
that I wanted to highlight are
we have two corporate income tax
apportionment formula
allowances, uh, corporate a
corporation can elect, um,
To a portion, uh, a certain way
if they have their headquarters
in New Mexico and likewise uh
manufacturers, corporation
manufacturers can elect a
certain method methodology for
apportionment that incentivize
the location of businesses here
and then, um, I think you're
probably all familiar with the
relatively new local economic
development Act changes I
believe they were made after the
2021 session, uh, that basically
allow these special GRT
distributions to be made to the
LEDA fund.
Instead of to the state and the
local government, um, just for,
for, for some very specific
large economic development
projects and I believe we've had
to come forward so far. So
we're, we're uh working on that.
It complicates our distribution
somewhat, but, um, so far we've
been able to handle that and
then 2 more, uh, one that I'll
talk about a little bit more
here in, in a moment. Uh, first
is tax tax increment development
district distributions, um, if a
local government either city or.
County, uh, forms a tid, uh,
they provide us notice and at a
certain point in time we create
a new location code for
distribution of GRT uh for the
TI, and we, we do that and then
upcoming in the future we may
find ourselves doing a very
similar thing for metropolilitan
redevelopment Districts.
Um, turning to slide 12.
Talk a little bit about our role
with tax policy development. I
know during the legislative
session you see us around a lot,
uh, Mark Chaikin and I, uh, the
tax policy director, uh, work on
this and um we have a whole team
of folks at the department who
analyze bills and work together
to have us prepared to hopefully
give all good information to the
body. So we're always working
with stakeholders all year long
to identify obstacles that
either the department or um
taxpayers are experiencing in
the tax code.
Something that is either, you
know, making us have to work
harder, not smarter, something
that's stopping economic growth
for no reason. Uh, we bring
those forward often in a tax
code cleanup bill, which we'll,
I'll talk about in a moment, um,
also we are a very heavy
responder to fiscal impact
reports, uh, in the last 60 day
session we did 209 FIRs and 108
FIRs in the last 30 day session
and each one of them, each one
of those FIR requests goes.
to probably 7 divisions and
multiple levels of approval, so
it's really all hands on deck to
make sure that we meet our
deadlines and provide good
analysis.
Um, along the lines of tax code
clean up, you know, the same
goes for our regulations, uh,
tax and Rev has a very large set
of regulations that always need
housekeeping, so as, as possible
and as issues are identified we
probably hold on average about 4
rulemaking hearings per year,
they might be big or small, but,
uh, we tried for about 1 per
quarter.
And then of course, uh,
taxpayers really depend heavily,
including businesses on our
forms and instructions we try
our best to make those easy to
read and easy to comprehend and
yet we kind of have to quote the
language from the law so that
there's no difference between
the statutory language and the
forms or instructions, so
there's only so much we can do
to make them read easy, but we
do try to do that and provide a
lot of guidance through
bulletins and FYIs and and
regulations, um, we work a lot
with other partners to um try to
formulate tax
policy that often bubbles up to
the legislature, um, some of the
major partners that we work with
the most when it comes to
business issues or the economic
development department, energy
and minerals, of course, the
council service, we've got good
friends in the drafting area.
Uh, the CPA Society also, um,
you know, the, the CPA is
another tax practitioners are
wonderful source of uh
information of what what issues
their clients are experiencing
to see if we can fix those and
the New Mexico chamber, of
course.
turn it back over to the deputy.
And how, how that impacts the
agency directly and how the tax
policy um impacts compliance.
We've developed this compliance
continuum on page 13 that really
kind of illustrates what we're
trying to do is stay out of the
area of risk and expense and
promote voluntary compliance by
staying to the left of this
graphic, um, so as secretary
said, we really focus on farms,
instruction, outreach, training
user groups, other things just
she just talked about on China
to de-escalate.
disputes as close to the
beginning of where the filing is
as possible, try to keep it out
of litigation, out of
collections, and out of audit to
the greatest extent, um, we, we
have a major emphasis on
taxpayer outreach we did um
pretty significant events last
quarter. We did 18 different
events in terms of in-person
activity, um, whether that be,
um, large groups, small groups,
uh, I have a major schedule of
all the different events that we
do, um, for different entities
across the state.
talk about different topics and
we try to have all divisions
that have applicability to that
event present, um, we also
expanded our manage audits in
2020, which is somewhat in the
middle of this compliance
continuum, but it also keeps
taxpayers to the left because it
helps to educate them and ensure
that the returns are processed
timely and that they can stay in
compliance um with payments and
stay out of collections and
litigation.
Um, so we're also working on a
lot of back end, uh, reducing
backlogs that we have in
different areas and literally
shifting resources from one
backlog to the other to make
sure that we have all the right
uh tools in the right places and
you've seen probably many C2s
from us in the year I heard
about them. We have several more
this year that we're bringing
forward, uh, our emphasis really
is on technology but also um
making sure that our processes
are efficient and that are.
Resources are in the right
place, always focusing on
reducing risk and expense to the
state and to the agency.
Taxpayers need a lot of guidance
and a lot of certainty as
secretary said, whether that's
in the call center and our forms
and instructions, uh, we, we
were, we strive to, you know,
modify our regulations to make
sure they're current, that they
are, they're not expanding the
statute, but they're making um
the statue easier to follow. We
have bulletins that we submit or
that we issue when there's a
critical issue, there's a couple
of bulletins that were just
issued by us within the last 30
days. We have many
FYIs that walk taxpayers through
how to navigate certain issues,
a lot of quick guides and of
course we also have rulings that
we do for taxpayers, so when all
of these things kind of um not
fail, but when there's another
avenue and a taxpayer needs more
specific guidance then we can do
a ruling with the taxpayer and
provide an opinion based on
whatever that issue is that they
have, so the contact information
we have here for our tax policy
office is a great resource to
help a taxpayer um with very
specific guidance that they may
need calling our call center may
not work for a very complicated
issue. um, this email, uh, box
is manned by many different um
individuals including our tax
policy director and all of them
are very qualified and take
great care in responding to
those issues.
I'll turn it back over to the
secretary.
All right.
wrapping up
I want to talk next about um a
preview of some of the session
priorities that Tax and Rev has
on our radar, um, of course,
there will be, you know, we
believe a tax package, although
I think we're all expecting a
tax package with recurring tax
cuts to be more modest than
we've had in past years, just
given the fiscal situation of
the state, um, you know, but
some of the, uh, questions I've
fielded and things we've worked
on to date there are some
economic development related tax
credits, um, and some other
proposals.
I, I've probably worked on about
5 or 6 different ideas for tax
credits thus far, and I know
there will be more, um, as far
as recurring tax relief, you
know, something that um has come
up on my radar in the last
Just couple, couple days or
week, um, I'm starting to think
about tariffs and the impact
that could have on New Mexico
families and thinking about, you
know, whether, whether we think
that will happen and when that
will happen, um, you know, it's
possible we could want to look
at expanding one of our existing
vehicles that provides targeted
relief, uh, for example, the
working families tax credit or
liter some or the child tax
credit, something like that, um,
could be targeted towards the
most vulnerable New Mexicans to
help offset the cost of
potential tariffs.
broadly, um, being estimated to
cost American families between
2500 and $3900 a year.
So, um, that's something to
think about that has kind of
just come on the radar.
Um, aside from that, Tax and Rev
will have 2 agency bills that
just clean up the tax code, and
I apologize in advance, but one
of them is over 400 pages long.
Um, we did present that to the
revenue stabilization and Tax
Policy Committee back in October
and it's so it's, it's available
on their, uh, meeting handouts,
but I'd also be happy to provide
those drafts to anyone and talk
through in detail through it
with anyone, um, but basically
we went through the entirety of
chapter 7, the tax code and
fixed everything we could see
everything that's causing
problems, not clear, obsolete. I
think there's something like 30
sections that we're proposing to
retire in in in
entirely because they're just
not applicable and if you're
trying to navigate our tax code,
they get in your way and they
make you confused. So there's a
lot in there, um, but I would
say none of it is real Earth
shattering. There are, there are
things that people could
disagree about, but really
nothing, uh, that has a big
fiscal impact, nothing that
changes the tax base or the tax
rate. It's, it's really code
clean up so I'm really looking
forward to bringing those
forward, um, I think that that
is sort of like my love note to
the department.
Try to fix all this.
Um, and then, of course, we've
got our agency budget, um.
We, uh, for several years in the
budget sphere have really just
been trying to chip down at our
funded vacancy rate, um, right
now we have about a 19% vacancy
rate and we have a hiring freeze
in most divisions because
they're just isn't more money to
get any lower than that. So each
year in our budget requests we
try to chip away at that a
little bit, but since the
beginning of this
administration, we've come down
from about 29% to about 19%
vacancy, which right now is as
far as we can go, um, but that
equates to some.
like 90 to 100 more employees
statewide.
In both the tax and the MBD
side.
And it really does make a big
difference, uh, in our customers
be able to get a hold of us and
resolve things with us.
Um, and then we'll of course
have a couple um non-recurring
requests. We always request a
special appropriation for bill
implementation and the idea
behind that is that the budget
gets made before the tax package
and so we don't really know what
our administrative impacts of
implementing all of the tax
bills will be until after it's
too late to add anything to the
budget. So we ask um for
consideration of usually between
3 and $5 million of bill
implementation that we can only
expend if we need to, otherwise
it reverts.
And then we will be coming
forward with 3 um C2 or IT
project requests for funding. 11
is on the MBD side and two are
on the tax side. Um, the MVD one
is, is a great innovation we're
looking at joining the number of
states that are moving towards
electronic vehicle titling, um,
right now when a vehicle gets
titled, we complete the
transaction and then it takes
about 2 weeks for us to
centrally print the title, put
it in the mail where it may or
may not get lost or stolen.
And then if it does arrive with
the customer, it may get lost or
stolen or destroyed in their
vehicle and we want to turn that
all in its head and issue you
immediately an electronic title
that you can have with you
everywhere you go. It's more
secure, no printing, no paper,
no waiting, so that's one of the
C2 projects. The other two on
the tax side, um, one of them
would replace a 12 year old
homegrown system software system
that we use. It's called Gen
KFI, and it images paper returns
and paper, um, amendments, uh,
amended.
returns and and refund requests.
And right now our 12 year old
system is making us do a lot
more manual work because it
doesn't have uh.
Newer technology like optical
texture recognition, and you
know, basically it doesn't read
the paper for you, just scans it
in and then our staff has to
manually key it where they may
or may not make an error or
something might be smudged, so,
um, basically we would like to
replace that with a state of the
art optical text recognition so
that the staff basically just
has to check the returns, not
key them all in manually.
And then there's data analytics
uh solution that we would also
request funding for that has to
do with return processing that
will basically get incorporate
advanced artificial intelligence
and machine learning to help us
direct resources to those tax
returns that need it, uh, versus
directing it across the board
just.
picking needles in a haystack,
basically. So we think we can
get a lot more bang for our buck
and be a lot more efficient and
return processing, uh, with
that.
And last, um, a brief update on
the Metropolitan Redevelopment
Act changes that have been uh
enacted in the last couple
legislative sessions, so to take
a step back of what this is, the
Metropolitan Redevelopment Act
has existed for a long time, but
it's new that a local government
can request to have their GRT,
their local option GRT revenue
distributed to um an MRA. And
so, of course, that's a, a
distribution, um.
Workload for us to implement
that, but you know, we, we work
together and, and we think we
can do it, um, but at this point
no local government has come
forward to us saying that they
wish to do this, um, I think
they're looking at it and saying
this is, this is like actually a
lot of work and if we were only
going to put one square block in
the MRA, is it really worth all
that? And so, um, we are in a a
little bit of a position right
now where we're saying.
OK, this is gonna cost us about
$1.3 million in contractual
resources to program into the
Gen tax system.
And we don't know if anyone's
going to use it and so we're
trying to figure out internally,
should we go ahead and program
it now where we have some of
that bill implementation money,
um, that we could potentially
use. We don't really have time,
but we do have money.
That we could program this into
GenTax, or should we wait until
someone comes forward and says
we actually want to use this, at
which time we might not have
money.
So that's, uh, that's where
we're at internally with the
Metropolitan Redevelopment Act,
but it's there, local
governments can choose to use it
and if, you know, if, if they're
thinking about it and want more
information about how it works,
we would really love to hear
from any cities or.
Counties about using it.
So, um, basically what it does
though is, you know, it would,
it would basically distribute
local GRT revenue to a special
place.
Within the local government
instead of to their general
fund.
So they can do that themselves
through the local governing
bodies appropriating authority.
But this also gives them enough
their mechanism for us to move
that money from one local pocket
to another if they so choose.
So
With that, we'd be happy to
stand for any questions. Thank
you.
Thank you for your presentation.
First on the list is
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, uh, Madam Secretary, for
the presentation. I, uh, wanted
to see if you could give me a
quick update on the dyed diesel,
um, uh, tax.
I don't know if it's a rebate or
whatever it is, and then, um, I
also wanted to know who is
actually, um,
In charge of reporting that is
that the distributor or the
consumer.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, um,
Representative Armstrong, um, I
know that we've gotten a couple
of questions about this over the
last, since the bill passed, and
I know that our tax policy
director Mark Chakin has fielded
those, so I can follow up with
all the detail, but it is an
exemption and I do believe it's
the distributor, but I'll
confirm that not the consumer
who reports the exemption. Well,
and actually they don't even
report an exemption exemptions
are just claimed and you, you
self-determine that, uh, your
receipts are exempt.
versus a deduction where you
report the deduction. So, um,
some of the questions I know
that we feel that are sort of
like.
Why is the form so complicated,
um, and really the form follows
the statutory language, so I, I
can follow up with Mark and see
where we left things if there's
potentially a need for any.
Legislative adjustment to
streamline the process, but
unfortunately that's what I know
right now and I don't think
we'll have data because it's an
exemption to share with you on
how it's being utilized.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Madam Secretary. I know
that there's a cap on it, and so
one of the biggest issues is
You know, the distributor.
Um
Not knowing whether to charge.
The tax or not because we don't
know if the, the um the cap has
been met. So is there a way to
just, and, and you can follow up
with me offline, uh, to that the
distributor knows can look in
there, um, and see, uh, if, if
they're still, if they've not
met the cap yet, because the,
you know, they don't want to go
back and back charge the cus the
consumer, the tax if the cap has
been met.
Thank you. I'll, I'll definitely
follow up with you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, uh, Madam Secretary.
Thank you, Representative
Armstrong. Senator Stephanic
next, and then Representative
Duncan.
Thank you, Madam Chair on, um, I
missed, uh, thank you, uh, Madam
Secretary. I missed the
presentations at the um.
Tax and uh rev committee and
maybe I was just asleep, but in
the two bills that you
presented.
Did either of them increase
penalties for something?
Um, yes, Madam Vice Chair and
Senator Stephanics, one of the
bills has inflation adjustments
to some penalties in the tax
code, uh, we basically went
through, for example, um, there,
there are penalties to deter
things like criminal tax fraud,
um, and some of them haven't
been adjusted since I think
1965, um, so, uh.
It might not be a deterrent
anymore, you know, like, like it
was back then. And so yes, the,
the reason we have two bills is
that we split the all the
sections into those that may or
may not need a judiciary
committee referral and those
dealing with penalties would and
so those are in the the shorter
version of the bill and I'll
send that to you when we're done
with some detail.
So Madam Chair, I think what I'm
asking is are there any new
penalties? I understand
updating.
No, Madam vice chair and
senator, there are no new
penalties, just adjustments. OK,
thank you. And Madam Chair, on
page 16 and talking about the
Metropolitan redevelopment Act,
you can get back to me on this,
but I have uh a community in
Valencia County that is a city,
Rio communities, and they have
had struggled and struggled and
struggled.
To uh be identified as a city
for tax purposes, uh, so I'd
like for you to investigate that
for me and we can have an
offline conversation. Thank you.
Yeah, happy to do that and I, I
haven't heard of that issue,
Madam Vice Chair, we started
this years ago under Governor
Susanna, and we have continued
with Governor Michelle and um
this community, it's tiny, but
it is a city and they would
really like some assistance,
even if the tax is very tiny.
Thank you, Madam Char.
Thank you, Senator. Uh,
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Madam Secretary, just a quick
question for you. Um, uh, could
you talk to me a little bit
about the cannabis excise tax
and are are there challenges
with that, uh, and if there are,
what are they, and, and then I
have a follow-up question, uh,
with that as well pertaining to
alcohol excise tax.
Sure, madam vice chair and
Representative Duncan, thanks
for the question. Um, I talk a
little generally about the
cannabis excise tax, but then I,
uh, our deputy secretary has, I
think, closer knowledge than I
do to the compliance efforts
being made in our audit and
compliance division. I'll turn
to her in a moment, but
basically the cannabis excise
tax went into place April 1st,
2022, uh, at the same time that
those um adult use sales went
into place. The revenue comes in
and is split 2/3 to the general
fund and 1/3 to the local
government.
where the sale is sourced to and
uh it's, it's, I think it's
about 30, I want to say about 33
or 35 million a year in general
fund revenue maybe about 15 $16
million a year in local
government revenue all combined,
um, there have been a lot of
questions about compliance. I
will say that in general that
program is fairly compliant. If
there are issues in, in the
licensure and, um, enforcement
of the industry that's sort of
more of
RLD area, but on the tax side we
have the benefit of it because
it's a very highly regulated
industry, and there's this seed
to sale bioTrack system. We have
a lot more information to
enforce compliance and see where
a taxpayer is noncompliant in
that program than we usually do,
like, for example, in the GRT,
so you, you know, we do
regularly look at, um, what we
think is due versus what's been
paid in total and usually
there's a little bit of
noncompliance in the most recent
month where returns are still um
posting and
reviewed, but it's fairly
compliant and if you want to add
to that, Deputy.
Thank you, Madam Vice Chair,
members of the committee,
Representative Duncan secretary
is absolutely correct. It's one
of our smaller compliance gaps.
I've been personally monitoring
this for quite some time now
because there's um a perception
of noncompliance, um, this is
actually a great example of how
we're keeping the taxpayers to
the left of that compliance
continuum because we built the
compliance into the statute so
they have to be in compliance
when they renew their license,
so really there's only about a
year that they can be out of
compliance because until they
have their next renewal, um, but
when when they renew they have
to not have a delinquency and
not have any non-fighters, so
that really helps us to keep
that gap down, but there is a
gap that occurs within that 12
month period. We carefully
monitor that. We also have some
technology that um compares the
bio track data to our data and
other data sources to ensure
that compliance, and we send
notifications to those taxpayers
within that time period,
offering them a managed audit
and for you know, encouraging
them to stay in.
compliance, um, also making sure
that they can make their
payments this, this is an e-file
epay tax program, um, so
sometimes they have issues with
e-payments, so we do have a
waiver opportunity for that
where they can pay cash, um,
sometimes that's a challenge. We
only have 5 district offices to
take those payments and as you
might imagine, there's
challenges in this industry in
general, um, so we do everything
we can to keep them in
compliance with those payments
as well, um, and we do have a
lot of outreach directly with.
regulation and lighting
division. We have an MOU with
them to exchange data several
different data files that we
exchange with them and a great
relationship and we're in
constant communication that's
all the way from, you know, our
farms development for filing all
the way through our tax fraud
investigation division. They've
done a lot of work with them as
well on the law enforcement side
and and and really trying to
support them on the regulation
side of it, um, where as
secretary said we don't have
authority or enforcement.
Um, but we are trying to be a
great sister agency to them
because we have a lot more
experience in those areas.
Thank you Madam Chair and thank
you for the answer. Um,
Let's just say that um liquor
goes the same way to that excise
tax at point of sale, um, coming
from a county that has programs
that use this, do you foresee
any problems with that?
Well, um, Madam Chair and
Representative Duncan.
There's a lot of, I think,
different aspects, uh, uh, you
know, in the, in the debate
over, uh, what shape the
alcohol, uh, liquor excise tax
should take, um, from a tax
administration standpoint.
You know, I'm, I, I won't have
opinions about what the rate
should be, if it should go up or
not, whether revenue should be
earmarked or not, you know, I
can, I can, I know that that's
all, uh, being debated and won't
wade into that, but right now we
have a tax that's imposed. I
know it looks funny in statute
because, because it's imposed at
the distributor, it's imposed in
leaders and gallons and, you
know, these, these odd, uh,
volumes, but the reason for that
is because those are the volumes
in which that type of liquor.
is distributed in and so the
concern for me from just uh
purely administrative standpoint
is that you move the liquor
excise tax from the distributor
level to the retail level.
You've probably increased the
number of taxpayers.
10 or 20 or 30-fold. I, I don't
know. I'm, you know, just
guessing, but for, for purposes,
imagine that now for enforcement
and tax return filing and
processing instead of
distributing a pretty or filing
for a pretty limited number of
distributors, you multiply that
by a lot, and there's all those
different compliance, uh, areas
to track down. And that's a
little daunting, um, I know that
too, you know, in the, the, for
example, of the restaurant
association can speak for
themselves, but I'm not sure
their point of.
systems can actually program in
well to charge a GRT rate and a
liquor rate and maybe a local
liquor rate in some areas and
and all of that, so I, I would
have technology questions about
that for them.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Representative
Duncan, I agree with that and
that that is why cannabis excise
tax was intentionally designed
the way it's designed, um.
It is somewhat complicated to do
all that we do to keep that
taxpayer base in compliance, it
would be complicated to shift
that into liquor excise tax, um,
I agree that the technology is
probably not there in some of
these industries, um, the point
of sale systems even in cannabis
excise tax, the smaller mom and
pops really struggle with the
technology and that's really the
areas that we struggle to keep
in compliance so I would assume
that that would be a similar
case with that excise tax as
well, um.
You know, regardless of where
that tax is imposed, we'll do
our best to keep it in in
compliance, but I would say that
technology definitely could be a
barrier there.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for the answer. Um, that's
one of the concerns I have is,
is making sure that these
programs that we have are fully
funded and we're not chasing,
um, you know, ABC company for,
you know, 40 or 50 bucks every
whatever week or so, um.
And then the final question on
that you'd mentioned, um, maybe
some problems with software and
stuff like that. Um, if we go to
that, what will be the cost to
your department of switching
over software, IT, um,
Will there be any personnel
needed different or can you
answer that or attempt to? Thank
you.
No
Madam Vice chair and
Representative Duncan, we're
looking at each other like, huh,
I don't know.
We would have a significant IT
cost of of changing the liquor
excise tax, reprogramming a rate
isn't that hard, um, but
changing the whole basis for the
taxes that would basically be
like,
Shelving one tax program and
creating a new one, and it's not
uncommon for when we have to
create a brand new tax module
and Genax that can cost anywhere
from say like 2 to 5 or $6
million. It could be, uh, it
could be pretty significant
depending on the way it's
structured and then as far as,
um, you know, assuming that um
the public and the body wants
the same amount of compliance. I
do think there's, there's no way
around getting around that we
would need more compliance, uh,
folks to enforce compliance.
so many more taxpayers and then
temporarily we would have to
transition a very large taxpayer
base to register for a new type
of tax account, become
compliant, learn to use a new
form, that part would be hard
for maybe about 6 months to a
year.
Uh, the communication out with
everybody that was a new liquor
excise taxpayer because the
existing tax base has it down.
They know what to do.
Thank you Madam Chair. Thank you
for that. You know, and I, and I
guess uh you can in your budget
next year you can if this
happens, you know, in the next
couple of years, you can always
ask for that, those funds, but
again from my concern from
programs that are used and
heavily used in my county, um, I
just wanna make sure we're
getting all those dollars and
not chasing them.
So, thank you for that, Madam
Secretary. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Senator Hamlin. Thank
you, Madam Chair and thank you,
Madam Secretary, for being here
and Deputy Secretary for being
here. I appreciate it. Um, so I
want to talk about the, the MRA
which is our favorite subject,
um, and so the last time that we
met, uh, with the modifications,
um, so the reason why there
hasn't been anybody asking for
it yet because it goes into
effect January 1st, right?
Um, Madam Vice Chair, I think
that's right. Um, we, we think
that we could receive requests
like notifications from local
governments to uh we think we
already could. I, I'd have to go
back and look at that timeline,
but they could already be asking
for us to form the district as a
location code in GenTax and if
you recall once they formed the
location code, then we start
this 12 month long period of
measuring the baseline with
actual data, right? And that's
what that's what I was curious
about because um
What, what, just for, for the
committee's sake, and please
fill in where I dropped the
ball, is that there has to be a
specific code for the GRT for
that area for them to be able to
allocate those monies that are
generated in this designated MRA
zone to then that money go back
in. So they have to have a
specific code. So I know that
Las Cruces and Albuquerque,
we'll be doing that, um,
because, but, but you'd come up
with a solution though that they
can already start pulling.
From local tax, right? So we can
start moving on that. Because
the thing that was my concern,
Madam Chair, is that I didn't
want it to be held. I, I didn't
want it to slow down any more
than than necessary. And so,
At that point, what is that you,
you, do you remember the taxes I
was talking about what we're,
can you refresh what that was?
Madam Chair and vice chair, um,
Hamblin, and I, I think
basically what we talked about
and what I would still say is
that
The, the MRA changes that we
could potentially spend a lot of
time and money programming.
From my perspective, they simply
allow a local government to
Tell us to move money from one
of their pockets to a different.
And, and so their governing body
can do that themselves without
our help and so in the meantime
if they want to get started on a
project, they can simply use
their local governing body
appropriating authority to do
that and I, I think they could
do that for the long term as
well, but I think there are
considerations that aren't tax
administration considerations
behind, behind that. OK, and I
understand because we don't
certainly want to
Add extra things when those
things can be done locally,
which is the whole point of this
is that these changes are done
locally and responding to local
needs. Um, so I can give you the
heads up, Las Cruces and
Albuquerque will be doing that
because in Las Cruces, we've
already had conversations in
community meetings and the idea
is your economic development
department holds community like
Charettes where they're asking
for input, they do surveys, they
get the input on what that
particular area wants done. So
we have 3
areas in Las Cruces that are in
desperate need of those monies
going back in and and our city
government has already started
that. So that's what I just want
to make sure. And so if there's
any conversation that we can
have that I can help facilitate,
just because I do think the city
of Las Cruces is already moving
ahead on that. Um, and so
Do know Las Cruces and
Albuquerque will be doing that
because they were really
supportive of, of this
opportunity. And I look forward
to our streets, El Paso and
Solano and Picacio not being
shop and shop and go, but
shopping stops, um, because we
want that economic development
to come back in that community.
So I'm grateful for the
partnership that you've offered,
um, and the ability to try and
make this work as best as
possible. Um, but also
understanding that you've got
capacity issues. And so if there
are ways that we can bring that
down to the local.
government
To where it doesn't mess up what
you need to do. Um, I'm always
for that because I, I do
understand the capacity issues
and those are challenging. So
thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, secretary and, and
Deputy Secretary. Thank you.
Well thank you um is there
anybody else who would like to
be on the list, uh,
Representative Allison.
Thank you Madam Chair.
Um, Madam Secretary, for the
past 3 years, IRS has been
trying to tax my per diem.
We had to file a letter that we
received one time, uh, do I
continue to look for that letter
every year I file my tax.
Madam Chair and um
Representative Allison.
It's been a while since I heard
about this issue, but we've met,
uh, a few times with the
Legislative council Service
with, uh, when Director Bruciaga
was here and some of his team,
uh, and we also brought in DFA's
financial control division, uh,
to talk about this and I think
it boiled down to the 1099 forms
that DFA Financial control is
issuing and sort of what box on
the form, uh, different types of
income were listed in. I'd be
happy to dust that conversation
back off with DFA Financial
control and with the council
service.
Director, um, to see if we can
push it forward to a place that
you don't have to deal with
that, but.
Deputy, do you want to add?
Certainly, Secretary, Madam
Chair, uh, Representative
Allison, you're, you're correct,
there has been some historical
issues there as secretary
stated, we, we have worked with
uh Department of Finance and
Administration to make sure that
those 1099s are flowing through
properly. Um, I can't really
talk about the audit methodology
that we use in particular, but I
can say that we are looking at
that data to make sure that
those false positives are weeded
out. So if that does reoccur, I
would personally love to hear
about that so that I can address
that.
As far as I know, that's been
addressed, but please reach out
to me if that occurs again.
OK, thank you for that.
OK,
if that's correct, I might try
to.
In 2 years. Thank you.
And it and and if I understand
correctly, this may be occurring
with the IRS rather than tax and
rev, but, um, OK, good to know.
We just need to get that from.
Alrighty, well, I think that's
it for questions. Um, once
again, thank you for being here.
Um, you always do such a great
job looking forward to reading
the 400 page bill, um, that
sounds very, uh,
yeah, tiring
sleep inducing uh legislation,
but of course, uh, we do wanna
make sure that you all have the
tools that you need to do to
continue to help New Mexicans. I
also on a personal note, wanna
always thank you for being so
kind, um, to our constituents.
and, and being, um, available to
us. So thank you for being here
today and please grab a burrito
on the way out.
Alrighty so much.
So next, uh, we've got
consideration for legislation
endorsement and my understanding
is we are down to, uh, Senator
Thank you, Madam Chair, um,
actually, I have, uh, one bill
that I'm requesting endorsement
and then I have 3 concepts I
just want to let people know
about.
Um, the first bill or the bill
only bill is a tax credit for
volunteer firefighters.
This affects uh firefighters all
over the state primarily in
rural areas it would be $1000 a
year for people who uh
participate and complete so many
hours of service provided by
their fire chief.
And uh it would be capped the,
well, first of all, the tax
credit is for EMT as well as for
fire. It would be $1000 a year
capped at 4 million a year from
the state funds and up and
there's a sunset of 10 years.
This was brought to me by
volunteer firefighters.
With the idea and I think you're
getting the bill right now.
With the idea that um it would
be a recruitment effort as well
as a thank you to all of our
volunteer firefighters. The
volunteer firefighters saved the
state about $500 million a year.
If we were to implement
professional firefighters all
over the state that would be an
extra cost, so that is the
purpose of this bill we've
presented it conceptually at
revenue, uh, stabilization and
it will be coming back in the
form of a bill at their next
meeting for endorsement as well,
Marmez, I am asking this
committee for its endorsement.
OK, um, Senator Hamlin.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator Stephanics, can you,
we've had this conversation, but
I think it would be beneficial
for the committee to know why,
uh, it is just $1000 because my
question to you is, can it be
more? And you had the
explanation, just because there
are several rural fire
departments in my district. Um,
and I know in many of our
colleagues here, and $1000 is,
it really seems kind of low as a
thank you, um, to the work and,
and the, the revenues that they
save us. So can you explain why
it's only that?
Well, first of all, there are
about 4000 current firefighters,
not all of those are active in
all of the uh hours that they
would need to participate in,
but in terms of making it
manageable for the state budget.
I know that Representative Ortiz
had a bill in the past to pay
volunteer firefighters with a
lot, isn't that what you said at
committee?
Uh, that was a large a large
amount and so we're trying to
make it modest so that it would
be accepted by both House
Appropriations and Senate
Finance is something that could
go into the budget. It is capped
at 10 years. It is capped at,
um.
4 million a year for each
category.
So, uh, the EMTs, one category,
the firefighters, another
category.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator Panics.
All right, uh, Representative
Duncan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, uh, Senator. I think this
is a great bill, um, did you
visit with the, um, counties by
any chance?
Yes, it was brought to me by a
volunteer firefighter and a fire
chief here in Santa Fe County.
They then reached out and
discussed this with the state
fire marshal who doesn't take a
position pro or con, but the
state fire marshal provided
information to us about other
benefits, uh, AKA the PERA and
then they um surveyed volunteer
firefighters all over the state.
They got a very low response in
terms of um.
Interest,
but the people who did respond
said, of course it would, this
would help us greatly.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for that. I, um, I, I think
all of us in rural parts, we
really, really struggle to find
a good blend of those that we
have to pay and those volunteers
that spend enormous amounts of
their time on it, so, um, have
you talked with uh
Representative Vincent about
this.
Well, several, um, legislators
have already started talking
about it too.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you very much.
Thank you. Uh, Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Senator, for bringing
this forward. uh, I'm all in. I,
one of my questions is, is, uh,
it says that is eligible
volunteer firefighter,
firefighter for volunteer
firefighter services in New
Mexico, at least 52 times, um, I
really want to read what the
What the protocol is and how you
qualify for this because, you
know, some volunteer fire
departments like maybe my Horse
Mountain Fire Department and
In uh Pitown area doesn't get
called out as much as my some of
my others, but all of mine that
I represent except for, um,
Tier C and some in Valencia are
volunteer, and I know there is a
$1000 stipend that they can
apply for as well, um, through
the fire funds, uh, and, but
their departments have to, to
the, their department has to
apply for that. But I, I'm, I'm
happy to, uh, actually sign on
to this bill with you and, um,
uh.
proud that you're bringing it
forward.
Thank you. It's my intent to
make this as bipartisan as
possible.
Uh, Senator Woods.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, Senator, I was wondering
something.
Off the top of your head, and
you may not have this
information. What does it cost
an individual to become an EMT.
Out of pocket.
Senator, I could not tell you
that, um, I do know that if you
are working, you are having to
take time off of work and then
there's probably materials that
you are requested to purchase.
I'm not sure what each.
The fire department would
provide. Now I do know that the
state fire marshal uh has a fund
that we gave money to.
And every county can apply for
up to $25,000 a year.
To spend on their volunteer
firefighters that could be
training that could be a small
stipend that could be an hourly
wage, so I'm not sure if it
would be covered.
You know, I, I thought that was
more of an hourly wage type deal
for them to go out and fight
fires, but it may be for EMT
work too because there's a lot
of, of training that they have
to go through to become an EMT
and I know that some of my guys
from Roy Mascaro, you know, they
have to go all the way to Clovis
to, to get that training.
And so there's several hours
they have to take to do that. So
it'd be interesting to see what
the out of pocket cost was for
those EMT to get the very
minimum basic EMT.
And then there's continuing
education on top of that. But I
think it would be a good sales
point for your bill to say that
Here were expecting people to
get this training.
And not giving them any money.
For that. So thank you very much
for your answer. Thank you.
We'll look into that.
A representative Castellano.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator Stefaniks for
bringing this forward. I know
last year I had a lot of
discussion with a lot of
volunteer firefighters that some
of their years that they had put
in were lost. They never got
paid for that. Um, are we going
to address that with maybe
giving them back pay for the
years that they weren't.
paid their
I guess they're, um,
What am I looking for? The
retirement.
Uh, Representative Castellano,
Madam Chair, I think that would
have to be a separate bill and
I'm happy to investigate that
with other legislators.
Thank you, yeah, because that
was brought up a lot last year
that they had 26 years of
service and they only reported
13. So I hope now with this
bill, the reporting gets done,
so like you say, we can really
acknowledge our volunteer
firefighters. Thank you,
Senator. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Any other que Oh,
Representative Reh.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator, um,
I heard and I don't know if this
is true, but a couple of years
ago that their retirement, the
volunteer retirement was in
trouble in my memory is, it is
the fire protection funds, which
are, uh, come out of the
insurance policies on our homes,
and you may want to look at that
to see if it's fully funded. I,
what I heard is, is that it was
underfunded, so it might be.
You want to look at to help them
that way. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Representative Marie.
Thank you. Any other questions?
Um
I know that I have talked to,
um, the senator about this bill.
I've, I'm very interested, um,
you know, I know within the last
few years, New Mexico has
experienced fires the way we
never have before and, um, you
know, we, we are calling on
people to be.
In dangerous situations and I
think it's so, so important that
we let them know that um it's
not just while the crisis is
happening, but that we are
thankful for for them risking
their lives to to be out there
to fight, fight the fire. Um,
and so, um, I am, I'm supportive
of this. I'm hoping that we can,
uh, send this on for bill
endorsements, so what I would
like to do is, is anybody would
like to make a motion. Oh.
I would, let's rock paper
scissors.
I'd like to make a motion to,
uh, for this committee to
endorse Senator Stephanics's
bill. I'll second that, Madam
Chair. And do we have a bill
number?
It's just it's too early.
Um, and, um, is there any
objection?
OK, see no objection. The bill
is endorsed and we will go ahead
and uh make sure that that
information is, is given out. So
thank you so much. I appreciate
the, the work that you've put
into getting it prepared for
today. Thank you and uh we will
be next taking it to revenue
stabilization because they've
already heard the concept, but
now they'll look at the bill.
Uh, the second topic I just
wanted to bring up, there will
be a a bill to uh uh update the
dark skies legislation that we
already have on the statutes,
um, that handout has been given
out. The next one is, uh, we
have a bill that's related to
economic development. It's the
net and the dark skies, of
course, relates to tourism, it
relates to a lot of communities
besides your neighborhoods, so
many, it's not just state parks
and national.
Parks, but many of our um sites
around the entire state depend
upon dark skies.
In the third topic I'd like to
bring up is that we're going to
have a networking, um,
It's about net metering, sorry,
rules that would protect low
income people and you received a
hand out the bill exempts low
income customers from rate
riders, adds the definition of
low income customers that would
meet with other state
definitions and directs IOUs to
administer verification of these
customers and the 4th, uh,
topic.
And this is being uh brought by
myself because of one of my
counties, but it would relate to
all counties it would allow
counties to request, uh, or to
just simply submit a statement,
um, that they want a 2 year
moratorium.
On cannabis grow permits and
water permits. Some of my
counties are having problems
because they believe the water
table and the water available
for farms and ranchers are
really being affected and so it
would not require any county to
do anything and it would have to
be a formal action from the
county commission to the RLD uh
cannabis division.
Those are just topics and I
don't have any bills. OK, um, we
do have a question, uh, from
Representative Lujan. Thank you,
Madam Chair. On the last topic,
um, uh, Senator.
Uh
With regards to the water and
the grow number, are you, you
will have legislation for that?
Yes, it's being drafted.
Thank you, I support you. I just
want to say I I'd like to see,
you know, further, uh, discuss
it because I think this is, this
has been ongoing and I think
this is a, we had um RLD in
front of us through an economic
development was it last month,
Madam Chair, when we were in
Albuquerque, um, having, uh,
noted that that that has been an
issue and, and others as well,
um, the industry, the lower, uh,
the smaller businesses, and so I
wanted to commend you and I'm
working on that and bringing
that forward. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair and, and
Senator.
Just a quick question. If you
start regulating, uh, water.
On cannabis.
And I don't support cannabis. I
don't like it for my grandkids
or my kids or anybody else, but
How
Will that affect the rest of the
farming industries in the state.
So, Madam Chair and
Representative Zamora, this
would be a two-year moratorium
on permits.
To grow cannabis and for new
water permits for that cannabis.
For cannabis.
So it would, it would go away
after 2 years and it would be
dependent upon, uh,
Representative Samoa, the county
commission determining that that
was important for the county.
OK, so it'll just be directed
directly at cannabis use water.
Absolutely. Thank you, Madam
Chair and thank you, Senator.
Thank you, Senator Woods.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Senator,
Has this been run by regulation
and licensing.
This thought.
Thank you Madam Chair, Senator
Woods, they are aware that I and
another senator-elect have been
discussing this, so they know
that uh we are discussing it we
were gonna roll it into another
cannabis bill that they're
supporting, but it, they told us
it needed to be, you know,
divided up.
They're not in support or in
opposition yet.
The, uh
The superintendent over there
was telling me that
He would like the power to
police.
Some of this growing
To actually get police powers.
I just, Madam Chair and, and
Senator,
Uh, what are your thoughts on
that?
Thank you, uh, Senator Woods and
Madam Chair, I believe, uh,
because I've been working with
Senator Linda Trujillo, and that
is some uh parts of a bill that
she is working on with me, but
she might be the lead since she
was at RLD prior.
You know, the, the
Madam.
Sure
Senator.
From what I understand about
this business.
We wanted to
Have this a free and open
business.
To, to be a free market type
business.
And of course, these, these
people are coming to us now and
saying, oh, it's overrun. It's,
it's, there's too much cannabis
on the ground and, and we just
can't make a living doing what
what we're living, doing, but,
you know, every little bird's
got a cannabis store in it, and,
and you, you often wonder.
How the heck they can all make a
living. There's so many of them
retailers out there. And I think
I know the answer to that
question, but I'm not gonna.
You know, it's not my degree,
but
Policing the industry.
is where it's at.
I'm not so sure trying to limit
water supply is where it's at.
That's, that's the, the state
engineer's job.
And so
When we passed this bill, we, we
made sure that those people had
to have a water right.
Before they could do that.
So if we're, if they're using a
water right, they're not
supposed to use. That should be
under the state engineers.
Preview
And I don't know who should turn
them into the state engineer.
But I understand what you're
trying to do, but it sounds more
like you're trying to limit an
industry.
Then
Limit water use.
So this is my 2 cents.
Not worth anything. Thank you
very much, Madam Chair, Senator,
Senator Woods, your opinion is
always uh well taken by me and I
investigated, Madam Chair, I
have had an a conversation with
the new state engineer about
this and because it's uh a
temporary moratorium and it
would come from uh a
governmental entity, uh, so far,
uh, she hasn't had any issues,
and she was going to have staff
actually work on the appropriate
language to
include in the bill.
Alrighty, um, any other
questions?
Well, thank you, Senator for,
uh, introducing the concepts I
look forward to see how the, the
bill, um.
Rolls out and good luck to you
thank you um before we wrap up,
I just want to say thank you to
this committee. This is always,
I think, the best committee
personally because uh we we have
such good people on there and I
think that everybody on this
committee, uh, always works
really well together and um just
an exchange of ideas, mutual
respect, um, I really wanna to
acknowledge, uh, Representative
Castellano, Representative Ream.
Representative Madrid and
representative Allison because
we will, uh, they will not be
coming back this next session
with us, uh, but they've been
great members and good friends,
and we look forward to to
continuing to work with you in a
different capacity. And, um, you
are always welcome to come in
and give us your opinions and
information on this committee,
um, I want to acknowledge my
vice chair, uh, Senator Hamlin,
who, um, we have, I know I have
really
enjoyed working with, um, she's,
she's the comedy portion of our,
of our, uh, committee, uh, but
just wanna thank all of the
members. You guys are great. I,
I think, um,
Well, once again I think it's
the best committee because we do
bring everybody together and
have a good time but have
meaningful conversations, so,
uh, thank you. I wanna see if
my.
Sidekick would like to say
anything. Sidekick is right.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I,
you know, I, I, uh, without, uh,
beleaguering me. It's, I've
always enjoyed this committee
and, uh, enjoyed the
conversations that we have. And
so, uh, thank you for your
thoughtful input, uh, your
thoughtful concern, um, and also
being able to work together on
things that are improving our
communities. And so I'm really
grateful for that. And so, Madam
Chair, thank you very much. For
those of you who did not get
Hailey's card from um DFA. Her
card is up here.
So she wanted to make sure that
everybody knew that, um, and as
always looking forward to seeing
you, uh, in January.
And with that,
we will adjourn.
