It'll.
Good morning everybody.
Good morning, everybody.
Nobody wants to, to be fully
awake yet, I guess, um, uh,
thank you for our, for hosting
us one more time, um, NMSU has
been great, providing breakfast
and lunch and, um, just with the
presentations and of course, to
have, uh, our president here.
I'm very, very happy that, uh,
you were able to come speak to
us today. Uh, we have to give a,
a good shout out to, uh, Johnny.
He has been Johnny on the spot,
let me tell you, uh, very
appreciative to him.
Um,
and once again, I want to thank
the committee. They have been
working really hard. Uh, what
I'm hearing is several people
are wanting to get on the road
early today, so I'm going to
keep us moving fast because if
not, it'll be being a Senator
Hamlin listening to the last
presentation, so, um, I'm gonna
try to keep this moving, but
appreciate you being here and
I'm gonna turn it over to you if
you all would introduce
yourselves and then just go into
your presentation.
OK, thank you.
Madam Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
members of the committee, thank
you for the opportunity to speak
to you today about the good
things happening across the NMSU
system. Activities and programs
that support economic
development in the county, the
state, the region, and the
nation.
Uh, I want to thank the members
of the New Mexico legislature
for their ongoing commitment and
support of higher education in
the state of New Mexico
particularly want to thank Chair
Dorian Gallegos, Vice Chair
Carrie Hamlin, our Donana County
legislators are legislators in
the next county over. Um, and
legislators whose districts
include one of our community
colleges, our AScience centers
or our AG extension offices. You
have made very, very specific
investments that support our
work, including, but certainly
not limited to providing access
to education
for New Mexicans, including the
possibilities of degrees and
certificates, but also
opportunities for upskilling,
reskilling, and community
development. For deploying
technology that supports both
research and teaching for
completing infrastructure
improvements across the system.
Your support allows us to do
these and many other things to
meet our mission as a university
system.
My time in this position has
been professionally and
personally interesting, deeply,
deeply interesting. And there
are two things that I found most
compelling.
The first is the opportunity
I've had to get a real sense for
the work that many, many NSU
faculty, staff, and students do
in their positions at NMSU.
The second thing is I've come to
a much deeper understanding of
the breadth and depth of our
service to New Mexico and New
Mexicans.
When I received the invitation
to speak here, I wanted to
figure out a way to demonstrate
these two things. And I think
I've done that. I have 3
colleagues joining me today.
Dr. Jay Lillawhite, associate
Dean of research and director of
our AG experiment stations.
We'll talk about some of the
work that the College of
Agricultural, Consumer and
Environmental Sciences is doing
to prompt, facilitate and
support economic development in
the region.
Doctor Marcella Shelby, the
strategic initiatives officer
with Physical Science Laboratory
will point to some of the
strategies PSL has used very
successfully during the course
of its history, as well as
describe a new initiative all to
drive economic and workforce
development critical for our
national security.
And you will also hear today
from Dr. Mary Ulrich, the
executive director of Workforce
Development and training at
DACC. She will be speaking about
DACC's plan to deploy the very
significant investment from the
legislature to support workforce
training courses,
apprenticeships, and internships
at New Mexico's public community
colleges and regional
universities. This was a 3, this
is a 3 year, $600 million
investment made by legislators
in the last session.
These 3 colleagues and the
programs they represent are just
a snapshot of the economic
development work that NMSU is
driving and or supporting across
our state.
And I believe that these
activities reflect our land
grant mission.
Our HSI MSI commitment.
And what we see as our
responsibility to thoughtfully
steward the resources that we've
been given.
We continue to be grateful for
the state's ongoing commitment
to an investment in higher
education.
We want to be productive
partners in the economic
development across this
beautiful state. Thank you.
Madam Madam Chair and Vice Chair
and committee members, thank you
for having me here today. Uh,
the mission of the College of
Agricultural, Consumer and
Environmental Sciences is to
serve as an engine for economic
and community development. That
is in our mission statement. The
faculty, staff, and students do
that through combination of
teaching, extension, and
research.
The college has 8 academic or
research departments and 6
extension specialist
departments.
As the 1862 land grant
Institution for the State. We're
the home of the cooperative
Extension Service, as well as
the agricultural experiment
station.
The cooperative, uh, extension
service has 30 offices in 33
counties in the experiment
station has 12 science centers
located throughout the state,
representing the diversity of
the agricultural and natural
resources we have in the state.
It's my privilege to serve as
President Torres mentioned as
the associate dean for research
and is the director of the
agricultural experiment Station.
I've been doing that for a
relatively short time and I'm
very, very much impressed with
the work that's going on in the
college and at the university
and I'm happy to share just a
few examples of what I think are
many, um, of the economic
development work that is going
on in the college.
The university and the college
have been supported by legis
legislature and taxpayers
receiving funding for some new
facilities, including a new meat
laboratory.
These facilities are creating
economic development
opportunities. Stampee Culinary
Partners, a meat processor with
operations in Sunland Park as
well as operations throughout
the United States and Canada,
reached out to Annama you
through our USDA Rural
Development Partners and their
rural partner network.
With a desire to develop a
certified butcher training
program for their employees.
The company had already
developed an online training
program that reached out to NMSH
and the College of ACEs to
develop an in-person program to
supplement what they were
currently doing.
The certified butcher trained
the trainer program was
developed in 2023. To date we
have trained 11 stampede
culinary partner trainers, and
they have an intern trained over
120 stampede culinary partner,
uh, employees, both at their
Sunland Park facility as well as
the other facilities around the
country.
The partnership has opened up
other opportunities for us as
well. For example, employment
opportunities for our students,
internships and on-campus, uh,
food safety training workshops,
uh, between, uh, the college and
uh uh Stampee Culinary Partners.
The college is in the process of
developing a more in-depth meat
processing training program that
will be available to industry
partners throughout the state
and the region.
Faculty in the college, as well
as faculty associated with the
Center of Excellence and
Sustainable Food and
Agricultural systems receive
funding to conduct research
related to controlled
environment agriculture.
The funding included the
purchase of a 40-foot container
farm where leafy greens are
growing in in and controlled
environment.
Um, the controls include precise
control of fertilizer, of
lighting, of temperature and of
carbon dioxide levels.
The container was placed on the
NMSU Grant's campus.
Where students have the
opportunity, opportunity to use
the container as a living
laboratory.
Participation in the growing
process will allow students to
explore a variety of career
opportunities in agriculture,
but also in other related fields
such as engineering and uh uh
construction design.
Spur spurred by the
opportunities made possible with
the container farm in the
Grant's campus, the Center of
Excellence, working with the
College of Engineering and
Donana Community College is
designing and building a 20 ft
container farm here on the main
campus.
Students are designing and
constructing the farm with
direction from faculty and
staff.
Disciplines included in the
design and build process include
engineering, plant environmental
sciences, agricultural
economics, and architecture and
construction technologies.
The project is scheduled to be
completed in 2025. To date, 21
students have participated in
the project and the design
process. We have additional
students working on the build
process right now.
These students are receiving
hands-on experience in
designing, building, and
operating state of the art
controlled environment
facilities. On the facility is
built, the students and staff
will have opportunities to use
that facility in exploring, uh,
opportunities with controlled
environment agriculture.
The agribusiness accelerator
program was established with the
support of, uh, state Senator P
Campos and the New Mexico state
legislature.
The program is focused on the
tri-county area, including San
Miguel, Moura, and Guadalupe
counties.
The program is a collaboration
between the College of
Agricultural, Consumer and
Environmental Sciences, and
Arrowhead Center. It has 3 goals
to increase the supply and
accessibility of locally
produced food.
To boost value-added
agribusiness activity and to
foster entrepreneurship and
business development.
The program consists of two
related components an
agribusiness accelerator and a
farm incubator.
The agribusiness accelerator is
a 5 week business boot camp.
That assists New Mexico-based
businesses and entrepreneurs and
exploring the feasibility of
their business ideas by
providing access to experts,
advising, network connections,
and grant funding.
The farm incubator training farm
is located in Las Vegas, New
Mexico and participants have
learned how to produce and sell
fresh vegetables and fruit for
local and regional markets.
Today, 73 individuals have
participated in the program.
They've had a steady increase
over the last 4 years. There was
a time in 2022 because of the
fires that we had a dip in
participation as as people had
to take care of uh issues at
home.
And lastly, the agricultural
experiment station in the
college is conducting cutting
edge research, something that
I'm very proud of and, and very
impressed as I've made my way
around the state to visit our
science centers.
The research conducted by
faculty, staff and students at
the centers impacts the entire
food and fiber supply chain.
Examples include improving
existing varieties, identifying
and evaluating new varieties
that are adaptable to this arid
southwest.
Identifying and evaluating new
production practices and
identifying and evaluating
value-added production
opportunities.
I'll, I'll just give one example
and then, uh, maybe later can
answer questions, but, uh, we
have in our acade Science
Center, researchers looking at
new crops that potentially, um,
could be grown in New Mexico,
for example, um, saffron.
Um, Saffron is a, is a crop that
we think can be very successful
in New Mexico and very
profitable. It will increase the
cash receipts of our producers
in the state. Just as an
example, there's a.
A study out that they suggest
that the the grocery seats for 1
acre of saffron is $100,000.
So it's 4 or 5 times what the
the highest that we have in the
state right now and the crops
that we're growing. So we're
very excited about those
opportunities. I'm very proud of
the faculty, staff, and students
who participate in the AG
experiment station.
And I would just make an offer
that anytime you want to come
out and see one of the stations,
please let me know. We'd be
happy to take you out there and
see some of the work that's
going on.
Thank you.
Madam Madam Chair, before we
move to Dr. Shelby, I want to do
two things. One is I visited 4
ag science centers in the last
month and a half or so. And, and
it's, it's really phenomenal the
work they're doing. They really
are trying to meet, uh, the 21st
century environments that we're
living in and, and to create
agricultural, um, economy around
and responsive to that
environment. But my real reason
for interrupting before going to
Dr. Shelby is I did not see the
chair of our board of Regents is
with us today, Dr. Ammoud
Devastali, um, is in the room.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I'll
turn it over to Doctor Shelby.
Welcome to Doctor Devitali.
Thank you for making it. She's
also uh one of my constituents
and neighbors, so it's always
good to see her. But you were
able to join us today.
Good morning. Uh, my name is
Marcellus Marcella Shelby. Um,
I'm the strategic initiatives
officer at the Physical Science
Lab at NMSU, um, in my role at
NMSC at PSL, um, I, I wear many
hats, um, but more generally, I,
I help support the strategic
growth of the physical science
lab, um, through supporting our
the business development, um,
uh, and our, for our director
and, uh, division, uh,
directors, um, as well as the
external facing.
And being able to tell our
story, PSL has a long history
and yet sometimes we are seen as
a best kept secret. Um, and, and
we want to change that. And so,
uh, through our marketing,
through our social media, um,
and more largely there are
strategic partnership, partners,
uh, we are, we are working to
change that and, and, um, I, I'm
privileged to be able to work
alongside our director, um,
retired General Eric Sanchez,
um, who came on board in 2019 to
lead the organization after more
than 30-year career.
Um, in, in the army, um, and his
last, uh, placement of service
was, um, as the commanding
general at White Sands Missile
Range. And so with his
leadership, um, we've seen the
continued growth of an organ of
our organization and, um, and
the growth of the expertise and
staff as well as student, uh,
programs at, at PSL.
Uh, a little bit about the
history, um, of PSL. We were
started more than 75 years ago,
um, in 1946, um, during the
exploitation of the V-2 rocket.
Interesting, we first started as
a student project out of the
physics department. And in that
same year, uh, the, the then
board of Regents sought to have
PSL become, uh, an organization
at, at NMSC and I think that is
incredible insight, um, and, and
recognizing the, the capacity
that would come out of that. Um,
we've ebbed and flowed.
For our time of the size of
contracts, we function as a
defense contractor, in essence
or a contractor supporting DOD
DOE, um,
As well as it defends industry
partners across, across the
country.
Um,
Right now we have on average
between 130 and 140 employees
and of that staff, another 20 to
30 students who participate as
part of our, our regular
workforce in addition to other
student programming, uh, that
engages, uh, students across
campus and in this year we'll
also expand that to other
institutions across the state.
Um, we're incredibly proud of
our, our, our history, um.
A little bit about some of the
facilities. Again, we're best
kept secret. A lot of folks may
know us as the building you they
aren't allowed to go into, um,
on campus and yet on campus, we,
we, uh, house about 7 acres, um,
that includes production, um,
and manufacturing capability on
campus. Um, we have an
electronic shop, a mechanical
shop, antenna production, and
plating, all happening on campus
through, through our incredible
staff. Uh, sometimes we also
Um, engaged with the AI
innovation space with which the
legislator has supported in the
College of Engineering to help
support the scaling, uh, when we
need to ramp up production for
our different customers.
Um,
Uh, our, our team, uh, mostly
works in the US but has
supported and can support, uh,
activities across the world, um,
and, uh, we do have on campus,
which makes us very unique and
controlled and classified
environment, uh, which makes for
the security that folks, uh,
meet when they come. Um, right
now up to the secret level, um,
by the end of this year, we
should start construction to,
uh, increase that infrastructure
to support work at the TSSE.
High level, which will really
enable a great deal of work and
expansion of those strategic
partners.
Uh, and then another part of our
infrastructure, um, comes out of
our, we have a UAS test flight
site, um, at the Las Cruces
airport. We are one of 7 FAA UIS
test flight sites across the
country and are able to partner
with, uh, those test flight
sites, um, for unique
opportunities with FAA and other
industry partners. Um, one of
the interesting ones are I'd say
I'd say one of our most robust
relationships is with the Alaska
test site and they playfully
call themselves fire and
and are able to do a lot of
work, um, where you're able to,
to do some testing where you
need the cold environment and
other where you don't
necessarily need to be there and
the cost, um, and can come to,
to New Mexico.
Uh
Unique, uh, at our, our building
while we are controlled and
classified. We still do share
our space and our home to a
number of other tenants. Some
are industry partners and other
are some state partners. Um,
more recently, joining us, we
have New Mexico Department of
Agriculture, New Mexico
Department and members of their
team's New Mexico Department of
Finance and Administration, New
Mexico public education, the
state land office, and the
National Agricultural
Statistics, uh, Service.
Um, which are great partners and
important, uh, part of the, the
integration, um, in our, um,
organization.
Um,
The more, more importantly, we
have an incredible team. Um, we
have some leaders that have,
Depth of knowledge and have been
with PSL for a very long time
and, and, um, help direct the
capabilities and the increase of
capabilities of not only our
legacy, uh, technology, but
also, um, what the, the research
and development that will bring
us into the next. Um, some of
our, our divisions, we have the
information sciences and
security services. That's led by
Joanne Esparza, um, who, um, has
been with PSL for more than 40
years. Um, she's a Stanford
graduate in math and leads.
Our team around electronic
warfare, cybersecurity, um,
Modeling and simulation and
survivability and vulnerability
assessments.
Um, we have our telemetry and
missile systems division. This
is
comes out of our origins, uh,
with the V-2 rocket. We still
support sounding rockets, um,
and now even more as technology
is changing and the need for um,
Increased speed, uh, and, and
the tracking of information. Um,
Margaret Campos has been with us
for, uh, more than 20 years, an
incredible story of a, of a
student, um, came out of the
Gallup, New Mexico area, uh, a
Navajo student who started at
PSL as a student employee and
now is a division director
leading our largest division.
Um, uh, they, we within PSL
within the telemetry missile
systems, we maintain our own
catalog, um, as well as, uh, TM
system development, integration
and launch support, uh,
mechanical electronic Service
Center and antenna production
and plating.
And then we also have our
aerospace division, led by Henry
Cathy, um, who has, uh, been
with us for more than 20 years
over he has expertise in
scientific ballooning. We
formerly held the NASA
ballooning contract. Uh, we
don't any longer, um, but we
still maintain that expertise
and team that supports
scientific ballooning around the
world, um, as well as supporting
the UA UAS efforts, um, in a
number of different capacities.
And then, uh, in
Fiscal year 21, uh, 1 of the
things when we are looking at
how do we tell our story. Uh, we
did reach out to Arrowhead and
the Center for Border and
Economic Development, um, to
support an economic impact study
and what we found is that with
our contract spending, our
expenditures are $16.3 million
in expenditures resulted in a
$25.7 million economic impact
for the state.
Um, for us as our strategic
growth and uh and goals have
been to grow that, um, and in FY
24, uh, we saw our, our
expenditures increase to 17.9
million. Um, we haven't yet, uh,
done the study to, to check
that, what that impact is. Um,
but our goals and our, our
activities to, to have that
strategic growth has largely
been through strategic, um,
partnerships. The next slide.
And so here you'll see, um, just
some of the strategic
partnerships very intentional,
um, that have been, uh,
The collaborations have happened
over the last year to have that
growth happen and instead of
one-off con contracts, we are
really building those longer
term relationships. Um, not only
with, uh, Department of Defense,
Department of Energy, as well as
defense industrial and other
industry partners.
Uh, I'll, I'll highlight one in
particular right in the middle
that chief digital AI office,
um, through our congressional
delegation, um, and in support
of our classified ready employee
workforce program initially, um,
PSL was able to, um,
was awarded funds to support our
crew program initially, um, but
has been expanded to support our
larger, um, student workforce
pipeline programs. Um, and next
slide.
Um, CDAO, um, their mission,
they, uh, the chief digital AI
office is out of the Department
of Defense. It's a newer entity
whose mission is to accelerate
DOD adoption.
Um, of data analytics and
artificial intelligence from the
boardroom to the battlefield and
to to enable decision making.
Um, for PSL this provides an
incredible opportunity not only
support, um, what had been our
traditional workforce
development into the defense
industry, um, but to, uh,
support.
That workforce specifically in
the area of data analytics and
artificial intelligence. Um,
which was really, I think,
cutting edge and and really
important for larger um state.
Our pipeline includes, um, our
early education K through 12.
Uh, gateway to hire with our
crew program and then our
current workforce as well, in
partnership with White Sands
Missile Range and expanding to
other installations tied to the
army test and evaluation
Command.
Uh, I wanted to highlight our,
our, our K through 12. This is a
really exciting area where we
are partnering to build literacy
of AI, um, in high school
students as well as supporting
the teachers, um, that are, are
are are introducing these
concepts to students. We see
and, and we have many examples
within our lab of students who
start in our high school
programs who then walk into job
opportunities at PSL.
As student employees move into
the crew program, which I'll
share a little bit more about,
and then um move into defense
industry.
Um, next slide. This is our, our
crew program. Uh, we have, we
know, uh experiential, um,
learning is an important part of
student success. And while we,
we have always had students part
of our workforce. Uh, we wanted
to take that to another level
and in 2020, we, we developed
the crew program this allowed
for students to, uh, not only
have an opportunity for
exponential learning, and over
the course of the program they
have an opportunity to have
More than 1400 hours of
exponential learning paid
exponential learning, um.
Get initiate their national
security clearance. And, um,
also participate in a national
security seminar. So they're
better able to understand as
they move into the defense
sector where they fit and what
the larger national security
implications are to their work,
um.
You see, you can see we have
partnered with a number of, um,
Organizations DOD, DOE and
Defense Industry partners. Um,
and now in this year with the
funding from the chief digital
AI office will be able to expand
that partnership beyond NMS to
NMSU students, but we'll partner
with UTEP as well as New Mexico
Tech.
Uh, we know with the additional
funds, um, that we, we are, are
engaged with, uh, or in an award
that we, we want to be able to,
to continue to expand those
those opportunities, um, through
the use of NMSU Global, um, and
other entities that will support
that engagement.
Um, and, and more, more largely
DOD faces, um, the same DOD and
the defense industry faces the
same challenges that all
organizations are facing, um,
and our, our programs are being
recognized at the highest levels
of DOD and now federal agencies
as a workforce solution to
national security and defense
sector.
Next slide or is there, they're
mine.
Um, and this is again, our, when
we see, um, our students that
are graduating from our
programs.
They're they're staying in New
Mexico, they're staying with
defense, um, defense and
national security organizations,
uh, and in our three cohorts
we've had our 4 cohorts, we've
had 81 students. This next week,
we will have our next cohort and
with that growth and expansion
and ability and award, um, from
Chief Digital AI Office, our
next cohort alone will be 60
students. Um, and, and again,
that's expanding to other
institutions and we know we can
see that girl with
We're, we're we're developing.
Um,
The defense sector has an
incredible impact in New Mexico,
um, in that same study from
Arrowhead, um, we looked at what
the impact of the defense and
national security sectors in New
Mexico and that is some $32
billion. That includes DOE, DOD,
um, contractors, military and
DOD civilian expenditures.
Um, now the impact, uh, that's a
larger organ, uh, economic
development impact, but the
impact to individuals and
families, um, is felt directly.
Uh,
another part of the study was
looking at positions with
national security clearance, pay
on average $38,000 more per year
than the average of all
occupations, um, nationally in
New Mexico,
um, positions with national
security, uh, clearance pay on
average $26,000 more.
Um, and what that equates to is
a lifetime NPV of more than
$430,000.
Uh, that is, you know, we're
invested, PSL is invested in our
strategic growth, um, to not
only support the student success
directly, um, and the impact
that that has on families, but
also continuing to be a catalyst
for partnership with DOD DOE
DOD, um, and the defense
industrial base. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
Madam Vice Chair and committee
members. I really appreciate the
opportunity to be able to talk a
little bit about DACC's
workforce training initiatives,
um, today I'm Mary Ol Rick,
executive director of the
division of workforce and
community engagement at DACC and
our division houses the small
business Development Center, the
adult education programs, as
well as um our
Non-credit training and
community and career education.
Next slide.
So the mission of our vision, or
sorry, the mission of our
division is to be a gateway.
For economic mobility for new
majority learners. We have
adopted this term new majority
learner to describe our students
and it's uh originally coined by
the education design lab. The
new majority learners are what
higher ed traditionally referred
to as non-trad students or
non-traditional students, and
they typically were kind of seen
it by higher ed in general as a
kind of subset of the student
population.
However, at the community
college level and and other
levels, we recognize that the
majority of the students we
serve do fall into um the
non-traditional category. And so
really what we're talking about
are the older students, low
income students, first
generation college students,
students of color, students, um,
parenting students, meaning.
Their parents, students who are
parents, that's hard to say, um,
individuals with disabilities
and formerly incarcerated
re-entry uh folks, LGBTQ plus
and veterans.
So in our division we strive to
provide customized learning
experiences, which means we
recognize there's not a one size
fits all.
Approach to training and
education and furthermore,
there's no necessarily we don't
need to put a time limit on on
learning. So in other words, you
have to learn it within this
semester, we have kind of busted
that open a little bit, um,
providing more flexible flexible
training options,
um, to accommodate people's felt
needs.
For example, our truck driving
program is a 7 week course.
However, some of the students
can finish that program in 5
weeks, so they do, they finish.
When they're ready, um, other
students.
Need more time.
We've had students who finished
in 2 months, largely due to
learning disabilities or other
barriers that they have, uh, for
example, taking care of a a sick
relative, um, that takes a week
of their time and we reinsert
them back into the draining when
they're ready and um at no
additional cost.
So for, for us, we've kind of
geared towards this definition
of economic mobility, which
refers to people's ability to
improve their economic status
over their lifetime.
This includes, of course, in
access to income, um, assets,
training and employment, but
also the ability to make choices
in their lives and, and, and
power over their decision
making.
It also includes uh notions of
social inclusion.
Which is very important.
Uh, next slide.
So with the new funding this
year specifically allocated to
uh for non-credit training,
apprenticeships and internships,
which is a huge game changer for
our programming. Um, DACC
received 1.7 million.
And this funding means we are
able to exponentially expand
access, um, to, to programs that
in prior years we charged
tuition for tuition and fees,
um.
These programs, by the way, are
not eligible for federal
financial aid, as you know, so
we didn't have access to that
funding mechanism.
For our students. So our goals
with this funding is to provide
access to workforce credentials,
uh, through training programs,
career development and, um,
specifically highlighting
industry recognized credentials.
Because if you go through a
non-credit training, the value
to you is not like necessarily a
diploma or a certificate of
completion, but at that point,
you want that industry
recognized credential that
industry recognizes this.
Like a CDL, a commercial
driver's license or a
certificate of nursing assistant
from the state. Those are the,
the important. So the fact the
sectors that we're focusing on
this year, um, advanced
manufacturing, Allied health,
information technology,
infrastructure careers, um,
industries and business with a
focus on small business
ownership, or development and
entrepreneurship.
Yep
We are targeting um.
Our targets include
Training 340 people at at a
minimum and offering paid
internships, as well as
developing summer bridge
programs with local high schools
focusing on the alternative high
schools like Las Montanaass um
to here in Las Cruces to um
introduce new graduates, new
senior graduates to uh careers
in manufacturing,
transportation, logistics.
Supply chain management. So
we're, we're planning that for
this summer.
Um, let me see.
I'll just mention briefly
another outcome of these funds
for you you to know about is
that the directors across the
division across the state.
have been um we've been able to
collaborate a little bit more,
start collaborating, for
example, I'm working with our my
counterparts at um New Mexico
State in Alamogordo in the
community college at Grants as
well to collaborate on trainings
and there's possibility for
collaboration with, um, Santa Fe
Community College and CNM and
San Juan.
Next slide
So we're taking a career pathway
approach to training, which
really emphasizes building
skills over a lifetime and
taking people from, um, you
know, receiving a uh earning a
non-credit industry recognized
credential and building that
career through a career ladder,
um, for example, EMT Basic when
they receive that, they can
continue their education to
intermediate.
And advance even entering an
associate degree program. So
this could be an in a kind of
ends or.
Entry points and exit points
that are well defined.
Next slide.
So this provides um the
recruitment for, for the
participants in these training
programs has been amazing. In
just over a month and a half we
were, we had 155 applicants
throughout the county and um.
Out of those we placed 102 in
our program. So actually our f
fall semester is full. We're at
capacity, um, and so we are
looking forward to placing
additional people next spring.
Um,
Just a little bit about these
participants, 70% are parents.
The majority, 63% were ages 22
to 54. Another 10% is 55 to 64.
Um,
I have some.
Statistics up there on the new
majority learner identity as
well. And we did have some.
We had about 15% of our
applicants, uh, are people with
disabilities and another 11 had
indicated they were formally
incarcerated. So what I included
this for was to show that we're
reaching our target population.
Um,
Let's see.
I'll just move to the next slide
quickly.
And lastly, I just wanted to
emphasize that the success of
any training program relies on
our employers to hire our
graduates.
Um, our goal is to strive for
living wages for our students in
Donana County, um, the
MIT living wage calculator
indicates that a living wage for
Donana County.
Uh, for 22 adult households who
are both working is 2450 an hour
and so that's about 50,000 a
year and so our goal on for
students is to reach that.
Within a few years of their
graduation.
Um,
However, there's other
characteristics of good jobs
rather than just salaries. It's
also things like benefits.
Um, health insurance, elder and
childcare.
As well as good work schedules,
uh, moving away from shift work
where you get a a.
New schedule every 2 weeks, but
more stable schedules and
flexibility there, workplace
safety, as well as.
Um,
just inclusion at work and the
sense of belonging.
So, um, with that, you know,
I'll pause or I'll, I'll turn it
back to Doctor Torres and we'll
take questions. Thank you.
Um
Madam Chair, Madam Vice Chair
and members of the committee, as
I said at the beginning, the,
the, the real pleasure in this
job for me has been learning
what my colleagues are doing
across the system. And, and I,
I, the second thing is really
learning the impact and, and the
breadth and depth of the work
that we're doing and I think
these three examples um kind of
demonstrate um different parts
of the NMSU system and and the
kind of work and the kind of
impact we're we're having across
the state of New Mexico and,
and, and beyond. So we would be
happy to answer any questions.
If you have any questions for
the committee?
OK.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I'm
going to be really, really quick
on this, but this is very
specific to you, uh, Doctor Lily
White. In defense of my
legislative colleagues, this
legislator has been very
supportive of agritourism. And I
pulled up the bill to to
demonstrate this because this is
on multiple accounts and 23, we
passed, um, the agritourism
Promotion Act. And, and it
wasn't a it wasn't slobby
legislation. It went to Senate
conservation with amendments. It
went to Senate Judiciary. It
then went to House.
Commerce and economic
development with changes, and it
passed both chambers
unanimously. And what it did was
it was going to put within EDD
economic development, um, uh,
responsibilities to really kind
of promote not just trails but a
lot of outdoor, um, um, economic
development with specific intent
of growing our agritourism
industry. There was a lot of
excitement about it, and the
bill was vetoed by the governor.
Which was a disappointment to
many of us, I think at this
point, if EDD, this is, this is
one of several examples. If EDD
will not recognize maybe the
agro-tourism investment that it
that it really does have an
economic development. My
recommendation moving forward
then would be, in the meantime
to, to, to make these efforts
over to New Mexico Department of
Ag because there was a lot of
work that goes into this as
legislators. And so if EDD
doesn't want to take on the
Agritourism, then let's move it
over to New Mexico State, and I
would encourage you to, to try
again. It's unfortunate because
there was so much work that this
legislator put into that. But
to, to try again, but on, on
defense really of this committee
and the legislator, we recognize
the economic development
benefits of that. And that's why
there was a lot of debate and it
stayed in ADD, but the reality
is is that they don't want it.
And so we're still, I would
speak on behalf of all the
legislators who said we still
want this and we recognize that
there's a value.
And that is to try it again. And
if EDD doesn't want it, then I
suggest NMDA. That's where I'd
move forward. Thank you, Madam
President.
Thank you. Um, Representative
Roy Bar Caviero.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you very much for your
presentations as you know, um,
my son is a graduate of NMSU, N
I U M, so you can imagine what
goes on during football and
basketball season. So but thank
you, he um actually excelled
when he made the transfer from
UNM.
To Annama you. That was the best
decision that he made.
And that we support it because
um he was.
Well attended in terms of the
whole environment and that was
conducive to his ability to
continue and now, um, prosper.
So thank you so much for his
education and that of all the
other students. Um, I needed a
little clarification, uh, from
Doctor Ulrich real quickly, um,
I may have missed it. What is
new majority learner mean?
Thank you, yes, um, new majority
learner is a word that was, um,
developed by a term developed by
the education design lab to
refer to the students that hired
used to call or still does
sometimes, but non-traditional
students. And so it's, it's a
more like inclusive term to
describe the students that we
actually are working with,
especially at the community
college.
College level and non-credit
training level that um are
re-entry students, older
students, and people like that.
Thank you for that and uh.
I learned something all the
time. This is a learning process
for all of us. I still refer to
students as non-traditional, so
I guess I need to change my
language now. Thank you for
that. So on that same, um, page
of workforce training and
work-based, um, I'm interested
just real quickly to know how
your interfacing with all of the
um border industrial, um.
Group, the other economic
development entities like Mesa
Valley, all of those entities,
how do you interface uh with
them to determine number one,
what the, uh, long-term
sustainable career pathways are,
And 2, in terms of their
placement, um, as they're going
through, um, all of the training
and certification.
Thank you. Yes, we work pretty
closely with Jerry Pacheco at
the Border Industrial
Association DACC is a member of
that association, um, we have
done a lot of work at the
border, especially from our
Sunland Park campus out of that
program or out of that area and
we've done a lot of work with
employers interviewing, seeing
what their needs are, surveying,
talking with employers, and also
with um.
Certification associations like
supply chain association of
supply chain management, those
folks have a lot of insight into
the industry, where it's going,
and, and we do a lot of
investigation of those areas.
Madam, Madam Chair, if I could
respond to that as well,
Representative Cabeero, um, the
New Mexico State and DACC are
both involved with Mavida with
the BIA and the Borderplex
Alliance. We sit on, we sit on
all of those boards. Um, in
addition to that, DACC several
years ago collaborated and
contributed to a study on
manufacturing, and that was a
collaboration with Mavida to get
some sense of what are the skill
sets that are needed and
educational levels that are
needed for manufacturing because
Mavida, BIA and the border lix
are
involved in bringing advanced
manufacturing to the region. In
addition to that, I was at a
dinner last week with um a
diplomat from Taiwan and a
Taiwanese delegation to talk
about what's the kind of work
they're doing in the border
region and how we can
participate in that. I think
the, um, the collaboration in
this part of the state and not
even this part of the state, in
this region, um, it, I think is,
is tremendous and, and
improving.
Thank you, and it does show with
all of your in in all of your
report. So one final thing that,
uh, I forgot I had a question
mark next to on that same page,
the clear pathway to in-demand
jobs and job sectors. This is
based on all current data, uh,
indicating, as you mentioned,
uh, Madam President, the, the
entire regional, uh, area,
right? Is that correct?
Yes, it's if we focus on the
southern region, the
southwestern region, but, um, I
think the state is also focused
on many of these sectors.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam Cha.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you presenters. I feel
like I need a college course to
understand and take in
everything you know presented
on, but it's, it's great, uh.
A question for you, Marcela, is
what is literacy of AI.
So this is, this is a broader
term, um, when we, when, when
individuals use the term, uh,
artificial intelligence, there
are so many different
applications and and areas that
somebody could go into. And so
for whether it's K through 12
students that are just through
or adults um that are learning
about artificial intelligence,
um, organizations like CDAO are
are wanting to increase the
literacy and understand.
of not only what AI is, um, how
it can be utilized. Um, we're
seeing it in the classroom of
teachers, whether it's having to
adjust their pedagogy to for
students who now know how to use
applications like ChatGPT to
find answers to questions or to
write papers, um, to, um,
individuals and professionals
utilizing that to support their
academic work or
Um
Or softwares that, you know,
more further utilize that, um,
even out of the, um, we're
partnering with White Sands
Missile Range and we have been
developing, uh, workforce
leadership programming in the
last couple of years that has
focused mostly on things like
team building, effective
communication, mentoring, and
this last year, the commanding
general said, I need my
workforce to understand AI and
developmental testing.
Um, for us, what does that mean?
And so we work with a team that
says, here are all of the
applications of AI, um, the
differentiation between
artificial intelligence and
machine learning, um, and all of
the in between, um, and start
introducing it and and sharing
that these are pathways that
individuals can take towards
careers.
I don't know if you're aware,
but Madam Chair.
I believe our first AI bill was
introduced in Santa Fe this past
session.
And it's, it didn't get really
in depth into AI, but we have to
disclose if we used any kind of
AI for our advertisements and
our campaigns and stuff.
So it's, it's very interesting
how we we're going with
technology and how it even
affects us as, as, uh, when
we're running a campaign and
stuff, so it's very interesting,
uh.
Madam Chair and
And uh Jay, Doctor Lily. So one
of the things that wasn't
mentioned that's very
appreciative of you.
And what you do here at the
university is uh support our
state climatologist.
I, uh, I the weather station
bill originated with me and
Senator Pat Wood's helped carry
it on the Senate side.
And that's gonna be something
that helps it helps the egg
community, especially in the
climate that we're in right now
with our, with having this mega
drought and.
We really appreciate what you've
done, uh.
Dr. Du Bois has been persistent
and consistent working on that
and, and we really appreciate
where he's at with it and and
how we've advanced with it and
where we're.
Where we're going and what it's
gonna do.
Thank you for that.
Uh, really appreciate your work
and, and supporting that.
If you want to respond to it
that Madam Chair and
represented, thank you very
much. It certainly is important.
I do have an update. I have it
written in my notes just didn't
want to take the time and let
you ask questions, but we do
have 215 weather stations
installed now physically
installed, um, 180 stations are
are collecting data.
Um, and 95 of them are reporting
to the website where you can go
and actually see your data.
We're working diligently to get
that those numbers increase, so
more reporting directly to the
website and making it, making it
easier to see that data and use
that data, um, and we're still
working on uh
what is it about 35, um, getting
some of the instrumentation
completed, um, but our goal is
to have that done as soon as
possible so that that valuable
information can be provided.
Uh, to stakeholders across the
state and, and, and hopefully,
Madam Chair and hopefully our
our state climatologist gets to
take a deep breath and kind of
slow down a little bit.
Thank you for what you all do.
It's a great presentation. Glad
to be here today. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, represent or excuse
me, Senator Hamlin.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Mine's
just a comment just because I
have a wonderful opportunity uh
committee of working, uh, with a
couple of these folks on the
panel, uh, every day, um, in my,
my, my paid job, um, I did want
to say how much I appreciate the
willingness, uh, to address the
workforce needs, and that's been
something that has been a trend,
uh for Donana Community College
and for MSU, um, you know,
especially since Doctor Torres
has shared with me about the
meat processing plant that is
coming online.
Um, because, uh, Senator
Brantley, our colleague Senator
Pat Woods, has been talking
about that for a long time.
And how, um, a lot of our uh
processing has to go out of
state and um none of us like
money to go somewhere else. We
want to keep it in New Mexico
and keep it going to not only
our small businesses, but our
community members and people who
are working. Uh, and so I'm
really grateful for that and I
know that, uh, I think we're
going to be inviting Senator
Woods, Senator Brantley, if you
want to see it, the, the, the
processing plant when it's up
and going, um, but also, uh, I
do want to commend on the when
we were talking about Donana
Community College and the work
down.
In the southern part of the
county, um, I still talk quite a
bit about the Union Pacific
Training Academy.
And, um, just for information
and y'all are welcome to fill in
any blanks that I have, but we
were there for that day. Uh, how
it is, uh, Union Pacific has the
industrial training academy
where they're training people
how to work on their systems
there and addressing those needs
and myself and Representative
Lata had asked for a priority
for New Mexico residents over
Texas residents, uh, because we
want that money to stay in our
community and, and there was
certainly a willingness, um, and
eagerness to do that. And so
So the other thing I, I'd like
to commend is, is something
committee that um for those of
you outside of Southern New
Mexico is just the
collaborations that not only the
community college, but also the
university, um, the university
is getting better at it. Um, the
community college has always
been really solid on those
participations just because of
the small business development
center, um, and the work that,
that, uh, DACC does in the
community. So I do appreciate
the collaborations that um the
university and the community
college do.
Also with the chambers of
commerce because uh we're coming
up with these ideas of things
that can be addressed in our
community, so, uh, I just want
to commend you because I I
believe that it serves as an
example for the rest of the
state on how these successful
collaborations can really help
uplift, but also address those
needs, uh, instead of just
saying, oh well, it's not my
problem, because it is, it's, it
is our, it's our, it's our
concern and it's something that
we should be addressing. So I'm
really grateful for the work,
uh, that we all get to do
together.
So thank you very much and thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. And, um, thank you to
the panel for your presentation
today. Um, I'm always very
impressed with the wide range of
opportunities that you provide
to our students and to our
community and so I think even
just on the small panel, you can
see just the different degrees
of how that happens. Um, my, uh,
my son is attending NMSU and he
is in the, uh, um.
Arrow, what is it, arrow
aerospace engineer.
I always forget, but yes,
engineering and um so when I was
looking at at your present, all
the presentations, but the one
that caught my eye, uh, was Ms.
Shelby's, uh, the gateway to
higher graduates, because of
course, I want them to get a job
as soon as possible within his
field, but I, I also um noticed.
Um, where it talks about, um, 81
students have completed, um.
This, this, um, Shelby, this,
can you talk a little bit more
about this, um, slide cause it
looks like it talks about
transition from graduation to
full-time employment in weeks
and just the caliber of um.
Just the, you know, Los Amos
National Lab. I mean, it looks
like people are going to have to
have background checks and maybe
if you could talk a little bit
about that. Absolutely. So part
of our program, students, most
of their crew students um that
come into our programs come in
in their last year. Some come in
a little bit earlier. Um, we
partner with Employers First,
um, who say this is what their
needs are and then higher
students that meet those needs
and who they're wanting to build
a relationship with, so that
there's
A, uh, a more timely transition
between graduation to
employment.
Um, part of that, so a year out
in their senior year at the
beginning of their senior year,
for example, as soon as they
become part of the program, we
initiate their security
clearance. Um, and that gives
them that usually I, I, I think
because of our role at a
university and as a defense
contractor, PSL has a, a, a
facility security officer on
campus where we're able to
initiate that, um, from NMSU,
um, that in the industry can
take.
Anywhere from 3 months to 6
months at the highest level
TSSEI, some companies will
actually hold the employment
start date until that full
clearance comes through.
Um, and so instead of having a
student start that process when
they get high or when they get
an offer from a company and then
have to sit out of the employ
employment for 6 months to a
year. Uh, we initiate that at
the beginning of their senior
year, and most students have
their full clearance. Uh interim
is within 2 to 4 weeks, which is
astounding in most of our
industry partners wish that they
could get clearance that
correctly even in DOD or DOE,
um,
and then their full clearance.
Within a first semester. Uh, we
have had a couple of outlier
students who may have family
backgrounds that include, say,
migrant migrant families or
family in in other countries,
um, that may have taken longer,
but all of them have had their
clearance by the time they leave
the program, um, most because of
that they, they start getting
recruited for full-time
employment, the semester before
they graduate and already have
offers and start date.
By the time they graduate. So
that, that's why you see that 2
week and most of them I'd say
they their employers are ready
for them to start. They ask for
a little bit of a break before
their start date, um, other of
our students, uh, and that's not
the, I think, for students who
have not had their clearance
before, they're still waiting.
They may have an offer. They may
have accepted an offer, but they
don't have a start date until
that clearance, um, is, is, is
solid, um, or.
Approved. And so this is a
program that really fast tracks
their entry, um, and it's an
incredible to see the offers
that they have. Most students
will have multiple offers and
are really getting to choose,
um, CDAO, uh, I would say I feel
that this is rare, but even
though they are DOD agency has
allowed us to say that a student
that enters national security,
whether it's DOD, DOE, which is
a different clearance, but
there's some.
Reciprocity, um.
In intelligence, Homeland
Security, um, or defense
industry is a considered a
success for the metrics of our
grant because those are students
that are going into that defense
sector where um you have
retiring, uh, employees, a large
majority of those that hold
clearance have the ability to
retire right now, I think it's
somewhere about 50 or 60% could
retire at any moment of the
clearance holders, that's even
more for the highest levels of
clearance.
So it's some major demographic
challenges and we're excited
that our students can be part of
that, um, you know, new
leadership. I say we're not,
we're not just building the new
workforce, um, for DOD or our
defense industry. But it's
really the new leaders because
they're gonna have that
additional training about what
it means to have to have a
clearance to work in national
security, um, and, and have that
clearance already ready to go
and what it means to be a
holder.
Um, to have a clearance, you
have to be making some lifestyle
choices, um, not only for
yourself but the people you
surround yourself with. And so
the earlier you understand that,
the better you have set up your
own life and the uh making good
choices to be able to be
eligible for that clearance and
those jobs.
Well, thank you for that, and I
think very, very impressive. So
I'll definitely be having a
conversation with him. We'd love
to. I appreciate that, um, I
just want to say thank you for
your leadership, um, very proud
of NMSU and the leadership that
you are providing. Um, I think
it shows just in this, like I
said, this very small, uh,
panel, but I, I think it's
across the board at NMSU and,
um, you know, proud of the
Aggies, so thank you for your
presentation today. Thank you.
OK
That's fine. I know, I know,
but.
Alrighty, if we can get our
next.
Panel up
So I do want to make sure that
I, um, acknowledge, uh, Kit
Johnson, who is not on our
agenda. I had asked him, um, to
to uh present and then I um.
I, I did not.
Put him on the agenda. So that
is my fault and I apologize for
that, so, um, we, I know that
we're getting it online on
there, so it, it's on there. And
so I will, uh, I'll have to make
it up to you later, I guess.
I don't hold you at all.
Well, technically it was really
his fault, but I was trying to
be nice and you know, take the
blame, but uh it it really was
his fault.
Thank you for acknowledging
that.
Alrighty, what I'm gonna do is
have everybody introduce
yourselves and um what small
business you're with, um, I, I
really wanted this presentation
because I want, you know, with
us, uh, being a commerce
committee, I want to know, you
know, boots on the ground,
what's going on, and so, um,
just getting a a small uh sample
of businesses here in my
hometown was important to me. So
thank you all for being here
and, um, look forward to your
presentation. If we want to
start here, that would be great.
My name is David Kreider. I run
and manage Southwest
Expeditions. We're a, uh,
adventure touring company
located here in Las Cruces and
the Messer area and we service
Southwest Texas, um,
And uh South New Mexico, uh, and
what we do as far as our
different tours and events.
Hi, my name is uh Martha Pena
and I am the CEO of Casa
Mexicana Taio business uh have
been in business since 1978.
Uh, basically just, uh, have a
tile, um, granite quartz and
cabinets. Yeah, good morning. My
name is Juan Albert. I just
closed a restaurant in Mesa,
Rincon de Mesa, but I'm now
working as a marketing director
for a company called Freeze
dried, excuse me, back backyard
farms which we do freeze dried
food here in uh in Las Cruces.
My name is Kit Johnson. I'm the
director of operations for
Boland Travel Centers. Uh, we've
been in business in New Mexico
since 1912, as old as New Mexico
is, we have 10 locations, uh,
scattered throughout New Mexico
and Arizona, 7 of which are in
New Mexico. 10 or 3 of which
were in Arizona.
So we're, we're happy to be here
and appreciate the invitation.
Well
If we want to just, if you guys
want to just talk to us, talk to
us what's good about business,
where are your challenges are,
um, and what you'd like to see
from us?
Um, are we in order or just
ladies first? OK,
got it. Yes, OK.
Actually, Madam Chair, um,
members of the committee,
uh,
Today I stand before you not
only as your CEO of Casa Mexican
Enterprises but also as a proud
steward of the family legacy
that my father is Eidro Pena
began in 1978. His vision was
simple yet profound to bring a
vibrant artistry and
craftsmanship of Mexican title
to our community in Las Cruces.
Over the years, our company has
become synonymous for quality,
color, and culture. However, a
small business owner encompasses
much more than just a passion
for craftsmanship. It involves
navigating an intricate web of
challenges and changes that
continually test our resilience.
When I reflect on the landscape
of the industry 25 years ago, I
reminded that 10 times importing
exquisite floor tiles from
Middle East, Spain, Mexico,
China, Brazil. It was very
feasible at the time for our
business model. Back then we
offered product
that were unique and exclusive,
allowing us to carve a niche in
the market. Our customers valued
the artistry and authenticity
that our tiles represented.
In every turn we built strong
relationships with our
clientele. However, in 2004, the
emergence of the big box
retailers like Home Depot and
Lowe's have changed the game
entirely. These national changes
have brought a level of
convenience and pricing power
for small businesses like ours
compete against.
While they're expensive
inventory and aggressive pricing
strategies attracted many
consumers. We've had to ask
ourselves how do we remain
relevant in this market with the
options. The answer lies in the
commitment to quality and
customer service. We may not
have the same resources or
marketing budgets, but we do uh
possess a profound connection
with the community and the
dedication to our craft. We
pride ourselves in offering
personalized service and a big
box source cannot simply
replicate our customers are not
just a trans.
they're part of our family. Each
interaction allows us to share a
passion for our products,
educate our clients on the
beauty and history of each
child. 8 years ago, I stepped in
this role as CEO and since then
I had to take a significant debt
to build a state of the art
fabrication shop. It's also been
challenging journey, but my
passion and faith have kept me
going.
Running a small business is a
bit like running, is like
raising a quirky unpredictable
teenager. Butulitzer Prizes,
plenty of hair pulling moments.
If you've been there, you get
it. One minute you're swamped
with dreaming of a whole team of
extra hands, and the next you're
scratching your head trying to
figure out how to make payroll.
It keeps you on your toes, but I
wouldn't have it any other way.
When I asked to speak to this
committee, I wasn't quite sure
what you wanted to hear. The
struggles of a small business
are vast and buried, and I could
easily stay here for a whole
year talking about them.
But as my late mother's advice
rings in my ears, cer onsta, be
honest. So here's an honest
breakdown of the key challenges
that keep me up at night.
Insurance costs between general
liability, workman's comp,
health insurance, my business
insurance costs has almost
tripled in the past 4 years.
It's a heavy burden on a small
business. Payroll costs as a
small business managing payroll
costs can be challenging,
especially when you are
increasing uh uh driven for
state mandated requirements
after
County Social Security,
Medicare, workman's
compensation, health insurance,
mandatory sick leave, retirement
benefits, someone that I paid
$25 an hour for their skilled
labor quickly becomes over $33
an hour.
And with 17 employees, these
costs can be
Quite high.
I will be covering.
In 2026, the paid family medical
leave, 3 months of wages for
employees on leave while also
needing to hire temporary help
and redistribute the workload
for small operation like ours,
it's a significant adjustment.
But we remain committed to doing
so to best navigate the
challenges and continue to
provide for our team. Our our
supply chain woes. Since COVID,
the cost of goods skyrocketed,
receiving material from time has
become nearly impossible task
pre-pandemic, a truckload of
study materials take 1 or 2
weeks. Now it could take up to 2
months and even then it's
impartial shipments and
explaining this to a customer
who's already upset. I'll let
you imagine how fun that is.
Uh, changing the consumer
behavior, the convenience of
shopping online has transformed
customers' expectations often
create a desire for immediate
results. However, many of us
don't realize the complexities
behind the scenes from ensuring
the same matching dialogue to
avoiding damaged shipments to
coordinating installation,
especially when customers want
it yesterday. Well, I come in
customers for conducting their
research, it does not always
translate into expertise,
particularly when it comes to
installation.
Our workforce challenges, hiring
someone to be is coming to
become one of the highest and
biggest challenges. Employees
who want to work, show up on
time and stay on off their
phones is quite hard. The
motivation to learn is wanting,
and they seem more interested in
becoming the next TikTok
influencer.
Which
Spans all ages, not just the
young ones.
Family business dynamics. I've
chosen to hire a immediate
family members, which comes at
his own challenges. It's tough
to know when to wear the CEO hat
and when to wear the mom hat.
Sometimes I wonder if I could be
easier if no family worked at
all, but it's unrealistic. These
are people that I trust and I
spend more time with them than I
did with my own mom.
Despite the obstacles, owning a
business remains one of the most
rewarding jobs I've ever had.
Many of my employees have been
with me for 10 to 15 years. I
get the thrill from working one
on one with customers, helping
them build a model, their homes,
Joy see the project through the
completion, and that's what
keeps me going. I pay for all
insurances and retirement
contributions for my skilled
employees because I want them to
be healthy and financially
secure because I've raised my
prices, but I believe that a
great customer.
Value Service is what is.
Necessary. My father always said
Lorato questacaro cheap is
expensive. In closing, I urge
you to support small businesses
like mine. The personalized
customer service that we offer
is rare. Respect the skill of
laborers. The expertise is fewer
and fewer than people possess.
Home Depot won't lose sleep if
you don't return. I will.
Why am I not getting the same
tax breaks that they are. It
just doesn't make sense. I'm the
one sponsoring your children's
team, offering discounts and
worrying if I've done enough for
my employees and customers.
I'm a mother, grandmother,
daughter, sister, and yes, a
local customer service rep at
Casa Mean Enterprises, where I
will greet you with a smile.
I'd like to go last if you don't
mind.
That was excellent, Madam Chair.
If I can just insert Southwest
Expeditions and then reread
that, that would be great.
Thanks, um.
We, as she hit the nail on the
head on a lot of those issues.
Um, anybody here doing small
business here no matter what.
Um,
Um
Industry that they're in suffers
from that and uh.
Now that COVID's over, well, our
prices, like she said, has
tripled, um, so we're in a very
Kind of a depressed economy
around here, um, so we have to
really pay attention to our
price point on what we charge
for tours, the different things
we do. We do everything from
plane tours to hiking, biking,
kayaking, tubing overnights lake
uh venues, uh, things like that,
and we provide food, we provide
things like that as well as the
equipment and and the guides and
the staff.
And everything's tripled, and
it's a real concern because our
price point.
We've come to realize it has to
be in a certain area, and if we
go outside that window, our
sales drop, but it's getting
hard to keep inside that window
when everything is up and so we
have to raise prices and we sure
hear about it on Facebook, on
Messenger, on text, um, as to
why is it so expensive, so I
have to, I make a little
paragraphs so I can already just
shoot that to him and and
explain this as nice as we can.
That our prices have gone up.
I, I work with the federal
governments a lot on the
different agencies for
permitting and getting the right
to have uh touring on these
different places like your land
management BLM and IBWC
International Boundary Water
Commission, I would really like,
because we're, we're a small
fish in a big pond. These guys
are huge organizations. They
mean well. They're usually
understaffed. They're usually,
you can't get somebody on the
phone. It's extremely
frustrating to deal with IBW.
See, for instance, which is
based out of El Paso,
International Boundary Water
Commission, you got to go down
there and you just got to sit
there because phone calls aren't
returned and.
You know, us saying something
and jumping up and down about it
just upsets people and they're
even harder to deal with and we
have to get these permits in
order to operate on certain
things, but it's pulling teeth,
so a better form of
communication from maybe top
down to let their staff know if
you have businesses calling you
to get permits or go through the
commercial process, which is
sometimes very lengthy.
Answer the phone, you know, get
back with us. Uh, we're, we're
just like you guys, we're just
as busy and we're, we're, as she
says, we wear very many hats and
so once you take that hat off of
marketing or getting the
permits, you got to put on other
hats to do other things that
call never comes, so you have to
put that hat back on and just
repeating yourself over and over
and so it's a frustrating thing,
um, and it could be a lot
smoother, but if.
Sometimes these guys are just,
they, I just feel that they're
removed from the day to day
operations of what they're doing
on our level, they're doing it,
you know, statewide, they're
doing it, uh, region-wide and
they lose track of their small
businesses trying to interact
with them to get what they do
done. So a little help on that
would be great.
Um,
The, um, we're in a tourism
business. We've, since we've
been here, which is going on
about 10 years, we've
Did everything we can do in our
power with our limited budget,
our limited staff to help to
make the uh Las Cruces and the
surrounding area is a tourist
destination. I think it has the
huge potential to, you know, we
have the parts now, we've and
all of that, but where we lack
in my opinion, is advertising.
This is from the city. We can
only do so much advertising. I
blast out on Facebook. I pay for
advertising, but it's, it's just
a drop in the notion. Um,
there's so much going out there
vying for everybody's attention.
We could use some of the dollars
and not just for our business,
for anybody in tourism in this
town, uh, and that includes the
hotels and and the restaurants
and things like that is to have
more of a say in the city budget
as to where these advertising
dollars are going to to put us
on a board or something that we
can provide input, uh,
billboards, you know, I'm so
tired of seeing billboards for,
uh, up north, um, go to go to
Santa Fe, go to Albuquerque, go
up to TRC as they pass through
uh Las Cruces.
And if we could get some, uh,
major billboard signages there
in a maybe a concentrated
effort. I know, I know the visit
Las Cruces goes out to get
businesses to come in here and
do the convention center and
things like that, and that's
great. And we, we do get,
um,
Business from that for people
looking to do things afterwards,
but, um, more specifically, if
they could target tourists
coming through here 67% of the.
Um,
Clientele that we have is women
and they're 40 and over, and out
of that, probably 40% come from
Texas, uh, the, the areas out
there. We have a large group now
of people that regularly come
down from Albuquerque, Silver
City, Santa Fe, but we've got,
um, buses that come in from out
of state and.
They weren't planning to do
anything, they just called last
minute to say, hey, we want to,
can you do a walk on tour? Can
you do this? Can you do that?
But nobody's contacted them or
some of these bus agencies, and
I know there's 1 million tour
agencies out there. But if there
could be a staff member on
either Visit Las Cruces to
actually reach out for these
guys and say we have that
available here we have walk-on
guides here, we have that, that
we can do stay and play
packages, which is what the
hotels we work with several
hotels here. They give discounts
for the room rates for us to
advertise.
At their place to bring people
uh from their hotels out to do
adventures.
And that would be a huge help if
we could see a ramp on that, um.
It's, you'll always hear this
access to working capital, and I
mean uh for for profits we have,
we see a lot of nonprofits of
these huge grant programs that
that are rolled out for
nonprofits, for organizations,
for all of that, and we can't
touch that and.
Uh.
Uh, I know there's programs out
there cause I've looked at them.
It would be nice to have
somebody reach out and the
reason I'm saying this is I know
we can get online, we can, we
can spend hours looking at the
different programs, looking at
the different organizations,
it's a lot out there and we're
back to being.
We wear many hats and that could
take up a half a day or many
days for us just to research
this stuff and then put it
together, get the package
together, get it sent out. It
would be nice if the people that
are already in the business like
Visit Las Cruces for tourism,
things like that could keep us
abreast and they've they've done
a pretty good job, but.
There's always room for
improvement on that end. Um,
it's to let us know what grants
are available out there, not
just for nonprofits, but for
for-profit companies because
there's not near as many and it
would be nice to see that.
Uh, I've got to bring up the the
crime downtown. We, we, uh, I
manage the uh olded used to be
the old Donana County Courthouse
and jail Ann. We do a lot of
events in there. I manage it for
a group of investors.
And.
I've seen just a tremendous
amount and everybody here that
has any business downtown knows
what I'm talking about, of the,
the homeless situations that we
have there and the more
aggressive homeless that's been
coming in, um, we've had pretty
much every window on the first
floor broke broken out. Um, they
bring tools and even though
we've welded up bars on our
windows, they, they pry the bars
off to try to get in.
We call the police usually about
once a week, um, if not twice
to, uh, we have out, we've had
to install outdoor cameras,
indoor cameras, um, because
they, they're blatant even in
the daytime now, it doesn't
matter and.
So, um, the police pretty much
and I and I have to commend the,
the, the police. They've done an
excellent job. They've stepped
up quite a bit. We see a police
presence quite a bit more, and
it is a, it's a bigger
deterrent, but if
You know, I just hate to throw
out problems without solutions,
and we've talked about this in
other groups that I'm with is we
really need to budget some money
for mental health facilities
here, um, and get these people
off the street, get them
detoxified, get him cleaned up
to where they're on the proper
meds, a lot of these people have
mental issues and they're just
out on the street and they do
what they do. They have no
concept, or conscious of some of
the things that they're doing,
and some of them are very
violent because they're off
whatever meds that they really
need to be on or
Institutionalized and we, as you
know, we went away from that and
it's, it's caused a lot of
problems down here. So that is
something that really concerns
me because we have a lot of
female staff and I'm really
concerned with them coming in in
the building we do ghost tours
at night and paranormal
investigations the place is very
active. So they come in at night
to run those tours and, um, me
or one of the guys always have
to be with them because I just
do not want um our staff being
subjected to folks coming out of
the bush.
and coming up to them, which has
happened many times and so
that's an issue, um, and we've
probably heard that ad nauseam,
but.
Um, as far as.
Everything else that that is my
main thing we, we, we do have,
we struggle the same way with,
with payroll with um the tourism
and the overall countries where
we're at right now as far as
people tightening up on some
things we've seen that we've
noticed that just from several
years ago.
And we're having to constantly.
Uh, put on different hats to
think outside the box as far as,
uh, tourism and home, the
different events. That's why we
do so many types of different
events is because I cannot rest
my hat on one thing. The river's
controlled access. We have it
for the for the summer and then
we have to switch gears. So
we've learned to adapt here like
most small businesses have to,
um, so any spotlight or any help
that uh, Madam Chair, that you
guys can bring to the table to
get the organizations that are
helping small business or in or
doing that would be huge just.
have them maybe refocus their
efforts a little bit. Everybody
gets busy and we get pulled
different ways and it would be
just a big help to have a
liaison between small business
and.
The city, um, because I am
downtown and we do a lot through
throughout the city.
is to have them reach out more
to small business. What are you
guys needing, you know, what's,
what's coming up? Hey, did you
know that this, this grant, I
mean, everybody shoots out
emails and I know it's more
efficient, but I'm old school.
I'm old enough to be old school
and, you know, phone call would
be huge or invite to a sit down
to talk about budgeting for
advertising for tourism dollars
and once again, not just us, but
what we offer us and other
people. There's bike riders out
here, there's all kinds of small
businesses, yoga, Pilates
instructors that go out.
As well as us doing different
tours.
They'll be a big help for us and
get the word out and that's the
thing, it's just getting the
momentum and we've seen it
increase, but
Things have gotten tight too, so
people are watching their
dollars and we have to spend
more of our time in advertising
to get them to focus on us and
it would be helped, very helpful
if we had some deeper pockets,
so anyway, that being said,
thank you for.
Let me talk.
Kit, you want to go next?
Absolutely, Madam Chair, thank
you and thank you committee for
allowing us to speak before you
today. I, I certainly would
disli uh step in line with, uh,
uh, with these who have already
spoken with uh Martha and David
both. Certainly, um, insurance
costs, payroll costs, virtually
every item of your, uh, PNL
sheet as far as your expenses
goes, has gone up. It's becoming
quite, uh, difficult as a small
business just to
stay in business. I'm going to
take a little broader
perspective if you don't mind,
uh, because certainly what's
been said is exactly spot on,
uh, runs right down the line,
but, um, I, I couldn't help but
just look outside of that one,
my key job as director of
operations for Boland Travel
Centers is that I spend an awful
lot of time trying to figure out
what is not going
Right. I was intrigued by uh by
this committee meeting and in
particularly, uh, the title, uh,
what's Working for us and what
isn't working for us. My job as
in my position with Bowens,
which by the way, is also a
family legacy. I, I appreciated
you saying that that that was
quite impressive. Uh, the Bowen
family, uh, Mike Boland is
currently our president and CEO.
His mom and dad started, started
the business back.
In 1912, and our business model
is, is serving travelers up and
down the highway. We're the only
ones I tell Mike we're the only
ones dumb enough to work out in
the middle of nowhere, uh,
there, there's, there's uh
numbers of challenges associated
with that, but.
I couldn't help but look at a
couple of articles I've run
across over the last few years.
One of them is with, um, uh US
news, uh, report that considered
this was done in 1923 or 202023,
excuse me. Um, it considered
factors like crime, economy,
education, physical stability,
health care, infrastructure, uh,
natural environment opportunity,
all those things were considered
and then it ranked all the
various states.
Within the United States. New
Mexico ranked forty-ninth. I
thought that was interesting.
More recently, there was an
article that was published by
Forbes Advisor that um
Highlighted the best states to
start a small business in. This
was published in 2024.
Uh, it considered factors like
business costs, business
climate, financial
accessibility, economy, and
workforce, uh, New Mexico ranked
forty-seventh within all of
that.
Further, just other rankings
that I thought were interesting
for New Mexico, child poverty,
we ranked number one overall
poverty. We ranked number one,
violent crime. We ranked number
one school absenteeism, we
ranked number one in high school
graduation or the lack thereof,
we ranked number one.
All of those factors might seem
more broad than just small
business, but all of those
factors affect our businesses in
one way or another, rather
directly or indirectly because
it either attracts tourism,
which we feed off of it attracts
more people coming into town or
it feeds our ability to be more
successful with the resources
that are available to us there.
Uh, workforce quality and desire
was mentioned earlier and
certainly we suffer with that,
that same notion. Um, it's sad,
uh, to see what
is available out there relative
to hiring uh
potential uh workforce
candidates, um, uh.
The kids that are coming out of
high school nowadays have such a
problem in just communicating. I
think some of that's been caused
by, I can sit down and text with
them and they can text all day.
They have a language that I
don't understand, but
nonetheless, they can text much
faster, but to carry to sit down
and carry on a conversation with
them. Uh, I have a grandson that
just that that will be
graduating from high school this
year. And he suffers from the
same problem. He can sit down
and text with me all day, but I
will.
Sit down and ask him, how did
your day go? Fine.
What all happened today? Oh, not
much.
He has a problem just simply
communicating with me and in my
business, we have to have people
that can communicate, uh, the
ability to add and subtract
something that you would think
is quite simple mathematical
capabilities, um.
Counting money back accurately,
doing small things like that
that you would think would be
quite simple and you assume
would be available and, and part
of their ability to to uh to
achieve uh is quite difficult
for them in many cases. In many,
many times they can't add in
their head.
2 + 23 + 34 + 4. I know that
sounds silly, but they will pull
out their phone and use their
phone to do that very thing.
Uh, so.
Being able to draw from a
workforce that is capable of
feeding our business and helping
our business succeed at a higher
level of performance is becoming
more and more difficult.
David mentioned the
homelessness, and I certainly
want to concur with that, um.
You know, the other day, my wife
went down to um, uh, one of the
local stores here to get a new
battery and in a car charger or
something that she was working
with.
She came back and she was very
upset and very.
flustered and the reason she was
is because when she went into
the business.
She was hounded by multiples of
homeless people that were
approaching her for money. Now,
my wife is about 5'2. She's,
she's very petite, very, very
small, and uh 70 years old, uh
you know, that was quite
disturbing to her and obviously
quite disturbing to me once I
found out about it. Once she
left the business, she had the
same, the same thing go on. Now,
as a husband, my immediate
reaction is don't.
Go back to that business.
How, what kind of effect do you
think that has on that small
business?
It's going to be very difficult
for them to continue in such a
way because if other husbands
like me do the exact same thing,
then ultimately that business
will no longer be able to
succeed. So this homelessness
thing really needs to be
addressed and really needs to
something really needs to be
done about it, and I certainly
concur with what David said. Our
local police department here in
Las Cruces is, is really up
their game, um, uh, our, our
police chief, uh, Jeremy Story.
I think his name is, is really,
really stepped up to the plate
and I think done a wonderful
job.
We have offices in Albuquerque,
um, we've been in the Louisiana,
those of you that are familiar
with Albuquerque, Louisiana, and
Central. Uh, we have a horrible
time with homelessness, uh.
Invading our space, if you will,
uh, one of our ladies who's been
with us almost 50 years now, uh,
came to work one morning about 3
months ago, uh, to find out that
somebody had broken into our,
our facility, our offices, and
they proceeded. It was a it was
a man and a, and his girlfriend,
and they proceeded to, to
destroy whatever they could
destroy and ultimately created
Right close to
to $100,000 in damage to the
interior of our office space.
Uh, our people got there before
the, uh, the police department
there, the police department
finally got there. They were
arrested, uh.
They were let out immediately. I
have no idea what has transpired
with them since then. One of
our, uh, senior vice presidents
wrote a letter to, uh, the mayor
to our city councilor up there
and to some of the other people,
uh, within city government up
there asking for some help.
uh uh telling them exactly what
had taken place, uh, not one,
not one of the people she wrote
to even responded.
Didn't bother to say, uh, thank
you for letting us know. We'll
see what we can do. Drop dead,
go away, don't bother me
anymore. Nothing, you know, it'd
be nice just to have a little
bit of, little bit of, uh,
reply.
Um, our state and national
economy is in a wreck right now.
I think y'all would agree with
that.
One thing that really concerns
us as a business because we rely
so much on people being able to
use their credit cards. Do you
realize that a year ago.
nation, uh, collectively as
consumers are consumer debt has
now surpassed $1 trillion. That
is a, I, I don't even know how
many zeros are attached to that.
But most people, I will tell
you, are unable to pay their
credit cards off in full each
and every month, so at a point
in time they, they make the
payments with it. Uh, payments
that are assessed, uh, an
interest rate of something close
to 25 or 30%.
Can you imagine what 25 to 30%
is on a $1 trillion every month,
so I can understand why people
are having difficulties being
able to buy more stuff, the
stuff we sell is all, uh.
is all discretionary dollars,
uh, people don't have to have
Native American handcrafted
jewelry. People don't have to
have the souvenirs that we have
at our various stores. Uh, they
don't have to have really
anything we have maybe a
hamburger or Jiry Queen or maybe
uh C store item with chips and,
and, and a Coke or something,
but I can tell you that our
sales have dropped. Our average
sale has dropped.
The uh the
Transaction count has dropped
and certainly the traffic counts
have dropped significantly over
the last several years.
So, I want to be careful when
I'm saying all of this because
it almost appears as though I'm
being critical and I'm trying to
take aim at somebody
individually or or even a
particular, uh, political party,
but, but I, I am not. Please,
please do not think that that's
what I'm saying because this is
not, this is not a Republican
problem. This is not a
democratic problem. This is a
New Mexican problem.
This is an us problem. This is
something that we've got to pull
together and start working
together to make sure that we
overcome these things. I
mentioned that my main job.
is to determine what is not
working within our business so
that I can then create some
pathway to overcome that problem
to mitigate that problem and
turn what potentially could be a
loss into a profit.
I guess my request is, as a
humble consumer as a humble, um,
citizen of, of New Mexico and a
proud citizen in New Mexico, I
might add. I'm, I'm, I'm a
homeboy, been here all my life.
Uh, would really like to ask
that.
Republicans and Democrats this
year in the legislature start
working together, more
formidably and more effectively
and more aggressively. Uh, our
national political picture is.
is embarrassing.
Uh,
The name calling, the slander,
the bickering, all of that's
going on. If my children were
acting like that, I suspect if
your children were acting like
that, uh, there would be, there
would be hell to pay.
And here we have a political
environment that is
Enhancing that picture.
Uh, I would like to think that
New Mexico is bigger than that.
I would like to think that New
Mexico can pull together.
My wife and I have been married
49 years,
approaching the 50 year mark, so
next August, uh, we will have
been married 50 years.
I would like to tell you that
every everything that we have
discussed, we have agreed upon.
If I tried to sell that to you,
you would know for sure I was
lying to you.
We've gone 50 years. We have not
always agreed on everything. We
have disagreed on many things,
but over the 50 years, we've
been able to
Strengthen our marriage to
produce a successful marriage to
raise a wonderful family of two
daughters who now have a
beautiful family and have
produced some grandchildren for
us.
Uh, and I am very proud to say
that.
We're approaching the 50 year
mark.
But we've done it because we
have been committed to
compromise. We've been committed
to, uh, working together and
we've been committed to
respecting each other's desires.
I may not always get everything
I want and she may not always
get everything she wants, but at
the end of the day, we all
always get what we want.
But it's all aimed at the
betterment of our family.
So I guess I'm going to look at
our legislative body in this
way.
The Republicans and the
Democrats are much like the
parents within a family.
And the decisions that you make.
The things that you do within
the legislature.
is going to affect the
betterment of your family, which
is a constituency and and the
citizenship of New Mexico.
So I guess if I would sit here
and say what's not working?
Well, there's a lot that's not
working, you and I all know
that.
What is working we have a
tremendous amount of resources
to draw from. We have a great
people here in the state of New
Mexico, and we have a great
legislative body.
That we that I hope this year we
can count on to set aside
differences and pull together
collectively.
With an attitude that says let's
Let's work toward the collective
betterment.
Of the state of New Mexico.
So thank you for your time. I so
appreciate that.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
good to see you. Thank you so
much for this invitation. I'm
gonna give a little bit
different spin to this.
Um, because when most people on
the outside look at businesses,
they like to highlight the
success stories, the ones where
entrepreneurs end up in Ink
magazine and and entrepreneur
magazine and you're sipping
margaritas and Cancun, um, but
let me bring back to the
reality. Forget the dreams of
financial freedom and
flexibility. This driving the
real reasons why you should
never under any circumstances,
start a business.
Starting a business is probably
the 2nd most challenging thing
you ever do in life. I think you
mentioned the first.
Number one, long hours and
little pay. Prepare yourself for
the glamorous lifestyle of 80
hour weeks, sometimes more for a
salary so low that you're
part-time job at Taco Bell
looked like it was rewarding.
Remember those dreams of making
millions, you'll, you'll be
lucky if you can pay rent on
time.
And who needs sleep when you
live on a combination of
caffeine, adrenaline, and sheer
panic.
And the customers, don't forget
them. Let's paint a picture of
your future, no matter how much
blood, sweat, and tears you pour
into your product, your
customers would never be happy.
But the customers are never
wrong, even when they're
absolutely wrong, prepare
yourself for the one star review
because your coffee wasn't hot
enough, your service was too
fast or your store didn't have
enough air condition.
And then there's the state of
New Mexico, Orlando Manana.
And sometimes pasal manana
starting a business is tough
anyway, but here in New Mexico
we like to make it extra
challenging the poverty level,
as you mentioned, is high. If
you're looking to build,
remodel.
Get ready to grapple with
permits and permits and more
permits.
Your contractor told you he
would be there on Monday, but
you have him figure out which
Monday he was referring to.
And, and please no more Mexican
restaurants. It's not that we
don't love tacos, but trust me,
the market is so oversaturated.
That Taco Tuesdays.
We have enough of taco Suess.
The reality is people can only
eat so many tacos burritos and
tamales our employees, let's
talk about employees, your
trusty team, sure they're carry
the business on their capable
shoulders except most of the
time they won't. You get Julio
who thinks showing up 15 minutes
late every day is basically on
time, and Sarah, who spends most
of the time scrolling through
TikTok and texting friends.
And don't forget about the joy
of managing because suddenly
you're not just a boss, you're
the full-time therapist. You're
the marketing department, you're
the janitor, you're the HR
manager and sometimes a
therapist for your customers.
You thought it'd be fun to work
for yourself, and yet somehow
you work for everyone else.
Let's discuss your personal
life. Yes, the one you abandoned
the day you started the
business. Remember the days when
you enjoyed having your
weekends, carnitas and a modelo
with Joaquin and Maria and the
widow Rich kiss them all
goodbye.
The joy of taxes and then
there's the paperwork, mountains
of it, because starting a
business means ones above.
Means all about bureaucracy. Get
ready for a love-hate
relationship with paperwork as
you drown in forms, license
permits, and OES taxes. And
speaking of taxes,
The New Mexican girls receive
taxes. New Mexico's special
little cherry on the top. Just
when you thought you had a
surplus at the end of the month,
you have to pay almighty Estado.
For those of you who may not be
familiar with the delightful
text. Let me explain. Most most
states have a sales tax with
customers pay taxes on things
they buy simple, not Mex, not
New Mexico. Here we like to keep
things into string with the GRT
attacks that small business
owners pay on the privilege of
just doing business. Here's how
It works. Instead of your
customer paying the tax at the
register, you, the business
owner, paid on almost everything
you sell, whether you're selling
goods or services or just a cup
of coffee, the state takes a
bite of everything. Then, then
there's our New Mexico small
town fascination of corporate
America.
It's just heartwarming when we
have one, not just one Walmart
4, in addition to 8 Starbucks
and a blank load of fast food
chains.
I mean what small town community
does it need yet another
Starbucks when we're barely
holding on to one local coffee
shop, which, which is run by a
nice little couple from Oregon
who's pouring their heart and
soul into making your cup of
coffee.
As a proud resident of Massa, we
should follow the law of Messia.
Everyone may not agree on
everything, but one thing's for
sure.
We never see a Dutch brothers on
the Benida Messia or Burger King
on the plaza.
And finally, the risk of
failure, let's face it,
statistically most businesses
fail.
You could work your fingers to
the bone, pour your heart and
soul into your business and
still go belly up. According to
the SBA, 50% of businesses fail
by year 5 and 80% fall fell by
10 years. So if you want to
start a business, just remember
it's not about being your own
boss or following your passion.
It's about becoming an unpaid
intern at your own life's chaos.
In conclusion, include ladies
and gentlemen, why start a
business? Sure, there's that
tiny chance that you might cross
the finish line, but odds are
you're just, you end up limping,
dehydrated, and wondering why
you just didn't stick with that
steady, boring 9 to 5.
So now after I finish this
doomsday presentation, let me
just tell she have reasons of,
of why you should stay and one
of the um one of the things I, I
would like to and everybody made
some great points with my
concern always in this state and
I did work for a uh a CDFI is
access to capital. I think
access to capital is the biggest
barrier facing small businesses
here. Um, and I'm gonna speak on
behalf of the minority, the
Hispanic community, we need more
information, more training, more
resources.
Uh, for the Spanish speaking
community that we have in our
community. Um, but the issue of
access to capital, um, banks are
extremely, extremely
conservative in this state. Uh,
1 in 5 may get a loan if you're
lucky. It leaves us with the
CDFIs when they're available
because they're also inundated,
but um.
I will leave you with that, the,
um, access to capital would be
my primary concern of what we
need to address here in the
state of New Mexico.
Thank you. That was an
interesting uh interesting
remarks from from the panel. I,
I appreciate your, your candor.
Do we have any questions? We got
Representative Roy Bar Caviero.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you all for your, um,
Um, passionate descriptions of
what you go through on a regular
basis. It's important to hear
that.
Um, but I also.
I also want to make sure that we
balance.
Uh, there's always a balance, as
you all know, sometimes it's off
balance for one and up for the
other,
but they eventually is a balance
and I, you know, I, I, um, have
had the benefit of teaching
public policy to graduate
students and I take the
approach, Madam Chair, of
beginning with history, the
whole, you know, his background
because it's important to
understand public policy and
our, our, our socioeconomic base
and we
how that transition. So I'm very
proud of all of you having uh
small businesses uh or big
businesses, however way you
because ultimately that is the
goal, um, in, in these United
States. However,
In the state of New Mexico, what
we have found is that we've had
to do we're we're going through
year after year after year of
undoing.
Um, and undoing.
Generations of cycles of neglect
as a gentleman, I didn't catch
your name from um the operations
manager from for Bola and I
didn't get your name, but as you
Johnson Johnson, as you were
describing the failures.
For a large part of our
education system.
Um, the inability to have a
conversation more than 2 or 3
words at a time, uh, and so many
other socioeconomic problems are
a result of cycles of neglect
and cycles of building
dependency.
And the, the mentality of
passing through.
Our students, um, and expecting
the minimum only.
We've, we've had a mentality in
the state of minimum.
Everything's been just pass them
through minimum.
And um.
The statistics you read to us
about 49th, 47th.
Number one, number one, all
negative because of this.
So we have to understand that um
those social-economic conditions
that all of you described in
your own from your own
perspectives, um, are also a
result of really bad decisions
being made on our behalf.
By self-serving interests.
Rather than people serving
interests.
I think we can agree on that.
That that's bad decisions.
Self-serving. How many people
have, um, in the state decision
makers have
been.
Tried and jailed for bad
decisions.
Made on our behalf because it
went into their pockets or for
whatever other reasons.
So unfortunately, New Mexico
suffers.
From
That history.
And so everything you've
described, there's a reason for
it.
That there's no justifying it,
Madam Chair, but there's a
reason behind it. So if we
understand the reasons behind
things, then we can get a better
grasp on how we can undo and
improve.
So I'm very proud, as I said
earlier, of my son who graduated
from Emosie with a finance
degree. His whole goal was he
saw what you just described.
And he said, I'm not going to
work for anybody. I want to be
my own independent,
self-employed.
Social entrepreneur.
I don't know how many years ago
he graduate, but anyway, he's
been in, he's been doing this in
pursuit and because of the good
education he got here at NMSU,
the great foundation, the great
resources, except uh accessible
to them.
He's 36 years old and a
successful young social
entrepreneur and his business
keeps growing, not to the point
where he's making six digits.
For himself yet.
But the foundation and what he
has built for himself.
is stable, he's he's taking care
of his young family, a 2 year
old, one year old, and a wife
and he's doing well. My point
being that everything that you
described, there's a reason for
it. You said no Democrat, no
Republican. I didn't say any of
that. I said the self-interest
versus people interests.
That's really important for us
to
To understand how we as
legislators have to focus on
undoing that, but by providing
alternative ways of doing
things, different mindsets and
different approaches. So I have
several questions. Um, one, if
you could just all nod or say
yes or give me a thumbs up. Do
all of you belong to either the
greater chamber, green chamber,
Hispanic chamber.
So only one out of the 4. OK,
that's really important.
Because this is where you and
this is where he, my son has
gotten a lot of contacts. This
is where you build
relationships.
And the member based provides so
many resources, but the
relationships are key. So my
strong recommendation is, I'm
sure it costs money, but you
know, the old saying it takes
money to make money.
Sometimes it's really worth.
Thinking about that saying. Um,
so my suggestion would be that
would be one huge avenue. The
second question I have has to do
with what David Cryer mentioned
about Southwest Expeditions and
needing more resources as well.
Are you tapped into the New
Mexico tourism department? OK.
Have you found that, um, Madam
Chair, helpful to you?
It's carving the time to to look
into those programs and stuff.
I'm, I'm very thankful that they
do have, they seem to be more
aggressive in what they're
putting out. So that's good to
see, um.
I don't know if it's just me
eventually getting to them to
look and see what they have. It
always seems like when I look on
that thing, the deadline has
passed for some grant or some
thing that they're putting
together. OK, I'll do the next
one kind of thing, and then you
get busy and life takes over and
you look at it again and I'm
late again on something, so I'm
uh.
Try to do something internally
that where I can have one of our
staff kind of look at that for
me and remind me of those kind
of things cause we get, we get
our head buried in different
things and um.
That's not a thing where I stay
up on unless it comes through my
feet or something, so. Thank
you, Madam Chair and thank you
for your answer. I, I have found
that they multiple businesses,
especially in your area, have
found it very um useful to be
tapped in so you have local um
ways in which to tap into the
state as well and the Department
of Tourism to be helpful to you
because you have a valuable
business. All of you all have
valuable business. Finally, um,
Um
To Miss Orta because I'm
particularly um.
I'm my inclination is always to
support small businesses my my
in-laws, uh, my husband, as you
heard my son, all of us come
from uh Hispanic Latino families
that have been long term uh
small businesses, and they've
struggled, but they've remained
in business and they made it
work.
I, I think especially our
cultural background finds ways
to make it work. Most Latino
owned businesses during COVID
stayed open versus those that
closed. There's a reason for
that, so we need to understand
that reason as well. So my
question to you one is, um, I
understand you described a lot
of challenges. All of you
described lots of challenges,
but you're still in business,
11, you have 10 employees that
have been with you 10 to 15
years.
That says a lot about your um.
Your business uh values and um
that's really important. So my
question to you is,
Have you seen uh another saying
real quickly because this is
where it's coming from. People
have, I've said, I've asked over
and over again for those
businesses, restaurants, food
distribution, others that have
stayed in business.
Why did you, why do you still
are.
Are you able to stay in
business? Well, the customers
still keep coming. They like our
service, uh, they like our
product and I said, and they
still will pay.
The increased price because some
prices, as you mentioned, went
up and they said yes, we have
that customer base.
So do you have that customer
base that that, um, well, I
guess I want to say, has your
customer base dropped?
And if it has.
How has that balanced with those
that have stayed with you?
Um.
How it's changed for us is that
we've had to um
Like I said, invest into
equipment so that we are not
offering just tile because tile
just dropped completely, so we
did have to start, uh, I had to
go get a, um.
Alone to uh bring in a
fabrication, um, shop so that
we're able to provide a service
because I feel that in the
service industry, whether it be
uh serving um uh as a line cook,
as a granite installer as a
plumber, these are, uh, jobs
that'll never go away.
Uh, these are jobs that are
always going to be necessary for
those who have homes, you will
always have to have some sort of
traits to fix your roof and so
we decided to diversify and tap
into that, but that took.
Um, a lot on our part, um, and
part of it is relearning a brand
new skill from 5 years ago, it's
taken us 5 years to just try to
relearn all of that brand new
business altogether, but that's
how we've stayed, um, relevant
and just to reiterate also back
on what you said about joining
the chamber, my father was, uh,
one of the spinner chamber
businesses of the year. We have
been, we've had participated in
the Espano chamber and the Las
Cruces Chamber of Commerce, um.
But I almost felt it was kind
of.
High school ish.
And where you have I pay the
$625 every time and what does
that get me it gets me nothing
for my business other than to,
hey, can you donate? Can you pay
for this? Can you, so that
doesn't help me as a business.
I'd rather take that money and
invest it into my employees and
do something word of mouth or
something that would benefit me
more uh as a on a business
level. Uh, I hope that with the
new, uh, chamber and.
The new members, uh, that that
will change. So I'm looking
forward to that. I'm not saying
no to it, but I'm hoping that
that will be something to look
forward to.
Thank you very much. And, and
that's what I've heard as well,
Madam Chair, um, so there's
always change and there's always
hope. So that's the point of
having chambers so that you can
benefit, not necessarily be.
You know, asked to give and
take, and another key point that
I just want to raise in, in
closing is that you talked about
diversifying. A lot of these
restaurants that were in my
district and across the state
that I visited, they diversify.
You walk into a restaurant and
you have a glass container now
and you have all kinds of
products, um, that pertain to
the theme of the restaurant or
you go into that's part of the
tradition of being, uh, making
it work. You have to find ways
to diversify. So,
Were you in your loan? Were you
able to access the New Mexico
Finance Authority or any of our
New Mexico loan, you weren't.
What I was, I was denied because
I was not profitable enough.
And so it became something where
I had to
go outside of that and pay the
higher interest, but in the end,
hoping that um it'll all balance
out, but local, I went to 4
local banks, nothing, nothing.
They, they wanted to secure over
$1000 in assets to have a credit
line of $150,000. That's not
worth it, so.
You're very savvy. Uh, thank
you, Madam Chair, very savvy
businesswoman. Thank you. I,
this is where, Madam Chair and
committee members and others
that I wish we would increase
our research and study and not
fear uh going into new avenues,
but this is where the public
bank of New Mexico would have
been a great service because it
would be New Mexico grown money,
New Mexico lent out money and
New Mexico owned money that we
cycle back to exactly your
situation where you're denied,
denied, denied, denied, and
In this case, that we want the
opposite. We want you to excel,
excel, excel. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, uh, all of you
for doing an exemplary job.
Thank you. Representative
Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
thank you presenters, uh, we
kind of got to see two sides of
the coin and then.
On the presentations, uh, the
last presentation that was given
was talking about more money
being available and and our.
Colleague, uh
Representative Caballero hit on
that.
Uh, I'll start there, uh.
The reason
That
Money's not as accessibly easily
accessible is because of exactly
what you talked about about 80%
of the business is failing.
Banks
Have regulations and and they
have.
Goals they have to meet.
And
Until somebody can prove
themselves or have capital to
back it.
They don't loan the money.
The state of New Mexico.
Wants to start a state run bank.
With your tax dollars. Everybody
in this room with your tax
dollars.
If we were guaranteed that money
back with interest and stuff.
It'd be great, but it's not.
Everybody in this room knows
that the reality of it is 80% of
those businesses gonna fail.
So your tax dollars are then
gonna be used.
For failing businesses and we're
not gonna get that money back.
And why would you want to put
people's tax dollars, why not
put them back in your pockets?
So that you can put them into
your business.
And take care of your own
business.
As we grow government and we
make people more reliant on
government.
We can't keep bailing them out
all the time. We've seen that
happen at the national level.
We've seen it happen with credit
cards. We've seen it.
Happen time and time again and
we cycle right back to the same
thing.
The consumer debt on our credit
cards, that's, that's not
anything to laugh about.
People are having a hard time.
All across our country.
Has New Mexico been
business-friendly in the policy
that we've made?
Since I've gotten elected.
No.
Not from my point of view, I've
had several businesses of my
own.
I know the struggles of signing
the check in the front and in
the back?
I've signed them on both sides.
I've had good jobs in my life.
I've been very blessed.
When we we created a minimum
wage increase.
That didn't help our businesses.
Because, because now.
Inflation takes hold.
And I tell people.
Kind of blowing it out of
proportion, but I tell people.
We're gonna be like Mexico,
we're gonna be paying $2000 for
a pair of boots.
If we keep going this direction.
And before the
That hamburger didn't used to
cost as much.
And then McDonald's has to start
paying that.
That higher wage and all it did
was increase the price of the
hamburgers.
And then
A lot of their customers could
come into McDonald's to buy a
hamburger because they couldn't
afford it.
We've sat down with the
McDonald's owners.
And they tell us what has
happened.
And, and now they're coming back
with the 34 5 or something or 2
for 5.
Trying to get those customers
back in there, but.
It didn't help us any.
When, when we look at uh.
The family paid sick leave act.
Did you did you business owners
wipe the sweat off your forehead
when that failed?
And it's coming back.
It's gonna come back. We're hell
bent, determined to pass it.
Even though we get a board.
Like you guys in front of us.
Sitting in front of us and, and
you, you tell us we can't afford
this.
And I talked to a business owner
and and he told me he said,
we're gonna have to cut back on
labor.
We're gonna have to hire less
people.
Hm
And cut back on labor.
So that we can afford.
Something like this.
So here we go, increasing the
unemployment and put more stress
on our, on our businesses.
New Mexico has not been friendly
to small business.
That's why we're sitting here
today.
Thank you for coming up and,
and, and.
Telling us about your issues.
We hear the most extreme.
And
It's not, it's not.
That it's not reality, it's,
it's reality, it's there. We're
there, we're.
It's happening.
Yeah.
The, the, the Clean Fuel Act.
We'll come back again and
that'll cost us.
That'll cost us more for fuel.
And, and, and we'll have to bite
the bullet.
And, and we all want clean fuel.
We all want.
Green energy, we all, but we
ought to do it in a manner that
makes sense and and.
Like representative Caballero
said we, we need some balances.
We need some checks and
balances. If we break all our
businesses, we're not.
We're not gonna make it work.
You're not gonna make it work.
We're not gonna be successful,
and we're gonna see the big box
stores come in and take over the
tile business and everything
else because they have more
potential.
To lobby for more money.
For more laws.
And once the big box stores take
hold.
They will want all those rules
in place. They will want all
those rules.
That doesn't let the small
person in.
And that's where small business
is losing is.
Is the big box stores.
Also, that's.
And that's
A a.
Countrywide problem that we have
when we, when we go to these.
Big box stores like Walmart, who
can compete with Walmart?
And they put pressure on their,
on their suppliers too, or they
have to sell to them at a at a
marginal price. We had a uh a
board in here presenting to us
yesterday and.
Their margins are so small, but
they do it.
Because of
it's in their blood, it's, it's
how your family was.
Has done it.
Your store is in your blood,
it's, it's, it's part of you and
and to to have to let it go
would just be devastating.
Devastating for you, for your
family, for your whole family,
your.
What you do, what you've done
for years, and.
I hope that New Mexico can.
Make a change, turn around. I
hope the paid family sick leave
doesn't.
Pass?
If there's a time for it, it's
not now.
Maybe there's other economies in
the United States. We always see
it in the legislature as a
legislator.
Well, they're doing this in
Texas or they're doing this in
California or they're doing
this, and we need to do it here
in New Mexico.
Maybe it's not the right time
for New Mexico. We're about
broke.
Maybe sometime in the future, it
might be a good place to put it
in when.
When things are in a better
balance or something, but.
And Madam Chair,
thank you for not cutting me off
on my time. I know, rampant and
raving, but I get it. I get it.
Thank you for your presentation.
Thank you for being here today.
Thank you. What I wanna remind
everybody to go through the
chair. Uh, we don't have direct
conversations, we go through the
chair, so I wanted to say that,
uh, I wanna keep the, the
commentary, uh, at a minimum and
uh maybe we could ask direct
questions if possible, so, um,
our next uh.
You know, Senator Hamlin.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, panel for being here
today. I know, uh, several of
you in some manner or another,
um, uh, Martha, you know, my,
uh, bathroom has your tiles in
it. The pond for my tortoise has
your tiles in it, the uh shrine
that I have in the backyard to
marry has my, has your tiles on
it, uh, and your customer
service is by far some of the
best that I've ever experienced.
And so if you didn't have it,
uh, and especially for my
tortoise, you had a special
tortoise tile that
in the fountain for my tortoise.
So, um, you know, I, I, I, it's,
it's nice to put a face with
your business because it's your
employees that I usually
interact with when I go, um, but
just for full transparency, um,
I do run the Green Chamber of
Las Cruces. My colleague Debbie
Moore from the greater chamber
is listening online and I think
Richard Aguilar from the
Hispanic Chamber is there in the
back, um, and certainly
understand that there are
challenges, um, uh, your
challenges and your concerns are
legitimate, um, you know, small
businesses have it hard.
I always talk about how for
every $100 that is spent at a
big box store about $14 stays in
our community. And when you
spend $100 at a locally owned
business anywhere from $64 to
$68 stays in our community. And
that is because you're
supporting local jobs, you're
keeping the taxes here, uh, you
are, uh, continuing to support
local businesses that give back
to local charities, 350% more
than do national chains.
Uh, you all get asked for
donations on a regular basis,
you get asked for gift
certificates for excursions, uh,
for things to help those small
businesses to help those
nonprofits because you're
invested in the community.
And so, um, that is, is greatly
appreciated and uh you know, the
customer service at our locally
owned businesses is usually
because, uh, you know those
folks. Um, I can go into a local
restaurant and I don't need the
menu because they already know
what I want.
Because I'm a creature of habit
and I like good food.
Um, but I also would like to
encourage that, um, you know,
the, the pandemic really brought
up a lot of things that small
businesses were already
experiencing but just kind of
barely treading water.
And, um, you know, that really
exam it, it, it exacerbated
those challenges that you have
already experienced as a small
business that you were
navigating and and able to
address in some manner either
address this this month and and
you know, take care of that the
next month. Um, and so what I
would encourage in in Martha,
especially, you know, given
your, your challenges that
you've had in the past with
chambers is I always encourage
people, we have 3 chambers in
town. Interview us, find out
what we can do for you.
You know, and then you make that
choice, but that puts the onus
on us, uh, to make sure that,
um, you know, if, if we have the
services that are benefiting you
that we do that. On that note
that I always, always recommend
and and is representative Robert
Caballero talked about is like
use, use your member benefits.
Um, because that's what they're
there for, um.
You know, but it's, it's, there,
there are resources that are
available. David, I was thinking
about, you know, just the people
that you and I get to work with
in terms of outdoor recreation
is, you know, Hillary Dutcher at
Visit Las Cruces with the
outdoor recreation department.
Also the grants from the state.
I totally get cause I know how
slammed you are and how it's
challenging to figure out when,
you know, those those deadlines
for those grants are, um, it
might be a good opportunity to
just connect with somebody
because then they can put you on
a mailing list and then you get
an email so that you don't have
to pay attention to their
website all the time
That they'll actually say
deadlines coming up.
Apply for this because, um, you
know, understanding in the small
businesses you're already
juggling, you're having
multiple, I screw up metaphors
all the time, so you've got
multiple plates spinning in the
air all the time. That's what a
small business is doing. Um, you
know, your, your experts in
chaos management.
And so, um, you know, I would, I
would encourage to, to reach out
to those like the small business
development centerer West, um,
those provide that, um, you
know, one, that's how you and I
got to, that's how you and I met
was when you were at West, uh,
is, you know, the, the
internship program and
understanding that we've got a
different workforce that is
coming in now, um, and with the
internship program that uh my
colleague with the Greater Las
Cruces chamber in Donana County,
you know, it's going into 3
years.
Uh, and we're finding that there
are soft skills that young
people don't know. And but there
are skills that they could if
you uh have a don't have a
social media presence, you get
them on that in a heartbeat, um,
because they can do that. But
you know, making face to face
communic having face to face
communication is always
challenging, uh, and then you
get a population that is so used
to immediacy by our phones,
right? And so, you know, the
challenge is also helping
businesses learn how to navigate
this new workforce.
Um, I remember about 15 years
ago I had a colleague in Tucson
whose sole job was to work with
businesses to help this new
generation, not expect a cookie
every time they went into work
every day.
But
That is what small businesses
do. They pivot.
They become a resilient, they
become reactive to the climate
on how like because you were
talking about how you had to buy
new equipment, right?
You know, it's not totally
unexpected because demands
change, um, needs change
people's preferences change, you
know, David, if you've got, you
know, women who are mainly, you
know, 40 or old coming into Las
Cruces, and by the way, I do
recommend the Paranormal tour,
uh, at the, the Donana County
Courthouse. It is, it is
fascinating, um, and very creepy
all at the same time and you're
doing something for Halloween,
right haunted insane asylum,
Creative things like that.
are things that make businesses
rise above the chain stores that
have the same calendar every
year of what they do.
And so, you know, and that's why
I think it's so important when
we start talking about small
businesses, uh, talking about
how their reactions and the way
that they interact with the
community is really unique to
the community because they know
the community, whereas big box
stores and chains have a
standard that they do across the
country and across the region.
So,
Um, I commend you because it, it
is, it is a challenge to pivot,
and it is a challenge to uh
react to the changing times and
expectations and workforces and
demands. Um, I, I also
acknowledge that your challenges
are legitimate and the things
that you have concerned, the the
access to capital, the access to
a decent workforce, um, the
access to being able to make a
living. I'm not a fan of the GRT
as the vice chair of the tax
business and Transportation
Committee. I'm not a fan of the
GRT. I don't think it's fair.
Um.
I really want to look at ways to
make that to where it is more
applicable and appropriate for
people, um, and for small
businesses and for sole
proprietors, um, because it is
something that is a hardship, so
certainly I, I want you to
understand that that that I'm
hearing what you're saying and I
know that my colleague uh in the
house with the, the chair, um,
also sits on the the the um
complimentary committee, um, in
the, in the house commerce,
yours is commerce. Ours is
called tax business and
transportation. Same issues.
But I think there are certainly
things that we, we, we do need
to. I acknowledge that there are
things that we need to improve
upon, but I also want to commend
you for your resiliency and for
your creativity and for the
commitment that you have to our
communities because you are
invested in this in the
communities in which you reside.
And you are examples of small
businesses all over the state
that do that. And so, um, you
know, I would love to be able to
help, uh, connect you with the
resources that make it a little
bit easier for you to do your
job but also understand what
programs are available
that uh can either be low cost
or free, um, and that can help
you as well. So I, I do
appreciate what you're doing,
um, and you know, I'd love to
have a conversation with you
afterward if you'd like. So
thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Uh, Senator Brantley.
Thank you, Madam Chairman.
In your remarks, you mentioned
that New Mexico is one of the
worst states to do business in
ranked.
It's not just business, we're
the worst in education. We
continue to be 50th and the
policies that we've passed in
the recent times we can't seem
to get off the bottom of that
list.
We're the worst state in the
nation to be a child in.
Most dangerous state to grow up
in a repeat.
Child maltreatment.
Because we haven't made a dent
in it.
And so I would say to the point
of public blanking, we state
government has no business then
taking over.
Your, your, your money cause
we're taking over taxpayers'
money.
To then make a mess of our
financial system, because we're
having a hard time just undoing.
Policies that we've put in place
for a long time through several
administrations through several,
uh, uh, party leaderships.
We've really made a new mess of
New Mexico and so really I find
myself as a young legislator.
Fixing a lot.
And it's a frustrating place to
be.
And yet there's still
opportunities. We're going to go
into this next 60-day session.
You guys touched on it briefly,
but the crime crisis that has
hit New Mexico.
And, and I want to thank the
governor for recognizing that
it's not a, it's not just a uh
Albuquerque and Santa Fe issue
anymore, who took the time to
come to come down here to Las
Cruces, who acknowledged our
open borders, who acknowledged
the fentanyl crisis that coming
in here that acknowledge that we
have a broken justice system
that is not keeping these
criminals in the revolving door
just keeps returning these
people to the streets and it
makes it hard for small
businesses to do business when
you have an environment.
As such.
We have an opportunity coming up
in a 60 day session to address.
These crime policies.
And I hope that you're right
that Democrats and Republicans
unite to finally put some
policies in place that actually
have teeth.
I'm optimistic that the governor
is willing to work with us.
We're going to have to make sure
that the legislator that we get,
we get egos and everything else
out of the way and just do right
by New Mexicans.
There's also another vote that's
going to come up and that's paid
family medical leave.
And, and I think it's the
elephant that's in the room when
we have small business because
it was.
Objected great objection from
our small businesses across New
Mexico. Every chamber that we
had up there talked about the
hardships that small businesses
were already facing.
And that this particular policy
mandatory paid family medical
leave, which would have mandate
that you must allow your
employee 3 months of paid leave,
and you may not replace them in
the interim because that job has
to be guaranteed and then to the
employee what it did is mandate
that we're going to tax their
paycheck whether they like it or
not to pay into the pot. And so
even employees who are like,
wait, I don't want, I don't want
you to take even more out of my
paycheck will not even have an
option.
To do that. I think that it's
disrespectful to small
businesses because what
governments coming in and saying
you're not taking care of your
employees, right?
And we want our employees and we
want our workforce in New Mexico
to be protected and have healthy
working environments. But we're
saying small business, we don't
trust you to take care of your
employees, so government's going
to stand in. We're going to tell
you the policies that you're
going to be put in place for
your business. And you know
what's going to happen? Many of
them are going to shut down
because they simply can't afford
it.
And then we're gonna be right
back, and it'll be long after
I'm gone with legislators who
are trying to undo bad policies
with good intentions to take
care of our employees with good
intentions, but we didn't trust
our small businesses to do the
job right. So we stood in and
what we do?
will cost them their job in the
end, because you had to shut
your doors. I'm gonna pressure
you on paid family medical. You
talked about the mess of
politics, and you're right. It,
it's been my greatest heartbreak
to see partisan politics hijack
good policy, and on both sides
are really guilty of it.
Paid family medical leave with
such an issue promoted by
special interest groups that we
saw it play a major role in the
primary races.
We had Ambrose, we had Willie
Madrid, who sat here. We had a
Harry Garcia taken out.
By special interest groups
because they got the votes now,
not because it's good by New
Mexico.
But because ugly politics.
Took its course, right? I'm
gonna call on small businesses
to say,
This isn't a partisan issue.
You're right, but we need to do
what's right by the best in New
Mexicans, and if you want us to
advocate for you, we're going to
need to hear from you. And so as
we go into the specials, uh, 60
day session, recognize that
there are going to be some
legislation that introduced that
could be catastrophic to small
businesses.
And both Democrats and
Republicans because it's not a
partisan issue, are going to
need to hear from you on how
that would directly impact your
businesses. But, but stand up.
You, you and your constituents
have elected us.
To be your voice in Santa Fe, we
are going to need that voice to
be amplified and, and, and
really multiplied as we move
forward. I have not seen a
friendly business environment.
I've not seen business friendly
policies passed in Santa Fe, but
we have I'm still optimistic
that we have opportunity to do
such, and I hope that you stand
beside us and know that there is
a large majority that is
standing with you and hope that
we still can going forward.
Thank you for all you do for,
for this community, including
our, our
local banks, also small
businesses, I should say, that
would be put out of business
with a state-run bank. But thank
you for all you do,
from everything a little leagues
to, you know, every community
investment, county fairs,
everything. Thank you for your
investment and thank you for
your testimony today.
Thank you. Um,
So I just want to end by saying
that uh my family had a small uh
business when we were growing
up, um, we all worked in it to,
to get through college and it's
hard work, and it's hard to to
keep afloat, um, and I respect
the jobs that you do. I, I
respect that your persevering
and just the the quality of work
that you put out there and the
example, so, um, you know, this
is might have been a difficult,
uh.
Panel, but I think that, you
know, I think it's important
that we hear from small
business, um, and there's ways
to help, and I think that, uh,
Senator Hamlin really talked
about some, some services that
maybe uh you all can look into,
um, and I hope that you'll
follow up with her or with some
of our staff to to get you some
of those, those, um, some of
that information. So, um, thank
you for being here today. Thank
you for your presentation and
thank you for serving our
communities. All right.
Hello.
Uh.
A
Already.
So if you would if you would
introduce yourselves and then go
ahead and start with your
presentation, we would, we'll
get started.
All right. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Nothing like going on
right before lunch.
And after a very difficult
conversation. Um, my name is
Scott McLaughlin. I'm the
executive director of Spaceport
America.
My name is Francisco Palares. I
am the director of business
development at Spaceport
America.
So we'd like to give you an
update, uh, as you know, Virgin
Galactic is going to come on
after lunch, so, uh, we have
some virgin Galactic material in
here, but we'll try and go um
pretty quick. But the idea is
kind of give you a status of the
project that is a space port
where we're at, a little bit
about where we're headed. Um,
so, uh, real quick on the first
page are some of the activities
we have done in the first year,
uh, the kind of the most
interesting one is the one on
the left, which is intuitive
Machines, which is Houston-based
company that came out here to,
to do testing. And this is
is a good example of the type of
company that have now been
discovering Spaceport America
and come out and do testing.
We're always trying to get new
companies to be tenants, but we
have a lot of companies that
come and do testing for a few
weeks or a few months at a time,
and that's a good one. Of
course, the middle picture is
Virgin Galactic, one of their
seven commercial space launches
this year and the right one is,
uh,
Is the US Thunderbirds, so, uh,
skipping ahead, I'll try and
kind of go fast, you know, it's
uh.
Pick up a little time for you.
So on page 4.
Uh, the recent and planned
activity, uh, we do a lot of
STEM tours and I'll talk more
about that in a little bit. One
of our other companies that's
been out there is an electric
car company. They like their
remoteness, they like the
runway, they've done some
battery testing. Uh, we continue
to do what we call venue
activities or commercial shoots
or movies and Virgin Galactic
has been helping with that and a
lot of times they want to take
pictures of the building. So
they've been a partner there.
Um, we've been working on a
master plan for over a year. I
hope by the time we get to the
legislative session.
I'll be able to send you guys
the final master plan from our
contractor. We're going to
integrate it with also updates
since they've started working on
it, so I can hopefully give you
a broader view of what's going
to happen over the next 10
years.
One of the big things we've
become uh involved in or high
altitude platform systems. And
what those are are very large
UABs that fly 60,000 ft and
above. So we have three
developers that have been out
there, um, often for months at a
time. One of them in particular,
uh, Doctor Payetes is working
with to see if we can get uh
manufacturing here in the local
area, so we'll see what happens.
Their goal is to prove the
technology and then become FA
FAA certified so they can fly
above us all the time. They fly
at 60,000 ft to 80,000.
Feet and stay up 6 months at a
time. So it's a very unique
vehicle. Um, Thunderbirds, I'll
talk more about them in a
minute. Uh, locally in terms of
infrastructure, we have a cell
phone tower that got installed.
We're waiting to get the carrier
on it, but that's gonna light up
that whole basin, which is a big
boon for all the ranchers and
all the people who live out
there, um.
We're working with other people
from El Paso to Albuquerque in
terms of what this means in
terms of a growing spaceport. So
I'll talk about that more in a
minute. Uh, let me skip ahead a
little bit.
Um,
I think I, I think I have slides
for most everything else, so
page 5, Virgin Galactic. Again,
you're gonna get a really good
update from them, uh, so I won't
go much into this other than to
talk about once they're back in
operations and commercial
operations with two new
spaceships that they're building
in Mesa, Arizona, we'll start
seeing fights every, uh, 2 to 3
days is the plan. That's
probably going to be a big
increase in their workforce, uh,
uh, and, uh, right now I think
there's somewhere around 200
people before they had a layoff
in December they were close to
3.
00. I think once they get back
in operation they'll be closer
to maybe 400 is just a guess on
my part.
Um, there is a, in the lower
left there, there's what they
call the business model video
that's on YouTube and on their
investor site. Recommend you
take a look at that if you've
got some time to understand how
Virgin Galactic plans on acting
over the next several years.
On page 6, this is a planned
view of the southern part of the
runway, if you guys have been
out here, this is to the right
of the large building, the GTS.
And what this is a picture of is
3, proposed 3 launch hangers by
VG. Right now, Virgin Galactic
is only working on the most
north one, but this is an area
that they're going to lease soon
from us. They're going to build
their own hangar at their own
expense, so this will be their
building and this will be
increased revenue from us in
terms of the leasing. This is
where they're going to conduct
operations from now on again.
Um, uh, Vice President Mike
Moses we'll talk about that
later, but basically it allows
them to do the fueling and all
the prep for the launch inside
the hangar as opposed to on the
end of our runway outside. Part
of that proposal is, is a
potential extension of two more
similar hangers depending on how
things go over the next several
years.
On page 7, here's a picture of
one of our high altitude
platform system providers. So to
get a picture of what this is,
it's actually over 300 ft long.
It's a giant flying wing when
it, when it goes over us and
hits a little gust of wind, it
kind of does the wave. Um, it's
a very, and it only flies about
6 or 7 knots when it's above us.
All the infrastructure below it
is the infrastructure of that
air environment put in at their
own expenses was about $8
million over a few years ago.
When they're out here, they have
about 40 to 50 people and, uh,
and they did they completed a
fine.
Season this year and they're
going to come back sometime in
the spring and continue to fire
us with us. They've been with us
several years.
On page 8, US Thunderbirds, uh,
they're coming out again in
January. Uh, we're talking about
them staying here for another 5
years. What they do is they come
out and stay for 2.5, 3 weeks,
and do their winter training. So
this is the kickoff of their
training to get ready for their
fly season. So we get, uh,
there's about 70 people that
come, um, and they have stayed
in Ter C at times. It looks like
they prefer Las Cruces. I think
it's because they have a lot of
uh younger folks who want things
to do. There's not quite as much
into your seat, but, um, they,
uh, have a huge.
impact and they love to be out
here. They love the airspace.
They like working with us in
White Sands most range that's
turned out to be a good thing.
When they first start, they've
been kind of not vocal about
them being here, but this
picture is actually from their
Instagram site where they're
advertising, they're in New
Mexico and they're at Spaceport
America, so it's a good
advertisement for us and it
means that local folks who can
figure out what the schedule is
if, if Thunderbirds don't let us
tell people can come out and
watch, so a very fun thing. Uh,
real quick, on page 9, we, we
got an FCC license for a low
Our FM station, that just means
we can broadcast. I think it's
one watt, and it means we do
that for safety and for events.
A lot of national parks have
these little low power FM
stations, so that was a neat
thing for us to get because it
will help again with safety, um.
On page 10, there's a picture of
the cell phone tower that's, uh,
now installed. We're waiting for
the carrier again, that's gonna
be able to support high uh high
speed internet for all the
locals. For us it's a safety
factor. We hope to get two
providers on there right now. I
know, Verizon is signed and then
T-Mobile has talked about being
out there, so that's going to be
a big change for that area.
On page 11, we have the
Spaceport America Cup, so, uh,
this was the largest one we had
to date, about 6000 college
students from around the world
participate. They all again
learn about New Mexico,
Spaceport America, about 1800
came out this year to fly, so we
had slightly over 100 flights.
Um, one of the things we worked
hard on is trying to get the
local universities involved so
far in New Mexico State, UTEP,
New Mexico Tech, and UNM all
participate. We're, we're trying
to get some of the more remote
universities in New Mexico, but
we haven't been successful.
Yet, but we, we give whoever
wins that of those 4 special
award called the Chili Cup, so
they compete locally. This year,
UNM won.
Um, again, the big thing is that
17 countries all around the
world. So if you enter Spaceport
America Cup and Google and then
click on the little news part,
you will find that people are
all around the world, India, the
Philippines, all these places
that came to visit us are
learning about New Mexico, so we
consider this one of our biggest
marketing efforts and if Phil's
part of our STEM and workforce,
uh, mission.
Uh, and on page 12 you can see
some of the large providers of
aerospace equipment and software
that that support the cup and
when they come here, they
recruit all these kids. In fact,
several of them have told us
this is the biggest recruiting
event for them in the world that
they participate in and also the
best place to advertise their
product to people because we
have so many people in one place
at the same time.
On page 14, uh, the, we have a
regional space port district.
This is the tax district that
collects GRT that pays off the
original bonds and if there's
excess pledge revenue that the
statute allows for those bonds
to be, uh, that the excess
pledge revenue to be used for
projects. So on page 14, we have
the uh projects that we propose
to the tax district about a
month and a half ago and were
approved, so it was 13.9
million. Um, I'll talk real
brief about those. I think one
of the points.
To make to the legislature is
that the local counties that
originally voted for the
spaceport are still supporting
the spaceport, and I think
that's key because it's been
about a two-thirds mix of money
from the legislature and, and
one third from the county's a
very significant amount, but the
counties still are supporting.
Um, page 15, this is the
building, the Stark building,
the spaceport technology and
reception center. This will be
the first building that has a
sort of a public facing side.
All of our buildings right now
are very operational, and this
one will be very will be right
up front, very close to the
gate, and it's designed to be a
kind of a Swiss Army knife of a
building. We're going to have
our IT center in there. We're
gonna have some leasable space
we're going to have a stem area,
we have some meeting rooms.
We'll be able to conduct a
legislative meetings there
someday, uh, for the committees,
and we'll also be
lease it out to um customers and
we think we'll we'll quickly um
have this as a revenue producing
building, a good deal of the
time.
This is uh a a quick look at the
design, one-story building,
hopefully with an observation
deck on top and again with the
interior, this, this rendering
has a lot of glass, a lot of
expensive glass we are value
engineering it right now to get
the price down, um, at 18
million or slightly above we
hope.
One of the other projects was,
uh, getting infrastructure and
at the top of the runway, the
very north end of the runway, so
that's just a picture of the
road and, uh, utilities,
electrical and water that we're
getting in so we can start
accessing the east side of the
road, similar issue on the
bottom, page 17. Uh, this is the
road to get allow VG to get to
the new hangars and for us to
build a hangar, which is shown
on page 18, so we're building a
hangar. We currently have one
hangar that we own, we call it
the clam shell or the armadillo
hanger.
We basically leased that 90% of
the time. So we're now building
a second hangar that we can
lease and we expect to be able
to lease that on the order of
90% of the time, uh, across from
the runway we intend to build
another one, in a year or two
again, increasing the amount of
leasing, hopefully getting
permanent customers.
On page 19, uh, a few years ago,
I asked for someone, I'd asked
for an extra full-time
equivalent to be uh our, our
lead for capital projects. One
of the problems we found is that
trying to support all the
customers and manage the capital
improvement money was quite
difficult, so you all did vote
for us to have a capital project
manager. So he's been able to
organize and and this is the
list of all the current projects
that are ongoing right now on
page 19 with a, a color scheme
to kind of give you an idea of
where we're at, but we're doing
very well in spending the
capital money.
We get both from the
legislature, from the state, and
from the the tax district. And
on page 19 is a list of, uh,
again, kind of folds in with a
master plan, but a list of other
projects that what we're trying
to do is to to get the
infrastructure in for the
companies we deal with. It's,
you know, with the small
businesses you just talked to,
of course, anybody can go and
there's a road and there's
electricity and there's water
they may need to build a
building or rent a building, but
in our case, a lot of what we
have is just dirt, and we can't
As the very young companies to
come to the spaceport and put in
the water and put it in the
sewer and put everything and
that's our job as New Mexico,
um, and, and is the Spaceport
Authority. So these are a lot of
these are infrastructure
projects that you'll see just
like building an industrial
park, so the, so the customer
can come in.
On page 21, uh, I mean page 22,
uh, let me review our budget
request.
Um, so one of the first things
that happened with our budget
this year was, there was a
Virgin Galactic announced that
they were going to be cutting
back on the launches. You
probably saw that in the news.
This was after they also um had
a a small layoff um again, still
almost 200 people here in New
Mexico from what we understand,
but there is a provision in the
agreements we have with them
that they can cut down on
something called the user fee.
So we have lease payments with
them, um, that covers the
building and it covers the use
of, uh, covers the, the area
that they use, but we also have
what we call
User fees which cover their
ability to launch and operate.
In that agreement we have with
them, they are able to cut that
back from 188,000 to 50,000, so
they are enacting that basically
right now it's it's becoming
effective in the middle of
September. We expect that, they
expect that to go through, uh,
uh, May, June or so of next
year. I mean, 2025 and it may
extend into 2026.
So obviously that's a loss of
revenue for us. It's kind of an
unexpected loss, 1.3 million. We
do, you know, we're a
non-reverting agency though, so
we have had success in building
up our, our fund balance. So
what I've proposed to the
legislature, and we're working
with with our DFA analyst and
LFC is that we would absorb half
of that and then we would ask
for a supplemental for the other
half. And that's to make sure we
don't drain our fund balance
down so low that we can't handle
any other emergency or any other
thing that happens, so, uh, we
have.
We, we intended to put in the
675 that may creep up a little
bit, but again, we're trying to
be fair and split that with the
legislature, so I'd appreciate
your support on that.
The and talking with the
governor, overall, we've been uh
um advised that we can ask for a
3% escalation, so of course
that's in our budget. And then
another thing that I'd really
like to get is what I'm calling
a STEM and workforce
coordinator, so that's an
increase in one full-time
equivalent. Right now we have
31. I would like to go up one
and this person would be fully
dedicated to all the STEM and
workforce development we do both
with Virgin Gal our customers,
Virgin Galactic and other
customers and with local schools
and the colleges. Right now, the
we do that is we kind of
disperse it between different
people in different departments.
Our PIO works heavily on it. Uh,
one of our engineers works on
it. Um, our business operations
manager works on it. What I'd
like to do is focus it into a
single person, probably a
certified teacher, uh, maybe
retired or doesn't want to be in
public schools anymore, but
someone who understands what the
public schools need and how to
shape curriculum, so especially
so we can start working with
parts of New Mexico that are
very remote right now that's a
difficult thing. We don't really
have a lot of online.
to do that and they can't get in
a bus and travel 6 hours just to
visit the spaceport. The local
schools do visit the spaceport
though. We have a lot of
interaction locally, but we're
not able to extend very easily.
So this is a request that we're
making right now.
On page 23, um, this is, uh,
aside from the drop in operating
revenue, which is our customer
revenue, it's kind of the same
thing that has been happening
over the few years, uh, slightly
increased revenue every year, so
we increase the number of
customers. Um, so I'm happy to
answer any questions on that.
You'll see that it dips, um, in,
in FY 25 and FY 26, we are
forecasting that it doesn't
quite get back to FY25
projected,
um, although it might be closer
to FY.
25 actual, but in FY 26 and FI
27 when VG starts finding and we
expect that to go up and, and
again, Francisco is working with
many different possible
businesses right now.
So I'll I'll hand it over to
Francisco for business
development.
Thank you, Scott, Madam Chair.
If we go to page this is
Francisco Pallaress with Space
Market. Hello, everyone. And if
we go to the next page, uh,
we're gonna be discussing a
little bit on the business
development side and some of the
work that we have been going on
at the spaceport. Uh, the next
page is actually, uh, page 25.
It lists some of the recent
activity that we have had with
regards to some of the business
development side. The first
thing that we wanted to update
you on is that we're currently
in negotiations for a new solar
powered data center to come to
the spaceport. Uh, the
The idea that they have is to
produce uh the, the computing
power for artificial
intelligence and for some of the
applications that that can have
to some of the other tenants
that we have currently at the
spaceport. May I be for support
into some other systems or or
with some, some of the other
ways in which artificial
intelligence can help them. So
we, we, we're good in
discussions with them. An
additional one is that we have a
customer that has been uh the
vertical launch area uh
frequently this year, and their
test, they're testing a drone
air glider and they're using it
for agriculture.
Cultural applications, um, that,
so they, we have, we have had
very, very good conversations
with them and they keep
constantly coming back to the
spaceport to test that drone
and, and we have that going
currently at the spaceport an
additional one that we have in
the plants is a satellite
communications ground station
that we are also in, in
conversations with currently at,
at the spaceport and, and the
plan that they have is to do
some lunar communication so that
has perfect applications for the
space port as well. Besides
this, uh, we're currently
working to get
FAA reentry uh license uh then
actually the aerospace team, the
plan that they have is to submit
the paperwork to the FAA on this
month, on September, uh, they
all have a slide in which we can
describe a little bit more and
later, later on that. Besides
this, we're also continue to
work with the commercial Space
Flight Federation. Uh, we
continue to do site visits for
different companies. Uh, we
continue to attend the different
trades and conferences that are
related to our industry to keep
the name of Spaceport America
out there and keep.
relevant for a lot of these
visits may not be in Florida,
may that be in Albuquerque, may
that be in California or may
that be in some of the places in
which we can continue to bring
some of these growth to our
industry and to our state. Um,
if we go on the next page you
can see some pictures right
there of some of the activities,
some of the recent uh business
development efforts that we have
been doing at the spaceport.
And, and my apologies because
the, the picture that we have,
oh yeah, it's updated. My
apologies. Uh, the, the pictures
that you have right there in
front you.
You can see on the upper right
corner you can see that
precision AI air glider is
operating currently at the
spaceport and they're doing some
of their operations right there,
uh, on the picture upper left
you can see Scott uh working
with uh the GSA Capitol Hill
summit on spaceports and as well
on the bottom left you can see
that there's another picture for
the aerospace state Association,
National Convention this year
and, and on the bottom right,
that is a picture from our open
house that just happened this
Sunday. So this.
Sunday we had an open house in
which we invited members of the
community. We invited different
vendors, we invited multiple
individuals to go and talk about
aerospace and get people excited
about the aerospace group in,
in, in the states where really
what we did is that we
coordinated with the Las Cruces
Space Festival, and we were the
kickoff event to get this
started and we're planning on
doing an open house on an annual
basis so that we can continue to
have that outreach to our
community and see how the
aerospace sector is
In their own backyard. So one of
the things that that I wanted to
mention is that uh the, the
number of people that, that
attended the open house this
past Sunday, 5 days ago, was
just shy of 2000 people, 1970
was the number of people that
went there may that the
attendees, um, it was, it was,
it was quite interesting. And
again, we're planning on doing
this on an annual basis as a
plan to continue the outreach
that we have with our
communities and um expanding on
that. Uh, the, the next slide
please.
On the next page, you will be
able to see that we created this
slide on, on the orbital
re-entry license, uh, right now,
as you know, out of Spaceport
America, we currently do not
have orbital launches. Most of
the orbital launches are
currently occurring made up in
Cape Canaveral, Vanderberg, or
Wallops, but one of the things
is that there has been a growing
interest from industry, private
industry, in bringing vehicles
from orbits into an inland type
of uh re-entry. So the vehicles
that are winged or vehicles.
That are guided and that can
safely land in the runway that
can safely land in space for
property. We're currently
working to uh apply for with the
FAA for that re-entry license.
What that would allow us to have
is that there's this growing
interest for doing manufacturing
in microgravity uh for multiple
companies, right? And besides
that different payloads that
need to be brought safely to an
inland space port that would
allow us to expand into that
area. Again, there has been a
growing development on this.
And if we get to do this right
now, most of the reentries
currently happen on the ocean,
so this would allow us to be
able to, as soon as they, as
soon as it comes back, be able
to help in the processing, be
able to uh recover the payload
and be able to uh make whichever
process needs to be implemented
into it to have it done at the
spaceport. So, what this allows
us is, of course, some from some
of those overall launches, even
though they're not occurring at
the space where we can have some
of those returned in here. So,
uh, as, as
You mentioned the aerospace team
is currently working very,
very hardly to get this done and
the expectation is that the
license is expected in early
2025. Um, besides this, the next
page that we have um is actually
showing the demand that there is
for orbital launches and and I
think that Scott is going to be
elaborating a little bit more on
that how that increased cadence
on the orbital launches is
increasing the level of activity
in the aerospace industry, not
just with us and not just in
Cape Canaveralad but all across.
The nation, and if you can help
me on the next page. We actually
have some slides uh on some of
the activity that other states
are putting in for the, the
aerospace industry, right? You
can see that Kentucky is there.
You can see Colorado trying to
get there. Houston, uh, even in
other places in the Caribbean or
in some places in South America
and even in Africa, there's this
growing interest to continue to
push for the aerospace industry
and to create some of these
spaceports in other places that
can help them develop their
aerospace industry as well.
If you go to the next page, uh,
you can see uh that the even uh
on our, on our with our
neighbor, Governor Abbott
launched the Texas Space
Commission, and you can see some
of the other work that other
places are currently putting out
out there. Um, the next slide,
I'll just pass it on to Scott.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Doctor Patterson, Madam Chair,
just a couple more things before
we end, um, in 2012, uh, SpaceX
brought cargo to the space
station. That was the first time
an American vehicle since the
space shuttle went to the.
station and since then, um,
almost all the cargo has come
from SpaceX, but even more
interesting was in 2020 NASA
paid SpaceX to be a taxi, so
that was the first time, um,
that a private company acted as
a taxi to take anybody to space,
only only 4 years later, um, you
probably know that SpaceX is
above us right now with a
completely private mission. It's
a billionaire inside of a
capsule with 3 other people, and
they took the first spacewalk.
Private spacewalk ever, and they
also flew higher than anybody
has flown since the Apollo
missions, and this is completely
private industry. There's no
government involvement around.
Now the government did its part
in terms of helping SpaceX get
there by paying for emissions to
the space station, um, and other
things, but what what we have
right now is a little bit of a
monopoly with SpaceX, but what's
going to happen in the next 4 or
5 years is there's a whole list
of private uh launch providers,
Blue Origin, Stoke Space, Rocket
Lab, Firefly, um, UI.
Crossbow, which is a New Mexico
company, relatively relativity
space, they are all adding to
what's on, we're going to add to
what's on page 28, which is a
number of orbital launches. So
where we are in space right now
it's kind of like at the
beginning of the dot com era.
The space is basically exploding
and just to give you an idea
what they're predicting for 2025
is there will be 1100 satellites
launched in a single year, and
that's because there will be 3,
everybody's probably heard about
Starlink and.
And its ability to support the
Ukrainians but also to support
people with an RV to support
remote areas of New Mexico. It's
really providing internet. Well,
by the time we get to 2030,
there will be 17,000 satellites
in space with 3 different
providers. So my closing remark
is that we are on the cusp of
things that are happening very
big around the world and around
the country. New Mexico is in a
very good place with its
spaceport, believe it or not,
other uh spaceports that have
been looked at in Michigan,
Maine, have basically failed for
whatever reason.
Um, in Georgia, um, there's a
kind of not in my backyard
thing. There's also the cost. We
were lucky to have a partner
with Virgin Galactic that is
still with us, so the spaceport
is active. Um, we've been able
to draw on other customers, but
I think it's important to
realize just where the
marketplace is going overall and
it's and it's very big. This is
all very big stuff right now and
I'm, I'm honored to be part of
it and, and, uh, I think that's
it. I'm happy to answer any
questions. So thank you very
much, Madam Chair.
Thank you for your presentation.
Do we have any questions?
Just a quick question, Madam
Chair, and really this is kind
of pertaining to just not just
Spaceport America, I think you
presented 5 times to interim
committees, is that correct? 3
times. OK, I think this is the
3rd I've sat through. So you
guys have done a really good
job. I want to thank you guys
for getting out capital outlay
dollars. I know that that was a
concern for the legislator. Um,
and also just promoting what's
happening at Spaceport. You guys
are so busy kind of taking care
of, well, you know, your job's
there that that we for a long
time were not promoting that
there is a lot of activity
happening.
It's spaceport and you guys have
really turned that around. I
appreciate it. This is just kind
of just a space question,
because I don't know who else
asked, maybe Virgin, um, there's
a lot of space trash.
But what are the policies? Those
aren't, those aren't state
policies or federal policies.
Are they global policies like at
some point when you were talking
about like re-entering licenses,
is that to allow to bring back
Space trash, I don't know,
clearly I'm ignorant to this.
You're looking at me like, how
do you clean up space? I, I know
that sounds like, is that an
issue?
Yeah, Madam Chair, um, it's
actually a huge topic in the
space industry right now because
um, uh, twice Russia and once or
twice, China has blown up
satellites as demonstration of
their anti-satellite ability.
Um, it's a huge topic in the DOD
community because if, if an
adversary starts taking out our
satellites, how, you know, we
are so dependent on GPS.
Everything we do every day is
dependent on GPS for timing, for
banking systems, for the stock
market, for us getting around
town, um.
So if we are in a conflict
situation there, that's one
thing they're worried about, but
they're also worried about in
terms of the space junk, and
technically anything up there
that was launched from a
particular company, uh country
belongs to that country. It's
the country's duty to deorbit
safely. In fact, in most modern
satellites have a deorbiting
ability, they can, it can even
extend some of them, it can
extend a little string basically
that adds drag and they come
down, but for all the stuff
that's been put up there, you
those
launches that I showed. That's
just floating around of it and
there's thousands and thousands
of satellites that are dead or
are junk floating around. So
there's a huge interest by the
community. NASA is looking at
it, um, the Europeans space
agency is working on it, but who
owns it? That's the problem.
Who's gonna go up there to a
satellite, but they are working
on it. There are companies, in
fact, private companies that are
specializing in how they're
going to attach to a satellite
and deorbit it and um or reuse
it. There's some people that
want to get to.
Satellite up and running again
or or take it somewhere in orbit
and reuse it. So one of the
things they worry about it
though is with that space junk,
if there's so much of it that uh
we can't actually go to orbit
anymore. So there's a real fear
that that we're not getting
ahead of the game, but it's,
it's definitely a topic you can
enter that in Google and find a
lot of things to to read, so
that's interesting. Thank you.
Um, when you mentioned, Madam
Chair, you, you mentioned the,
the need for uh re-entry. Um, is
that something that needs to be
done at a state level through
Statute is that proposed
legislation to
You said re-entry licensing is
still needed at Spaceport. So is
that draft legislation for state
for us to consider and will that
be introduced in the 60 day
session or what are the details
on the need for that, Madam
Chair? No, this is purely FAA.
So we, we are, we are launch
site provider, um, and that is
its own launch, own license
through through the FA we had to
do environmental impact
statement and we had to work
with all of our local providers
going back in 20, I mean, uh,
community members going back 25,
22,000.
2006, the trail Coalition, the,
um, and we worked with a lot of
people so we could be a um a
site for launch a multi-use
site, and that included
horizontal and vertical. Now
we're working on the same with
FA for reentry and it does not
involve the state. We have to
make sure our environmental
impact statement is up to date,
um, that, and we can do it
safely, but just so you
understand how this works as a
as a launch site operator.
We have to get that license or
for the re-entry, we have to get
the license, but once a vehicle,
once a company decides to either
take off at Spaceport America or
land at Spaceport America. They
work with FA for their own
license. So all the safety goes
back again for that very
specific vehicle, that very
specific uh company. So for
example, when Virgin Galactic
flies, they have been working
very much with the FAA and every
time they go to space, there are
2 FAA people in the gateway to
space in the mission control
working with Virgin Galactic to
oversee the launch, and that's
The same for any launch any that
a suborbital orbital launch that
happens in the country as there
are FA people directly involved,
but no, ma'am, there's no,
there's no state action other
than thus continuing to work on
our infrastructure to support
it. So thank you Madam Chair. So
no policy ads, just, just money
so that we can invest in
infrastructure, right? Thank you
guys so much.
Thank you, and I don't think we
have any other uh we do have one
more question.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
just want to say thank you
again. I every time we hear this
report and this um how we're
moving forward, it's um so
encouraging and as the director
knows, I've been a huge fan of
the spaceport, but now I have a
new reason to be a fan. We have
a 2 year old and a 1 year old
grandson. Oh my God.
They we know the Planet song by
heart, um, they put on their
spacesuits in the heat of the
summer, they run around
sweating, but they, but their
spacesuits, they know exactly
which planet they wanna visit
and um they, they're focused on
wanting to be astronauts.
They're soon gonna be 3 and 2
year olds and their theme for
their birthday party, they're
two days apart in October, is
always.
around
the planets and space and so,
um, I've been a fan before they
were born and now I'm really
going to have to arrange some
kind of a of a visit uh when
they get a little bit older, I'm
sure, but uh I just wanted to
let you know that what you're
doing is for their generation
and forward, and it's so very
critically important that we
stay ahead of the game and then.
Front and foremost in the nation
and world with what we're doing
and I'm very proud that it's in
your back door here, uh, and in
my home county, so I appreciate
it and thank you very much.
Thank you. And thank you for
your presentation today. I, I
think uh lunch is here, so I
think everybody has calmed down
with questions, so, but I do
appreciate you uh presenting.
What we're gonna do is take
about a 15 minute break that way
everybody can get their, get
some food, um, and then we'll
start up again because uh we
have one more presentation
before we, we adjourn. So thank
you again for your presentation.
And may I make an announcement
because uh Eric with uh Virgin
Galactic also for the committee
has
Some of his homemade pozole.
That he is, uh, um, provided for
us to take home, um, and, uh,
our friends from Dickerson's
Catering also provided lunch for
us today, so, um, and then we'll
finish off with our, our update
from Virgin Galactic and it's
sponsored Virgin Galactic.
Yeah, so Jason and Eric with
Virgin Galactic took care of
lunch for us today as well. And
then just for those of you that
are here, we will have public
comment after this last
committee, uh, last presentation
from Virgin Galactic.
That way we can get everybody on
the road at a decent hour today.
Whenever you're ready.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee, appreciate the
opportunity to be able to speak
to you all today.
Uh, I am, in case you don't
know, I'm here representing
Virgin Galactic, uh, commercial
spaceflight company based here
in New Mexico, offices right
here in Las Cruces, um, and I
won't spend a lot of time
because I think everybody's
pretty familiar with us, but
obviously a commercial human
spaceflight company trying to
provide pretty transformational
life experiences on a journey to
space. We've got uh some of my
teammates are in the room with
me today as well.
local, some have lived here,
some have helped make lunch, um,
small business owners, uh, NMSU
grads and folks actually
currently enrolled in NMSU, and
Jose in the back there was
actually an intern with us,
graduated and is now a full-time
employee. So, uh, so thanks to
the team for coming out today as
well. Uh, my name is Mike Moses.
I am the president of Virgin
Galactic. Um, I've been at
Virgin Galactic now for 13
years. I came here after a
career at NASA in the space
shuttle program, where I worked
in Mission Control.
Houston, Texas, flying space
shuttles, and then ended the
space shuttle program in Florida
as the program manager in charge
of all shuttle operations, and
so I've been really excited to
be at Virgin Galactic helping on
the commercial front. I've lived
in Las Cruces with my family
since 2019, um, and so I've been
a longtime resident and happy to
be in the state. Um, let's see.
So this next slide here that
shows that, you know, it's been
a long road for us to get to
this point and last year and the
beginning of this year showed
basically.
Uh, that significant investment
in time and money and
technological development really
paid off. Spaceship unity uh
flew 7 commercial flights, uh, 6
flights in 6 months, and our
last one was back in June of
this year. Uh, and that is a
pace never seen before in human
spaceflight, a single
spacecraft, uh, flying to space
back to back, month after month,
6 times in a row. Uh, next
slide, we put 26 new astronauts
into space since we began
commercial service. They all had
a remarkable life.
Changing journeys. In fact, we
should be paying them for the
stories they came back and told
about the, the experience. I'll
just highlight a couple up in
the upper right where Keisha and
Anna, a mother-daughter pair,
uh, they won their tickets in a
charity auction uh from and and
they're from Antigua, the first
astronauts from Antigua, and
they actually hosted a watch
party at the embassy, the
governor's mansion, rather, the
entire island came to the watch
party and so that was a pretty
cool experience. The bottom row
is our Galactic 7 crew, the
last.
Flight to fly combination of
researchers from the Turkish
government and private
astronauts, and the reason I'll
highlight them is both uh
Georgio and Tuva, two of the
flyers, uh, within an hour after
landing, wanted to get right
back in line and have already
signed up to buy tickets for
another flight. So, a fantastic
endorsement, I think, of the
value of our space flights.
Uh, so next slide. So New
Mexico, uh, is a, is a huge
place to fly, and this is a
fantastic shot we took just a
couple of months ago of of
Sunrise out at Spaceport
America, and it is an iconic
facility at the spaceport. and
thank you for the state for the
investment in it and to the New
Mexico Space Port Authority for
running a great facility. The
gateway to space building.
Picture there is the iconic
representation of the spaceport,
and it is unique. I'll just say
for my own part, access to the
airspace next to White Sands
missile range.
the wide open spaces and the
support of the state and local
communities is a fantastic asset
and a reason we are located here
in New Mexico.
Next slide. Uh, so while New
Mexico has had a big impact on
us, so I wanted to highlight for
just a few minutes the impact
we've been able to put back into
the community, and I'll go
through each of these in a
little more. Next slide, please.
On the economic front, we
currently have, uh, just shy of
200 full-time employees here in
New Mexico, including myself and
Jason and the teammates in the
room. We've been extremely busy,
those folks, even though we're
not flying at the moment, we're
getting ready for the new fleet
of spaceships, including teams
out at Spaceport America.
Every day working on upgrades to
our current ships and our mother
ship. These are all highly
skilled jobs. They're very
competitively paid nationally,
and that makes us significantly
above the local average in terms
of pay, and they have a direct
economic impact into the
community, obviously they're
homeowners, uh, community
spending and taxes over $100
million in payroll so far, $35
million in payroll just last
year uh from our company. Um,
let's see, in terms of services,
we focus on using local New
Mexico New Mexico
whenever possible. We have over
200 on the rolls right now and
we've spent close to $55 million
with them locally, keeping that
money in the state. This
represents things like
hospitality, construction,
aviation services, uh, food and
beverage and and janitorial
services, so we use a lot of
local suppliers whenever
possible for what we do here in
the state. And then obviously
the last bullet direct payments
to the state of New Mexico
through the New Mexico Spaceport
Authority, lease payments
started since.
We took occupancy back in 2013,
uh, so that's totaled more than
$35 million in payments
directly. So a huge economic
impact directly into the state
and the state's economy both in
Sierra County and Donana. Next
slide, uh, the other impact we
can have is on tourism. So
obviously when we fly, we get a
lot of folks, those 7 flights we
flew last year brought in
hundreds of visitors to the
state. We conservatively put a
number on there about 2500 local
hotel room bookings.
Just for those flights and you
can see in the photos, that's a
shot on the left from Incanto
Hotel Incanto here in Las
Cruces, a fantastic facility. We
host a postflight party after
landing where we pin astronaut
wings on all our flyers and so
their families come out and join
us and on the right is just a
representation of the number of
private jets that come in for
the week of our flight, so
that's Las Cruces International
Airport, with the flight line
full of private jets parking for
the week for our flights. So
that's a, that's an
experience. It's been a change
for us. We initially launched
our business plan expecting that
we would bring about 4 or 5
guests for every person that
flies, and we're seeing hundreds
of times that Galactic 7, the
last flight, had over 220 guests
for the four people that flew.
So that's a lot more than just 4
or 5. We're seeing them
basically akin to your wedding,
right? You want that number of
people to come watch you fly to
space. So that's a fantastic
thing. And another uh an extra
boon for the economy that we did
not originally project.
In our business plan. Uh, next
slide, I'm actually really proud
of our teammates, right? They
they locally volunteer here for
outreach, so as a company we try
to make sure we support
outreach, but our teammates go
above and beyond on their own,
uh, supporting local events on
the left is Tori. She is one of
our employees in New Mexico,
resident, uh, lifelong Las
Crucian, graduated from NMSU.
She's on our rocket propulsion
team. That's her speaking at the
Spaceport Cup ceremony, uh, and,
uh, and in the middle there is
Denita. She supported.
This was a women in aviation
event out at the, uh, Las Cruces
airport. We are members of the
Chamber of Commerce. We support
a bunch of partnerships like New
Space Nexus, uh, the Space
Valley Coalition and the
governor's STEM program, and
local charities like Big
Brothers and Big Sisters, both
in Truth or Consequences and in
Las Cruces.
And then speaking of NMSU, we
support with scholarships and
internships here. We're actually
expanding that across the state
to cover New Mexico Tech and
University of New Mexico, as
well as some of the tech and
trade schools in the state. It's
a good source of of workforce
for us.
Next slide.
So with all that great success,
uh, flying our spaceships, why
did we stop? and that's a
question I get all the time. So
unity was an amazing spaceship
and it really proved the
concept. It proved the market.
And when you think about it as a
business, right, you want to go
out and demonstrate not only uh
that you have a good technology,
right? It's reliable, it's safe,
but you also want to see that
the market supports it. The
regulatory environment is
approving, right? The federal
government will let you fly and
like I said, above all the
safety and reliability of the
product, and Unity did exactly
that for us.
Uh, it demonstrated to the world
that this is a viable business,
but one spaceship by itself is
not a very uh profitable
business. Flying once a month
with a very high burden of labor
to do care and feeding, uh,
wasn't really making things
work, right? And we've always
known that and we've always been
focused on needing a fleet, and
a fleet means a new spaceship,
and so a picture here of our new
delta class of spaceship. It
looks exactly the same as unity,
but it is built and designed
very, very differently. It can
go high
higher performance, so it's
lighter weight using more
advanced materials, but more
importantly, it's much cheaper
to build and faster to build.
The unit cost of a new spaceship
is on the order of $55 to $60
million and can be assembled and
built in less than a year,
whereas unity took many years
and many hundreds of thousands
of dollars to build. So being
able to build them faster and
more gets a fleet faster. That's
a very key thing. We're using
modern aircraft technology where
we are not building this solely
in-house ourselves. We
have major vendors that are
supplying components to us, and
we bring them together and
assemble them as a final
product.
But most importantly to us is
the cost to operate, how much we
need to spend in time and money
between flights. Unity could fly
every 3 or 4 weeks. So one
flight a month, Delta will fly
every 3 days and we achieved
that through purposeful design,
key durability parts, easier
access and and built in the
first place to be maintained and
flown fast. So for a fleet of
spaceships that each one can
turn every 3 days, doesn't take
too many of them before we can
fly every day out of Spaceport
America.
And that's a key, but I will
mention we're not going back to
square one. These ships are
built off of unity, so they'll
fly fast. We'll get them into
test quickly and we'll get into
commercial service very fast.
Next slide.
So just to focus, we talk a fair
bit, you know, as a public
company we go quarterly and
report our earnings to Wall
Street. So these are a couple
snippets from our public
materials. If you're interested,
they are on our website under
our investor page and you can
see everything we put out
including our decks and our uh
our talking points. So these are
two snapshots of this slide and
the next one, we're gonna start
with 2 Delta spaceships and 1
mother ship. Those will be here
in 2025 starting test and
commercial service in 2026 and
with those two.
ships and that one mother ship,
uh, Eve, that we have right now,
that's 125 space flights a year.
And we've already knocked that
down for weather and other
things. We have, we can actually
fly much more than that. And
while the weather down here is
fantastic, it's not quite good
enough to fly every single day
and so we're going to hedge our
bets a little bit and fly 125
times. That's 750 customers. If
you do the math, that's a $450
million annual revenue. So just
two spaceships by itself is a
pretty good business and a nice
healthy line item.
that we can invest in the future
for more ships for Virgin
Galactic. So, uh, this was an
important point that we've been
making in the public marketplace
that while our stock price is
currently taking a beating
because we're not flying, or the
business model sustains itself,
uh, and that's an important
point. Next slide shows how we
grow from there, right? So bring
in two more spaceships and
another mother ship, and now
suddenly you can fly almost 300
times a year. Uh, one more
spaceship after that and we can
fly every single day, 33 to 400
times a year out of Spaceport
So our vision is exactly that a
full spaceport with enough
ships, enough staff and enough
buildings to fly every single
day.
Uh, next slide. So that kind of
highlights the change. This is
going to be very different. So
first we build them differently.
We have an assembly facility out
in Phoenix. The manufacturing is
actually done at sub-tier
vendors. Uh, most are based in
Dallas, uh, some in Canada and a
few in Connecticut. But the
major pieces come from Dallas,
Texas. They'll come to a
facility in Phoenix at the Mesa
Gateway Airport, uh, just south
of Phoenix, and we'll do
assembly there, a team of
anywhere from 40 to 60 employees
will spend about
To 3 months building a spaceship
and then doing ground tests
we'll bring in the mother ship
and fly it here to New Mexico to
do all the flight testing right
here at Spaceport America. So
that's a new thing for us. We're
not building them from the
ground up out in California
anymore. Next slide.
The other new thing for us will
be, uh, oh, and those, yeah,
they'll take the journey here
and come to our operational
headquarters in New Mexico. So
let me just, let me talk a
second and talk about some of
the changes that have to happen,
right? Uh, this is a massive
difference from flying once a
day, not only for us at Virgin
Galactic, but for our colleagues
at at NMSA as well and in the
local communities, a much bigger
influx. So if you go to the next
slide, as a highlight of that,
we need new facilities at the
spaceport. so this is a
rendering of what we call a
launch hanger, and if you
Look in the squint in the upper
in the middle of the right there
is the gateway to space back in
the background. Uh, so this
hangar would be built down at
the southern side of the runway
at Spaceport and it'll house our
mother ship and all of our
fueling facilities right now
when we fly to space, we have to
go outside about 2 days ahead of
time to load all the propellant,
and that's a hazardous activity
we don't want employees around
it. And so right now, I can have
bad weather one or two days
before flight, I might have
perfectly good flying weather,
but I have to scrub the launch
because it wasn't good enough
weather before.
That. So by being able to be
inside an enclosed hangar, we
can eliminate that handicap and
be ready to fly much more
frequently. So this hanger is
about a $30 million investment
Virgin Galactic will be funding
the construction and building of
that, uh, leasing it from NMSA.
They're doing a great
partnership laying in the
utilities and the roads we need
and the services that will
operate from, uh, but this will
be an investment Virgin Galactic
is making directly into
Spaceport America. We expect we
have a letter of intent signed
now working on lease
negotiations, no pressures to
The lawyers sitting behind me,
um, but we expect to break
ground in the early spring,
hopefully January, February have
bulldozers out there moving some
dirt around. So we want this
hangar operational in 2026.
So, that's just a sample of what
we're doing out of the
spaceport. If I go to the next
slide just to wrap up, I love
this quote. Uh, if you don't
know Jamila Gilbert, uh, she is
a Las Crucian, uh, born and
raised here, went to NMSU and
was one of our astronauts flew
to space with us, uh, last year,
uh, and I think it's a fantastic
quote about New Mexico, uh, the
impact that that the land of
enchantment has not only in the
local area with Virgin Galactic,
but on the entire commercial
space flight industry is huge,
and we are working.
feverishly to bring our new
spaceships here and I just
appreciate the chance to be able
to come and tell you a little
bit about that. So with that,
uh, ready for questions.
Thank you. Do we have any
questions from the panel or from
the Kamanskis.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Um, Jamila is
actually a friend of mine, and I
was so proud of her when I saw
all of her social media. She is
a social media rock star, um,
and as well as all the other
astronauts that you have, uh,
that are there, um, I, I do
appreciate the, the economic um
reports on that and just for
full transparency, Virgin
Galactic is a member of the Las
Crucesre Chamber of Commerce,
um, and I would love to be able
to spotlight that more because
that's been one of the things
that's always been a concern for
me, and I think I've talked
about this with Scott is like,
you know, knowing.
How the people that are cutting
the grass in my neighbor's front
yard and the people who are
putting the roof on the
backyard, uh, on the neighbor
behind me, how spaceport and
Virgin Galactic and space
tourism can actually impact
everyday New Mexicans because,
you know, I think there is an
acknowledgement this is still
for a particular bracket of
people who can afford it. Um,
and so it's not like the
landscaper is thinking that
they're ever gonna be able to go
up into space. And so I hope
that
Eventually, you know, that we're
getting there, but I also
recognize that there are costs
in this, and this is something
that that uh requires that. And
I know that you're making more
efforts to get folks who look
like everyday folks up in space,
so I do I do, I'm really
grateful for that, but you know,
Jason, we should probably talk
about like how we can get those
economic numbers out, um,
because I think that's really
important for the rest of us who
and especially the the other
part of the state, um, because,
you know, anything below Secorro
has a tendency of getting
ignored.
And, and, uh, and we get really,
really crabby about that, um,
but we do know that we have some
amazing things happening from
Socorro below.
And, uh, and I know that Senator
Brantley and I, um, and
Representative Gallegos, we're
all like really defensive about
that when people.
Talk about Southern New Mexico
like we need help.
The whole state needs help, but
we're doing some amazing things
down here and and I believe that
what's happening in the
spaceport and at Virgin Galactic
is really great. I think there
are other things to try and make
it more accessible to everyday
New Mexicans, but I know that we
have to start moving forward in
order to get there. So I'm
grateful for that. So, um, thank
you and I and I'll, I'll let
Jamilla know that she was part
of a, a Senate presentation. Um,
I'm sure she knows that anyway,
but um thank you very much for
that and I appreciate that.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, Representative Roybal
Cavillero. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and we just visited last
week, so thank you for your
presentation. It was extensive
then, all of you that were there
with us at the New Mexico
Finance Authority. Thank you
very much. I'm so glad that our
two grandsons live here.
Because they're, they will have
firsthand uh experience, uh, I
really have complete faith in
all that you do in the
partnerships that you have
established and um.
Um,
you know, there have been some
rocky roads as a spaceport has
gone through, you all have gone
through, but this is a perfect
example of being prepared for
the future before we even had a
handle.
On the future if that makes
sense and you all and your
partnership. We're in the
perfect position and even though
when I first took office, all I
heard was.
No, no, no, no, no more. No more
funding from the state, no more
financing from the state, no
more. It's, it's a, it's.
It's a failure, it's not gonna
work, too much money, and this
is what happens when you, um.
Don't have a vision.
That
dictates what you do for the
future and you're just only see
the here and now. And so I just
wanted to commend you and thank
you because um all of our.
Younger generations, uh, and
their future generations are
have the foundation in place and
you are providing that to your
partnership, so best of luck. I
will not be one of your
passengers.
Um, but I hope to be able to
see.
Uh, if, if God grants me life, I
hope to be able to see them at
least in training, um, to be
your future astronauts. Thank
you very much. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Um, we've got, OK, here we go.
Representative
Anya Narnia.
He.
Thank you so much. That was,
that was the best you've ever
dated. That was brilliant.
Um, thank you very much for that
presentation. It was really very
fascinating. Um, one thing I
really like about Virgin
Galactic is.
Making space and science
accessible.
To so many, um.
Because, you know, it's it's
just the it's literally an area
where.
We can only dream before, um.
And so making it accessible was
is is really quite fascinating.
So looking at the 26 astronauts
that you have since beginning
commercial service and just.
The diversity and the different
backgrounds and different
stories and it's really
fascinating. So I want to know,
I do have a specific question is
of a current astronauts that you
have, what is the age range?
Uh, Madam Chair, with your
permission, so they spand quite
a large batch, and so I would
say of those who have flown uh,
Anya was our youngest, she was,
I think, 19 at the time when she
flew uh first year university
student, um, and, uh, John
Goodwin, who flew with her, was
our oldest at the time, and I
believe he was in '89 at the
time. No, 79, sorry, 79 at the
time. Um, but in the, in the
community that holds tickets, we
have them spanning that same
range.
There is unfortunately a lower
limit on the FAA, so for your
grandchildren, you'll have to
wait till you're 18. We can't
fly you before you're 18, uh,
but our goal is to basically uh
find a way to say yes to
everybody. Um, obviously the
medical conditions are one of
the things that you want to pay
attention to a lot of G forces
on the body um changing and
actually one of our doctors is
here with us too, uh, Dr.
Hughes, um, and that's one of
the things we strive to do is
find ways to accommodate
whatever the condition may or
may not be, and that's actually
really unique.
We don't talk about it a lot,
but this commercial suborbital
space flight market is really
going to expand the medical
database available. Most people
who fly to orbit are going there
at a 65 to $100 million dollar
ticket and they spend a lot of
time to make sure you're going
to be very healthy and stay on
the space station for months at
a time. And so typically very
fit military age people who have
very extensive medical
backgrounds on them, right? Um,
we fly people who don't have a
whole lot of
Good health maybe in their
background, although I, I tend
to joke, right, having coronary
disease makes you resist the G
forces a little better. You
might not live long enough to
buy a ticket, right, but uh, but
it's a chance to really get some
more data on more people and
it's a research thing so that'll
help us allow even more people
to fly to space, so it's, it's a
really unique thing, but on, on
the age range, we see quite a
large range of folks, both in
terms of their medical
conditions as well as their age.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair, and thank you for that
answer, um, yeah.
It's absolutely spectacular. I,
I really appreciate the fact
that, you know, it's giving
people opportunities they would
never have otherwise, and I
know um my colleague
Representative Caballero has no
interest in being a passenger,
but I'll take her seat,
so I can totally see her
floating around in there because
I said, I mean, Jamila's videos
of her floating and just looking
out at that beautiful blue
marble. I can see you doing
that.
Yeah.
Senator Brantley, thank you,
Madam Chair. I am, I echo my
fellow legislators celebrating
your accomplishments and, and
really praising all these
highlights that you've gone out
here, but I, I want to talk
about the criticisms that you
continue to receive because as
you know better than anyone,
this is not a unanimous, you
know, representation of the
legislator and really this is
also for Spaceport America and
Scott as well. I think it's
Important than when you continue
to receive, you know, criticism
from legislators that they
recognize that any failures or
delays based on anything
Spaceport America or Virgin is a
direct result of the legislators
in actions or actions and not
yours. And Virgin specifically
has come to the table. You,
you've done your job. You've
kept your end of the deal up and
that's important to recognize
and when we look at just in your
presentation
we, we have all these updates
about infrastructure investments
that you're going to continue to
make at our Spaceport America,
you're willing to continue to
show up and do the work. And I
feel like you could almost, it's
like we created this house where
the owners of this house, we put
Spaceport America managers over
here to manage it and then you
came in to rent it and we're
always on Spaceport for not
getting more tenants. We're
upset when you don't spend
enough time in the house. It's
none of our business, you know,
you guys are here.
And we're not giving you the
tools that we really need for
Spaceport to succeed and it's
not popular on my side of the
aisle, but it remains that in
2005, the legislators decide to
take a huge risk and invest in
Spaceport America.
And because it hasn't been
popular, it goes up and downs to
political whims. We're not
making the investment into this
to really allow you guys to
blast off to the next level.
When Scott has to come before
the legislator and beg to fix a
leaking roof.
That you guys have had to tarp
over.
Space ships, it's embarrassing.
I'm, I'm just expecting to drive
up one day and see tires on the
roof. Like, we must make the
investment or, or I would say to
sayers or get out.
But stop making these people try
to operate on shoestring budgets
and stop reminding Virgin that
it hasn't done enough. You guys
have done, you have done your
part and really every
opportunity that we see you, we
should thank you for staying
here for, for, for putting roots
down in New Mexico, for not
abandoning us and I would call
on my colleagues to encourage
the rest of our legislators
like,
Get in or get out, but we can't
continue to criticize Spaceport
America and then expect everyone
else in America to make the
investments and come here. Like
if we're going to continue to do
this, let's go all in. And I, I
just, I want you to feel welcome
and appreciated. I want
Spaceport America to know you
have done everything that the
legislator has directed you to
do and in local years and
actually as the representative
of Donana in Sierra County when
it comes to any community
backs, let that be my problem,
cause the only legislator that
can even be impacted at the
ballot box by that if it's an
unpopular opinion, is, is me.
And I'm saying we're all hands
on deck. Sierra County is happy
for the investments that they've
made in Spaceport America.
Like we're, we're all in on
this, and I hope you guys hear
that message loud and clear. We
are behind you. We're
supportive, and while there may
be a few that continue to, to be
so critical of this. That's
what's holding us back. That's
what's holding us back, and I
just hope that you guys feel
that you are supported by, you
know, the New Mexico legislator,
a legislator that we weren't the
ones to make this initial
investment, but whether we like
it or not, here we are, and you
guys have done a good job of,
of, you know, taking it doesn't
look like what we thought. It
was.
Look like at this point. Yeah,
there's been struggles. That's,
that's the case in many of the
areas that we've made statewide
investments, but you guys were
right there, and I just want you
guys to feel championed and to
continue to do your good work,
um, and really promote what
you're doing out there. A lot
of, uh, I, I appreciate you
being here before us at Scott I
appreciate you going to all
these interims. There's a lot
going on back at the office, I
know.
And you're out here having to
remind legislators that it's not
crickets out there, and it's
not. There's a lot of activity
going on there. So you guys
continue to do what you're
doing. Uh, I'm, I'm proud to, to
house spaceport America in my
district, and I'll never change
my opinion on that. So, uh,
thank you guys for the
investment you made in New
Mexico.
Well, I want to thank you for
being here today. Um, you know,
giving us the, the update. It
just sounds like there's a lot
going on and it looks like a lot
of growth going on, um, this
delta class spaceship looks
amazing. That I mean, it's it's
spectacular, you know, um, and
to know that that's here in New
Mexico, and I think that maybe
we don't highlight it enough and
so maybe that's something that
we need to work on, whether
it's, you know, through tourism
or you
You know, running billboards or
something when you know you're
running up and down, uh, I-25
that people see that beautiful
picture that I think it's
gorgeous, um, you know, you said
you haven't been, been flying,
um.
When do you have a waiting list
to?
For people to fly. Yeah, Madam
Chairman, we do. We have sold
close to 700 tickets so far, and
we've actually had sales closed
for several years because
there's no sense adding to the
backlog. We have, we're turning
people away right now, and so
yeah, we have a a decent list um
at the rate we plan to fly, we
hopefully will clear that out in
about 2 years and so we do have
a plan to expand. I didn't bring
those pieces of the deck, but uh
but uh independent third party
analysis not only from our
company.
But other investors into that
what that marketplace looks
like, um, and I think a
sustainable market of, you know,
1000 or 2000 people a year for
many, many years to come, and
as uh as the vice chair said,
right, the price will eventually
come down as scale kicks in and
that'll just open the market up
even further. So we, we do have
a healthy waiting list, um, and
they're clamoring for us to get
started again. I mean, I think
if, if you're able to, I mean,
what an experience, um.
Also, uh, I, I lost my train of
thought, um.
Flying
Yeah, I lost it. Yeah, yeah,
yeah, yeah. Billboards, I think
I covered it, yeah. Anyway, I, I
forgot what I was gonna say, but
it's, it's amazing and um I
think that we do need to do some
more promotion to make sure that
um New Mexicans know because I
think that there is, I, I know
that, you know, when, when we
start talking about spaceport
and Virgin Galactic and for
whatever reason, um, and maybe
because it's down south that
people get grump grumpy about
it. I don't know because I don't
know that.
If people know that it's just
how uh how shiny it is, the
shiny star, you know, so I, I
appreciate what you're doing and
just the um the dollars that
you're generating. I mean, when
you're talking about, um, you
know, the people that come out
to, to celebrate, and it's like
3 to 3 to 1 almost, you know,
that's, that's amazing, so I
mean those are tourism dollars
that we we want, so I think
those are things to keep on the
forefront of people's minds, so.
Appreciate that, appreciate the,
the, the pictures, I mean, just
they were worth 1000 words, so
keep doing what you're doing and
we're proud to have you here.
Thank you, thank you for the
presentation. How many here are
here to support Virgin Galactic
and Spaceport America just
so Adam, you're the loner,
you're just the one that just
sit here.
He's, he's against them.
Well thank you all for, for
taking time out of your day to
come.
Thank you all. Alrighty, well,
we're gonna go ahead and go to a
public comment. OK, um.
Is anybody here for public
comment?
Would anybody like to say
anything?
Well, I would, I would, the
thing I will say is thank you. I
think uh we had 3 days, uh, a
very packed agenda, um, and I
don't think anybody, um,
disappointed us. I mean, they
came in and presented well, um,
they gave us lots of really good
information. Uh, I always like
to, um, be able to say that we
highlight things in Las Cruces,
but things that are also in
Donana County and that affect
all the New Mexicans, so I
think.
That's really important and just
so proud of our community and,
um, the work that that's being
done here locally. So I wanted
to say thank you to the
community, uh, also wanted to
thank the committee. I know that
we're down to just very few of
us here, but I know that, um,
it's, it's hard to be away from
your family for 3 days and you
know, away from work, but people
hung in and and uh worked hard,
so thank you for that and we
will see you in Albuquerque when
we, that'll be our next.
