Looking to implement solutions
uh to deter commercial property
crime.
Hospital 228 from the 2025
session sought to provide a
consistent predictable, um,
level across different
jurisdictions in the state.
The bill passed the House
overwhelmingly but ran out of
time on the final Senate
committee. We intend to bring
back the bill during the 2026
session and wanted to discuss it
with the committee today.
In New Mexico, businesses face
lengthy delays and uncertainty
when it comes to permitting due
to a patchwork of standards and
interpretations across
jurisdictions.
Customers seeking local approval
to install systems to protect
their assets, weigh an average
of 180 days to get permitted.
Some waiting
uh, over 500 days.
because property crime has grown
dramatically, more businesses
have expressed a desire to
implement security technology to
protect their assets and ensure
employee safety.
The monitored security
technology covered in the
legislation is used by
businesses located in commercial
manufacturing and industrial
areas across, uh, whose needs
include protection of outdoor
assets.
Mr. Fadias will tell you more
about the safety systems like
these, but I will briefly
address the need for certainty
and consistency around the
installation of security systems
and technologies.
Um, I'd also like to highlight
the local government's retained
zoning control, the ability to
enforce building codes and the
ability to establish
requirements for alarm permits.
The bill simply provides a
consistent framework to monitor
alarm systems across the state.
And with that, I would like to
introduce Mr. uh Luis Farias
from Amro, uh, to brief the
committee.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee
My name is Luis Farias. I am an
Amaro representative speaking on
behalf of business customers
seeking innovative solutions
like battery charge fences with
alarm systems to deter
commercial property crime and
the critical need for
legislation that would make it
possible to install set systems
with minimal permitting delays.
The monitor's security
technology is provided for
businesses located on commercial
manufacturing and industrial
sites whose needs include the
protection of outdoor assets.
The system is always installed
on the interior of the property
and behind an existing
non-electrified perimeter fence
or wall.
The security technology has
secure businesses here in New
Mexico since 1998 and for
decades elsewhere, it is worth
noting that the system is based
on open source technology.
all of its components are
commercially available.
because property crime has grown
dramatically. More businesses
have expressed a dire need for
the security technology
These businesses invest
considerable resources to secure
their assets and insure employee
safety.
Failure to secure their sites
can easily lead to losses in the
tens of thousands, and sometimes
hundreds of thousands of dollars
in a short period of time.
This is money they would much
rather invest in their
businesses hiring and expanding
their footprint, which benefits
local and state economies.
in New Mexico, businesses face
lengthy delays and uncertainty
when it comes to primity.
The challenge is that different
jurisdictions treat the system
differently.
Some consider it offense, while
others may want to consider it a
structure.
to further complicate things.
Back in 2016, the state
eliminated the licensing
requirement for fence contractor
licenses because fences at any
height are not covered by the
state's adopted building codes
and therefore do not require
permits or inspections. This led
to different interpretations by
cities. Some jurisdictions
follow the guidance while others
sought to impose conditions for
specialty
lic ense s which are excessive
for the installation of a
battery charged fence.
Given these challenges, it
becomes clear why statewide
standard is needed to define
battery charged fences with
alarm systems in state statute
simply as outdoor alarm systems.
which may be permitted like any
other security alarm system.
We have 19 businesses waiting
for this technology.
The majority's businesses are
waiting over 100 days and one in
particular has been waiting over
533 days.
Delays are also not specific to
just one jurisdiction.
to operate businesses need
certainty and timelines around
the installation of security
systems and technology.
recognizing that need this past
legislative cycle. Reps Linda
Serrado and Ala Martinez,
champion HB 228, which would
have brought uniformly to the
permanent process.
allowing businesses to grow and
expand operations locally.
The bill was voted out of
committees but regrettably
didn't get out of the Senate
Judiciary due to time
constraints.
so we are now before you again
asking for your support as we
look to move similar legislation
forward.
Back to our system for a second.
The battery charged security
device is a crime prevention
tool which provides a startling
but safe pause to deter and
detect criminal trespass.
The system interfaces with a
monitor alarm to detect a breach
and alerts a business in
monitoring operator who verify
an alarm event before police
officers are called, thereby
also helping law enforcement.
and it's great for businesses
who see crime virtually
disappear upon a stallation. In
fact, just a couple of days ago
I talked to Hannah Commercial.
Uh, they had the system
installed and they were very,
very happy. They wanted to get
this letter uh before the
committee to express the need
for this permitting legislation.
uh, the system is safe and can
only be installed behind an
existing perimeter fence or
wall, and it does not, let me
repeat, it does not impact local
zoning nor alter the land use of
a secured property.
It is merely an outdoor security
system that local government may
require an alarm system permit
for operation of the system.
The system features warning
signs that are located every 30
ft to alert and deter potential
trespassers and criminals
It also complies with recognized
safety standards established by
the IEC standard 60335-2-76. The
device is very powered with no
more than 12 volts of direct
current.
and the batteries continuously
recharged by solar panels. Its
green security technology
completely off the grid to
prevent inadvertent contact, the
battery charge fence is always
located on the interior of the
property and behind a perer
fence or wall. Now I had put
together a PowerPoint and you
know we'll leave that behind. I
understand you've been pretty
busy the last couple of days,
um, it'll cover a lot of
information and additional
questions, but I'm here if you
have any, uh, at this time
uh, your state now has the
opportunity to join others like
Utah, Arizona, Texas, and
Oklahoma and most recently
California in passing laws that
make it easier to install crime
prevention security solutions.
This security technology
prevents property crime at no
cost to taxpayers, cities, or
the state.
When the time comes to vote on
future partisan legislation,
bipartisan legislation next
January. I would respectfully
ask for your I vote and I'll
just share one more thing. The,
uh, national, the, uh, New
Mexico utility Contractors
Association was going to attend
today. They were unable to do
so, but they are also in support
of future legislation to deal
with permitting issues.
Thank you.
Thank you committee we'll vote
for questions starting with
Representative Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you presenters for the
presentation.
So I remember this bill going
through the processes and the
committees and everything. Uh, I
have a couple of questions. So
in the bill
in House Bill 228, does this
allow
Amaro
to sell what, how, how does
how does it pertain? Does it
pertainstrictly to Amorro and
their product.
or does it pertain to all the
electric fences and, and all
companies to be able to sell
such a fence, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative
Zamora, this would go across the
board. Any business that has
this technology
will be allowed to do all this
bill does.
is set a standard across the
board so that businesses can
plan, they can know what they're
up against, they can know what
they're permitting time looks
like. So there's not different
permitting processes across
jurisdictions if a business has
more than 2 locations in 2
different towns. It would be
nice for that business to know
uniformity what the permitting
process is gonna be so they can
get that done in order to
protect the assets.
Thank you for that answer and
thank you, Madam Chair. And
how many other companies have
such a fence as we're, we're
putting here the, the battery
operated and all, all the
features like are in the bill,
Madam Chair.
So there are different companies
that um.
work in this space. There's some
that work in the agricultural
space, um, keep cattle inside. I
think some of you may be
familiar with that. The
technology, the products what
consists of the system as I
indicated in my remarks is
commercial commercially
available so anybody can
replicate it. Anybody can get
into the space, uh, Amark jumped
into it, but that doesn't stop
anybody from uh getting in and
doing what we're doing at this
point in time.
Thank you, Madam Chair
and, and Madam Chair and
presenter, so do you know how
many other companies have
the fence as described in the
bill.
Madam Chair Representative
Samora, I don't have a specific
number as to how many other ones
may have similar technology,
but, uh, in this space
innovation drives a lot of
things in the security space,
particularly when you're dealing
with uh outdoor storage, so you
know it's if we don't see any
right now doesn't mean we won't
see any tomorrow.
Thank you Madam Chair
Madam Madam Chair,
real quickly, this is open
source technology, so it's
available to any company that
wants to start the business.
It's not um
uh,
just Amaro, uh, because it's
open source, anybody can take
advantage of it.
OK? And, and Madam Chair and
presenters, I, I voted against
it in committee and then voted
for it on the House floor.
And I think what my gripe in
committee was in it in
if my memory serves me well, was
that it was
it almost looked like it was a
particular fence for a
particular company and, and
that's, that was my griping
committee and maybe I researched
it and found out different
And then that's why I voted
different on the floor.
But, but it seems like there
was, uh,
and I remember asking the
question about why can't the
fence be plugged into a 120
Uh, that's most, most of the
farming, uh, farmers use it that
way instead of having to deal
with the battery, the battery
going down and stuff all the
time and having to recharge the
battery. And I believe that the,
somewhere in the bill, it said
that that wasn't allowed.
So
I, I would just, those were my
concerns. Uh, I think the bill
has a lot of strength. I want to
back
I want to back the businesses
and, and keeping their places
secure and stuff.
But, uh, I think there was,
there was maybe some kind of
issue with that, with me and,
and I look forward to, to see
how this moves forward and
and progresses and, and how we
can support it. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Leader Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for the presentation.
So basically it's, this is
really about zoning issues.
um, across the state in
different entities where people
have different zoning
uh, areas. So, but is this
mainly, uh, effective in
Berlio
Donana
and Santa Fe
Madam, madam
Chair, uh, Representative.
Armstrong, this would be across
the state. It would set a
standard across the State.
So it doesn't target uh
certain counties directly.
Uh, this would be a a statewide
standard.
Thank you for that. And Madam
Chair, uh, do you need the
Internet?
to be able to
for for any part of the electric
fencing for the alert or
anything else?
Madam Chair
uh, what I will say to that, uh,
is we have a monitoring system
that is part of the system
that's what makes it a very
smart sophisticated system, but
we're not connected to the grid.
They're independent systems to
ensure that a criminal can't get
in and hack, uh, so
we're off the grid. We don't run
off, you know, like a plug you
were a war because of the power
goes down if there's a weather
event, our system is standalone.
Thank you
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, sir. So I, I was reading
through the, the, uh, pamphlet
here and it's ultimately you
want it, uh, through solar,
recharged the batteries through
solar. I really like this, um.
I
I think that it would be a, a
good thing. Can you tell me
where
you're running into issues that
someone could not
you had stated, uh, that you,
you don't, you no longer have to
have a license to be a fencing
contractor.
Is there, I know of a, I can
think of a few fencing
contractors, specific fencing
contractors
and they don't have to have a
license to do this. Is that
correct?
Madam Chair, Representative so I
speak specifically to some of
the issues that we've run into
because some entities may
consider it, you know, uh, the
battery charged fans as a fans,
then they want us to use or get
certain licenses, but the state
itself did away with that so we
shouldn't be required and we
actually work with the state
some to ensure that we could
proceed without having to have
special
ty licenses for something that's
really not offense it's about 20
wires, the thickness of a wire
hanger spread apart evenly, you
could easily move it, but if you
move it, that's how we know that
you're messing with it
Thank you.
So this is a barrier behind,
it's really just a chart, uh,
not an electrified, not you, you
will not get electrocuted to
death, Madam Chair,
Representative, that is correct
and that is part of the reason
why we use the 12 volt battery
to make sure that it's not
plugged in to continuous power
it's uncomfortable. I did it
myself in training. I touched it
not once but twice. I want to
see if it was really bad. Second
time, I'm like, this is, this is
not something I need to keep
doing so you
you walk away from it it does
its job, it deters.
Thank you
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
presenters. um
being raised on a ranch and farm
kids have touched a lot of
electric fences, so
uh, it's, it's not a, it's not
comfortable, but it's not
deadly.
Um, but it does alert at the
time of being, uh
messed with. So, um
I, I think it's a good idea. I,
I don't understand why
why, you know, it, it, it is
open market. You're just trying
to get the barriers removed for
it to be able to be something
that can be on the open market
and uh
and as a business owner, I
appreciate that. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative, and
we'll have a comprehensive
zoning briefing later in the
agenda. Um, Senator Block, and
we have about 2 more minutes for
this presentation, so just keep
that in mind as you're asking
questions. Thank you, Madam
Chair. You didn't happen to
bring in a sample we could see
Representative Martinez, uh, do
this, did, did you?
Madam Chair, Representative, no
unfortunately we didn't bring
something for him to touch. All
right, well, we'll have to work
on that one for next time for my
good friend over there. Um, I'm
looking at your briefing. I, I
like this idea. I'm, I'm very
familiar with security protocols
in my business, uh, in the
nuclear industry as a
uh retired military guy and
current consultant doing that,
doing, um, partly nuclear
security.
I, I would argue on your um your
slide on page 2.
um, and your common criminal
tactics, to me it would be deter
as one, detective 2
delay, you don't have delay.
Delay is really 3.
Um, and then you would have
defend and then deploy, uh,
because that's part of security
is the delay piece, uh, to make
sure that you'll have, um
time for, uh, forces or I'm uh
law enforcement to respond by
um
did you, is there an annual, uh,
Madam Chair, and sir, is there
an annual certification, um, for
this particular uh capability um
because you're in businesses all
around the country and any other
states, you have to have an
annual certification or once
you're, once, once it's in once
it's uh deployed and and
operating, you're, you're good
to go.
Madam Chair Representative, so
we comply with the IEC.
and 60335-2-76. So everything is
installed to meet that standard.
There are different listings
that we have with SGS, but there
is no sort of annual, uh,
certification per se. I'm a
little short on time, Madam
Chair, uh, sir, is this has your
company worked with any state or
municipal governments here in
New Mexico to uh use this uh
capability.
Madam Chair, Representative,
yes, we've worked with a few and
we're overcoming some hurdles
and what we wanna do is kind of
bring that uniformity to the
whole process, so Madam Chair,
sir, did when you were working
with the state and local
municipalities, did you have to
follow some type of zoning
procedures that you would have
to do for private businesses, or
is it a little bit different?
Uh, man chair representative, so
usually our system operates
within commercial, industrial
and manufacturing areas.
So, so long as it's operating in
those areas then you know we can
work with the entity to ensure
that we can install it.
And lastly, Madam Chair and sir,
I, I didn't read, read the bill.
I wasn't because it, it didn't
come over to our side on the
Senate, but were there any tax
incentives for uh businesses to,
um, use, um, to invest in any
type of security to protect
their businesses.
Madam Chair, Senator Block, uh,
there were no tax incentives
worked into the bill. This was
simply setting the statewide
standard for zoning.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Thank you, gentlemen
I'd still like to see
Representative Martinez
touch this thing
I'd like to see you touch this
thing.
Oh.
Representative Royval Caballero.
You, Madam Chair, and thank you
very much for your presentation.
Nice to see representative up
there. um, I, I think I just had
that my question answered but
for clarity, the legislation is
to set a statewide standard for
battery charged fences, correct?
Madam Chair, Representative Rual
Caballero, that, that's correct.
So, uh, one final related
question and and I appreciate
the the and I understand and
support the battery charged
fence
at.
absolutely because it is another
high, higher tech, um, and it's
safe. I saw the page where, um,
you described, uh, the benefits,
uh,
representative, did you have to
address anything related to
anti-donation, uh, when you were
preparing the bill and when you
were presenting the bill, I
don't, I don't recall
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Royal Caballero. We, we didn't
because this doesn't deal with
one specific company. This just
sets the standard across the
across the state, so any company
that that has this technology,
uh, knows what they're up
against so it wasn't uh we have
uh
Mr. Fadias from Amrok because
they, they have the technology
now, uh, just as an expert
witness, but we weren't, it
wasn't directed at just one
company.
Thank you. I just wanted it for
the record to make that clear,
um, for those that are
listening, so I appreciate that.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Senator Figueroa
Thank you, Madam Chair. So to
clarify, the municipal
municipalities, municipal
league, um, in the fiscal
analysis that they generally
oppose because it's one of the
ways that they consider
permitting and zoning their
purview. They don't want the
state to take control of that
power in any instance. So not in
this instance as well. Can you
explain just one more time to
close us off why you believe
this
is an instance where the state
should take
permitting control to set that
standard
and require all municipalities
to follow it.
Madam Chair, Senator Figueroa,
this doesn't take the ability
for the local government entity
to to zone.
it just sets the standard
statewide.
So it keeps local control
All we're doing is trying to set
a standard across the state, uh,
to allow
companies to to know what
they're up against, but it, it
still maintains that local
control when it comes to zoning.
They will actually do the zoning
we're just trying to set us a
standard across the board.
Madam Chair and Representative,
thank you. It's, it's this
permitting control that is
different. The permitting
requirements are different in
the municipalities all across
the state, and that's what's
part of causing the delays and
the obstacles. So we are saying
the state should set the
permitting standard. Would the
bill allow municipalities to
adjust those standards in their
local area, make them perhaps
more demanding, more
restrictive, or would they be
limited to the state standard as
we said it.
Madam Chair, Senator Figueroa,
that's the problem that we have
now is there's no uniformity.
11 city can have
a certain standard and the
county
will have a different standard.
So even though they, they govern
the same area.
you can go 2 miles out of the
city limit.
to set up your business and it's
a whole different standard, so
it's the confusion and standards
that we're trying to deal with
in this bill, just trying to set
that uniformity
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative. We hit that
lack of uniformity across many
industries. Um, in permitting
county permitting, city
permitting, tribal permitting,
federal permitting, they are all
different, so this is an
interesting way to go about
creating uniformity. It would be
an unusual step.
for New Mexico to say.
we're all gonna follow this and
you must to localities but it
might be an instance where we
need to do so. I'm not 100%
convinced, but I look forward to
the bill. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. um, thank
you committee and thank you
presenters for being here this
morning. It sounds like we all
look forward to hearing this
again in the regular session.
Um, we'll now hear from Scott
McLaughlin, executive director
of Spaceport Authority and
Francisco Paerrez, director of
business development on
Spaceport America's economic
impact. Welcome and thank you
again. Thank you, Madam Chair
and members of the committee.
Uh, while we're transitioning
committee, um, we were all
provided yesterday in our
packets minutes from the July
7th and 8th, gathering in
Mescalero, and I'd like to call
for approval. Um, we have from
representative Chair, I move
approval of the minutes. Thank
you.
We've got a second and with no
opposition?
Thank you
Those are approved
Good morning. Welcome. Thank
you. Please get us started. Good
morning. Good morning, Madam
Chair and Representatives and
senators, um, very happy to be
here. I'm glad there's a
turnout. um, we have a lot to
talk about, a lot to present.
I'm gonna try and go very
quickly through my presentation
on Spaceport status and
activities. I'm here with my
director of business
development, uh Franciscopaiare,
um, and then we're also the
second half of the presentation
is gonna be from uh New Mexico
State University
Seabed Center for Border
Economic Development.
with Doctor Eriksson and Doctor
Vargas. So, um, and what I've
done with my presentation, I I
have a lot of background and
some of that I'll, I'll just go
over very quickly. I know
there's new representatives and,
and, uh, uh, senators who have
not been to the spaceport and I
extend a welcome to all of you.
My emails in the back and we're
happy to set up a tour, um,
Virgin Galactic will often
partner with us on that kind of
tour so you'd be able to see um
the space system, um, and I'll
talk about that in a minute. So
anyway,
welcome and I'll go ahead and
get started then, Madam Chair,
if that's right.
All right, so very quickly, uh,
the front, just some quick
activities of the spaceport, the
very first pictures, of course,
the, the center picture is, is,
uh, Virgin Galactic. The one on
the right is, uh, Thunderbirds,
US Air Force Thunderbirds. We'll
talk about that in a bit. And
the one on the left is a, a
client we had, um, recently that
did something very unique with a
rocket engine and uh I'll go
through that. So overall I'm
just gonna talk about the
background, uh, site activities.
I'm gonna talk briefly about
budget and staffing. Um, some of
our capital
improvements, uh, we do a lot of
outreach. I put a list in there
for just the last few months. I
really want to talk about the
space economy and that leads
into where Spaceport America can
grow. And on page two, you can
see a picture overhead picture
of our open house last year, so,
uh, we've tried to have open
houses, uh, but we've had wind
and weather issues, but this
year we're having 1 September
21st, and so that's open to the
public, Virgin Galactic is gonna
show off uh one or both of their
vehicles, either the spaceship
or
the, or the White Knight 2.
And we had about 2000 visitors.
This was on a Sunday, believe it
or not, so very happy to have
you there in the center, you see
a lot of um tents. We had a lot
of community outreach, STEM
workforce, and other partners.
Uh, we had food trucks, Las
Cruces, city of Las Cruces
brought their balloons, so it
was kind of a nice event. um,
this year we're gonna have some
other static displays. I think
we're gonna, uh, I don't, I'm
not sure what the static
displays are. We have some
helicopters and some other
things, but it's a good, good
event for bringing your kids.
Um, on page 4, real quickly here
are, here are the federal and
licensed spaceports. So
spaceports that are considered
commercial spaceports or
licensed by the FAA. That's what
we are, um, and you'll see on
here some of the other more
traditional space parts that are
Space Force sites or NASA
Wallops Island or um Vandenberg
Air Force Base or uh Vandenberg
Space Force Base.
but just to give you an idea of
who right now is licensed and
happy to go back and answer some
questions on that, but we are
FAA licensed for both vertical
and horizontal launch, and we're
working on a reentry license,
uh, for the benefit of the new
members on page 5, I list some
important dates of the
spaceport, um, really the most
one of the most important ones
starts in 1984 when the federal
government allowed for
commercial space and spaceports
to exist. And then you can see
that there's kind of a steady,
uh, drum beat as the
state of New Mexico tried to
figure out if we could have a
spaceport that led all the way
to the late 90s when there was
something called the Ansari X
Prize, which was a contest, a
private contest, to see if you
could get to space twice and
with the same vehicle. That
happened, uh, scale composites
won that with Paul Allen helping
support that and uh shortly
after that Virgin Galactic, Sir
Richard Branson, uh, wanted to
buy that space system and also
around that time our governor
decided that maybe we could
bring those folks to New Mexico,
and that all happened very
quickly, um, in that just few
year time frame, but really what
led up to it was the all of the
90s uh actually the state of New
Mexico looking to see if they
could have a spaceport, so we're
not really a flash in the pan in
terms of trying to build a
spaceport where there's
something that's been worked on
a long time.
And then the important date 2021
was the first where the 3rd
state to send humans to space
when Virgin galactic, uh, uh, we
had a few launches from New
Mexico with uh Sir Richard
Branson going up in space.
on page 6, I, I list our
statutory mission, um, just so
you have it, uh, but I'll go
ahead and skip over that.
On page 7, I think some of you
haven't been there, so just to
remind you where the location
is. There's, um, something
called the Rio Grande Rift that
goes right to the middle of New
Mexico and on the left of the
mountain range is the Rio
Grande, where truth or
consequences is in a middle
basin is where Spaceport America
is, and there's no water there,
so it's a very dry basin and
some with some ranching on the
right side, then over another
mountain range is White Sands
missile Range, um, and so we're
very conveniently located if you
go
to page 8 directly underneath
White Sands Missile Range
Airspace. So on that map, uh,
the blue map on, on page 8, the
blue represents the airspace
that's completely controlled by
the US Army White Sands missile
range.
The red, the little red, uh, uh,
rectangle in the middle is the
White Sands missile range proper
and the little red red on the
left is Spaceport America, and
that's about 18,000 acres of
land that's state trust land.
Uh, I didn't add it to my
presentation, but, uh, in the
spring, uh, winter, we actually
negotiated a new 40-year lease
with the state land office.
That, that took a while to get
that done, but we now have that
that's an economic development
lease that includes Sierra
County, um, but it
includes that 18,000 acres right
there on the left. So part of
what makes us unique as a
spaceport when you go back and
look at the other spaceports is
that we're in a remote location
so we don't have a lot of
people, um, and we're under
White Sands airspace, and we can
also do things with white sands
like use their telemetry, their
radar, and their meteorology. So
those have all been good
competitive advantages that,
that we have been working hard
to bring more customers in.
And on page 9, you can see what
happens. This is sort of a
collected time lapse of airline
flights over that same airspace.
So because that airspace is
active, they use the word
active, meaning white sands
missile Orange is doing
something. All the airlines have
to routinely fly around
Spaceport America and fly around
White Sands missile range. So
it's another unique advantage we
have, although it's, it also has
some, uh, negative points which
is that if the Army decides that
they have a higher priority
mission, then we may not be able
to schedule our
um operations that day or
morning or even for a while.
Uh, skipping ahead then on, on
page 10 of that 18,000 acres,
we've divided that up into 3
areas we call the horizontal
launch area, the vertical launch
area and the advanced technology
area. The horizontal launch area
is very well developed with
roads and water fiber optic,
electrical, um, for those of you
who don't know it, we're like a
little city in the desert, so,
um, when in Mexico decided to
build the spaceport literally in
the middle of nowhere. We had to
basically become our
own little city, so we part of
what my staff does is maintain
the water, uh, the wastewater,
the electrical, the fiber, the
roads, and we're about 45
minutes from truth or
consequences and terms of
emergency services, so we have
our own fire department. We have
our own security, and we have
our own EMS and that's probably
the biggest cost to the
spaceport in terms of
operational costs besides the
facilities cost is the cost to
have those services available 24
hours a day, um, but,
um, in the vertical launch area
we've got customers like Up
Aerospace that have been there
since 2006 and down in the
advanced technology area where
we don't have any electricity or
water or or services we have
spin launch and we're trying to
sell that area, trying to lease
that for other projects that
need to be far away from things.
On page 11 is just an aerial
view of, uh, the horizontal
launch area. That's where the
gateway to space building is.
This is the, the building that
the state of New Mexico built um
with Virgin Galactics, um,
desires and mind, so we lease at
the Virgin Galactic, and then
you see the runway, which is
12,000 ft by 200 ft. And again,
this area has water and
utilities and fiber and, uh,
we're doing a pretty good job
of, of getting more customers
there.
On page 13 is a quick picture
of, of some of the activities
that have been at the spaceport
in the last several months.
and some of the pictures I don't
have here are some of the venue
events like last year we did a
space race, so, uh, a foot race.
So if we can bring in economic
activity into the area, we, we
can fill up some hotel rooms.
We'll try and do it. We do it on
kind of a non-interference basis
with, with our other aerospace
activities, but we're definitely
trying to create economic impact
whenever we can.
Uh, let me, uh, on page 14, uh,
Virgin Galactic just did their
one of their quarterly updates,
and some of these pictures here
on the right are from that.
um, what happened, uh, over the
last year was Virgin Galactic
decided they needed to, um, the
BSS unity, which was their
first, uh, spaceship that they
were able to take paying
customers the space. They
decided that that spaceship is
not one that they can turn
around quickly, so they had been
working on a design they called
the Delta class and, uh, that
design is complete and they're
assembling the first of those
spaceships in Mesa, Arizona, and
you can see down on the lower
right is a schedule for this is
scheduled
from the previous quarterly
report, but when they expect
operations to resume at
Spaceport America.
Um, so they did have 11 space
flights, uh, 32 private
astronauts did go to space from
New Mexico.
um, and one of the things I
wanted to highlight is when they
do get the two spaceships here,
if we do some simple math, um,
down in the lower left of that
slide, we're talking at least
100 flights a year or something
on the order of 100 flights.
That means about 600 private
astronauts go to space. What
we've found from talking to
Virgin is that, is that each of
those astronauts may bring 10 to
20 people with them, you know,
friends and family. So we're
talking about 12,000 visitors to
the region and when they
eventually begin full
operations in about a year,
sometime in the in the next 1416
months, um, anyway, that, that
will hopefully be about 60,000
room nights in the, in the
region around Las Cruces, but
when these people come to New
Mexico, they go everywhere they
go to Santa Fe, they go to
Carlsbad Caverns, they visit all
around the state, so this is of
course part of the, the point of
the um spaceport in Virgin
Galactic's activities. One of
the things they mentioned, uh,
on page 15 was using the
spaceship, the, uh, developing
some other applications for the
carrier aircraft and of course
because of that restricted
airspace, we're a very good
location for that sort of thing
where they can have some other
types of tests on board.
On page 14, on page 16, I'm
sorry, we had Venus Aerospace.
This was the customer that, that
flew, uh, a rotating, uh,
detonation rocket engine. This
is one of the first ones that
has flown commercially this and
what they're working toward is
hypersonic flight, which is the
picture of the vehicle on the
lower right.
Uh, some of the other customers,
17, we've become a site for high
altitude platform systems. These
are, uh, solar powered, very
large UAVs, the one in the
picture on page 17 is from
Aerovironment. Last year, it's
about 300 ft across. It flies at
60,000 ft, uh, and we've got two
other customers that do that
sort of thing. That's on page 18
and page 19.
again because of the restricted
airspace, we have some unique
benefits where they really can't
fly very many other places in
the country.
um, on page 20 we have up
aerospace. They've been here
since, uh, 2006, and they fly
once or twice a year, and we're
expecting that cadence to come
up. They have their own launch
rail system, and they also
manufacture motors on site.
Uh, page 21, we have Precision
AI. They've been with us now, I
think 2.5 years. Their goal
with, with this kind of standard
looking uh parasail system is
that it fly automatically um
using AI. That's hence their
name Precision AI and to do that
for agricultural reasons, so
they would be able to fly over a
field and and spray, um, you
know, herbicides or something,
so they've been at the spaceport
now for uh I think over 2 years
flying back and forth, good
customer
On page 22, we have the US Air
Force Thunderbirds, so they've
flown with us 4 years in a row
as part of their winter
training. Uh, Netflix came out
and did a, uh, a story on them.
So if you go watch the Air Force
Elite Thunderbird's Netflix
special. You'll see Spaceport
America in the background. We
expect that they will stay with
us for at least the next several
years. They'll, they'll be there
in late January, and this is
their winter training where they
are, are, they have the new
pilots and they're actually just
working out the new uh
a completely new show with new
pilots. Eventually after their
2.5 weeks, they get pretty good
and, and, uh, people find out
about them and they, they sneak
out the spaceport and watch, but
it's a pretty cool thing to be
able to do at Spaceport.
And then, uh, on page 23, we're
working on a, on a two-year
lease with Sirius Technologies.
They're gonna be launching a
vehicle similar in the picture
and learning how to take off and
land and control rocket engines,
so that's going to be kind of
fun, um, and on page 24 we have
leappace. We're also working on
an agreement with them. They
have a plan for suborbital
flights at the spaceport that
would take off and give a
customer 3 or 4 minutes of
suborbital payload uh flight and
then land at White Sands Miss
s ile range. So we expect both
serious and Leap to start
operations late this year.
Um, budget and staffing on page
26, there's just a quick look at
our budget, um, there only point
I want to make is that there's,
um, we haven't put out a request
for this year, but the only
thing I wanted to point out is
that there is a dip, and the dip
is because of Virgin Galactic's
drop in operations, so they
were, they are some user fees
that they normally pay for space
operations that dropped um
luckily we have, uh, what I
worked on was we have a fund
balance, so we've been drawing
off of our fund
balance. We're a non-reverting
agency, so we're able to kind of
save up our money in case we
have emergencies with utilities
or or anything else, especially
that would affect the customer,
but in this case we've been
drawing on the fund balance to
uh support us a little bit while
Virgin Galactic gets back in
operation.
um, as part of that though on
page 28 on the staffing, there
is, uh, a request that I will be
putting this year for some
additional FTEs. Um, these are
very important for us,
especially as we expand our
operations, so I'm happy to talk
about any of those. I think some
of them are, are, are kind of
obvious in, in the job title,
what we're looking at, but this
is important for us to continue
to bring in new customers and
you'll see that with the
economic impact report that
we've been doing that.
um, I pre I put in the capital
improvements just so you
understand that we we're keeping
the ICIP request filled up, um,
and that's not just to fill it
up. These are things we need,
um, to do to keep the spaceport
um competitive and site ready.
Um, one of the ones I did want
to highlight was just the
environmental impact that's old,
um, and that we're updating so
we can do reentries, uh, and so
the FAA has asked us to both
update the environmental impact
both for the reason that it's
old and to do
reentry.
On page 33, I've got a list of
some of the STEM and outreach we
do. We've really ramped that up
over the last few years trying
to, to encourage workforce in
the area and, and to have kids
uh be interested in in science
and space.
um,
let me go ahead and skip ahead
on page 36. So here's what's
happening in the, the space
industry, and I think this is
people don't really understand
that. So if I were to ask you
how many launches occur at the
Cape. Most of you might say
something like once a month or
once or twice a month and, and
actually what's happening at
Cape Canaveral right now, there
are launches every 3 days. Um,
there's usually SpaceX launch.
They're, they're filling up the,
the sky with satellites and you
can see that on page 37 where
we've got the cu
m ul ative number of objects in
space, and the reason they have
both these graphs is just to
show how quickly space is
developing in terms of a
marketplace. um
it's something that's happened
because of the reusability of
rockets that SpaceX has shown,
but other people like Blue
Origin and other companies are
following suit, and they've
really dropped the price to go
to space dramatically, so the
applications in space are
expanding immensely. um
on page 838, I talked a little
bit of that in terms of the
space economy growth. I won't go
over those, but it, it, it is on
a high trajectory, kind of like
the dotcom era was with the
internet. It's a new marketplace
that is developing quickly and
on page 39 I really wanted to
highlight what's happening with
the other states and communities
that are also trying to do the
same thing that Mexico did when
we built the spaceport almost 20
years ago and it's very quick
and one of the big things, I
don't know if I have it on this
particular one, but um.
the Texas created something that
called the Texas Space
commission a few years ago. The
first thing they did was give
out $350 million to try and
bolster space, the space economy
in the state, um, I thought that
was gonna be kind of the end of
it, but what I've heard is that
there will be another 300
million in coming this year and
what they do with that money is
they support companies that um
put in for a grant they support
education. Midland has won a $5
million grant to look at a
vertical spaceport, which is
not that far away from New
Mexico when you think about it.
and other states are doing the
same thing so I wanted to kind
of give you a flavor for what's
happening in the industry that
um what was kind of stagnant if
you go back 10 years ago is not
stagnant at all.
So, uh, moving forward for the
spaceport, of course we want to
work with our partner Virgin
Galactic to maximize their um
economic impact and see them
successful and fly like they
want to do at least twice a
week, uh, since hiring
especially uh Doctor Paetas,
we've been working very hard on,
on the regional economic growth
and focusing on on partnering
with EDOs um throughout what
we're calling Space Valley,
Albuquerque to E El Paso, trying
to make sure that the that uh
the nation knows that we have a
very special thing with
the DOE labs, with what's going
on at Kirtland Air Force Base
with White Sands missile range,
the NASA White Sands test
facility and an active
spaceport.
and that's working. We're
getting a lot of interest in the
region and of course those folks
want to be at the spaceport, um,
in fact, today there's an op ed
that I, that's in the
Albuquerque Journal where I talk
about orbital launch. One of our
problems though is that the
space force is very focused on
Vandenberg and, and, uh, in
Florida in terms of space launch
because that's where all the uh
infrastructure is, that's where
all the launches occur, and
believe it or not, SpaceForce
runs those launches. They, they
help launch those
vehicles for SpaceX. In fact, I
think you could argue that the
US Space Force is subsidizing
commercial launch, um, at
Vandenberg and, and Cape
Canaveral. But at the same time
they're not really preparing for
the future in terms of launching
Inland, which is something that
we'll have to occur. So this is
an op ed you can find
Albuquerque Journal, um, to talk
about that.
So I think I'll go ahead and
close real quick. So, uh, Center
for Economic and Border
Development can kick in. So, uh,
Doctor Vargas, would you like to
go ahead if that's all right,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee, so you have there
also a second presentation
that's titled Economic Impact of
Spaceport America.
um
and the first
item there, um, next slide here
where you have your materials
there. I wanted to introduce you
to what NMSU is doing by way of
the Center for Border Economic
Development in the Arrowhead
Center. um, we prepared this
analysis at the request of
Spaceport America. We looked at
the economic impact for a
six-year period and it's
building on a previous report
that where we had solely looked
at one year 2022. I've listed
the report's authors
Any one of us can answer your
questions with me is Doctor
Erikson today, uh, but there's a
third author, not be here, um
today.
So a little bit of background on
uh Arrowhead Center and
Seed is to really position you
in terms of the work we've done
regarding regional economic
development.
We have over 24 years'
experience in this field and
always of course focusing uh uh
on the state of New Mexico and
we look at also uh the US-Mexico
border. Hence our name, Center
for Border Economic Development
and as part of a Lant
institution, i.e., NMSU, were
deeply embedded in the regional
economic landscape and we think
we are uniquely positioned to
support public and private
sector initiatives, uh, with
data-driven insights and
community focused strategies.
Um,
next
uh, in terms of our track record
again we're all about economic
analysis, so, uh, there's
different, um, examples of the
economic analysis that we do,
whether it's economic impact
reports like the one we did for
Spaceboard America Economic
based studies feasibility
studies for a given projects,
uh, benefit cost analysis as
well as strategic plans and one
of our most recent project in
fact is a strategic plan for the
Santa Teresa, New Mexico
community and
we, uh, focused a lot on the
economic impact of Santa Teresa
industrial Development, uh,
looking into, uh, 5 years into
the future, but you have a list
there of also uh clients and
collaborators we've worked with
a series of cities that you see
there, City of Anthony.
Carls Barrett City of Las
Cruces, Santa Fe, Sunland Park,
uh, which we consider a border
city, uh, I already mentioned
Santa Teresa, but also some
counties, uh, as well as
nonprofits like the Border
Industrial Association and of
course the state of New Mexico.
I also want to point out, you
see there the state government
of Chihuahua, uh, we worked on a
border task force report which
also um
allowed us to collaborate with
the state of Chihuahua, um
the Secretariat or Ministry of
Economic Development there.
So next I'm gonna sort of go
over the the the methodology for
economic impact is to position
us, uh, in terms of how we go
about generating generating an
economic impact analysis, but
the key thing to understand
there, it's on that first
bullet is that we seek to
measure or this type of analysis
seeks to measure.
uh, the impact on a local
economy of any new emphasis on
new economic activity associated
with a new project. So for
Spaceport America its impact we
looked at, uh, the impacts of
the county level for Donatta
County, Sierra County, but also
the spill over into the rest of
the state of New Mexico, so the,
the specific software we use,
it's called Implant and it's
considered a standard tool for
academic and professional
economists
doing this type of analysis and
it's been around for decades so
it's a very solid proven
methodology that not only do we
use it multi uh multiple
entities use it to measure
economic impact and it's based
on economic data sets and
estimates that have been um
subjected to uh review by in
professional publications and
peer reviewed it. I say all this
because again the, the, um
basis and and and and software
that we're using is a proven
tool uh across the industry.
Standard practice in economics
so have a little uh kind of uh
table if you will or figure
where we're showing how we
decompose output for any one of
these activities, uh, so it's,
it's, it's again just to enhance
our understanding of once we do
look at a new economic activity
we're gonna look at the
production and how it's split
into its intermediate inputs but
also what we call the value
added, uh, or what is the value
added, uh, a lot of it through
labor
income, uh, more detailed
explanation of this, of course
we're happy to provide, but we
thought that this particular
picture might prove useful to
understand the methodology.
The next one is especially
important because we uh proceed
with economic impact analysis
via 3 components, and those are
the direct effects of the
activity, the indirect effects
of the activity and the induced
effects of that new economic
activity. The direct effect
stems uh directly from that
change in economic activity, for
instance, in the case of Space
for America, there's tenants and
the tenants are employing
people. That's the new activity
that would not be there but for
Space
ce port America. Tenant
Construction, visitor spending,
all those are the direct effects
indirect effects result from the
direct effects and and results
from additional spending that
occurs when you start to spend
in the construction industry,
business services industry that
having located that new activity
will be prompting you to do and
then the induced effects come
from the direct and indirect
effects that support employees
when they start
spending their wages in the
economy. Again, you assume
spaceport America away or the
tenants away and none of these
sort of chain of effects would
be present. So combined these
three effects will give us what
we call the total economic
impact of the new activity. So
the main idea behind an economic
impact and analysis is that a a
dollar spent in a local
community or location area
results in
more than $1 impact based on the
multiplier effects stemming from
those indirect and induced
effects.
So for um the next one, the, the
impacts for, uh, I already
mentioned the activity we're
looking at what's occurring in
Donana County in Sierra County,
the two involved counties, but,
uh, we're still recognizing the
spillover effects into the rest
of New Mexico so we talk about
this impact study being for the
state as a whole.
So the three primary sources of
the
study itself are from 3 areas
the tenant operations, but we
exclude the real estate
spending, which is captured by
Spaceport America revenues. We
look at out of state visitor
spending and then we look at
specifically what is Spaceport
America, uh, the organization,
uh, doing in terms of the
revenues, but we do exclude the
funding coming from the state of
New Mexico so together these
three components are the so
the sources that give us the new
dollars that enter uh the given
area that we're studying
Donanata County, Sierra County,
and spilling over into the rest
of New Mexico. So the next
series of slides are the data
input, uh, we call them they go
into what's gonna produce the
output, the actual analysis, so
here we have tenant employment,
sort of the trend between 2019
and 2024, um.
you can see the numbers there
that in general they have grown
from our starting point of 2019.
to 2024. The next one in terms
of privately funded construction
at the Spaceboard, um.
by the tenants themselves, so we
have these um numbers in terms
of millions of dollars and they
they occur, of course, depending
on what each individual tenant
might be doing in terms of their
projects on any given year.
So next we look at the visitors
spending we have an estimated
daily spending for visitors by
category, uh, so we introduced
this into the model as well so
we have a daily, uh, sort of
spending number for each one of
those categories that we
introduce and you see they're
the toll at the very end
$328 spent, um, by, uh,
visitors.
uh
in Donana County and Sierra
County.
and then the next one we, we
call this a visitor days by
county. How do we calculate
this? So what we do is we count
the number of visitors that are
being reported by the Spaceport
America folks but also by the
tenants themselves, and we see
the number of days that they are
visiting, right? If they, uh,
stay at a hotel for what number
of days they're gonna be in the
area, so if we have for example
10 visitors who visited, uh, 4
days we count that as
40 visitor days we multiply the
10 visitors by the 4 days, um,
so again that's what those
numbers that you have in this
graph show, but again we see
that uh in general from our
starting point in this case from
2021 to the last year of our
analysis period we see uh an
increase for both Donana County
and Sierra County.
The next input is the revenues
of Spaceport America itself and
we see again that particular
trend.
being in general uh an upward
trend when you look at the
totals at the very, uh, bottom
there. That's again one of the
inputs that we're gonna be
feeding or we did feed into our
analysis, so that's kind of like
what went into the model, so now
for the results, which is the
next series of slides.
So when we introduce those
direct effects, if you will, of
just the tenant employment, what
was happening, uh, in terms of
job generation by the tenants.
We get the the graphs that you
have in front of you of the
direct jobs, but then we add
those layers of the indirect
jobs as well as the induced jobs
to give us that overall total
just stemming from what the
tenants are doing upward trend
if you start from 2019 to uh our
2024 year again
uh, it was already mentioned
that the dip has to do with
activity at Virgin Galactic.
Galactic having been, um, having
moderated somewhat, uh, but
expected to to grow um after
2024.
Next one in terms of the overall
economic impact not just on
unemployment stemming from the
jobs that are being created by
the tenants. uh, we have here
the total output that that
represents and then we have the
breakdown for what is labor
income and value added, but
again you see our starting point
of $50 million for total output
to 220 million by the end of the
study period just coming from
the tenants.
The next, the next, um, item is
for tenant constructions. This
is privately funded construction
that is happening by tenants at
different periods of time within
this six year period.
So again, it's there's a job
impact associated when you
launch a particular construction
project and that's what we're
tracking here. It's not just a
construction jobs per se, but
everything that happens via that
indirect and the induced effect
of that job having been placed
in construction.
So the next one in terms of the
full economic impact of that
tenant construction where you
put all of that, the three
effects together and then you
translate it into output you
have the numbers here.
millions of dollars with the
breakdown of labor and value
added.
So now we look at visitors
spending and we look at the
direct jobs that are coming from
a visitor spendings and the
spending and then the layers of
not just a direct jobs but the
induced and indirect jobs of,
uh, this period 2021, 2024, you
look at the starting point and
the ending point. There's,
there's increases.
Total economic impact of the
visitors spending when you look
at the output um
component when you start to look
at the spending by category that
I mentioned earlier, you look at
the output and we're at the $3
million mark of the total in
2024 having started at $2
million total.
for Spaceport America revenues,
again, there's the same three
components of direct, uh,
indirect and induced jobs. It's
on an upward trend
The economic impact of those
revenues when you look at actual
output, you see that uh the, the
higher line, uh, starting at 8
million, ending at 14 million.
and if you break it down by
county in terms of total jobs we
have this next one, and also
it's Sierra Donana but also the
rest of New Mexico where um
we're able to show uh that in
total we have the 790 jobs a
little bit bit more on that
later.
So value added, I have a slide
as well. Uh, I'm gonna skip to
that one because I think I'm
running out of time and I'll
direct your attention to the
table where I have the
breakdown, which is following
this slide here of the of the
graph uh economic impact results
by county where you do have the
composition of the direct jobs,
total jobs and the output
numbers and you see, of course,
the upward trend, not just in
direct jobs, total jobs, but
then overall
we do see, um
up until that year of the
slowdown and increase uh for
each of the two counties.
The tax revenue impact coming
directly from, um
uh, for a space for in America.
Spaceport America activities
also we start at uh roughly 7
million. We end up in 24
million.
breakdown of the tax revenue
impact, uh, directed at Sierra
County.
Um, you have that particular
slide after the when I'm seeing
up on there on the screen, but
you have it in your in your
handout. The next one does the
same for Donana County.
and um
then skip directly to the next
to the last item of your
handout, which is called Total
Economic Impact
um
which again repeats the numbers
I had shown you before, so I'll
be just
very executive and lead you to
the very, very last slide. What
is the conclusion of all this
study after I.
went through so many numbers in
so many different aspects of the
study that the conclusion is
this there's a definite economic
impact from spacer in America
that is positive for the period
of study 2019, 2024 for the
state of New Mexico. Direct jobs
grew to 313, up from 242 total
jobs 790, uh, from 396. Economic
output almost 24
$0 million up from under $73
million in 2019 labor income the
same story of growth as well as
for taxes, total taxes rose to
20/24 million, up from over just
7 million and New Mexico taxes
paid reached just under 8
million, up from just over 2
million in 2019 and with that I
conclude my uh presentation and
we're open for questions.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members.
Thank you, presenters, um
vice chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for the presentation
today. Um, I think that the
information is, um
something that we as legislators
need to hear, but I also wanna
really stress that I think that
the community and our
constituents in the state needs
to hear this. And so I would
encourage you all to, um, maybe
do a better job of PR within,
um, maybe Sierra County and
Donana County. As you know, um,
this last session there was uh a
bill that came up that was
wanting to, to take revenues
away and taxes away from
spaceport and you know when I
was approached by people,
especially in Donana County, uh,
what I was told was, you know,
we're not getting a benefit for
for this and so and I know that
you've, you've done some of that
work, but I, I would encourage
you to continue that work and
maybe we really do some type of
um
I don't know if you want to run
a billboard, if you want to run
a commercial something because
when we hear the numbers in this
type of presentation, I
definitely see how um
we as a state and especially
those communities that you are
in really is are making an
impact
um
but I don't know that Joe Public
knows that, so I think that
that's important, um, what I
didn't know when we were in the
middle of, of the, you know,
hearing that bill is the
significant impact that the
schools would be affected.
Um, can you talk a little bit
about that? So the, the, the
committee can hear that as well,
please.
Sure, Madam Chair,
Representative Gagos, yeah, a
couple things, yes, we are
trying to ramp up our, our PR on
the economic impact and the
jobs, and we were waiting for
this report, um, as you can see,
it's a very comprehensive report
looking at 6 years. Um, we're
happy to have partners,
especially local partners who
can look at the impacts
objectively, um, and even work
with us on, on how to improve
those numbers over time, you
know, this is, these are folks
who are business folks, so, um,
in terms of
the uh the education component,
the GRT tax that was that the
counties, both counties Sira
County and Donana County voted
on to help fund the spaceport
included 25% of that tax goes to
the to the school districts in
the, in the two counties.
It's up to the counties how to
spend that money, but an example
of, uh, in Las Cruces and
Doniani County is Las Cruces
Public schools fund both the
Challenger Center, which is a
very unique, um, uh, facility
that is related to the space
shuttle Challenger. These were
funded and conceived after the
Challenger accident, um, and New
Mexico is very lucky to have a
Challenger center and, and, uh,
have it in Las Cruces and so
they do
mock, uh, mission control
missions and things, and they
teach uh kids how about space.
They teach them project
management, they, um, get them
interested in STEM. So that's
one of the things that gets
funded in Sierra County, I think
they use their part of the 25%
just in general STEM, um, within
the school district, so it is an
important part of how the GRT
tax is distributed, um, and, and
is necessary I think when you
look in hindsight about how that
tax was created, uh, folks like
Virgin Galactic need workforce.
They need people who are going
to come up from the ranks and
work on their spaceships,
especially when they start
flying twice a week. They have
what they call space wrenches,
um, those are the folks that
keep the spaceship running and
the, and the white knight
running, but we have other
customers too who were a lot of
them are not permanent tenants
yet. They come out for a year or
two, but workforce is a big part
of that and just as an aside, we
a few of us were just in Roswell
and vis visited the eastern New
Mexico University and that I
think it's called
the ANT program there, the
aviation maintenance Technology
program, and I believe Virgin
Galactic has hired people out of
that. So anyway, the STEM
component workforce component is
very important, so I'm glad that
the legislators did learn about
that. There may be some good
that came out of that bill.
so thank you
Thank you and um like I said, I,
I think that, uh, the
misconception misconception is
that, um, Sierra County is maybe
not paying their fair share, but
I think that when we look at it
just in that just with the
education component I mean
Donana has significantly more
schools that are benefiting and
so you know one of the things I
said during committee is that
we've got to be good neighbors
and especially when we're
sharing in um
well uh profits, um, uh,
benefits, uh, we're probably
looking at Enema Houstons is my
guest for some of that
technology. How are you using
NMSU to, to partner as well?
Madam Chair and Representative
McAgos, um, one comment about
the counties is, is when you
look at the counties in a study
like this and you, and you think
about it in terms of uh county
money. I think it's an
unfortunate way to look at it,
really on a per capita basis
when people paying a GRT tax
that we're all paying the same
percent when we go shopping, so
yes, it's accounted for in terms
of the counties and that has
made Donana County look at it,
at least a few people there in a
particular way, but I don't
think that's really the right
way
to look at it. It's, it's just a
per capita tax that the voters
agreed on to help support the
spaceport and the economic
benefits of the spaceport, which
we, I think we're seeing very
positive results and would not
be there if it weren't for the
tax. That's a, that's a choice
for the visitors to make, of
course, whether they, I mean the
uh the public wants to make it.
You want a spaceport or you
don't want a spaceport. It's a,
it's a relatively simple choice,
but, uh, in terms of New Mexico
State, and we are uh working
very hard with New Mexico State,
for example, on Hypersonics they
have hypersonic, uh, program
which we highly recommend, uh,
that you support, um,
hypersonics or something the
United States has gotten behind
in the last few years.
Um, there are a lot of people
looking on what that means in
terms of uh rockets for both for
defense but also in terms of
applications just uh for
civilian applications in terms
of being able to move faster
this one engine I showed is an
example of an engine. I think it
produces something like 30 or
40% more power with a lot fewer
parts and um and this is the
opportunity that I when I bring
up what the other states are
doing, they're, they're Arizona
reconstituted their uh Arizona
Space Commission
Oklahoma's been in the news for
some things they're doing with
airspace. Texas, um, is doing
that. They are all focused on
trying to capture this very
quickly, uh, building
marketplace and we need support
for both workforce and
technology development at our
universities. We need to take
advantage of the laboratories
and that kind of thing. So New
Mexico State is a big part of
that. UNM is a big part of it.
New Mexico Tech is a big part of
it, and we've also been, uh,
developing partnerships even
with UTEP, um, as they have a
very good aerospace program and
are deeply
involved in aerospace. So
Thank you. And once again, and
as you know, I'm very
supportive, uh, plan to continue
that, uh, would just encourage
you to run that big PR program.
So, uh, you can gather more
support because we, uh, we don't
want to see any more challenges
like that, um, but I appreciate
that the job you're doing and I
think this report is um a way
of, of showing the positive
impact that you're making. So
thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Representative. We
have Representative Little, then
Block, then Chavis, then
Shearer, and we have about 8
minutes left, so I'm gonna ask
that we get straight to our
questions and are quick with our
answers. Representative Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you so much for the
presentation. I have two quick
questions, I hope that they are
quick. Um, in the, uh,
presentation, um, you made
regarding the economic benefits
you were discussing the tenant
employment.
um,
and I
don't remember what page they're
on, but I did note that it is,
uh, the job impact on tenant
employment and also, um, so my
question and on the uh visitor
spending, which is a couple
pages behind that, um.
and it's, uh, I'm very I'm happy
to see what the um the
opportunity that has come about.
Uh, what I'm curious about and
if, uh, I'm wondering if you
might be able to go deeper to
see if you can tell, tell me,
Madam Chair, uh, tell us what
the ratio of New Mexico of
employees from New Mexico are as
opposed to, uh, compared to that
of out of state workers. If you
don't have that information now,
that's fine, but I'm wondering
if that information is
available.
or for the tenant employment's a
majority of our respondents
indicated Donana in Sierra
County exclusively.
so we do ask that question where
do your employees reside?
and it's either Donana County or
Sierra County. We, we go by the
uh respondents who did um submit
their their survey, um, if we're
missing, uh, one of those
responses were some employees
might be living outside of the
state then it didn't make it to
the study because 100% of the
respondents when asked that
question, it was either Donana
or Sierra.
and, and if I could add, um, the
out of state employees because
of course all these most of
these companies have out of
state employees, but when they
come to New Mexico, that would
be captured in visitor days.
Um, so these are, these are the
people who are residing in New
Mexico that we're talking about
we talk about employees, um, uh,
10 employees.
that was the second component of
your question, visitor days, can
we distinguish, right? They're
out of state visitors. We are
capturing the out of state sort
of component and then for the
actual employees, they're
reciting in one of those two
counties.
Thank you. That's good to know.
Um, I think I might have a
follow-up question after it, but
we can do that later, uh, um, of
offline, um, my second question
is actually it's to uh bring to
your attention as I was looking
through your outreach and I
think, um, uh, you've begun, uh,
the outreach to the local
uh schools and education, higher
education institutions is, um,
for having started in, well,
this last year I see the report
is on 2025, but I wanted to
bring to your attention if
you're not already aware of a uh
charter school in my district
and I do want to promote them,
uh, Madam Chair, it is Aviation
Academy, which is in uh
northwest Albuquerque. It is in
an institution that's been
established since 2012. There,
those students actually have the
opportunity for hands-on, um,
opportunities to earn their
private pilot's certificates.
They actually fly real planes,
and it's a nationally recognized
aeronautics program. The other,
I think, important piece to
highlight there in that
institution in that school is
that they also have the opport
students have the opportunity,
Madam Chair, to,
uh, take a comprehensive drain
drone flight course, um, and,
uh, helping them to work, uh,
hands on again with uh unmanned
aircraft. So, um, their website
is, and I'm just gonna stay for
that for the record is ABQ
aviation.com.
um
I do have some contact
information for them, but, uh,
to facilitate that a little
quicker. That might be an easy
way to to go. So thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Block
Thank you, Madam Chair. I just
want to, uh, touch with the vice
said and what, uh,
Representative Little said
because the charter school, um,
on the drones, they actually get
their drone, uh, pilot license,
uh, which is, which is pretty
cool as well as their private
pilot license up there. It's a
great school, so please reach
out to them.
um
I want to talk about what the
vice said on an on an issue
regarding your story
I saw in here where you guys uh
had some work with Sandia. Uh,
I'm sorry, uh, Los Alamos, but I
didn't see Sandia. Did I, did I
miss that? Do you work with
Sandia, but you worked with Los
Alamos
I, I would imagine that's
probably one of those county
jobs that you probably want to
touch upon. The reason I say
that is you don't want to really
focus at the legislature just on
a couple of counties. You want
to get some other counties that
have some skin in the game.
and make sure you talk about
that because um Sandia's got a,
a lot of opportunity as well,
and, um, if you can, you know,
pick off Los Alamos, Sandoval,
and Bernalillo. Uh, that really
helps your, your story a lot.
Uh, that being said,
I've been stationed at
Vandenberg in Cape Canaveral as
an Air Force officer doing titan
space lift as, as you know. So
this is really important to me.
um,
real quick, do you guys have a
lot of, uh, Madam Chair, do you
have a lot of issues with range
scheduling?
Madam Chair, and Senator Block
Guest, actually we do.
Madam Chair,
and sir, real quick, um, what
other
mitigations do you have to get
around some of the uh Wiser uh
range restrictions.
So Madam Chair, the, you know,
we consider White Cha's partners
and, and they, they're are
trying to consider us partners,
um, but they're, uh, you know,
they take priority now because
of the 1984 Space Launch Act
and, and the amendments to that
act, they're required to support
us in terms of what's called
excess capacity for launch on
operations, but when it comes to
things like UABs and some of our
other activities that use the
airspace, um, those would be
considered a little bit of a
lower priority. Um, we are going
to be meeting
soon with Colonel Morgan, the,
the base commander, and we're
going to talk about those, uh,
things and how to make sure that
we're good neighbors and we can
continue growing as a spaceport
because we're we're going to
continue to have more and more
activities. Thank you, sir.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I hope
you work with uh Air Force
Research Lab as well at Kirtland
Air Force Base, uh, missile
defense agency at Kirtland Air
Force Base as well, because
those are jobs in Bernna Leo
County that I think, uh, would,
would benefit not just obviously
them but uh your organization as
well, um,
real quick, Madam Chair, sir,
you said you had 11, um, space
lights in the space where all
those 11 above the Carmen line.
Madam Chair and Senator Blockne,
the, um, the definition of space
by NASA and the Air Force is
above 150 miles, and so those
were all about 50 miles, but I
don't believe the Virgin Galacti
vehicle has gone above the so
none of the 11 flights were
above the standard by NASA. The
international standard, no, the
NASA standard is still 50 miles.
The American standard, 100
kilometers, it's about 62, isn't
it? Well, 50 miles is what got
the astronaut wings in the past,
um, but, um, the, yeah, but
not, not above uh the Carmen
line, no, no, sir, thank you,
um, Madam Chair, lastly, tell me
about uh in your vertical
launches, um, pretty familiar
with refurbishment issues, uh,
especially working at Slick 40
and 41 at the Cape. Um, what,
what are your, uh, issues with,
um, refurbishment and, uh, and
how does that affect your
schedule with the refurb
activities.
So, uh, Madam Chair, so of
course the Spaceport Authority
doesn't actually touch the
vehicles. We don't work on them,
uh, you know, we're, we're,
we're the airport for the
vendors. So in terms of
refurbishment, Virgin Galactic
is these two new vehicles are
designed to be able to refly
within about 3 days, um, but
our, our goal is orbital launch
with other customers that will
come out of the vertical launch
area, and that's where I
mentioned in my editorial and um
where we're looking for federal
funds, we're looking for federal
strategy on how to expand
beyond Vandenberg and Cape
Canaveral and Wallops. Thank
you, Madam Cha Yeah. I mean,
Vandenberg is just strictly
polar, uh, launches out, out of
there versus the Cape, a little
bit different, um, lastly, Madam
Chair, and sir, some of, some of
the slides, uh, the trends, I, I
was a little little concerned
about it. I'd like to talk to
you about those offline on, on
the trends of where they're
going cause I, I'd like to see
them going in the opposite
direction, um, because this is a
national asset as far as I'm
concerned, spaceport. And when
you're talking the hy
per son ic s and maneuverable
RVs. You're right, we're way
behind China, way behind China,
and that's a threat to our
country and uh we're going to
need you and uh need our
industry partners to, um, make
up that hypersonic gap that's
currently, uh, out there right
now. So please come see me
offline to talk about some of
the trends that I'm I'm not
really happy with, but, um, we
got to turn that around. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, um, Ms. Vargas, on
the two last slides in your
presentation. I just wanted to
um verify and this is great data
and information. Um, it looks
like the jobs have increased
significantly to almost 800. I
just wanna verify or clarify
that these are full-time jobs.
They're not part-time or here in
their positions. So yeah, they
are full time, uh, jobs manager
and representative.
Thank you. And, and when you get
access to the report which is
being released today, we're
gonna be publicizing it all that
is explained. It's in the finer
detail and whatnot so that there
is no doubt of the nature of the
jobs that are being created.
Perfect that's all the questions
I have. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative Royal
Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you very much, as you
know, throughout the years I've
expressed, I'm a big fan of the
spaceport. I know it's been a
difficult haul, um, but you're
making progress and I've seen
the, the progress and thank you
if you remember I'm the one that
was pushing for this kind of
detail to be part of the PR
effort that the vice chair
talked about. This is extremely
important. We not only have to
do a PR at the local level,
county level, state level, but
we have to do it amongst
ourselves
uh,
as legislators if we're going to
uh be uh monitoring this and
reporting back to our taxpayers,
so going to that question on the
last page conclusion, um
the econo the third item
economic output which equal to
239.8 million. Um, when do we
expect to realize a return on
investment when do the taxpayers
begin to realize their return on
investment. That's one part of
the question, and what
percentage of the um economic
output is and and maybe you
might have already answered this
related to out of state sources
versus
in-state and then I know you
said that there's a further
detailed report coming out
today. So the final tax related
question is with the the um
state tax revenue generated in
2024. How long before the annual
tax returns alone cover the
general operating uh fund of
appropriations so there are 3
related interrelated questions.
if you have the information and
can answer it now please answer
what you can answer and then let
me know how we can um get the
other answers or if the report
today will address those.
Yes
Uh, Madam Chair, and, uh,
Representative Caballero, um,
always appreciate your support.
Very good questions. I'm just
gonna preface real quick to say
that one of the problems for the
spaceport in terms of reporting
is, uh, you know, as a
legislators, taxpayers, people
want different things out of the
spaceport, right? Some people
want us to be revenue neutral,
um, some want jobs. Um, one of
the things we've really been
focusing hard on over the last
few years is building the
regional economy in terms of
Space Valley and turning us into
a
catalyst for the whole area. So
some of those things, uh, don't
produce enough, you know,
immediately produce revenue, or
the revenue might be counted in
terms of extra jobs in
Albuquerque or the region, so I
just want to preface that
answering your question depends
on, you know, what the real,
what the real question is, what
people want, um, but, um, in, in
terms of the payback, I think
those are things we can look at.
We have not the economic impact
report and and unless Dr. Vargas
wants the answers
is kind of fresh off the press.
So whether we now try and
compare that to see, well, is it
paying back the original capital
improvement as a paying back the
operating cost for the
spaceport. I think those are
more decisions you all have to
make, whether you think it's a
payback, but, um, I agree we're
making progress. I don't know if
you want to add anything
for the report, uh, Madam Chair
and Representative for the
actual report that we are
presenting today, we don't have
that estimation. It's an
excellent question, but we would
have to dig a little bit more to
try and do those comparisons and
can, you know, continue the,
the, the, the conversation
discussion to try and dimension
that, but having said that, um,
if, if we just
look at the three sources that I
mentioned in the study in terms
of how we produce this impact
for that kind of payback, um.
that your question is racing, we
will have to do a broader
analysis beyond those three main
sources, so it would involve
kind of like another layer of
analysis to be able to answer
that, but with the data we have
right now, we're we don't have
the capability to answer that.
Thank you Macellent question.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair, and thank you very much.
It would help with the PR
effort, uh, on a broader scale,
so I would encourage that we add
that other layer as much as we
can and differentiate based on
what Mr. McLaughlin mentioned,
um, the differences if you can
chart it out that way because
there are variances that are
important for us to look at.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Representative
Montoya to close this out.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
actually, uh, I'm very
appreciative that, uh,
Representative just asked those
questions because I think we
want those answers
So if we, we can't have them
today, that's understandable,
but
um, by the session I think
that's
definitely a question we'd like
to have answered is, uh, we've
invested a lot so far, uh, for
us to have to be concerned with
the PR of this in our
communities is because we're
being asked these questions. So
if you can provide those
answers, that'd be great.
Um, the answer might be that
it's just not
going to give us a return on
investment. If that's the
answer, that's the answer.
But to that, um, Madam Chair, I,
I guess my question is, right
now with the space, uh, launches
that are taking place in just a
massive amount
Um, I, I'm not sure if, uh
the government's not really
meant to compete in the private
sector.
And I'm wondering if now might
be a time for us to consider
is, is this a is this, is it
viable for us to
sell the spaceport and basically
say we
have we've, we've, we're done
investing taxpayer dollars. Um,
it
obviously is located in a great
location, uh, with, uh, right
next to the
uh missile range
um
in New Mexico where we.
along with uh the federal
government, we've had a fairly
good partnership, um, is this a
time for us to consider
selling, even at a cut rate if,
if we were, if you look at where
Elon Musk has gone into Texas.
They've built an entire
community out in the desert
and it's been all private
investment dollars. I, I, I
think
and maybe this is for maybe not
a question for the
for the panel, but for the
members of, of this committee.
that might be something we might
consider. Is this have, is this
a marketable
property? Is the same marketable
uh project site where we could
let's say offload what's been
our investment and if, uh, if
someone were to come in and
develop it the way that it's
space
uh, exploration has been
developed recently
We could still benefit from the
jobs, economic
uh, prosperity in those
communities, but stop asking the
taxpayer to subsidize something,
um, because I'm, I'm just not
sure
once again government
is not really good at turning a
profit in anything. The best
thing we do is in the military,
and that's where we destroy
things.
and uh I, I think that's what
government does best, um, so
thank you, Madam Chair.
That's a heck of a zinger.
Thank you, Representative
Montoya, and thank you
presenters, um, for this great
information and for the progress
that Spaceport America is making
and the information that we're
collecting on, on that. I do
from the presentation feel like
we are just getting started and
this investment is starting to
pay off. So thank you for being
here and thank you for
presenting this morning. Our
last presentation committee is
going to be from Alex Horowitz,
project director.
for housing Policy at the Pew
Charitable Trusts on zoning and
housing affordability. This
presentation will be by Zoom and
our folks will let us know when
we are all set up.
Alex, are you there and can you
hear us?
Hi, glad to be with you. Yes, I
can hear you loud and clear.
Wonderful. Welcome. Thank you
for being here. So we're gonna
ask you to um go ahead and get
started. Introduce yourself. We
have a stop, a hard stop at 11
a.m., Alex, which I know isn't a
lot of time, but if you could
help us get back on track, that
would be wonderful. And thank
you to, um, Senator Maestas for
helping to bring this
presentation to fruition.
OK, terrific. Glad to be with
you. I'm at the Pew Charitable
Trust's Pews and nonprofit,
nonpartisan organization that
does work in the public
interest. I work on the housing
shortage especially. So the
availability and affordability
of housing. I have a a bunch of
content, so I'm going to move
pretty fast this morning. I hope
we can have a few minutes at the
end for questions also, but
you've got my slides, so we've
got the content there, and my
contact information, so feel
free to follow up.
if there's material that I don't
cover that you would like to
discuss.
and
uh we also have uh a lot more
material, including some of New
Mexico that is not in uh today's
presentation. So thanks to the,
to the chair and committee and
glad to be with you. Um, I trust
that you can see my screen and
I'm gonna go ahead and fly
through.
Housing costs have never been
higher, both to buy or to rent.
Used to be about 3 years. They
haven't come to buy a home in
the US on average, now it's over
5.
Half of all renters are spending
30% or more of income on rent,
27% of all renters are spending
50% more of income on rent. The
New Mexico figures tracked the
US exactly on both of those, US
household size is at an all-time
low. New Mexico's average
household size is even smaller.
63% of US households have one or
two people. New Mexico, that
figures 67%. So the housing we
have is not a great match for
how our population is living,
because most of our housing
stock is single family detached,
but most of our households are
small
and people tend to value
location and lower maintenance
over larger homes farther from
the places they go every day,
but our zoning dictates that
homes are, are larger on larger
plots of land, farther from the
places we go every day by
restricting what can be built,
your commerce, near jobs, your
schools, near transit. The
housing shortage in the US is
estimated at 4 to 7 million
homes, but if it's not in that
range, it's over 7 million, not
under 4 million. Why are rents
rising so fast
Cause there aren't enough homes.
And when the availability rate
for housing goes down, rents go
up.
It works just the opposite. In
the opposite directions from
each other
when there are lots of homes,
affordability improves when
there aren't enough, it gets
worse. We see that consistently
across states, across cities,
and throughout the country. So,
New Mexico, housing inventory
fell in half from 2018 to 2024,
and that explains why the median
cost of a home rose so much.
From 1,863,002,000. Over that
time period, because New Mexico
was in a consistent sellers
' s market, where they just
weren't enough homes. Now,
rental housing works the same
way as housing to buy, and when
there aren't enough rentals
available, that's a landlord's
market. When there are lots of
rentals, that's a tenant's
market. So, over the seven-year
time period, rents rose 29% in
the US.
which is a lot. Affordability
was getting worse, but in New
Mexico, rents rose 58% during
this time period. Albuquerque,
right on the mark with the rest
of the state, Santa Fe even
faster. So, what's going on?
There weren't enough homes,
rents go up for everybody,
housing costs go up for
everybody. Homeownership gets
farther out of reach, but it
doesn't affect everyone in the
same way. Low income renters are
hurt the most by the housing
shortage, cause when there
aren't enough homes,
high income residents tend to
push into middle and income
areas to find something they can
afford. Middle income residents
tend to push into low income
areas to find something they can
afford. Low income residents
nowhere to go. So the housing
shortage is damaging. It drives
up costs for everyone, but it's
regressive. It hurts low-income
households the most, because
housing works like an escalator,
and when there's not enough of
it, that escalator is going down
and everyone piles up at the
bottom.
When there is enough housing
available,
different story, that escalator
is moving up and people get
better options. We can see this
by looking at places that made
it easier to build. They
reformed their zoning codes,
especially, and their land use
rules
and Minneapolis, Minnesota, New
Rochelle, New York, Portland,
Oregon, Tysons, Virginia are 4
examples right here. All of them
removed regulatory barriers, and
once they did, more housing came
online, especially apartments in
prime locations near jobs, near
commerce, near transit, near the
places that people go regularly.
Once they did that, they all
started producing housing at
more than double the rate of the
US, and while rents were going
up 30% in the US
during this time period, rents
rose between 0 and 5% total over
this six-year stretch.
Rents in Minneapolis didn't go
up at all during this time
period, because they, they made
it so easy to build. Well
New Mexico is a counterpoint.
New Mexico has been producing
housing at a below average rate.
compared to other states, and
during this time period, New
Mexico only added 2.9% to its
housing stock, so rents rose
60%. Doesn't take that many
people moving in from California
to take up all of the available
homes in New Mexico, if more
aren't being built.
Compare that to Houston. Compare
that to Minneapolis, cities that
made it easy to build. They were
producing housing
at well over triple the rate of
New Mexico, and you can see that
their rent growth was much, much
lower, and incomes kept rising.
Minneapolis rents real rents,
inflation adjusted are down 25%.
Since the start of 2017, cause
they've made it so easy to
build. Austin, Texas.
rents are down 25%. Inflation
adjusted in the last three
years. Houston, real rents have
been falling. So
what's the consequence of not
building enough housing and
having the sorts of regulatory
barriers that New Mexico
jurisdictions do, not enough
homes getting produced, and that
means rents, rise quickly.
Homelessness tracks rents very,
very closely. Rents are an
excellent predictor of
homelessness levels. Across
cities, across counties, across
states. So, no surprise, because
rents were rising twice as fast
in New Mexico as in the rest of
the US homelessness.
rose twice as fast in New
Mexico, as in the rest of the
US. Highly predictable, even
though homelessness has been
falling.
In jurisdictions that have made
it easy to build housing and
produced a lot. Here are 6 metro
areas that added a lot of
housing in 2023. A lot of this
pencil that interest rates were
low.
And once they did, Rentz came
down on all of them. But what's
interesting is Rens came down
the most
in older naturally affordable
homes, known as Class C. So we
know that when there's not
enough housing, it hurts low
income neighborhoods the most,
hurts low income residents the
most. When there is enough
housing, it helps low income
residents the most, because by
removing those regulatory
barriers we're opening the door
to more homes. There can be
enough for everyone.
Allowing enough housing reduces
displacement as well. These are
the largest four cities in the
US.
3 of them have been losing black
residents. They're the 3 that
don't build enough homes.
The one that's been gaining
black residents is Houston.
Houston also added the most
Hispanic residents during this
time period, because housing
scarcity forces competition.
and the residents who have the
most resources, the most money,
can pay the most
when, when there aren't enough
homes, but if they're enough for
everybody, different story, and
that reduces competition for
each available home, landlords
compete for tenants instead, and
you have more of a buyer's
market on the homeownership
side.
So how did Minneapolis do this?
They eliminated their parking
minimums.
and they made it, they allowed
automatic buy right permitting
for apartments on corridors.
That's the single most effective
change policy change there is.
Once they were producing
housing, it tripled the rate of
the rest of Minnesota, rents
held steady there while they
rose in the rest of the state.
Homelessness dropped in
Minneapolis while it rose in the
rest of the state. So, this used
to be a local issue, not
anymore. The debate is moving to
the state level. 2011 to 2016,
all states combined passed an
average of one law a year to
allow more homes. 27 and 2022,
all states combined, passed 18
laws a year on average to allow
more homes.
2023 and 2024, 48 laws a year to
allow more homes. 2025, we're
already at more than 80 laws
that have been passed to allow
more homes. So what are they
doing? Well, I mentioned
allowing apartments on
commercially zoned land is the
single most effective policy
change there is.
Montana passed a law to do that
in 2023.
They expanded it this session.
California passed one in 2022.
Florida passed one in 2023.
Hawaii, Colorado last year,
Texas this year. This is
probably the most important
policy change available. As a
tool, because it can add a lot
of homes, and it allows them
where people go every day, your
transit, near jobs, near
commerce, and it also is highly
popular in part because it does
not uh con
cent rate new housing on single
family blocks. It does so on
corridors. What about Kasita or
ADUs. 18 states have passed laws
to allow those. That means a
property owner can add a
basement apartment, a backyard
apartment, a garage apartment, a
little secondary home
rent it out or use it as needed,
and that's not disruptive. It
fits in with the fabric of the
neighborhood, but it's a good
and fairly inexpensive way to
add more housing. 18 states have
done so, including Arizona and
Colorado recently.
States are taking other steps
too, to allow third-party
reviews and inspections to speed
up permitting, limiting
environmental review, because
allowing housing in already
developed areas extremely
environmentally friendly,
simplifying the process and
shortening timelines to build
and enacting building code
reforms to lower the cost of
constructing housing. Office to
residential conversions are a
highly promising way to allow
more housing or building
co-living of any sort, sort of
dorm style
ho us ing That means smaller
rooms. This is an example of 150
square foot unit, but this
doesn't include the kitchen and
bathroom or living areas, which
are shared. When people live in
less space, it's more energy
efficient, it's more water
efficient, but most importantly,
it means more homes can be
created and they cost much less.
Here's a micro unit from a new
study that we just released,
looking at Albuquerque and Santa
Fe. We published this last week.
It's like a college dorm room
where everyone has a large
single, kind of upscale, uh,
micro unit, but this is
something that is
it is cozy, 150, 160 square
feet, but also safe, clean, and
often enough space for a single
person.
Here's an example of a floor
plan for a vacant office
building in Albuquerque that
could be converted easily into
co-living, dorm style housing
with individual shower rooms and
bathrooms in the middle that are
that are shared, laundry rooms,
kitchens, living space. You can
fit about 3 times as many homes
this way, as you can with
regular apartments, and the cost
per unit is dramatically lower.
Here's one in from Santa Fe,
hypothetically, that is was
drawn by the architecture firm
Gensler. This would be a new
build model, but to have much
smaller homes, and these could
be constructed at a much lower
price point than apartments or
certainly single family houses,
that means dollars go a lot
further, including subsidy
dollars
but they also could be
constructed much less
expensively, while also reducing
transportation costs by letting
people live near jobs, near
stores, near commerce, and that
means rents can be lower cause
the units are smaller
and the construction costs are
lower. That $800 in Santa Fe,
just over half the median rent.
and about 700 in Albuquerque.
This means subsidy dollars could
go much further. If you had $10
million in subsidies in
Albuquerque that could produce
about 150 studio apartments,
154, um, sorry, 43 studio
apartments or 154 co-living
units. So subsidy dollars could
be stretched more than 3 times
as far. We're seeing states pass
laws to make
office to residential
conversions easier and also to
make it easier to build micro
units. Here are 3 from Texas,
Hawaii, and Washington, from
this session and last that have
done that.
Overall, more housing is
popular, even though you
wouldn't always know it, to go
to a community meeting, but the
community overall and the public
overall is very favorable toward
allowing more homes, and that's
true across party lines, whether
we're talking about Republicans,
independents, or Democrats. My
contact info is here, the QR
code will take you to of our
research, and I hope we can
slide in a couple of questions,
but glad to do follow up also on
my email address is there.
Thank you so much for that,
Alex. First up, we have Senator
Maestas. Thank you so much,
Madam Chair, and thank you for
the presentation, uh, organizing
the presentation rather and and
for your work, uh, Mr. Horowitz,
and thank you for your interest
in Albuquerque and New Mexico,
uh, just a quick comment because
I know the time is short.
Usually as policymakers, we, you
know, we make assumptions, we do
predictions as to what the bill
will do, what's going to happen,
and there's, there's usually
disagreements with regards to
that. These initiatives, there
is no disagreement. It is
essentially gu
ar an te ed that this will in
fact create more housing more
affordable housing in the places
that these laws are implemented
because what we have to kind of
look at is the unintended
consequences of our zoning laws.
They're well intended. We, we
want them to create this perfect
neighborhood, this perfect
environment, but we have to
acknowledge as policymakers
though the stark consequences,
the grave consequences and the
horribly detrimental
consequences, uh, that, that
the lack of housing and
homelessness cause on people,
so, um, so I think uh it's time
to just have a serious
conversation at the state level.
I'm hoping that a lot of these
initiatives will be on the call.
I'm confident that they will,
uh, Mr. Horwitz did, uh,
published a study that was, uh,
in January which prompted me to
do a handful of bills, uh, on
the Senate side they didn't,
they didn't get a hearing
because
because, uh, Spack is so
horribly
mismanaged and inefficient, but,
but I look forward to the
debates and I thank you, Madam
Chair, uh, for that and, and Mr.
Horwitz, could you explain that?
Could you reiterate how does the
criticism is, well, more housing
doesn't solve the pro all the
problems involved in
homelessness, but could you
reiterate on how low income
households benefit the most.
Absolutely. So we see that when
there are enough homes
available, that the benefits are
largest to low-income
households, cause it takes the
pressure off the housing stock.
They don't have to compete for
their own homes. With middle
income residents with high
income residents, because the
escalator is moving up, it's not
moving down. In places that have
made these changes, the policies
have worked as intended. That's
true whether it's Houston,
whether it's Raleigh, North
Carolina.
Austin, Texas, New Rochelle, New
York, uh, Minneapolis is, is
poster child. And so we're
seeing bipartisan laws pass
through states to replicate
those successes in cities, rents
are already falling in Montana.
Texas passed 7 strong bipartisan
laws this session. Colorado and
Arizona did so last year, and
then Arizona doubled down and
passed 3 more of this session.
We know these laws work as
intended because we've got the
data from cities that have done
it.
Thank you, and I noticed that
that in states of California and
Washington, two of the most
liberal states in the country
passed limited environmental
reviews and limited lawsuits,
uh, and also third party reviews
zoning zoning if in fact the
builders have crossed the T's
and dotted the I's, it should
not be a political decision.
It should be a legal decision as
to whether or not uh they've
done what's required by the
local ordinances. But anyway,
thank you, Madam Chair, thank
you members.
Thank you, Senator Leader
Armstrong. Thank you, uh, Madam
Chair, and thank you for your
presentation. Um, I, I noticed I
looked up the date and it, and
it looks like everything started
rising after COVID. And so, uh,
you know, when you couldn't
evict someone if you owned a
rental, where there was a lot
of, of things put in place that
actually were detrimental to the
people who were actually
purchasing and paying for these,
uh, uh, rentals, uh, if you were
the owner of the rental
and renting it out. So that I
think that probably is what
really made it rise. Um, and
then legislation that comes back
every year for rent control.
That comes back every year. So
why would anyone build
rentals when rent control comes
up every single year. Uh, you
would have a limit, limited
income, uh, the expense to build
right now is really, really
high, and
mandates, um, like I've heard in
Bernelio County, uh, or in the
city of Albuquerque where you
have to have a refrigerated air
unit in every rental
uh, just different things like
that adds to actual cost of why
would I build more rentals? Why
would I even own a rental? Um
have you done any comparisons to
the regulations here in New
Mexico compared to the markets
that have actually done a lot of
this, uh, infrastructure in all
of these other states. Have we,
have you done an actual
comparison to the regulations to
actually know which specific
regulations or permitting or
whatever it is that, that
prohibits us or confines us from
doing this kind of investment.
Yes, thank you for the question
And you're right. So
jurisdictions that have rent
control are not those that have
improved affordability the most.
The ones that have improved
affordability the most are those
that have made it easiest to
build. And remove the most
regulatory barriers. So when
we're looking at New Mexico
jurisdictions, we generally see
discretionary permitting. That
means that apartments are not
allowed, as a matter of right.
New Mexico's building codes have
not been modernized. Other
states are modernizing their
building codes to reduce
construction costs in a way that
doesn't compromise safety.
The zoning is still quite
restrictive, so commercial land
is usually not zoned for for
residential use, for apartments,
and so that combination
of restrictive zoning codes
which come from the localities,
restrictive permitting, which
comes from the localities, and
restricted building codes which
come from the state and then and
are adapted by localities is
what is causing the shortage,
when rents rise 60%, builders
want to build because they can
make more money. So if they're
not after a 60% rent increase,
that's indicative of regulatory
barriers that are getting in the
way of adding homes.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for that. I, I, uh, I, I
agree with you on that. Uh, one
other thing that, that everyone
in the room may not be aware of
is that, that we need tax
reform.
uh, you know, we charge tax on
the labor that is used to build
these units.
and so it's an additional cost,
um, where we, we could actually
be, uh
you know, in a better place to
be able to build. So, uh,
interesting information, look
forward to seeing what, uh,
moves forward and thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Chavez.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you so much for this
presentation. I think we all are
aware that there is a need for
housing and affordable housing.
I just had some quick questions
and really want an example of
some of the legislation that
you're saying is needed because
just in my district alone, which
is the far northeast in
Albuquerque. I think there's 4
apartments that have gone up
just in the last 2 years alone,
where was normally commercial
commercial
building or, or maybe housing,
and then in Albuquerque, we did
add or pass um the zoning for
Casitas that was just within the
last year or so, um, so my
question is, um, where would the
zoning need to change as far as
um the office space to
residential in one of these
slides, so, um, I'm thinking
that large bank building on
Central and San Mateo, which I
think they're even
stating that that could be
housing, especially affordable
housing, do we really need
zoning changes or is that
already allowed in that specific
building itself.
Thank you. I can't speak to that
building cause I sure don't know
the answer. But when, uh, land
is zoned commercial or is zoned
office. It's frequently not a
buy right conversion into a
residential use.
And even if it is, they're often
other barriers that get in the
way, such as parking mandates
is, is the biggest. Minimum unit
size can be another and a
requirement for operable windows
can, uh, really make the
economics of the project not
work anymore, because modern
office buildings are have
usually HEPA filters, um, air
conditioning, heat, and don't
have operable windows. So we see
that it's a mix of parking
mandates, uh, by right zoning.
and building codes that can get
in the way, but even the the
zoning use sometimes is for full
sized apartments and not for
dorm style apartments, which
have the lowest rents and make
the most economic sense for
convergence frequently.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for that. So I guess I'll
just
look into this for the
buy rate zoning that you set in
minimal size, that dorm size
that that you showed on the
picture is very, very small, but
I think, um, you know, apartment
style would be sufficient in in
the building that I'm, I'm
thinking specifically and then I
know there's
some discussions or um I don't
know, topics that we've
discussed for the state
fairgrounds currently, and
they've talked about putting,
um, affordable housing, so I
guess that'd be I'd be
interested in looking at that,
but thank you so much. Thank
you. Um, I'd like to wrap us by
11:15, which gives us a few more
minutes, committee, and we have
Representative Cullen Little and
Montoya. Uh, thank you, Madam
Chair, and I'll make this uh uh
pretty quickly, um, so I've been
in real estate for 30 years.
and um this is a bit more
complex than just this, um, so
yes, the Representative
Armstrong is very correct that
the prices rose during COVID,
and so we saw the increase just
go up dramatically. I also had a
rental property before in
Colorado and is very difficult
as a landlord to manage these
properties, especially out of
state, um, and there, I can go
into that forever. So I, I'll
make this quick. I also have
young
adult that is paying really high
rental prices right now, but I
will say that I am not for
making a state mandate on how
we're going to be doing this.
This goes to local misidalities
we have, they have their own
local zoning and planning
departments and that fits within
their um own communities and
what their communities want. Um,
when I was at NCSL, there was a
lot of surveys that I ended up
taking in reference to this, and
I could say that in my district
I really have a concern as if
mandating statewide of what our
local cities have to do with
their zoning and planning.
There's also, if you're looking
at the, the cause and effect and
I'm OK with corporations buying
up a lot of things. However,
corporations bought a lot of
these rental properties, and
they were paying cash, so we
were seeing that local buyers
were unable to outbid these
corporations.
So there's a lot to this, so I
say that if we are if you're
looking at, looking at this as a
statewide you have to be very
careful of the way that you're
doing this and how you're going
to be overstepping your local
municipalities when you're
trying to make the statewide,
um, restrictions or to
unregulate some of these things.
So thank you.
Thank you, Representative Little
Thank you. uh, thank you, Madam
Chair. I've got several
questions, but I'm gonna limit
them to 2,
um, thank you for the
presentation. My question is,
uh, on the inventory that went
to half of the 2018 level, I
understand, we all understand
that COVID had something to do
with this, but what were the
other reasons for the
uh for the number, the sheer
drop off of only getting half,
half of the housing numbers were
available.
Sure. Thanks, great question.
Well, I should flag it at this
point. New Mexico is the only
state in the Southwest that has
not passed state laws to allow
more homes. So
do you want to kind of put this
in context. I realized that some
of this, you know, seems new,
um, and the idea of states being
involved in this kind of policy
is new, but right, New Mexico is
the only state in the southwest
that has not passed any of these
laws. To make it easier to
build, and New Mexico's low rate
of housing production is the
main reason why inventory has
declined.
Uh, when a state is only
producing, um, adding a little
more than 0.5% a year to to its
housing stock, this is likely to
happen where inventory declines
but I think a main reason is
also that California um has not
been building much housing
either. And so we see a major
influx of residents out of
California into other western
states who have been pushed out
of that state by their
restrictive zoning codes and
restrictive building codes and
difficult permitting.
they've started to pass some
recent reforms to alleviate
that, but, uh, the effects are
very large of the fact that
California hasn't built homes
and has gotten so expensive.
So that's a main reason for the
inventory decline is an influx
of residents into the state and
the very low level of housing
production during this time. Um,
where New Mexico hasn't passed
the sorts of reforms that we're
seeing in uh Arizona, Colorado,
Utah, uh, Texas, even Nevada
now, and some new ones in
California.
um,
changing those laws, um, let me
start this by saying that um
where I grew up in the Pueblo of
San Felipe. A lot of us that
travel I-25 going back and forth
to Albuquerque and Santa Fe, see
a lot of the housing that has
been uh is being built in the
community to accommodate those
that did these are first time
homeowners as well. So what I
know of what I'm aware of in
those homes being built, those
are not luxury homes.
Those are homes solid homes for
people who are working families,
uh, I will say who have access
to a solid, very well built home
but with the uh
as I see it, the, uh, the very
basic necessities and some
embellishments that really make
it to be a not a very nice home.
After that, individuals may
choose to add on, make it even
better, or so on. Uh, and make
improvements to, um, to, uh,
improve their homes.
So
I'm wondering, do you have a
suggestion on how to ensure we
all agree that we need more
homes, but one of the things
that I see in my district is
that these are not, these homes
are luxury homes. These homes
are being targeted to
individuals that have the means
to purchase $4,500,000 homes.
That is not even me.
I couldn't do that if I wanted
to.
So do you have some suggestions
on how we might be, how states
have tried to grapple with
providing
um
how to ensure providing more
homes that are available to
first-time homebuyers, and we're
not talking necessarily low
renters. We're talking or low
income individuals. We're
talking about everyday working
people, citizens of the state
versus luxury homes that are
being proposed to be developed
in these sites.
Uh, that is my question, Madam
Chair.
In the 1980s, about 40% of homes
were starter homes. Now we're
under 10% of new homes or
starter homes. Starter home
production is absolutely
plummeted.
Main reasons are that lot sizes
have gotten larger because of
local lot size restrictions,
requiring people to buy more
land than they can often afford.
Once a lot size has to be large,
a quarter acre, 1/3 of an acre,
half an acre. At that point, it
only makes sense to put an
expensive large home on it,
because land costs are a major
part of the home itself. If
you're allowed to build on
smaller lots, homes cost less.
Once Houston began
allowing small lot homes, those
cost 38% less.
than the large lot homes
that were built in other parts
of the city. So allowing homes
on smaller lots is a major part
of the solution. Another one is
making it easier to build
condos. And so building uh
especially above stores or on
Main streets, Building codes are
part of that. So is liability
for builders and reducing
liability for builders, another
one is making it easier to build
factory-built housing. We're
seeing that Utah and Colorado
have invested in making it
easier to produce modular
housing. Texas recently passed a
law to make it easier to use
manufactured housing.
Factor-built housing is high
quality and it can cost less
than site-built housing. So
enabling more factory-built
housing as well as smaller lots,
and making it easier to build
condos for all a piece of the
puzzle, but so is permitting.
When permitting is simple, it's
quick, it's inexpensive. That
opens the door to lower cost
homes. If permitting is
expensive and conditional and
takes a long time, that creates
an incentive for a builder to
build a larger, more expensive
home
because they're incurring more
cost along the way.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Um, and, uh, I appreciate, uh,
giving me the term, uh, the
starter homes. I could not think
of what that was described
because that's what it is for
anybody who's beginning, who's
looking to get into the um
buying a home for the first time
you've given me some ideas and
some
under uh additional
understanding uh on the
importance of the permitting
process and other factors
related to
having more the ability and the
opportunity for more affordable
housing, um, thank you so much,
Madam Chair.
Thank you and splitting one
minute, I'm just kidding, but if
you'll make it quick, um,
Representative Montoya and then
closing us out as Representative
Matthews.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
like, uh, Representative Cullen,
I'm, I'm a rep I'm a realtor.
and, uh, this, this is a bigger
problem in New Mexico, uh
in part, we're, we're at the,
and, and please don't take this
the wrong way, but, but we're at
the bottom of the food chain
when it comes to pricing pricing
of homes nationally and what
happened during COVID. We had
migration out of California into
other states. You had, you had
billionaires moving and
multimillionaires moving to
places where millionaires had
homes and they were buying them
out of a ridiculous price.
Those people were selling
because it was an opportunity to
make a quick $1 and the
millionaires moved down into
uh the next level down, and it
just had this downward pressure
to where, uh, every people
couldn't turn down the money
As a realtor, we made a
tremendous number of cells
during COVID because of the
outmigration out of places like
California.
It has caused this problem
though, and one of the things
that it did as well is it
kind of pushed our contractors
towards building
these massive homes instead of
building 4 or 5 smaller starter
homes. They built one or two
custom homes.
It costs them less and their
profit margin was higher.
In the process over the last
several years we've lost
construction workers
During COVID, we lost a lot of
people who were that in that
industry, and we had a lot of
contractors go out of business,
uh, so, so we have fewer
contractors in New Mexico
simultaneously
uh, interest rates rose
dramatically since COVID. About
4%
from we were, we were down
around 3%. Now we're around 7%
on, on an average loan. That
means the same home that you
could have bought, uh, for that,
that, uh, would have been a
$1600 a month.
house payment, you're getting
1000 less square foot.
of house for that same
price
So we have fewer, we need to so
this problem, Madam Chair, the
reason I'm going through this is
we need to come up with some
ways to direct New Mexico, uh.
folks going into higher
education, we need to be
directing them to the trades.
There are not enough
contractors. There's not enough
workers. There's not enough
carpenters. We need to fix that.
But there are some state
regulations that we've put in
place that make entry into a new
home, not affordable or too
affordable rent, and that is
um, we started forcing folks
towards a an apprenticeship
through
uh, unions and we and we have
continued with state policy
towards prevailing wage for
those who are not in unions.
That raises the cost of the
house
that the largest, uh, cost that,
that a that a contractor has is
an employment and so the cost to
build in New Mexico, so the
answer may not be to just do
away with those, but it may be
for us to halt
some of these things for a while
until we can build up.
inventory.
in and, and one of this is kind
of the last point, Madam Chair,
and that is I, I do have a hard
time
doing a statewide
pushing a statewide law that
affects all communities, in
particular because Albuquerque
is not responding. The smaller
communities around the state are
responding to the housing
crisis. Um, what was described
as allowing uh these old hotels
and office buildings to be
converted into these smaller
units is happening in San Juan
County and it was been driven by
the need, so there I can point
to 3, hotels that have been
retrofitted to be small
apartments with a
kitchenette.
Um, so they're happening in, in
the smaller communities
Albuquerque
legislators need to step up and
push Albuquerque.
because that's where the problem
is. The bottleneck is there and
it all flows out. So I, I don't
have a problem if we can work
out something that we can all
agree upon, but Albuquerque, uh,
legislators need to come to the
table and because that's where
the problem exists. Let's be,
let's be honest, the existence,
the problem, yes, we have these
problems across in a smaller
communities, but the smaller
communities are reacting to the
problem. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Matthews.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um, and
thank you the presenter
disappeared from the screen, but
I assume he's still there, um, I
just wanted to, uh, I was glad
that he mentioned at the end the
row of manufactured housing,
also sometimes called mobile
housing except it's not mobile,
uh, once, uh, once you put it in
place so you don't just get in
and drive it off, um, there's
36,000 New Mexicans who are
currently living in manufactured
housing throughout the state. A
num a couple
of us have been working on
um
uh, trying to be sure that these
parks and these facilities
remain available. Most people
own the home. The only thing
they rent is the space that it
sits on and
part of the attraction from a
from an affordability standpoint
and I quite frankly think
manufactured housings is one of
the best bets for affordable
housing you can have is because
you don't have a huge amount of
land cost. You can, I have a
park in my district that has
spots for about 400 mobile
homes, um, and there's over 700
people living there in a
beautiful place, um, but because
you can put the places right
next to each other you don'
t have these huge land costs
um
so
uh
but we got to do some
legislation to protect these
people in the future, and we had
a couple bills last session.
None of them passed. I'm not
gonna get into them in any
detail here, but I think you can
we're certainly hopeful that
some are gonna come back on the
30 day and we can be sure that
we don't lose more of what is
some of the best affordable
housing we have and hopefully be
in a position to grow it. Thank
you.
Thank you, Alex, and thank you
committee for those insightful
comments. Um, it is incredible
to learn that New Mexico is the
only state that has not passed,
um, any housing laws in the
Southwest. It's sobering to
think about, um, I think the
presentation has left me with
the feeling of is the American
dream over? Do we have to
augment our American dream
because the solutions that are
offered look more like the norm
in Tokyo, Shanghai, and Rio de
Janeiro.
These really close compact
places. I'm still wondering what
the housing solutions are for
rural New Mexico contrary to
some of the comments made, we
are in a housing shortage in my
district. What are the housing
solutions for tribal communities
across New Mexico which comprise
the majority of our rural areas,
um, and I appreciate the
conversation and look forward to
moving
actual policy forward, um, with
that committee members, uh, will
now proceed on a tour. Alex,
thank you so much. I look
forward to building a
relationship with you and
learning more.
um, folks, will Caravan over.
It's about a 25 minute drive,
um, and then finally, before I
lose folks for the day, I just
want, or before I lose the
microphone for the day, I just
wanted to thank our amazing
staff for helping us run
efficiently and productively.
Thank you again to our gracious
host, UNM Valencia Campus, and
lastly, I wanted to take the
opportunity to invite all of you
committee members, um, to a
couple of feast days in my
region. Aama Feast is September
2nd, Laguna Feast is September
19th, and it would be
my honor to host all of you, um,
in my family's homes and share
some of the best of Senate
District 30. Thank you.
