manufacturing reshoring and
onshoring opportunities. uh, Mr.
Decker, do you want to go ahead
and, and begin?
Is that it? OK, good. I know you
guys are on late so I'm gonna
try to go through this as
quickly as I can, um.
title of this presentation is
shoring up New Mexico's Economic
future, a little bit about
myself and our firm. Uh, I'm an
architect and planner. We've
been in Albuquerque for over 65
years. My dad started the firm.
We have 215 employees in 3
offices, primarily in
Albuquerque, we also have
offices in El Paso and Phoenix.
So we get to do a lot of work
around the Southwest and
something we've done a lot of,
and I think this could apply to
this discussion today are
extreme makeovers took old
Albuquerque High School,
repositioned it as a great place
to live, work and play, uh, the
Albuquerque Convention Center
turned in 1970s brutalist
architecture building into
something that was way more
reflective of our architecture
and culture.
And so I'm gonna start off here
by talking about the times they
are changing.
And really it was the
coronavirus and the shock of the
coronavirus that really has
reset the table and created
opportunities, I think for New
Mexico and it what it did was
that it exposed a dangerous risk
to our national security and the
safety to our US citizens that
Overextended and risky supply
chains, uh, were no longer
tolerable. We weren't getting
medical equipment,
pharmaceuticals from China, and
91% of the companies affected by
the supply chain disruption
where in China and our US based.
And if you look at in year 2000,
uh, the United States was the
global manufacturing and export
hub of the world, and then 18
years later, uh, it's turned
into China and that's as a
result of offshoring and moving
industry from the United States
to China, but it just wasn't the
coronavirus we've had extreme
weather, which is interrupted
supply chains. We've had
political upheavals, wars, we've
had accidents in the Suez.
Canal, which shut it down for a
short period of time, it costs
the world economy hundreds of
billions of dollars. And then
there's human rights issues.
Who's making all this stuff that
we're consuming in the United
States.
And so
When President Biden got
elected, he, uh, put together a
task force called the 100 Day
Review to look at building
resilient supply chains to
address this issue and they
identified these critical
infrastructure uh uh
manufacturing component
industries, pharmaceuticals, you
can see them aerospace,
microelectronics, rare earth
minerals, and the defense
industrial base, and that was
really the driver for 3 major
bills that came out of.
the
uh infrastructure investment and
Jobs Act, the Chips and Science
Act, and the inflation reduction
Act of 2022. And what was
interesting there is there was a
provision that most of the
materials they were going to be
funded by these different acts
had to be made or had to be
bought in America, which again
is an economic development
opportunity for our state. If
you look at that and total those
up, it's $1.149 trillion.
And if we just got our per
capita fair share of those uh
bills, it'd be another $7.25
billion into New Mexico's
economy.
So showing up America's economy
with these critical
infrastructures and realizing
that industry is going to
reshore.
Back to the United States, it's
going to onshore, which really
means that they're going to
build capacity in the United
States versus going to uh other
countries. There's near shoring,
which is another huge
opportunity I'll talk about
friend shoring, which is really
doing business with people that
are uh sympathetic and their
allies versus potential enemies
and then green hooring and green
onshoring.
And so if you look at Reehaw and
this is defined as the act of
bringing US manufacturing back
to the United States and a lot
of that's been occurring and
onshoring is sourcing or
expanding US manufacturing
production in the United States.
Both are great opportunities for
New Mexico and what are the
market forces driving that
supply chain risk, we went over
some of those total costs,
transportation, access to
markets, the wage gap is closing
and tech.
Technology is driving a lot of
the activity that bringing
manufacturing back to the United
States.
And this was a chart that was
put together in 2020 and we're
kind of right in the middle of
this where we're starting to see
uh companies globally near
shoring to Mexico, reshoring to
the United States, many
expansions are going on.
Albuquerque is talking to a
couple of solar companies that
are going to take advantage of
the inflation Reduction Act, uh,
Soleo and, and Rocket Lab was
another one that benefited from
that and as well as Intel
locally. And so the top
industries that are reshoring to
the US or clean tech mobility,
electric vehicles, battery
storage, aerospace.
It's interesting when you look
at, and I have a son who's a
F-22 pilot, uh, and some of the
components, you know, for our
military was being produced in
China and we are now realizing
that's not such a good idea.
semiconductors, uh, and what's
going on, moving that from China
to the United States Intel, uh,
Samsung, and others. And it
really has resulted in jobs.
Over 1.167 million jobs have
been created since the start of
the pandemic is a direct result
of of reshoring and foreign
direct investment, but when you
look at the multiplier effect
that for every manufacturing
job, you're creating 4
additional jobs you can see that
that's nearly 60 plus jobs that
have been created by reshoring
just in the last 4 years.
And there's something I think
that is really exciting for New
Mexico is the whole near shoring
trend, and that's the practice
of transferring a business
operation to a nearby country in
this case it's Mexico and in the
headlines, the pick for the next
manufacturing superpower is
Mexico and of course we've got
common borders, we have common
culture, common language, uh,
with Mexico, so there's great
opportunities for that and you
can see the 7 reasons that are
given.
For why companies would want to
move operations from China to to
Mexico, uh, wage stability, uh,
protection of intellectual
property, uh, 1 to 2 days to
transport products versus 30
days that are up for risk and
then access to qualified and
affordable labor.
And this is starting to show up.
This is now the United States
trade with Mexico surges to the
number one position, and you can
see what's happened with China.
It's dipped over that period of
time and look at the growth
we've seen uh with Mexico and
the the trade there.
So near shoring is highlighted
by the fact that 400 companies
are expected to land in Mexico
in 2024, uh, reinforcing the
growth of manufacturing and
Chihuahua stands out in job
creation nationwide for Mexico
as far as creating manufacturing
informal jobs.
If you look at the trade that
goes through El Paso and Santa
Teresa. It's, it's about $109
billion a year and that I could
not find a more.
Recent statistic on that, but
I'm sure it's a lot more than
that now and I'd I'd love to
update that, uh, slide if
anybody's got that data, but
what's interesting is look what
we have as far as infrastructure
in New Mexico we have what's
called 2 freight railroad land
bridges with the Union Pacific
and the BNSF in the north and
those are great infrastructure
assets that moves product from
the west coast.
to the east coast, but look at
our relationship with Chihuahua
right up and down the Camino
Royal. It's almost back to the
future for the Camino Real in
the 21st century.
And I know that you are going to
hear about the trade port
corridor, but look at how this
also connects with the trade
port uh corridor along I-40.
We've got this amazing
infrastructure in this great
opportunity for, uh, value added
manufacturing and location of
industry that can easily move,
uh, east and west through our
country. And of course, I think
Chihuahua has got to be part of
the strategy and how we do that
as a state, I think it's a great
So the critical infrastructure,
the reshoring Institute, uh,
really, I think, uh, gives New
Mexico a great opportunity with
reshoring and with the state of
Chihuahua on near shoring to
really work together to develop
strategies to best take
advantage of what we're seeing
in the world today.
Another thing that's a
competitive advantage for um.
Uh, New Mexico is what I call
green shore, and green shore is
bringing manufacturing that
moved overseas back to the
United States that has a
corporate mandate to reduce its
carbon footprint and that holds
true for green onshoring.
Is companies that are here that
have a corporate mandate to
reduce their carbon footprint
through the use of renewable
energies. We all know that New
Mexico with its wind and solar
makes it one of the lowest cost
of renewable energy states in
the United States and wouldn't
it be great as a state, it's
yes, it's good to export that
energy to California, but
wouldn't it be super if we could
monetize it and create jobs in
our own state and create
industry in our own state.
And there's this group out there
called the RE 100 and uh it's
based in London and they've
signed up 223 global companies
who have publicly committed to a
goal of 100% renewables.
And since all of us are in the
business development world, look
at the names of these companies.
That's your hit list, I think
for New Mexico if we were to
really go out there and try to
recruit global companies, let's
focus on green renewable, uh,
uh, companies that have a
corporate mandate to their
shareholders to reduce their
carbon footprint and use
renewable resources. So that's
another huge opportunity and,
and I, I think something that
We could all talk about.
But here are the mega trends
driving it, and when we talk
about manufacturing, we're not
talking about, you know, people
putting bolts on tires and
things. It's really evolving to
a whole different level with uh
robotics, intelligent
manufacturing, small nuclear
reactors, industrial
revolutions, 5.0 and 6.0 space
technology, space
commercialization, and then just
the internet and the of things
and.
Smart sensors, electric
vehicles. I mean, these are all
huge opportunities for growth
for our state.
And what's driving a lot of this
change is going to be artificial
intelligence.
And if you look at the the
demand that artificial
intelligence is going to create
on our electrical uh systems
it's gonna double in the next 28
years.
And so if you're in the solar
manufacturing business or you're
in other renewable energy
things, there's going to be
tremendous demand and it
wouldn't be great for New Mexico
to land those kind of companies
gonna help.
Address that. Now most of you
know, and Rob was here in New
Mexico has an economic.
Plan and path forward to build a
diverse and robust economy, and
they identified these economic
development clusters as where we
should be focusing our efforts
to diversify our economy.
And what's interesting about
those uh clusters is 7 of the
target industries require a real
robust engineering and STEM
professional and technical
workforce, so matching our
workforce its capabilities and
training with the industry
clusters is going to be critical
moving forward, so I call this
shoring up with a matching our
clusters with the globalization
trend to near shore, reshore and
bring industry and keep it here
in the United States.
And this is what the advantages
is for every manufacturing job
you're creating 4 additional
jobs in the economy,
but
Our nation is facing a dire
shortage of manufacturing
workers.
We have the resources, CNM is,
is a huge asset as well as our
many community colleges around
the state from San Juan
Community College to Dona Anna
to all of the community
colleges, so we have the
infrastructure again to pivot.
And I think really provide the
workforce because that's what
companies are looking for. Not
only are they looking for green
energy, they're looking for uh
workforce.
And here's something that's kind
of good news is our states
continues to have a very low
unemployment rate as compared to
the United States, but our labor
force participation rate is way
lower than the national average.
And if you just run the numbers
on that, that means we've got
about 45,000 people that are
works capable but are not in the
workforce. So if you're a
company looking for workforce
and we have the infrastructure,
we can put people to work.
And wouldn't that be good for
our state to have people with
high wage, high paying
manufacturing and support jobs.
So it's really is about
connecting the dots and how we
use our research universities,
how we tie to those major
funding acts, how we build
partnerships with our national
labs and public-private
partnerships. I know Joy Garrett
and many of you have been
involved for a number of years
on public-private partnerships,
but this is the time to get it
done if we really want to start
to reset our economy and
diversify it and have enabling
legislation that not only allows
for horses.
but also vertical construction.
And then we need to recruit and
retain our best engineering and
talent that we have in the state
and not export that talent out
of state someplace else.
So if you don't like something,
change it. If you can't change
it, change your attitude.
And here's where we stand. I
mean, you know, sometimes you
just have to look in the mirror
and say, hey, these are the hard
facts and we got to figure this
out. Uh, our state is considered
the forty-ninth best state for
US news for careers and business
and, and for as much effort as
we put into small business,
we're still rated a D.
You know, why is that? Why can't
we overcome that hurdle. And I
think one of them is, is
regulations. We need to look at
our regulations that we have in
our state. Uh, this study done
by the Mercata Center at George
Mason University, uh, New
Mexico's got a 125,000
restrictions, 9.2 million words
13 weeks to read versus Arizona,
which is about half of that.
Do we need to really go through
our regulations and get rid of
the stuff that's duplicative and
not value added doesn't protect
anybody and really doesn't do
something that's, that's should
be a major priority, I think for
the legislature and of course I
think you can do that without
compromising the values that we
have.
So as uh Wayne Gretzky said when
he was asked how he scored so
many goals, he said, I skate to
where the puck is going to be,
not to where it has been. And so
here's an opportunity for our
state to invest. We have oil and
gas revenues,
uh, that we can invest. I'm sure
there's 100 different ways we
could spend that money, but if
we're really going to diversify
our economy, we have to invest
in, quite frankly,
Our target industries, but we
also have to invest in the
education system that supports
that and we can't lower
standards. We have to raise them
and we have to give teachers and
educators the tools that they
need.
So and, and again, this is, I'm
not a, I'm not an economist. I'm
just a citizen out here trying
to figure out what do you do
with
$2 billion and how would you
spend that money and it's gonna
be a ramp up over a number of
years, so I'm suggesting that we
put $600 million per year for 5
years and to K through 12 STEM
education and this is going to
require us to really do some
work with our colleges of
education, uh, that we need to
invest in our community and
career technical education
schools and align those with the
grants and the businesses that
are aligned with those in our
economic
Development efforts and we need
to invest in our R&D
universities, you know, good is
no longer good enough. We need
to have great engineering
schools.
And we can do that and we're in
a position to make that happen,
and I think we could invest
along those clusters and really
build up our uh universities
because that will not only help
our universities and attract
business here, but it will also
provide the workforce and the
human capital that's going to be
necessary for our labs to
compete in a very global world
for talent and people. So
there's almost a 2 for in that
area and then I think we, we
need to really look at
Uh, incentives, similar maybe to
the film incentive where we're
giving rebates to those critical
infrastructure and companies are
looking to uh reshore and
onshore and and uh work with uh
along the cluster lines that
we've identified.
And then we, we've talked about
co-investment funds, you know,
we need to get our state
investment council. I think they
already do this to a limited
extent, but we need to use
targeted, uh, co-investment
funds where we partner with
venture capital and for every
dollar that the state puts into
it,
um, the venture capital company
could come with $2 so we're
bringing more money into our
state, bringing more economic
opportunity to our state.
And then again, this probably
won't be too popular, but it, it
is what it is. We have the
highest annual corporate income
tax rate of the states
surrounding us, it generates
2.2% of our state, uh, annual
revenue. But what would happen
if we were to get down to North
Carolina and become actually the
lowest of those states
surrounding us other than Texas,
which doesn't have one, we'd be
giving up about $100 million a
year in revenue, but would that
be offset by
Industry moving here, creating
jobs, additional taxes being
created, moving people into the
workforce and, and the like.
And you've probably have heard
that site readiness is a big
issue in our state. We don't
have places right now where some
of these big companies might be
able to come. So if we could
figure out a way to identify
those critical infrastructures,
those sites that are ready to be
developed and invest in those
sites and get paid back through
the revenues that the businesses
create or the industry creates
um in, in future property taxes,
that's something I think we
could also look for, and I know
there's
other groups out there that are
talking to you about that as
well.
So, you know, you add it all up,
it's $3 billion.
I mean, what's billionaire,
billionaire, right? Pretty soon
you got real money. Uh, but, you
know, it's time to go big or go
home.
We cannot nickel and dime this.
You have to invest to get a
return on investment, and I
think that, uh, just nibbling
around the edges and doing a
little bit here and a little bit
there in my opinion, isn't going
to diversify the economy. I
think we'll be frustrated. I
think we'll still be at the
bottom of the good list.
And the, and at the top of some
of the bad lists and um but this
is your time.
You're the leaders, you're the
appropriators, you make the
rules, uh, and I just want to
throw this out there again. I
have no authority other than I
love New Mexico and I believe
that a rising tide lifts all
boats. And so, just real
quickly, we need a business plan
for the 21st century, and we
need to make those strategic
investments now. Uh, we need to
focus on creating a more
business friendly environment
through regulations and really
looking at those things that
keep us at forty-ninth for
business, and I think there's a
Huge opportunity to create a
binational economic development
plan with the state of Chihuahua
and the city of Chihuahua,
wouldn't that be amazing? Again,
Back to the Future for the
commino Real, and we got to
diversify our economy and I'm,
since I'm a private sector
person, I'm going to say that we
have to build a stronger, more
robust private sector and
there's got to be a sense of
urgency.
We've got this opportunity we
need to take advantage of it
now. And of course, you guys
have all seen this slide before,
but this is New Mexico's
trifecta no other state can show
this slide of where we have this
amazing nature and authentic
culture, um, this is a Zuni uh
concho that's about 3 inches in
diameter and this is a micro
machine at Sandia National Labs
that's 11,000 the diameter of a
human hair.
No place else in the world.
Can you show this slide.
That's New Mexico's trifecta, so
the future belongs to those who
prepare for it and um.
Thank you for listening.
Thank you.
Uh, Senator Munoz.
Thank you, Madam Chair and Dale,
good to see you again. Good to
see you. Um, you know, we put
11% of our, our investments into
a venture capital fund that was
supposed to provide private
equity to create a
business-friendly environment,
but it hasn't worked out.
Have you looked at that number
and and their returns are so low
that we're looking at that, but
11% of, I don't know what the
total number is, but.
Where this is going to be a
topic going forward for the
legislatures, we haven't seen
any returns on that, that 11%
and it may be probably 200 to
300 million.
That they're allowed to invest
and they haven't invested in and
and you mentioned the the state
investment council changing
that.
I mean, what changes were you
thinking that the state
investment council?
Well, um,
You may not know, right now I
don't know the answer to that
specifically, uh, Senator, but
my sense is, is that.
Capital for startup companies is
risky. We know that.
And we know that one out of
You know, 9 out of 10 might
fail, but the one that hits is
going to be 100x return.
So
When it comes down to risk, we
need to weigh the risk and the
benefit, and I'm not sure about
the different funds. I will tell
you if you go to look at the SIC
website on their dashboard, they
are very good about making um
private equity investments. It's
been a huge return for our
state. So I'm not saying don't
do that, but maybe we should,
when we're sitting down with
those private equity companies.
Say to them, uh, you're gonna
invest in this aerospace
company, have you
told them about all of the great
economic development incentives
that we have in the state of New
Mexico. I mean, there's a push
pull here, I think that we could
use, but it really is turning
the SIC a little bit into an
economic development arm and
being able to help in educate
and inform. They can't
necessarily influence, but just
by planting seeds we might be
able to get one out of those 50
companies and if you look at
where the private equity is
going, it's going into those.
Clusters that I showed.
I, I agree with you, but I mean
we, we probably need to look at
and see if that venture capital
is really working. I mean, look
at eclipse what happened. We
thought that was going to
happen, right? And they bought
out 2 or 3 times and, and then
you look at.
What's the other advent solar
that we did in Rio Rancho,
right? That thing kind of came
and went and and failed and, and
the problem is we don't have any
success rate in that, so it's
time to change the way we're
doing that in that fund. I think
you were in the first LD meeting
that you and me and Steve
Maestas and when he said let's
do Lita and let's put 150
million, right? And let's swing
big in in leaders turned into a
sprinkler.
I mean, the economic development
secretary had a presentation and
one is a meat cutting factory in
Santa Fe that sells high-end
meats and got 200 or 300,000.
That wasn't the goal of LA. The
goal of LA was to create.
Big jobs and and say we have a
lot of money to go invest and
lead us is completely watered
down in in what we're trying to
achieve.
And so I think Lita needs to
change too.
um.
But I think, I don't know how
you target that that was a
gentleman a couple of years ago
from Santa Fe and I think it was
from Google if I remember
correct and Adrian May shook his
head yes or no, and he talked
about creating this.
Center in Santa Fe where, where
the labs had had staff and
equity and and people would move
in and, and.
I don't know what you call it,
the triangle that they have and
I forget what Austin in North
Carolina and creating that in
New Mexico with rail into Santa
Fe and then working at the labs
and the labs, but then we go
back to how do we create those
employees, right? And, and we've
Funded everything in higher ed
in this may be on the
universities. I mean, we need
doctors, we need nurses, we need
social workers, we need early
childhood care educators, but
they can't seem to get them out.
Mhm. And, and I don't think you
can force a person to go down a
career path, but we've funded
all these things in universities
and, and we get no growth out of
them.
We're still struggling to get
teachers, right? We're still
struggling to get, I mean the
doctor situation is a big
problem in New Mexico and U and
him with Doctor Richards is
gonna work on that. But I, I
mean, we fund and we fund and we
fund, but we never get there to
where we need to be, I mean.
I think you, you went to Arizona
and you saw how flourishing
Arizona is, and I see it all the
time, right? I mean, ASU's
building next to the Mao, right?
They're on track. You have the
largest chip manufacturer just
south of Chandler building a
three story and then 15 miles
north of Scottsdale, there's
another chip manufacturer
building. I mean, I don't know
how we, how we win.
And I think that's the problem
is in New Mexico is everybody is
so territorial. I want this or
this hilar and I want that
little for this area, but how do
we get the big win?
New Mexico gets needs to get
used to winning.
We try to put things together
and we always lose, but we got
to put some things together to
get a big win, and I don't know
what that looks like and how we
do that.
But we're gonna come with a big
infrastructure plan this year, I
know.
Because that's the biggest need,
right? And then everybody wants
a spec building, but are we
going to build spec buildings
and they're gonna end up like
the more courthouse 20 years
later still trying to get done,
uh, or are we gonna say, OK, we
have.
Santa Teresa, we have something
in Albuquerque. Somebody's
looking for 90,000 square foot
building in Albuquerque. I can't
remember off the top of my head
who it is and and.
And why aren't those buildings
getting built by business guys
that'll that'll spec that
building in and take some risk,
I mean.
Where, where are we really
falling through the holes?
In putting everything together
in that big circle.
I mean, that's the answer I
think the legislature needs to
see.
is
We can put money here.
And we talk about, you know, the
the state investment council,
but we're not seeing any
rewards. We can put money in
education or not seeing the
outcomes.
I agree.
As a New Mexican, it's very
frustrating.
Let me come back in a month and
I'll have an answer for you.
Because that's, I mean, that's
what we should be thinking about
exactly what the senator is
talking about. Why is it?
That we aren't.
Completing these
These opportunities.
And I think it's a variety of
factors, but I, I think,
Senator, what it really gets
down to is we're not on the same
page.
We can't, you know, we don't
know where to start the journey.
We're going in 27 different
directions, and I think quite
frankly, the, the state's
economic development strategy
provided a good vision for
clusters to focus on.
And if we just built around
those and really worked with the
SIC and we're to look at in
business development that list
of companies that have a mandate
to be carbon neutral.
Those are all Fortune 500
companies are probably would.
That
If nobody's knocking on their
door, there's a big difference
between marketing and business
development. Marketing is you're
telling your story. Business
development is you're there in
person impressing upon people
what your story is and it's
person to person.
And so it takes leadership. It
takes a plan that is people can
count on over a 5, 10 year
period and it takes
accountability.
You tell the universities that
you want to have the greatest.
Aerospace engineering program in
the United States and you're
gonna fund it.
Then they ought to be able to do
that.
Because we have other resources
that could support that. But
anyway, that's, like I said,
I'll be back in a month and you
know, I, I'll have that answer
for you.
But we do that.
In my shoe and a kid from
Gallup, right?
Aerospace engineering giving
$250,000 job offers and he's.
Just graduated, right?
I mean, we do that. We tell
them, OK, if this is what you
want to do, do it. But if you
take NSU and you take all the
university's growth, and I think
this is a conversation about
where the workforce comes out
of, right, the higher ed
universities, NMSU's greatest
growth was an online university.
And 50/50 people going to the
class, 50 parts Miss Payton
online, a lot of out of state
people, right?
And you would have 0 growth.
Flat across the board.
In if they did not have that
online university.
And then you get the university
and you say, OK, they came to us
and the legislature, we're going
to fund it this because kids are
fifty-fifty. COVID made them
learn differently. You have a
new cohort coming in and what
does NMSU do is come in and take
their profits from that online
university and put it into the
school that that's not
generating anything,
not changing any growth, and
then they come back to us and
said we need more money and so.
I, I, I don't know where we
change in New Mexico, but I
mean.
Do we build an event center and
get rid of the fairgrounds and
build a big giant event center
cause if you're 20 some years
old in my kids are that age,
right?
They're not staying here for the
weekend.
Right? They're going to Vegas,
they're going to.
Football games they're going to
whatever sporting event,
whatever concerts they want to
go see, and that's part of the
whole life of.
Attraction, I mean.
I like to use Phoenix, but I
mean you can go to a bask a
football game and a basketball
game at night and a football
game the next day and there's so
many things to do and so many
concerts, but I don't know how
you retain.
This new generation no matter
what they're called, but I mean,
they wanna be entertained and
they wanna work during the week
and and go play on the weekends,
and they're not really worried
about their house payments or
their retirements or or anything
like that. So I don't know how
we create that workforce and
then retain them in New Mexico,
but you have to create that
whole atmosphere.
Right.
You can go to
To a concert on this day and you
can do this and and and do that,
but I, I don't know how we
retain that that workforce,
that's the hardest, that's the
most temperamental thing I think
right now in in.
All of, all there and you and I
discussed it, but I mean the
workforce is so temperamental
about what they want to do and
when they want to do it, that
it's hard to manage that and.
I don't, I don't know how we
track this. We have the
investments.
I don't know how we put it all
together, but.
I think you're correct when you
say everybody's on a different
page.
You know, we heard about the,
the corridors earlier this
morning for for transit rail,
but you gotta build everything
else around that, but where do
we really get it and how do we
get that end point, I mean.
The guy from Santa Fe had a
pretty good plan, the triangle,
what he called it, where they
live and travel and you had the
labs and you could jump on a
train in the morning and come to
work at San Diego, you could
drive up the hill to go to Los
Alamos and that.
In that workforce, but I, I
don't know how we get that.
It's not for a lack of funding.
I mean our, our educational
systems are funded at a higher
level than most other states,
and we're still not there, but
I, I just.
How, how do you force that? I, I
don't know.
I don't know either, but.
Hey,
You better figure it out.
The world's going to pass us by
and we're gonna be looking in
the rearview mirror saying we
missed a huge opportunity.
There is going to be a ton of
freaking money.
Dumped into our national labs.
Particularly around national
security.
And defense
A time. Just look at the world.
Read the headlines.
And
It wouldn't it be great if most
of those graduates and engineers
were coming out of UNM and New
Mexico State.
But you also look at our
universities as compared to our
per capita enrollment in
engineering programs we're a
third of what they are in
Arizona. That's why Samsung is
there.
Because their engineering school
has 8000 students and then we
have 1500.
So yeah, it's a, it is
definitely a complex problem.
But I think if you don't have a
site for them to move into
quickly because they're not
going to wait for 2 or 3 years
for permitting and to get a
site, they're not going to come
here.
So that's one good place to
start, and I think our sweet
spot really is our renewable
energy on for green shoring and
onshoring and really appealing
to those companies that have an
ESG in corporate mandate, and
that's business development.
Um
I mean, at least that's what I
would do. I look at, I'd go
through that 221 companies and
start making phone calls.
But that's
The easy way, I guess, and we
also know that rebates worked. I
mean, we wouldn't have a film
industry here.
If we didn't have rebates.
Now
We could argue about that, but
there's also opportunity there.
In targeted industries that are
sustainable and will grow the
economy differently than the
film industry might that we
could look at uh for targeted
rebates in aerospace and
renewable energies.
But that's
Just me talking and I'm just an
architect.
I'm sure I think we can continue
this conversation all day long,
but I mean, I, I said this
before, we're not a poor state
anymore, right? We're, we're a
pretty wealthy state. We built
the funds up, we can stand
recessions, we can do that,
right? Now we just got to learn
how to win. We want to play in
the game, but we want to play,
but we gotta learn to win when
we play and you had Yogi Berra
and Wayne Gretzky up right. We
got to learn how to win.
And not have everybody on a 100
different pages across New
Mexico as it may be different in
Clovis than it is in Gallup,
maybe different Albuquerque that
is in Las Cruces, but I don't
know how we create New Mexico.
You, you, we can win just how
are we gonna win?
And who's gonna help us win
because the legislature, if you
rely on government to do
anything for you, it ain't gonna
happen.
You have to rely on industry and
in the private sector to do
that.
And and can you borrow money?
Yeah, you can go borrow all the
money from you want from the
bank, but corporations don't
want to borrow money they want
who's got the biggest
investment? Lea was supposed to
do that for us.
Who's got the biggest amount of
money that that can make it flow
that way so we don't have to
upfront that money, but.
I, I don't know until we figure
out how to win, I mean.
That's, that's the, that's the
whole key of the thing is where
do we win and where do we win
one time and then we continue to
win every time.
So thank you, Madam
Chairsentative Armstrong.
Get the hint, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, the biggest place
we can start winning is by not
being a D.
Yeah.
That's one of the biggest places
we can start.
Removing those barriers for
small businesses. We just heard
from CNN all the money that's
being put into entrepreneurship,
creating new businesses, all
these different things when we,
we sitting at this table are
creating the barriers.
And so I, I think that's one of
the biggest things that we can
do, higher education
institutions, uh, um, leveraging
state money for with federal for
federal state money for federal
dollars is a big one.
That's a big one. Well, we need
to get that money out.
The state needs to get the money
out to those entities so that we
can leverage federal dollars so
that we can bring AI, we can
bring cybersecurity. We can
bring all those things to New
Mexico Tech.
NMSU UNM, whatever, whoever
wants to do it.
Let's just do it.
But I'm tired of sitting around
a table saying we have the
answers and not doing anything.
And that's on us.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you and thank you, Mr.
Jack, for your presentation
today.
If we can get our next
presenters up.
Alrighty, growing New Mexico
hospitality industry after
COVID, um, if you want to, um,
introduce yourselves and then go
ahead and begin your
presentation. Thank you.
Perfect. Thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, um,
first of all, thank you,
especially for this opportunity
to present to you on this
amazing industry. My name is
Cathy Coal. I'm the CEO for the
New Mexico Hospitality
Association, and we represent
hundreds of businesses around
the state.
In the hotel and lodging arena,
we represent tourism
organizations, DMOs, chambers,
um, direct marketing groups,
municipalities, and hundreds of
small businesses that provide
industry support. And so I am
representing them today to give
you a little bit of an update on
the industry and also to talk
about what some of our policy
priorities will be going into
2025. I'm gonna start off with
some very exciting news. Um,
most of you have probably seen
The tourism zone department just
released their new, um, economic
impact report in October.
Hopefully you've had a chance to
look at that. If not, I'll make
sure and get you a copy of it,
but we have some exciting
numbers to announce, um, and
that is that in 2023 we set a
record for visitor spending of
$8.6 billion. That was a 3.8%
increase over 2022 and is the
result of having 41.8 million
visitors.
To New Mexico, so very exciting
numbers that visitor spending in
the categories of lodging,
recreation, and food and
beverage.
All of those spending areas
increased, with visitors
spending $2.7 billion on
lodging, $2 billion on food and
beverage and 1.1 billion on
recreation.
That direct spending from
visitors supported 72,000 jobs
across the state and the
economic impact of those
tourists coming through
generated $8111 million in state
and local taxes for New Mexico.
That visitor spending reduced
the tax burden on every New
Mexico household by $997. So
we're very excited to see that
our post-pandemic numbers are,
are back up and that.
We are starting to see growth in
all sectors and so I'm looking
forward to working with all of
you in 2025 so we can continue
to build on that track record of
success, um, we have seen, as I
said, that significant process
or progress, but we do have some
significant challenges
remaining. Um, a big one, I, I'm
sure you've heard from others
and you'll hear from from my
colleagues is that we continue
to face a workforce shortage,
um, we lost a huge amount of our
workforce during the pandemic.
And we are having difficulty in
continuing to rebuild that
workforce and we have done
significant wage increases in
every county in New Mexico, but
in spite of that, we're seeing
our hotels and tourism related
businesses continuing to
struggle and those increased
wage rates have placed
considerable strain on those
small businesses, and you hear
me talk a lot about small
businesses because I think we
have um sort of a
misunderstanding. People tend to
look at hotels.
Especially, and they see the
Hilton banner or a Best Western
banner, and they think it's part
that it's a national business,
but the truth in them is in New
Mexico, most of our businesses,
most of our hotels are owned and
operated as franchise agreements
and they're owned and operated
by individuals, families, and
small marketing and independent
management groups. So again, the
majority of our members are
small businesses working really
hard in communities.
Across the state and so they
face the same challenges that
other small businesses are
dealing with and that I'm sure
you hear on a, on a repeat
cycle, which are universal
issues of inflation, economic
vol volatility, uh, the burden
of debt service that came out
during the pandemic and an
ongoing shortage of services
like reliable transportation and
childcare for the workforce. So
based on um those ongoing
challenges, our policy
priorities for 2025
Um, we're looking forward to
working with legislators and
encouraging you to support a
robust and comprehensive tourism
marketing budget. The marketing
budget has shown, um,
Trackable results, um, for every
area of the state and has
allowed us to compete nationally
and to build existing programs.
And when I look around at all of
you here in the room, I don't
think that many of you have not
had your community benefit from
at least one of the tourism
department's programs, whether
it's um co op marketing, the
amazing New Mexico 2 program
that I think actually touches
every county in New Mexico. The
new event grant support.
Programs.
The clean and beautiful grants
and also, of course, we are
gearing up and we want New
Mexico to be in the spotlight as
the world starts to look and
especially the United States
starts to look at the
anniversary, the centennial of
Route 66. So again, a, a robust
tourism marketing budget is
going to be important. We also
want to work with the
legislature to develop and
support workforce programs that
address both short-term and
long-term staffing needs, and we
want to figure out ways to
educate up and.
workforce members about the 200+
career pathways that we have in
the hospitality and tourism
business. And we also want to um
to work with legislators.
To collaborate on how we can
develop policies that support
growth in the industry. Um one
of those specifically, many of
you saw back in 2022, we had our
hotel ren renovation tax credit.
We're going to be representing
that bell in 2025. It provides
much needed support again for
those small business owners and
also we want to make sure that
any policies that are
implemented don't place undue
hardships on small business
owners, whether
It's related to labor and
workforce issues, taxation, or
as mentioned earlier, um,
regulations that increase the
expense of doing business
without supporting business
growth. So those are my main
points and um I'm happy to take
questions later, but I will turn
it over to my colleague Carol
White from the Restaurant
Association.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for having
us here, um.
You know, we have, I represent
1500 members in the New Mexico
Restaurant Association. There's
probably about 4000 restaurants
out there, many of them in all
of your communities are our
members, um.
So we were asked to do a
presentation on growing the New
Mexico restaurant industry after
COVID and we kind of decided to
take a policy focused approach.
The pandemic did reshape our
industry and what we've seen
signs of recovery, inflation and
policy decisions are slowing the
pace. Rising food and labor
costs due to inflation are
creating restaurant hurdles.
Inflation has significantly
impacted operating costs. Many
restaurants are struggling to
keep up with
rising prices and as a um on the
back of your sheet, I, I
actually put something in there
that kind of gives you an idea
of what restaurants are really
dealing with. So you can see
here that in 2019, a restaurant
that was making $1.5 million
could actually make pre-tax
income of about $75,000. That's
5%. That's probably, that's a
decent margin in the restaurant
industry, you know, you have,
you have one,
refrigerator breakdown and it
takes half of that 5%. So, um,
so you can see that since 2019,
food and beverage costs have
gone up 29%. Labor costs 31%,
utility costs 16%, and occupancy
and other costs have gone up
22%, so.
That same restaurant in 2024
that was making $1.5 million is
now losing $298,000 or almost
$300,000 and
And obviously this restaurant
would not be in business
anymore. We have raised our menu
prices, which accounts for some
of the increase that you've seen
in the industry, maybe all of
the increase that you've seen in
our in in our industry. But one
thing you need to know about
restaurateurs is they hate to
raise menu prices. Number one,
it costs a lot to, to print a
menu, right? Um, but number 2,
they know that as they raise
their prices, people will stop
coming and so it's this.
It's this wicked thing they've
got to raise their prices
because things are costing more,
but they know they're going to
lose business. And so it's just
this circular thing that they,
that is really hurting them
right now and we'll have
somebody talk about some of this
in a minute.
Really what I want to talk
about, um, with that in mind is
the policy impact that
that laws have and you all will
remember the healthy workplaces
Act, uh, that was passed in
2021. It increased restaurant
operating costs and staffing
shortages and while it benefits
employees, the operational
burden on restaurants struggling
to recover from the pandemic has
been substantial, so, um, I
talked to one restaurateur. He
has
3 restaurants, he said that on
average his restaurants pay
about $27,000 a year in paid
sick leave. That's not including
the overtime that he has to pay
somebody else to come in on
those shifts. That's just
straight paid sick leave, so.
And then another restaurateur,
she said she spends between 2000
and $2500 every two weeks on
this and.
And on top of that, the
regulation is not well written.
If you'll remember that was
passed in 2021 and it didn't go
into effect until July 2022, and
we were told as the business
community that
We will come back to this. You
will have an opportunity during
the legislative session in 2022
and we will work on this with
you. Well, that.
Legislation never gone on the
governor's call. It was never
made available to work on again.
So it went into effect the way
it was written. It's very
difficult to understand what
happens now is that the minute
somebody builds up any sick
leave.
They call in sick.
And you know, this can happen on
a Friday afternoon in a
restaurant that's that's our
Monday, that's the worst day in
the world for somebody to call
in sick. They don't have to
prove it. They don't have to do
anything.
If they call in sick.
You just have to deal with it.
And we don't have a large
workforce that can just all of a
sudden come and make up for
that. So that was passed again
in 2022. We have been dealing
with that since July of 2022.
And now we're starting to talk
about paid family and medical
leave, um.
And it will have an oversized
impact on restaurants and
staffing, so.
Again, this already this strains
are already tight margins. It
also, again, you're talking
about somebody taking 12 weeks
of leave.
And us having to replace that
person.
Where do we go to replace this
person. We're having a hard time
filling positions that are
there, much less having to
replace people that are now gone
on leave. So
Just to make a point here, the
New Mexico Restaurant
Association.
Um,
We have been working on policy
recommendations for paid family
medical leave. We believe we
have to come to the table and
we're not here to say no, hell
no, and just draw a line in the
sand. We're here to say we're
here to work on this, but we
need somebody to listen to us.
And so we do have some policy
recommendations. I have them
printed. They are here. It
wasn't going to be a major point
of, of what I'm talking about
here. So if you're interested,
I'd be happy.
hand those to you, but right
now, um, really I just I wanted
you to to know that we're coming
to the table with that.
So we're just really asking for
you all to balance the benefits
and the business viability. I
mean you saw we have
regulations, we have lots of
regulations in this State. I
will tell you that a small
business person in the State
cannot do it right.
If you're doing payroll in this
state, you cannot do it right
because we have made it so
difficult. As a matter of fact,
in New Mexico, now the US
Department of Labor had 5000
audits on restaurants last year.
They were happy to say that not
one of those restaurants passed
with flying colors.
Now to me that doesn't say that
restaurants aren't trying to do
it right. To me, that says we
may have too many regulations.
And remember, we have, we have
the federal regulations, we have
the state regulations, and we
have many, uh, local regulations
as well. And then you pile those
on top of a small business
person.
who is trying to do payroll
among catering and all of the
other things they have to do.
It's very, very difficult, and
we need to make it easier for
them. So, um, we're just asking.
For po solutions that really
look at and balance labor and
businesses. We get that there's
labor out there, we try to take
care of our employees. We do a
good job, um, but we need to, we
need that balance there. So, um.
We encouraging collaboration
between restaurants, their
communities, and policymakers to
find a path that supports
business and employee well-being
and we're willing to work with
anybody on that.
Um, with that.
Move it a little closer here.
uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Russell Hernandez,
uh, restaurant tour, uh,
individual business owner in uh
southern New Mexico and right
and right I thought right
outside of Missa in Las Cruces.
Um, I did speak with you all,
uh, last month, I, and I was
wearing a different hat at that
point in time. I was wearing my
elected official hat because I
do have that going on as well,
uh, and it's a very busy life to
say the least, but I do come
here to you today.
to speak on behalf of being an
individual business, and I think
that that's highly important,
you know, you, you heard, uh,
individuals speak, uh, that are
CEOs uh for, for associations.
But I think when you have an
individual business at the
table, it makes very, very
large uh impact and, and I'll
open it up to answer any
questions that you may have at
the end for sure, uh, cause I,
I'm I'm out here. Uh what I
would ask, and I want to ask
every single one of you is, um,
can you?
Give me a raise of hand if you
uh know a restaurant tour or
even a small business owner for
that matter, within your
community. Can you, can you all
agree that we, we know these
people within our community,
right? So, right, I, you know,
those of you that are in the
southern part of the state, I
hope you know me because I love
my, my community and I love my
restaurant, um, and then so my
my question really is in, in
kind of opening this up as a as
a conversation more than
anything is.
When you go and you speak to
these individuals that own these
businesses and you ask them, how
is everything going for you? Are
they ever saying it's horrible,
it's bad. Are they saying it's
good, it's OK, it's not the
best, um.
If you come to me, I'm, I'm one
of those individuals that I
support anybody and everybody
that I possibly can because I
try to lift up our community,
uh, and more than anything, and
I think that those of you that
know me can attest to that
that's exactly what I do, um,
and if you come to me and you
ask me how business is, uh, I
will tell you that it's OK, that
it's good, um, but the reality
is, uh, my, my business right
now is, is hurting bad, uh, and
I will tell you that, uh, you
know, from I'm 8.5 years into
my.
My business now, um, so I've,
I've, I've hit a good threshold
and I should be going strong and
I was going strong, uh,
increasing at an average rate of
12 to 15% year over year uh in
gross sales, so it was just
phenomenal. This year to date
though, what we're looking at is
I'm, I'm down almost 20% in
sales. And when we look at that
overall, uh, and at that, I mean
that that's blocking me at being
down almost $400,000 a year.
And that that's a big amount of
money. I, as I speak to several
other other businesses, uh,
they're in my community, other
restaurants, other, other small
businesses, uh, I, I see that
that's not the same. I just
spoke with another business, uh,
and, and she's down 100 year to
year, uh, and that that's almost
50% year to year decrease in
sales, uh, and that that's
hurting. So while you hear good
things, the reality is, is that
it's not that good, right?
Now. So when we talk about like
for myself, I take pride in my
team and the people that work
for me and, and, and I try to
lift them up and to create the
best individuals that we can
have because I know they're
they're my babies, they're not
gonna be there for the rest of
their lives. They're gonna fly
off and and do their own little
thing, right? Uh, so I want to
encourage them to have that
experience. But the reality is,
uh, in that, is that my staffing
level, uh, were pre,
pre-pandemic and even up into
the beginning of this last year
was at about 38 employees of
I'm down to 24 and I have no
plan on hiring, uh, anytime soon
just because I don't have the
business coming in, uh, for
that, so it's just when when we
look at it and, and that
disparity, it is or or or that
information, that that's what it
is, um, at the end of the day,
uh, and.
It's, it's hard to say because I
know the questions are going to
be, well, what do you think
causes is the cause of this. Who
knows? That, that's if I, if I
had the, the answers to
everything, let me tell you that
that's where we would be at, uh,
but we don't have those answers,
uh, per se. I can assume, uh,
that, you know, may, maybe that
the assumptions are out there
that it's a it's a presidential
election, you know, uh, in that
year, that that's what it is,
uh, may maybe we look at it from
from a pandemic standpoint, and
this this is me looking
At it from a a bigger
standpoint, you know, back in,
in 2020, 2021 as a, as a, as a
government, we pumped money into
our economy to help to support
people. We gave them that
opportunity so that they can
still sustain their lives. But a
lot of people maybe didn't have
that, that, that opportunity or
have that that money at that
given point in time, so then now
they're building capital on
their personal side getting
credit cards, getting everything
to that point, whatever that
case may be, and now that
discretion.
money has come to an end, right,
which, which is something that
we talk about. Those credit
cards are completely maxed out
to the max of what they can do,
so they're not going out and
eating as much or doing that,
that would be my assumption on
what's going on with the why why
we're seeing a loss of that,
because there's other.
As, as, and as a family man, and
because I do have 3 beautiful
children, uh, you know, that
they're, the focus is gonna be
on making sure that I have food
on the table, clothes on their
backs, and, and, and making sure
that that the necessities for my
family are being met, and those
necessities don't necessarily
mean going out to eat at a
restaurant or going out to eat
at a restaurant frequently, so
that that's, that's my thought
on, on, on that in general. But
I also believe that there's
policy things that need to be
taken into consideration the the
Come from, from you. And I think
that when we, when we look at it
as a whole, there's a very large
disparity uh in the food and
beverage industry alone, and I
just want to bring up a couple
of those to you to to right now
just add some notes, uh, when we
think about it, let's just take
alcohol and and liquor laws, you
know, and as as a whole.
So I myself have uh an enhanced
restaurant B license. I paid
$10,000 a year, uh, for my, my
licensing in order to to serve
alcohol and have the spirits.
Thank you all for bringing that
forward a couple of years ago
because it gave me that
opportunity to have that
potential growth, but I've
actually seen my liquor sales
decrease this last year, which
is an interesting thing with
sales fully decreasing, that's
what it is. I take that hand in
hand and that goes there. But
where the disparity truly comes
in.
is we have the Vors, the
brewers, the the the distillers,
those people or those
individuals are great for the
New Mexico economy.
They get their license $300 a
year. They can have up to 5
locations under that $300
license, they can pour a grower
and have that sent out the door,
uh, to go, and that can be taken
out. Uh, and that that's that
$300 license. Now I could just
do a basic license if I wanted
to do that, uh, and that that
just a generalized beer and wine
license that's about $1100 more
or less. I can do that in hand
day as an extra $750 and I can
sell them to Mexico spirits, uh,
so.
I do understand the choice that
I made, but there's a large
disparity in there and I'm not
even including those individuals
that own the full liquor license
that have paid hundreds of
thousands of dollars for their
licenses are ready and uh some
of those that have a 100
license, but
The thing is what I'm getting at
with that is it.
If you go to my restaurant and
you look at what I have, I have,
I take pride in it. I really do.
I'm a wine spectator, award
winner. I have over 100
different wines. I'm one of two
restaurants in the southern part
of the state that actually have
that. And I know up here in the
northern part of the state, you
guys have great food and great
everything, but I take pride in
what we're doing down in the
southern part of the state. Uh,
and I, you know, I do only New
Mexico craft drafts on there,
um, on my handles, uh, when I
pour that, but I can't pour a
grower.
have somebody take that out if
they wanted to do that, but
there's a winery right up the
street from me, a distillery
right down the street from me
and a brewery right across the
street. They can do all of that,
package it, it can be taken out
and right out the door it goes.
Disparity at its best in and
just liquor. Now let's take a
look at it from a corporate
standpoint. And I, I, I can say
it because I came from a
corporate background originally
before I opened my business.
Senator Hamlin can attest to
this because that's, that's
really where I, I first had
those first
conversations with her, and this
was back years ago when we were
talking about the minimum wage,
uh, and let me tell you, at this
point it to this effect. When I
worked for this corporation, it
was, it was dan restaurants for
for that for so Olive Garden was
one of their, their, their
mother ships and I helped open
the Olive Garden almost 20 years
ago and and uh and.
And because of Olive Garden as
to why my job was, yeah that's
why.
Thank you, Senator. Um, but with
that in mind that, you know, I,
I, there was a talk on, on
minimum wage increasing at that
point in time, uh, and I
immediately went to my, my
directors at that point in time,
and I was talking to my
directors about it and from a
corporate level, my directors
were saying, there's nothing for
you to worry about. Nothing's
gonna happen to your restaurant
because we are 1500 restaurants
strong and your restaurant is
carried
all of the other restaurants, so
no matter what that they could
do a $20 minimum wage they could
do $30 minimum wage, we'll make
it happen. We, we, we'll make
business work, but what does
that do for the small business
that rolls that small business
completely out because we can't
compete with already what's
happening at the corporate
level. That's one. So we think
about it, that when I opened my
business, I had this grandeur 5
years ago, uh, or, or 8 years
ago of of continuing to grow.
My business and having more and
more businesses and I still will
do that and I still do plan on
doing that even though I'm down.
I'm, I'm bullheaded and strong,
and that's gonna happen. I, it,
it will take a little bit longer
for that to happen because, you
know, year 5 when I was getting
ready to open up literally
another business. Here comes
pandemic and says not today, you
know, so literally I, I was
getting ready to sign a contract
on a, on a business, and thank
God I did not sign that contract
to open that business on the
other side of town.
Uh, it wasn't going to be the
same business of what I have
completely different concept,
but that's, that's pandemic for
you.
When I talk about corporations
though, in a, in a buying power
sense, that's the huge part in
the disparity for everything in
corporations on the corporation
side. When I talk to my food
distributors more than anything.
I, I, I, I say, OK, food
distributor, what, what's it
going to take for me to get
locked into a set contract set
contract pricing agreement and
that way we have that. You need
to have at least 2 locations,
maybe 3 locations. Well, that,
that's not gonna be viable for
any small business, especially
those.
When we're talking about those
that are starting up and wanting
to get going. It's not the
viable option. Then let's look
at it on a, on a liquor
standpoint, on a wholesale
wholesale standpoint, if you're
not aware on this, this is the
crazy part on on all of that. So
especially on on liquor, so.
Here I am, small business, 11
location. I can buy a bottle,
just then I'm just gonna throw
out numbers here just as as an
example. I can buy a bottle of
of Jose Cuervo, $25. If I buy a
single bottle, which is probably
what's gonna, what's gonna get
me through this month or
whatever the case may be,
depending on how many margaritas
I'm making or whatever the case
may be. If I buy a case that
bottle price on that on the on
the case is now gonna go down to
about $23.22 dollars.
Right? So the,
the more volume you buy, the
bigger discount you get, so then
if I'm a larger corporation and
I have multiple restaurants or
multiple businesses, and this is
for any business when you think
about it, cause Walmart's
another big thing in corporation
when we think about it. The
buying power is there. So if I
can buy.
10 cases, 15 cases, 100 cases at
a time, my bottle price just
went down to $15 a bottle.
Have you ever thought about it
like that and just bringing in
the disparity from the
differences in the businesses
here and you know, just going
back to the corporation when I
worked for the corporation, it
made sense from then, the more
you have, that the more you get,
right? And from a discount
standpoint, that that's really
where it comes from. So we know
that that the opportunities
there for us to open the
business it's there, you know,
I'd love to grow to be the 1500
strong here in New Mexico, but
we have to be afforded.
That opportunity for growth
first and I think that that's
where we've hit that and it's
been mentioned earlier,
regulations can some and
policies can sometimes
immobilize these businesses and
do that. I know sick pay was,
was talked about a little bit
earlier, um.
Think about it from a small
business standpoint on on
sickbay, uh, I have a, you know,
being, being wearing the
multiple hats, I have small
businesses as well and think
about these smaller communities
that you serve and represent
some of these restaurants might
be these mom and pop restaurants
that's uh only have the the
owner who's there serving in the
front and they have one employee
in the back, right? That one
employee calls off. That
business is closed for until
that that they can do that, but.
That owner's paying that wage
while that business is still
closed, even though there's no
income coming in. And that's the
one thing that I will say is, as
I mentioned earlier, uh, to you,
uh, in, in this, this is the
first time in my 8.5 years of
running my personal business
that I've actually had to take
money out of my personal, uh,
savings account to actually make
ends meet for the past 2.5
months I've been doing that and
that that's, that's not OK.
the end of the day. I don't, I,
I see the light at the end of
the tunnel because now I'm
starting to see a little bit of
an increase, but it, it worries
me to think about where we're
gonna be and how we're gonna be
in the future. And a lot of
these, that's what I was getting
at at the very beginning is
think about those businesses
that are telling you it's good,
it's going OK. I feel confident.
But then tomorrow, because
they're not forward with you and
telling you the truth of how
they really are and what's
really going on in their
business, they're closed,
they're gone. Our small business
is no longer here, and I think
that that's something that that
really truly needs to be taken
into consideration when we're
making these policy decisions,
uh, more than anything, um.
I, I, I think about.
Now, and, and that's where I, I,
for me personally, I wear the
multiple hats, you know, I, I
think about because I'm in your
shoes literally for my
community, for my town, uh, so I
understand. I don't make the
policy decisions like you make,
but I also have the hat of
wearing to worry about the
people that work for me, the
people that, that depend on me
to be there, and I think that's
the bigger picture that that we
have to look at, you know, and I
have a community. I have, have,
have that. I have my kids.
My kids, they're, they're.
They're my legacy, and that's
what I want you to all think
about. What's your legacy? What,
what do you want to have for
your, your constituents for your
families, for, for everybody,
what do you want to be going out
as being known as that you
helped small business across New
Mexico helped to grow that
business or that we crippled
industries and
Close small business completely.
So thank you.
Thank you. I was at the end of
your? OK, so, um, first on our
list is Senator Hamlin.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I, I
don't know if you made this
disclosure, um, Russell is
actually uh a very good friend
of of the both of ours, um, and
we frequent his restaurant, uh,
quite a bit, which by the way,
he has the senator burger there
which outsells the green chili
cheeseburger, which is my
hamburger.
After much pressure, um, for
Russell, but also I, I do want
to be transparent in the
Russell's business is a, is a
member of the Las Cruces Green
Chamber of Commerce.
And so, you know, you shared
this with me, uh, a couple, a
couple months ago about
The trying to leverage the money
that that you're buying when you
buy in bulk and and it's very
difficult because you're coming
in as a solo restaurant.
Um, and I'm wondering like what,
what can we do to help that
because ultimately it's like how
to stretch your dollars. I mean
you, you've you've touched on a
number of issues, and I'm sorry
I didn't hear the, the two of
your, your, your presentation,
um, and, and, and I'm wondering
like.
Just watching Representative
Armstrong's body language as
well, we're we're both like.
OK, there are things that have
to be done.
We, we really outsize a small
business owner. There are things
that have to be done and so what
are kind of the solid concrete
things that we can do at the
state level, um, because I can
see how you can leverage your
dollars more if you can do it as
a co op or a group is like you
and indulgence and underlays and
tide delight and all of that,
that all of you and they're all
in this area, by the way, um,
that if all of you could pull
together and buy and have much
stronger buying power so that
you can say
On your overhead, but the other
thing is, is that, and I have to
admit this as well is that um
you know, prices have gone up
and you all are trying to keep
your prices down so that you
keep your customers coming in,
so you're eating those costs
literally eating those costs
because you don't want to pass
on the increase to your
customers because you don't want
to lose customers and so it's
also this education of we're all
experiencing the cost of things
increasing and there's the
supply and demand, um, that
we're experiencing um the.
Cost of goods and services has
gone up and our small businesses
are the ones that are literally
eating those costs because they
don't want to scare away
customers.
But there's also, there's some
onus on us as customers.
That I think we, you shouldn't
be shouldering that entire
burden.
That we
We as customers need to
understand that impact and so
and I'm, and I'm thinking out
loud, but I'm thinking, you
know, my wife and I when we go
out to eat, we go out to eat at
our friends' places, you know,
we don't go to new places
anymore because if we're gonna
spend that extra money, we're
gonna spend it with you.
Um, and not people that we don't
have a relationship with. And,
and so I'm wondering like how,
how we can help reduce your
overhead costs.
By maximizing the power that you
have as small businesses.
So that you can continue.
Doing what you're doing because
I have to say Salute de Messia
is one of the businesses that
gives back to our community and
is one of the pillars in our
community locally owned
businesses give back to local
charities, 350% more, and it's
because we know them. They are
employing our friends and our
neighbors or are our friends and
our neighbors. They are
committed to the community, so
how can we continue to support
you and how can we reduce the
challenges and so what I'm
asking for in a long drawn out
way and I'm sorry, um, is what
are the.
Concrete things we need to do in
order to help you and keep you
from struggling.
Because you are a small business
is the largest employer in the
country.
How can we keep you in business?
And so that's the question that
I have and maybe there isn't an
answer today, but I think for
all of us it's like what do we
have to do?
Senator, I'll, I'll, and I know
that these two will, will chime
in as well, but I think the the
biggest thing or Madam Chair,
Senator, uh, one of the biggest
things here is ensure that when
we make a policy or we do these
regulations that we literally
have the business at the table
because I think that a lot of
these decisions are being made
or have been made in the past
without having the actual
business at the table. We look
at uh introductions into.
Uh, just this last session when
we had tax uh liquor tax laws
and things like that that were
potentially going to be going
through and who was brought to
the table on that? I, I tried to
talk with my my representatives
that were, were local about
that, some of who were carrying
those tax tax bills, one of them
refused to talk to me completely
and I'm open. I'll open my books
any day for for anything to for
you to see just everything,
anything and everything.
We'll talk about it.
But I think it's literally
having the conversations with
the businesses. We're not doing
that, you know, so literally
have us at the table and and
let's have these conversations,
but also leverage the fairness
across the board, as I
mentioned, because there's so
much disparity between within
our own with the images within
the food and beverage industry,
there's there's so much
disparity in that. And that,
that's just one. So let's look
at all the industry across the
board and then it's a bigger
conversation, but you've
nurtured those relationships and
not everybody has to keep
or just the, the, the idea that
they can. And one of the things
that I think that is, that is
really makes New Mexico stand
above is that your legislators
typically are approachable. um,
I mean, you and I both will sit
and BS in the store about things
that we need to do, um, and so I
think it's when you, when you
talk about the equity.
Like that's where I need those
specifics is like, you know,
because when I think of like
when we had talked about this is
how can we allow you and several
other restaurants to pull
together your buying power.
So that you can get more for the
money that you're spending, like
what can we do, can is that
something we can do?
See I don't, I don't think that
that's a, a, a possibility from
a legislative side that would
have to be from a from an
individual business side, and
you have to think that each one
of us carries different product,
different inventories,
different, different selling
prices and you know, different
uses of product. You know, I, I
inventory, you know.
Alcohol alone, I, I inventory
over 300 items, you know, and
then so then you add in food and
it's 700 items, you know, so,
you know, so inventory alone
there it's huge, and you know my
menu, my menu is huge all
around. Uh, it's probably going
to be cut back very quickly
soon, so,
but don't worry, I won't be
going anywhere, but when we
think about it at the end of the
day that that's what.
I mean, yeah, it, it's nice to
think it's just one of those,
you know, and, and, and I, and I
think it's also something that
like talk with your colleagues
about is like what are concrete
things that we can do with the
legislature to help you because
I think, and I, and I don't mean
to speak for this in committee,
but I think just an
understanding the values that
this committee brings is like,
how can we keep throwing
roadblocks at you and allow you
to thrive.
And, and that's where those
concrete examples I think are
really important. Go ahead.
And um I wanna, I wanna expand
on the liquor tax. I know it
hasn't passed, but, and I think
you saw yesterday that the
liquor tax in New Mexico is very
high.
So you know, is there a reason
does the state need the money?
Is there a real reason to
increase the liquor tax right
now when these folks are already
in a bad state. One of the
liquor tax bills that was put
forward last year was somewhere
around $273 million in liquor
taxes, um, at the excise level
if you break that down by the
number of liquor licensees out
there. It was something like
$22,000 per licensee.
And so you just, I mean, really,
we got to start thinking about
these things for these small
businesses, a small, you know,
and so we carve out businesses
that are 1 to 5.
Well, restaurants.
Fortunately or unfortunately, we
have
Thousands of employees we employ
11% of New Mexico's employees.
85,000 employees were the last
bastion for service. You don't
get service anywhere else. You
come into a restaurant, you're
greeted by a host, you have
maybe, maybe not so much
anymore, but you have those
points of service. Some cooks
your food, somebody cleans your
plate, um.
So, so when we're talking about.
Uh, labor laws. We are the most
affected. That's why you hear
about me crying about minimum
wage all the time, right? If
you, you know, if you change
minimum wage, oh my God, things
are gonna go bad. They do go
bad. Let me tell you, this guy
is gonna hurt every dollar
increase is $2000 per employee.
OK, because it's just $1 to you.
It's $2000 per employee. How
many employees did you say you
had 24. He's a small business.
He's a small business that has
24 employees and on average in
New Mexico these businesses uh.
Average restaurant has 25
employees. So when you start
talking about carving out small
businesses from 1 to 5, that
doesn't work for us. You need to
carve out small businesses and
restaurants from 1 to 25. So
it's just, it's, it's a matter
of.
Yes, listening to these guys and
I will tell my folks.
Every
You know, every minute I get
that they need to be talking to
their legislators and Madam
Chair and Senator, thank you so
much for listening because I do
know you all listen and I know
you know this guy and you know
many other restaurant tours in
your in your district and a lot
of you know restaurateurs in
your district and, and I do want
to tell you, so when I was a
restaurateur 20 years ago.
Almost right where he is now,
um.
People would come in and say,
how are things?
And no matter how bad it was.
Things are great because that's
what they wanted to hear. They
didn't want to hear because I
used to do this. I used to say,
ah,
you know, it's horrible things
are bad, you know, I'm not
making payroll, you know.
Customers don't want to hear
that, so, so you, you basically,
you.
You put on a face and you make
it happen, but if, if you will
go to those restaurant tours and
really ask them to tell you how
are things really? They will
tell you and I don't think it's
very good right now. I have a
few restaurants in my, um.
On
Committees that are doing OK.
But not many of them are.
So just keep that in mind when
you're thinking about passing
laws and you probably have some.
Yeah, um, Vice Chair Hamblin,
members of the committee, I
think the most important thing
to take into consideration when
you are looking at making
policies is to really as, as
Carolyn Russell said, really
look at who's behind that
business. You know, I mentioned
that our hoteliers have big
brand names on them, but if you
really investigate the hotels,
the small tourism businesses in
your district, you're gonna find
out they're mostly mom and pops,
they're small businesses, and
they are struggling, and they
have a
vested interest, um, sometimes
we get villainized as if we
don't care about employees, but
the fact is, all of my members
have a vested interest in
keeping their employees. They
want to retain employees. They
want those employees to stay
with them 3 years, 5 years, 10
years down the road. They don't
want to have to continue to
cover that training cost. So
when they tell you something is
a burden on them, they mean it,
and we really need.
To have their opinions and their
voices respected. So when they
say that's $2000 per employee
per year and this is its impact
on my bottom line or this
regulation is gonna cost me or
trying to meet these
certification guidelines is
going to cost me, um, I, I
encourage you to really listen
to those business owners in your
district because they are all, I
mean, you know, we have good
tourism numbers, we're bringing
people in from out of the state,
but the business owners working
in this state.
are really working hard and
struggling to to be successful
and to grow their businesses.
Well, I appreciate your candor
and, and I do think that
they're, you know, I mean,
there's always an opportunity
for a conversation, even if it's
in the backyard watching a kid
movie. we still always have
those conversations and so, um,
if you could marinate on like
the specific things that we can
do that makes it a lot easier
for us, um, and, and I, you
know, and any opportunity to, to
partner with uh our members in
the House and in the Senate.
Uh, to help that I think is, is
really important and really
powerful, so I appreciate you
being so straightforward and
honest with us and wanting to
make sure that we get those
things done. So thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, panel. I
appreciate it.
Thank you. Uh, Senator Maestas.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you presenters. Thanks for
driving up the um.
This is great. I wanna thank the
chairs for putting this
presentation together cause you
know.
Not all of us in the legislature
no economics inside and out, um,
and I don't think a great and I
would imagine even less know the
economics of a restaurant. So
this was just really cool.
You know, good old fashioned
economics of a restaurant that
makes 1.5 million and and has to
pay out because restaurants.
Survive on the margin, 2%, 3%,
and so that's why the thought of
raising the minimum wage had
restaurants just panicked out
like you wouldn't believe, um,
so I understand why, why that
policy was, was.
was struggle against so much.
Because you know the an
economist will tell you that
restaurants benefit the most
when you raise the minimum wage
because folks have more
disposable income, but that
doesn't happen overnight. You
raise the minimum wage, the
economy adjusts, salaries
adjust, you know, that takes 34
years to kick in the minimum
wage payout kicks in like from
one day to the next. So
hopefully, uh, and here in
Albuquerque what raised the
minimum wage.
More than the legislature was
Amazon.
When Amazon came online, uh.
The the chair, Senator Munoz was
talking about.
You know, what's that economic
home run Amazon came online and
was paying 4000 workers 1617
bucks an hour, boom and that
then, so the minimum wage in
Albuquerque is not set by
lawmakers, set by the market,
um, because it's it's way above
1212 bucks. But anyway, so I,
but I respect the fact that
minimum wage, why minimum wage
is struggled against so much
the, uh, there's some things we
can't do as policymakers. We, we
cannot micromanage the economies
of scale.
You know what I mean? so a
restaurant that has 20
restaurants is just likely gonna
lower its costs by economies of
scale because they only need,
you know, one accountant and.
You know, they buy in bulk or
whatever, um, but we can do
policies particularly to uh.
Lowering barriers to entry, so
to speak. The, the liquor
license, I hate to shudder as to
what the restaurant industry
would be like if we had not
passed uh the the the new liquor
license reform laws, the, uh,
I got uh information from RLD
and I'm sure there's there's 135
restaurants that that now have
the restaurant B license that
did not have to pay 3500 for a
liquor license and there's uh
578 restaurants that have the
restaurants A,
which is the beer and wine and
of that 107 have the the
restaurant A plus with spirits
and stuff, so, so there's almost
250.
Restaurants that have uh the
ability to sell spirits and it's
not the
spirit sales necessarily, but
it's customers coming through
the door. That that's my
understanding, but um, but his
policies like that that we could
do to assist a restaurant tours
because this city to become a
big time city we need.
Frankly, more high-end
restaurants that sell non New
Mexican dishes, even though we
love New Mexico food. Um, so
anything we could do from a
policy standpoint to grow the
restaurant industry is, is it
will have a ripple effect
across, across our entire
economy, but it's up to us, I
think, as policymakers, you as
leaders of the association to
come up with the policy
recommendations, listening to
the rest tour, that's, that's
awesome because it's up to us
for our wheels to turn and come
up with answers, but I think one
of the easiest ones is uh.
This tax credit, you know, I
mean, like I think it would be
legal to do a tax credit for
restaurants in their first year
of existence if we were to try
to do that.
The restaurant that's 3 years
old.
will say that's unfair.
So, um,
So we got to uh.
We can't fight that, you know,
we can't fight stuff like that.
We're trying to help small
businesses, we can't.
Uh, have small businesses that
are not affected fight those
policies cause, cause then the
next year or the next year we'll
come up with policies that help
that particular small business,
you know what I mean? So we have
to give a little bit to all get
a lot, you know, um, but, uh,
but certainly small business
startups, restaurant startups,
uh.
You know, uh,
Tax credits for local culinary
artists that come out of CNM or
UNM. I don't know, we'll just,
you know what I mean, we should
have like a brainstorming
session, but um.
A
But, but at some point, um.
So the disparity, Madam Chair,
between the restaurant B, the,
the, the, the bill had the
restaurant bees and then it was
amended to to add the the local
distilled spirits, and that was
uh.
500 bucks versus a 10,000. So
that's a huge disparity, um, I
think that will probably close
at some point in the future, but
for now, the, the restaurant not
only helps the restaurant, but
creates a local market for for
distillers, local distillers,
the um question the uh we wrote,
we wrote the law to read that if
somebody orders a pizza,
somebody orders food, they could
take home alcohol on.
But it's limited to.
Uh, 750 mL of wine.
A 6 pack of beer. I'm sorry, or
a growler and a six pack of
alcoholic beverage. That's the
magic words in the law,
alcoholic beverage, liquor
director in the executive branch
in its wisdom has in rule beer.
So that's not cool because
there's a lot of alcoholic
beverages that are not beer that
that technically legally, in my
opinion, you could take it home
legally, but you'd get in
trouble and have to sue so we
gotta make sure that when we
pass laws like that, that the
executive branch that the rules
don't make their own laws, that
the rules follow the statute,
um, but, but, uh, how is that
going? Is it, is it just too
bureaucratic to get the
Uh
Oh, never mind, I was talking
about delivery because delivery
for some reason hasn't really
taken off, but, but, uh, but
theoretically you can have
customers that have to buy an
additional item and they could
take home wine, six pack, or
growler. They cannot what's the,
can they, Madam Chair, why are
you shaking your head,
Madam Chair,
Senator, um, the, I, I think
that that that when we think
about restaurants in specific,
so restaurant A or the the
restaurant licenses whether they
be the regular.
Restaurant license that enhanced
A enhance B are limited to
serving within their premises.
It cannot leave their premises
unless the only way that it can
is if the guests were to order a
bottle of wine in which a glass
is poured from that bottle and
then it can be packaged, sealed,
put in a bag, and then that that
bag that wine, wine only can go
home with that guest.
Thank you, sir. I believe that's
probably what the rules read.
But the law that we passed
allows take home up to a bottle
of wine up to a 6 pack of beer,
up to a growler. That's what the
statute reads. So let's take a
look at that between now and
January the first delivery
uh license that was issued in
the state just because when it
came about I was like, I'm gonna
jump on this. This is great.
I've, I've used it once because
of all the regulations that are
behind it and because it is
absolutely a horrible piece of
legislation right now, but
I'm sorry. I'm, I'm sorry, it
is. I'm like I told you, I'm not
gonna beat around the bush. It,
it, it's, it's, but, but the,
the thing is, is that I hold on
to it and I pay my dues every
year because I see, well, number
one, it's it has number one on
it, so I hope I don't ever lose
that, but the other part of that
is that I know that eventually
there will be reform that will
make that happen and and we'll
we'll get to where it needs, but
with that, that's where you can
have the grower. You can have
the 750 mL you can have that.
The, the, the, uh, the premade
beverages uh that are made up to
a certain amount that don't have
more than 4 ounces of liquor
within that that can be
delivered to a home with a $10
purchase of food, but then there
again, like for myself, unless
I'm gonna carry a $5000
insurance policy, uh, then, then
that, that's one. The other part
is, is that I can only do one
delivery at a time. I can't
take, so if I have 10 deliveries
that come.
that all have a bottle of wine
that are going to 10 different
locations. I can't have those in
my vehicle. I can only go one,
come back, one come back, one
come back, there's the way that
it's written is not supportive,
and I think we should work on it
and make those happen.
I thank you, madam. Thank you
for that. That's fantastic
advice because I believe 80% of
those of your complaints are
because of the rules.
Because of the executive branch
and its rules, um, and to get
that in the books in the first
place was took us 40 years so to
change it will be way easier
than to put it in initially, but
uh but a lot of that stuff is in
rural and I think I could write
a letter to the liquor director
and say change the rules and
yes, no, maybe I, I would just,
I think it'd just be easier just
to just to someone to sue and
win and forced the executive to
change its rules. Um, but yeah,
let's look at that between now
and January because I think
it's.
Probably time where 4 years
removed from house built 255,
uh, so it might be time to tweak
tweak that statute. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you. uh, Representative
Montoya.
Thank you Madam Chair um Mr.
Hernandez, uh, thank you for
that brief moment of honesty
this uh legislators need to hear
once in a while that some of our
legislation is not.
Optimal, um, that is, that's a
fact and uh unfortunately, you
sit there, we do these things
and, and frankly, sometimes, uh.
The business owner and the
average New Mexican is afraid to
even complain about.
A piece of legislation not being
perfect, uh, so I actually, I
appreciate that that was.
I saw Carol jump, but the
reality is, uh, it's your
opportunity to talk to us and
I'm, and it's very helpful to
hear that from folks and uh I
would.
That being said,
I wanted to ask.
Any one of you or all of you,
just one question about
legislation that was that's been
before us the last couple of
years and I expect it to be
coming back up again this next
year.
And that is um.
The paid family medical Leave
Act that has been before us, um,
uh.
For
Restaurant owners that I know in
in my community, they're
terrified of that piece of
legislation.
Um, because the way it's
written, it's would be the most
aggressive paid family medical
leave legislation in the
country.
Um, there are really no
boundaries.
There's, there's really no
reasonable boundaries around who
is a household member. It could
be a cousin who's living in the
household who's unemployed.
Um, and.
With an industry like the
Uh, restaurant industry and or
the or the hospitality industry
in general, um.
In other states where where.
The
Family medical leave acts that
have been passed in other states
which are not as aggressive as
the one that we've seen.
What has happened in other
states is having to employ 30 to
35% more employees.
To manage the number of
employees who are
Who don't show up or uh due to
The law, um.
I, I know that's kind of a
horn's nest to throw out there
considering uh Miss White, your
reaction to
Mr. Hernandez, just a second
ago, but the reality is we're
likely to face that again and
and I just I see small
businesses across the state.
Going out of business, not.
Because of the way we're
planning on paying for that, but
for the very fact that there's
just not enough employees right
now, there's just not enough
employees and so if you had to
hire a 33% more, let's just go
to the middle.
33% more employees, they, they
don't exist.
So is there any way you could
before this committee talk about
that before we potentially do
that to you next year.
Madam Chair and
Representative Montoya.
So
I actually run a coalition of
30.
Um, business organizations that
are working on paid family
medical leave and um one thing
we're doing is we're opposing
the bill that's out there now,
and I think for a lot of
reasons, most of you know.
Why that bill isn't good, number
one, it's not fiscally
responsible for the state, um.
And you may not have been here,
but I did say that the New
Mexico Restaurant Association
has come up with a, a list of 8
things that we think would make
that bill better. And so of
these 8 things, I will just tell
you right now is, is that we
believe the one of the things is
that we should integrate the
paid family medical leave with
the sick leave, right? Let's do
one bill that deals with leave.
Let's do some um definitions
that make sense.
Not just for everybody but for
Employers as well and then let's
consider, here's, here's the big
thing for businesses.
This bill would have placed.
Um, this program in the
workforce solutions department.
And God bless them, we don't
trust them.
Anybody who's filed an
unemployment, um.
claim
Knows that they will get
unemployment.
Anybody on our side who has done
all the things right. I mean,
you have, you have put, you
have, you know, you've given
them 3 chances. They've taken
those 3 chances, you let them
go, you let them know they
wouldn't be getting unemployment
and yet they get, they get it.
We don't trust this department
because it doesn't do what the
law says it should do.
And you're talking about taking
200 employees from
The labor pool that we don't
have and putting them into that
department.
So
were suspect. Let's just say
that, um, so there's some things
in here and I will, I will get
this to you and make sure you
see it, but um the first thing
that the legislatures should do
is a an actuarial study. You
will find that if an insurance
company wants to come into the
state of New Mexico, they have
to do an actuarial study in
order to sell insurance in New
Mexico. We should be doing that.
And an actuarial study isn't
Bieber or some
Other organization that
Kind of know something about
insurance, actuarials know about
insurance. They know about the
population. They know who's
gonna uptake this, and they can
tell us what this is going to
cost New Mexico.
Before we put a piece of
legislation together, we should
have a study done to tell us
what it's going to cost New
Mexico because again that's the
other fear for businesses is,
yes, you tell us it's going to
be 0.4% of payroll now, but you
put something in the very back
of that piece of legislation
that says, and we will
We will raise this on employers.
If there is such a time. We give
Discretion to the Department to
raise this on employers. So the
only people that get the raise
in the um.
rate or the employers, not the
employees. So now you've got the
employers paying more and more
and more, and we're used to this
because taxes usually go up and
up and up.
But we really need, we need
relief right now again, so, um,
those are some of the things
that I think are important. But
the other thing is, could we
just not do this right now?
You know, again, um, these guys
have a lot on their mind.
And other small businesses in
New Mexico do as well.
I will tell you that when I call
Russell.
He's usually doing a catering.
He's usually working the floor.
He's not somebody who comes up
to these things and does this
all day long. I mean, he had to
replace himself on the floor
today in order to be here.
That's every restaurant tour in
this state, there's very, very
few of them that are not working
in their businesses and working
very hard because, number one,
they can't find employees and 2,
they've got to do it to make a
bottom line. So just give us a
little bit of a break on the, on
the regulations, um, that's.
Really what we're asking for and
that's what we've always asked
for, you know, the New Mexico
Restaurant Association very
rarely comes to this body for
money. We did it last year, it
didn't work. We're not doing it
again.
But
What we do come to you is we
come to you and say, please
don't do this. It's really going
to affect us. And so those, you
know.
That's what I'll say about the
paid family medical leave.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, I, I
know we're running behind so I
don't wanna, uh, elaborate just
uh just.
We need to listen to small
business.
We listened to everybody else,
but we don't actually listen to
the employers.
And the small business in New
Mexico is the backbone of our
economy. And if you want to know
how a community is doing, look
at the restaurant industry.
If right now if you go to
Espanola, I think there's one.
Restaurant that is is an actual
sit down service restaurant
today post COVID.
Um,
That that.
is a problem. I mean, obviously
you've got the casinos, you've
got the bigger, you've got the
hotels, you've got restaurants
like that, but you don't have
the small business.
Thriving the way they did
pre-COVID.
Um,
We have lost
In San Juan County, I think it
was 20.
Restaurants
Um, since COVID that have not
reopened.
Um, minus the big box stores
minus, you know, a, a, a
corporate.
Structure
The little guys are not making
it. Our homegrown folks are not
making it and we need to, I
think we look at the big guys
first.
Um, we need to stop that. We
need to flip that on its head
and see how it affects the
little guys first.
And, and if it hurts the little
guys, we shouldn't do it because
these are us.
The little guys are New Mexico.
The big guys move here from
somewhere else, love to have
that out of state investment in
New Mexico, but the little guys
are us. And I would and I think
we need to, we need to be very
careful.
That we don't put people who
have invested everything.
Uh, their mortgage. Many of
these folks are, are, are
floating credit cards to pay
payroll.
So when they, when they say
something, I, I, we need to
really listen to them and so,
uh, look forward, uh, Ms. White,
to have you and the other
industry folks very active this
60 day, I think you're gonna
need to be.
Thank you Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Armstrong. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I'll be quick and to the
point, uh.
People don't go into business to
break even.
They go into business to make a
fair profit.
Um,
All businesses at one time,
whether corporate or not,
started as two people.
More than likely.
Uh, when
Uh, I have a couple in, in my
district, Osiris Navarro, and
Michael Gola, both immigrants.
Opened a business right as COVID
hit.
Luckily, uh, my husband and I
are the ones that sold them the
building and we said do not make
a payment.
Until you get on your feet.
Not everybody will do that.
Or has that opportunity.
So
Uh, we cannot subsidize our way
out.
Of where we are.
But what we can do is every
single time a policy comes up on
our side.
We see
Your face.
We say your name.
Russell Hernandez.
I say Osiris Navarro and Michael
Gola.
And we make a decision.
What we're going to do.
And I want people to remember
his face.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. um, thank you for
your presentation today. Uh,
Russell, when I, when we met
last week to talk about what you
were going to talk about, I
asked you to be honest, um, I
think you told your story very
eloquently, um, I think you
were, um,
very honest and very passionate
and um I think that you made a
difference today. So thank you
for making the time to drive up.
Um, I know we've had a long
friendship, but, um, this is a
whole different, a different
thing, um, you know, when you
talk about having a $400,000
budget. You know, I think what
people also around the table
need to understand is that
you're also um paying payroll
you're, you know, you're doing
your quarterly taxes. I mean, as
if you do all that, I mean at
the end.
I mean, what's the bottom line
and is it, are you in the red a
loss because he, right. And so
I, I appreciate that on so many
levels and um just wanted the,
the room to hear that because I
think for, you know, this
committee especially we need to
know impact that our, our
decisions, um, impact small
business and so I, I really
appreciate you being up here. I
appreciate the whole
presentation. So uh with that,
I'm gonna close out your
presentation unless you have
anything else to say. Um, I have
a little bit of a.
Keeping before I let us go, um,
but thank you for your
presentation today.
So, um, our last presenter, uh,
she got caught up in traffic and
it kind of worked out because
then it makes it, uh, easier for
us to go on our tour. We will
reschedule her for, uh,
November, um, but, uh.
I hope she's safe and I, I hope,
um, I, we will, it will be one
of the first, uh.
Presentations that we will hear
in November. Um, we have our, we
have a van that we can use that
people can get a ride over for
the uh tour today. Uh, we also
please remember we have dinner
tonight and uh Sky has done, uh,
she's getting a a food truck and
she's gonna have lots of uh
entertainment, so please make
sure that we, we show up because
she is, she's trying to make it
nice for us, um, I do have an
announcement though for tomorrow
for
Netflix, uh, we've been told you
have to bring in your ID to be
allowed inside and no weapons.
So what's that?
Oh, even in your vehicle, so no,
no weapons even in your vehicle
and we, right, we will be at
Netflix.
So please leave all your weapons
at home. OK? Yes.
OK, and so with that we're gonna
adjourn for today. We'll meet.
Where do you want us to meet you
with the van?
OK.
you want.
Wonderful. And dinner and
reception tonight will be around
5:30ish.
So how far is it from here to
where we're getting where we're
meeting the students?
What
OK.
