Um, I'm gonna hand it over to
Missy and if you would, uh, both
just introduce yourselves and
what you do and why you're here
today.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Missy Currier and I am
the president and CEO of the New
Mexico Oil and Gas Association.
Uh, thank you very much for
having us all here today and
also Madam Chair, I want to
thank, uh, your fantastic staff
for all they do to help us get
prepared for these meetings. We
really enjoy working with Aaron
and the team. So thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair, and
the committee. My name is Andrea
Felix. I'm the senior regulatory
policy advisor for NMOga. I am
in the New Mexico native, um,
born and raised in Blanco, so
this is my backyard. Very
honored to be here with all of
you today. Thank you.
So just a little about Namoga. I
know that several of you guys
have worked with us before or
heard of us, but we are the New
Mexico Oil and Gas Association.
What that means is that we have
over 180 member companies and a
unique thing about Nmoga is that
we represent some of the largest
oil and gas companies to the
smaller mom and pops that have
been in New Mexico for decades.
Balancing the needs and the
expectations of those two
different sides of companies is
always a great opportunity for
us, but probably the
association.
' s greatest challenge as well,
because as you might guess, some
of the regulations that the
larger companies can absorb can
sometimes be difficult for the
smaller companies without as
much capital. So finding a way
forward for all of those
businesses is something that's
important to us within the
association itself.
I know you guys hear us talk a
lot about this and you've heard
it in committees and on the
floor, but just a little bit
about the oil and gas landscape
in the New Mexico. Uh, we are
the 2nd largest producer within
all the states for oil, and we
are very fortunate to drill one
of the cleanest barrels of oil
in the world. And when we talk
about one of the cleanest
barrels of oil, I'll let Andrea
mention what that actually means
so that you've got an
understanding of why we do it
better than most.
So New Mexico is extremely
blessed with the greatest
geological resources in the
world, as Missy said, when you
couple that with the um New
Mexico's nationally leading
performance-based emission rules
that has allowed members to
really take that a step forward
and achieve compliance through
simultaneously reducing gas loss
rates and methane intensities.
So, um, with New Mexico's
legislature.
All the work that you guys do
with instilling the rules and
regulations that has helped us
to maintain and achieve the
cleanest barrel of oil.
Moving forward, even though
we're the 2nd producing largest
oil and gas state, we also
provide 13% of all US crude oil
production in the country. Uh,
why that number is significant
is because that helps to provide
for energy security as well as
increased stability in the
energy space. And it's also
important because we have such
stringent and important
environmental rules within New
Mexico that allows us to produce
at such a high level that we not
only the energy security needs
with environment.
Pursuits.
We also have, we are the 7th
largest natural gas producing
state in America, and that's due
largely in part to the San Juan
Basin and Farmington, where
you're sitting right now.
Farmington, Blanco, Aztec, and
the surrounding area have long
time held the opportunity to be
a true focus within gas
production. We'll talk a little
bit more about the region in a
minute, uh, but just want you to
know that, um, despite some of
the economic development
challenges that Mr. Gibbs and
the mayor discussed this
morning.
There's some really good things
going on in the region as well
as companies continue to
diversify, as well as get better
within the production space.
So when it comes to the energy
landscape, as you all know, we
are a very, very rich
energy-rich state. Um, I think
that there's a little bit of a
misnomer when it comes to the
name of our association. First
and foremost, we do represent
oil and gas, but we also are
very supportive and interested
in many different types of
industries. Uh, we work very
closely with our partners and
wind, solar, hydrogen, carbon
capture, geothermal and beyond
because New Mexico has so many
energy rich.
opportunities we don't want it
to be about just one or two
energy sources, but finding a
way to not only diversify our
portfolio but ensure economic
diversification as we move
forward.
Of the two basins that we're
fortunate to have in New Mexico.
We have the Permian Basin, which
is often in the news the most.
Um, one of the reasons that the
Permian is in the news the most
is because it is as, uh, Andrea
alluded to. It has fantastic
rock. And when we say fantastic
rock, it's fairly cheaper to
drill it's environmentally
friendly to drill and it allows
us to really move the industry
forward in a way that not older
shale production.
often have the opportunity to
do. I know several of you have
uh visited southeastern New
Mexico. We're glad that you've
been there. If you haven't, I'm
from Carlsbad, and I would love
to introduce you to my hometown
and to the region. Um, but when
you go into the area, you will
notice that if you're around
Artesia and Hobbs, there's more
legacy production, and by that I
mean you see more of the old
pump jacks, those things that go
like this, like a big teeter
totter. Um, I promise, um, only
a
Occasionally we would try to
ride those growing up, um, and
cows really don't tip as easily
as you would think, um, but, uh,
that legacy production is stuff
that has been drilled for a long
time. A lot of the newer
production is south of Carlsbad,
and the reason that that
production is newer is that our
geologists knew that the
resources were there, but the
technology wasn't there to go
get it yet. Now that there has
been increases in opportunities
around horizontal drilling. Um,
it is allowed.
That production to be increased
within the region, um, the
Permian also has gas production,
um, but not as near as much as
the San Juan.
The San Juan on the other side
has a little bit different
opportunities in the way that
they produce and they have a
different shale formation. So
while oil is drilled in the San
Juan, Gas is king in this area.
Um, what's very unique about the
San Juan, and I know that some
of our folks in the room that
have worked here for decades can
tell you 40 years ago, they said
that the San Juan Basin was
drying up. 30 years ago, they
said the San Juan Basin was
drying up 20 years ago, 10 years
ago.
technologies continue to improve
and allows us to be better
stewards of the environment as
well as opportunities to go and
get the product. The San Juan
and the Permian have continued
to revitalize so that we're able
to get the energy rich resources
that are made available to us.
And, um, Andrea, I know that
they've heard a lot this morning
already about um, the shift away
from the coal plant and how
that's affected the economy, but
with your understanding of both
oil and gas and how things have
changed you.
want to talk a little bit about
your experiences? Yes, thank
you, Missy. Um, San Juan Basin,
my backyard, right? Um, 40 years
ago, I was 5 years old, um, on
the back of the tractor with my
grandpa. I'm a 5th generation
rancher here, um, in the basin
and, um, I, I refer to the San
Juan Basin as the, the gift that
keeps on giving. Um, everybody
keeps saying it's going to dry
up as Missy said, but here we
are and we're still going. When
the
The plant closed up, you know,
that hit near and dear, that hit
my family, that hit my friends
and my uh fellow community
members. And so diversification
is very important to me and my
friends and my neighbors here
because, you know, they, a lot
of those displaced folks looked
to the oil and gas industry. So
as we move forward with the
energy transition, it's very
important that we look at all
sectors. So we have a home for
our friends and families to go
to, so they can continue.
Purchasing groceries, putting
their kids through school and
all the things that we take for
granted every day.
We know that you've seen these
numbers a lot, especially in the
last legislative session and
your legislative finance
colleagues are actually in
Riodoso right now discussing
what the revenue projections
will be for the next fiscal
year. Uh, one of the things that
I think that often surprises
reporters and others that ask us
about our interest and the
opportunity that we provide, uh,
such a significant portion of
the state's budget. We're very
proud to be able to produce at
that level, but we would also be
very proud to share that
percentage with other major
industries.
in the state. Uh, we certainly
don't want to decrease our
production, but one of the
reasons that Texas has so much
money. Obviously, Texas is much
bigger than us, but Texas's
economy is much more
diversified. So we would love to
still produce at the level that
we are, but still share the
reins with other industries, as
you and your colleagues work to
further diversify the economy.
In the next couple slides, uh,
we've pulled a couple of the
communities that y'all live and
are proud to represent to show
our impact.
Packed within those different
communities. Uh, this goes from
capital, uh, capital outlay K
through 12 funding, uh, just the
money that goes into the regions
as a whole. Um, know you guys
know these numbers, um, if
there's something, if there's a
particular region that you're
not sure about, we would love to
get these numbers to you. Of
course, we will update these for
the next legislative session.
Um, but we'll definitely keep
you updated as these numbers
continue to change. One thing
that we really want to
Highlight is when we provide
these numbers to you, we don't
provide them as a, hey, Senator
Griggs, you should be thanking
us for everything that we do for
you. It's more of a, we just
want you to know the impact that
we're able to bring to the state
and the opportunities that we
can utilize these dollars to
continue to further your
communities. Uh, with that in
mind, we wanted to talk a little
bit about the taxing structure
within New Mexico and how that
taxing structure definitely
affects.
the way that we are able to
provide these dollars and how
the state benefits from
production.
Oil and gas is one of the most
taxed industries within the
state of New Mexico, uh, we're
comfortable with that. Please
know that that's not a
complaint. um, but we certainly
want you guys to understand how
our business operates so that
then helps benefit the state.
Included in those taxes are
severance tax, property taxes,
emergency school taxes, gas
processing tax, Avalorum taxes
for both production and
equipment, as well as benefit
from taxes on federal and fee
land. That's a long list that
adds up to big numbers, uh, but
our companies are very proud of
the fact that we can continue to
contribute to the region as well
as with our other industry
partners and other energy
sectors. Uh, one of the things
that we've talked a lot
About as well is the
conservation tax. Last session,
uh, there was a bill that was
considered that would help with
the reclamation fund and wanting
to talk a little bit about that
bill briefly. What that
reclamation fund does, it's been
in existence since the 1970s and
that reclamation fund is there
to help with the plugging of
abandoned wells. Um, a lot of
abandoned wells are plugged by
the companies themselves, but
sometimes there are reasons
maybe a company goes out of
Business they fire file
bankruptcy and other things that
they cannot plug those wells.
That is what the conservation
tax and reclamation fund are
therefore to ensure that
taxpayers are not paying for
those reclamated sites. Oil and
gas should be paying for the
opportunities to remediate the
different areas. And so this
year we are hopeful and excited
that y'all will please consider
that bill again so that we can
refund the reclamation fund,
which was unfortunately.
a few years ago when the state
didn't have as much money as
it's enjoying now. Uh, Senator
Greggs also carried a bill last
session that was unfortunately
vetoed that would have provided
a tax incentive for stripper
wells, uh, for smaller companies
and what that stripper well
exemption would have allowed for
is an environmentally friendly
way for that well to continue
producing, which number one
continues to make money for the
state.
Uh, and number 2, do so in in a
way that's
Much more environmentally
friendly because the smaller
companies would have the tax
incentive to go and get the
equipment to ensure that it has
proper monitoring and others. We
are also hopeful even though
that Senator Greggs is retiring,
we are hopeful that that
legislation gets moved forward
and the governor will have the
opportunity to consider it again
if the chambers decide to pass
it. Uh, but there's lots of
really good economic incentives
as well as opportunities for
environmental enhancement with
some of these bills.
Uh, one of the other bills that
we did want to mention and we're
excited for all of you to hear
from the state land commissioner
following our presentation. Uh,
we're very grateful for Namoga's
partnership with SLO and the
work that we do, uh, with the
commissioner and her team. One
of the reasons that we wanted to
bring up the bill is she's going
to talk about the royalty rates
bill, just so you're all aware,
um, Nmoga has been neutral on
that bill since it was first
filed in 2019. I'll let her
explain the specifics.
Of the bill and why the State
land office feels that it's
important to move that forward.
Um, the one thing that I did
want to mention is that
comparing Texas state land
trusts to New Mexico State Land
Trust is not an apples to apples
comparison. She'll get into more
of the details, but please know
to have a full picture of the
changes in that potential
royalty rate. We would encourage
the legislature to please look
at the entire taxing structure
between both of the communities
as well as
management regulations in New
Mexico as well as the cost of
doing business in New Mexico.
Um, we have offered to the state
land office that if they would
like to do a comparison, we'd be
happy to work with them on that,
uh, but very grateful again for
our partnership with the Land
commission and all that they do
for industry as a whole.
In addition to the tax dollars
that we're able to generate,
we're also very grateful as an
industry to give back to the
communities, uh, both in the San
Juan and the Permian and
throughout the rest of the
state. Namoga alone has been
very proud to give over $200,000
throughout the state annually,
um, and we're close to reaching
our $1 million mark. We've got
our annual meeting, the first
weekend in October, which you're
all invited to, and we hope you
will join us, uh, uh, but that
we will go.
Over the $1 million mark in
annual giving at that meeting,
and we're very excited to
celebrate that number. One thing
that we do want to point out of
those donations is that that
dollar amount certainly does not
include what our companies are
able to give directly into the
communities. We certainly
appreciate and understand a
company's social license to
operate and we know that that
doesn't include only oil and
gas, but should be something
that all industries work toward
to be good community partners.
We're also very proud to
announce the creation of the
brighter Future Fund, uh, for
several years, we have worked
with outside, uh, 501c3s to
administer Nummoga's donation
dollars. We are now bringing
that internal with our own
501c3, but our goal with the
brighter Future Fund is not only
to have that backed by our oil
and gas companies, but to find
partnerships with other energies
and other industries throughout
the state. Uh, the Brighter
Future Fund itself.
Of course, focuses on STEM, uh,
child hunger mitigation, and
many of the other issues that
you've heard about this morning
that make sometimes make
economic diversification
difficult, but we are proud to
give back. I think it's
especially proud for Andrea and
me and others in the audience as
native New Mexicans that are
proud to live here and proud to
work here. Uh, we're grateful
for the opportunity to see all
of New Mexico continue to rise.
Uh, one of, uh, this kind of
this slides probably kind of out
of place because you want us to
talk about economic
diversification and then we're
like, hey, let's put a bunch of
really great teachers on the
screen. Uh, but the reason that
we wanted to highlight this is
because we work with the public
education department and Namoga
is proud to annually sponsor the
Teacher of the Year award, where
we work with PED to give dollars
to ensure that the teacher that
is awarded can go and receive
additional, um,
Um, additional learning to
become a better teacher, that
she, he or she can take back to
their classroom as well as to
their colleagues to continue to
raise education in New Mexico.
Uh, this is, these are just a
handful of the recent teachers
of the year. Um, we have some
that the, the great lady at the
end that has on the scarf, she
actually teaches, um, pre-K, and
then the gentleman in the dead
center in the blue shirt, he
teaches at an alternative school
in the Gallup area. And when we
went
To go meet with him and his
colleagues. There were several
of his students that said if it
wasn't for Dr. Bassa, they would
not still be in school. Uh, so
very grateful for their teachers
and the impact and very grateful
for the opportunity for us to
continue to move science and
education, and education as a
whole forward.
So as we talked more about
economic diversification. I am
very proud to have worked in
economic development in Lee
County. Lee County is in
southeastern New Mexico, right
on the Texas border and is part
of the Permian Basin. Uh, it was
brought up earlier, Senator
Neville mentioned Hobbs. Hobbs
is, um, right in the middle of
Lee County and as you all know,
there is a ton of oil and gas
production in that community.
What makes it unique is it is
very
difficult to economically
diversify when you have a
booming industry. I know all of
you know this, and I know that
Representative Barrego knows
this well from her economic
development days,
but if you don't have housing,
if you don't have an additional
workforce, if you don't have
other opportunities, we might
have companies coming all the
time in Lee County or other
places to say we would love to
move in and we'd say we'd love
to have you and they say, cool,
do you have houses? And we'd
say, no, but we'd like to build
them.
And then they say, well, what
about workforce? And we're like,
we've got a great workforce, but
they're already working. And so
it's such, and I appreciate that
I'm preaching to the choir on
this, but it's, it's very
difficult when
Is it a chicken or the egg? Do
the workers in the houses come
first or the jobs get there and
then you provide the housing and
the workers. And finding that
balance is something that we're
still striving to get right, but
I think that one of the ways
that oil and gas actually
assists with economic
diversification is other
industries are paying attention
to the fact how states handle
and protect thriving businesses
within the state itself. So if
another
Industry comes in and says, OK,
what's the biggest industry in
New Mexico outside of tourism.
Let's look at the healthcare
systems and let's look at oil
and gas. If healthcare and oil
and gas have a fairly
business-friendly economic
climate, then that probably
means that we will receive the
same treatment if we come in and
build our presence within the
state. That doesn't mean that
regulation should be so loosey
goosey that a business can do
whatever the heck that it wants,
but it does provide
A business climate that is
structured as well as provides
more carrots than sticks. And
when I say carrots and sticks, I
mean, you shouldn't accompany
any one of us in this room, any
company in this room, is one
unfortunate mistake away from
being considered a bad actor.
Just because a mistake happens
doesn't mean that a company is a
bad actor. So as opposed to
saying, well, they're a bad
actor, they should be in
trouble. It provides a
regulatory climate where we work
with that company.
To get back into regulation so
that they don't continue to make
the same mistake. But creating a
climate of carrot versus sticks
is something that will continue
to be important to our overall
regulatory climate.
This next slide is a slide that
is actually in the last edition
of the site Selector magazine.
Site selectors are economic
developers that go around and
find the right places for the
right companies at the right fit
at the right time. Uh, this
shows where New Mexico was in
its last ranking of hay site
selectors here are the states
that you should look at. Um, I
would very much like to
congratulate you guys on the
great numbers, um, but it also
shows that there are ways that
we
We can continue to improve to
become more business friendly,
not only to retained businesses,
but economic diversification.
Um, there's, it also talks about
some of the wonderful bills that
y'all, um, actually passed in
the last legislative session,
including the establishment of
the renewable Energy Office
within the state land office and
others, um, that shows ways that
we can continue to diversify but
also retain our current
workforce and base.
I'm sorry that this slide is not
as easy to see, um, and I know
that it's even smaller on your
handout, but one of the things
that I wanted to point out is we
work toward an energy transition
is that all energies can
certainly work better. Carbon is
certainly a part of our world
and as oil and gas works to
become all industries work to
become more carbon neutral. What
we need to figure out around
carbon is how we can best
utilize carbon so that we're
utilizing it in a way that's
been
Official and not harmful to the
environment, but still allowing
us to move forward in a climate
that is not a third world
country and allows continue
other manufacturing. One thing
that I would like to point out
is on, um, this particular
graph, if you look at the 2nd
bubble down on the left at 2017,
that highlights, um, that
highlights oil, and then the big
dark line that shows where those
things go.
To the one, the second bubble on
the right is a car, so it shows
that a lot of um oil production
is going to transportation. It
also shows on there it's going
to manufacturing and industry.
Let's skip down to 2050. 1 of
the really cool things about
this is that it shows how other
energy sources, um, like
renewables, bioenergy, and
others will increase as we move
forward, but it also shows that
oil and gas, even in 20.
50 will still be an important
part of our economy, economy to
continue to drive things
forward. So even though balances
shift, that doesn't mean that
one will have to be completely
taken away, it just means that
we can all continue to do better
and that science can continue to
improve.
One of the things that was asked
of us was to talk about how oil
and gas is continuing to
diversify. I promise we won't
read all of these chapters to
you, um, but one thing to keep
in mind as we move forward
around CCUS, uh, the opportunity
to use oil and gas with
artificial intelligence as well
as EV charging our exciting
opportunities for us and
something that our companies,
many of our companies are
already working on. And Andrea,
I'll let you touch a little bit
on decarbonisation solutions,
please.
Thank you.
So I'm really proud to say that
our member companies are working
really hard to, um, explore
alternative, um, power sources
to their facilities out in the
field. So whether that's
renewables, electrification, and
as we continue to see increased
technologies around equipment
and autumn is, um, automate.
Oh my gosh. Automization? Sorry
for that. Um, that creates the
additional opportunities for
diversification out in the
field.
And finally, um, as we move
forward closer to the
legislative session. We know
that there are both regular and
legislated regulatory and
legislative, uh, topics that all
of you are interested in that
not only affects simply oil and
gas, um, but also how it will
affect other industries that are
coming into the region. We
talked a little bit earlier
about the reclamation fund. Um,
again, those funds are there
that would allow, uh, industry
to continue to do better within
Plugging an abandoned wells,
we're very excited to see
language around the strategic
water supply to see how we can
continue to preserve and
conserve fresh water throughout
the state.
And we also know that you all
are looking very closely at
utility and transmission issues.
Um, that is something that not
only affects our industry but
the opportunity to diversify, so
we're excited to work with all
of you on those issues. Um, also
wanted to talk a little bit
about some of the current
rulemakings that we're going
through.
So I'll just start by saying
that Namoga, we work very hard
with our members to create a
platform for collaboration and
engagement with our members with
industry and with the agency
decision makers to make sure
that our members are ensuring
responsible operations out in
the field. So a couple of the
current rulemakings that are
going on in New Mexico
currently, PFOS is coming up.
Our member companies 100%.
I believe we should not have
PFOSS in our operations. So
ensuring that that rulemaking
process is balanced, um, is what
we're working really hard on
with, with the agencies in the
department. Water reuse, very
important to us as well and our
member companies. We need a
role. We need balance, and we
need a rule that will provide
balance and standards. So really
appreciative of all the efforts
there. Um, I would like to thank
Representative Ortiz for her,
for her bill, House Bill 41.
all the hard work getting that
pushed forward. Um, we have
followed very closely and have
been working with the, the
department through the advisory
committee and know there's a lot
of work to get that role, uh,
finalized and active, but that,
those are just a few of all the
hard work that we know each of
you do every day and we fully
want to support by bringing our
members together and offering,
you know, best practices, what's
taking place out in the field.
What works operationally, what
does not. And so
Continuing to move things
forward together is going to be
the best for us and the state of
New Mexico.
And to conclude, uh, this is the
Namoga Mission and you'll notice
I added an asterisk and in
italics and parentheses. Uh, we
talk about the responsible
responsible development of oil
and natural gas and other
energies. Uh, we, as I mentioned
earlier, there's often a
misconception that we only care
about oil and gas and that we
only imagine oil and gas moving
forward. We certainly understand
that, uh, moving to Mexico
forward includes all energies,
and we're grateful for our
partnership with many others.
Um, we're excited to continue
moving New Mexico forward, um,
both figuratively and literally,
and we're very grateful to be
here and we're grateful to
represent the companies that we
do and we appreciate, we
appreciate all of you and Madam
Chair, we're happy to answer any
questions y'all might have.
Thank you and thank you for your
presentation. First on the list
is Senator Griggs.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you guys for, for the
presentation and
You know, I think.
What it, what it shows me, and I
hope it I hope it shows
everybody in, in the room that,
um, you know, New Mexico just
can't operate.
Without the revenues provided
for oil and gas.
It also shows us that
It's irreplaceable.
Nothing
Wind, solar,
Outdoor wreck.
Cannabis
They're not going to replace
this revenue that you're seeing
right now.
Now that doesn't mean
That there's notportunities to
utilize all sorts of revenue and
hopefully generate it all.
Hopefully there's room for
everybody under the tent.
Um,
You know, I
Before I got in the legislature,
I worked for one of the largest
oil companies in the world. I
worked for Texaco.
One of the seven sisters from
years past.
Um,
I've seen all sorts of different
things that have done been done
well and things that maybe
haven't been done.
Abashed
What we've seen or what we used
to see with oil and gas is we
used to see boom and bust
cycles.
On the United States became the
player that it has become due to
the horizontal drilling
primarily.
In the Permian Basin.
It's also other parts of the
country, but primarily in the
Permian Basin.
The United States became a
player that we're, we're
unstoppable if we want to be.
We're no longer particularly
subject to boom and bust cycles.
We can continue to provide
positive opportunities for New
Mexicans in positive revenue for
the state of New Mexico.
But what we really need to do is
we need to work together to find
ways to do it.
Cleaner
But we're making a lot of
headway there.
We just, we just need to say
that, OK.
Why don't we embrace the
opportunities we have.
You know, New Mexico has long
been blessed.
With natural resources and
natural resources to develop.
But stuff has happened to some
of those.
My wife has a family reunion
every year in White Oaks. White
Oaks was a
A gold mining town.
Provided great jobs, great
opportunity, but the gold dried
up.
White Oaks is a is a ghost town
today.
Go to the city of Raton.
In New Mexico. Raton was a coal
mining center.
In years past.
Coal became not the uh the
product of choice and Raton
right now is at a situation
where almost everybody in Ratone
has to live on some form of
government assistance.
Go not too far from here to
Grant and Grant was one of the
major uranium mining centers in
the world.
Matter of fact, Kazakhstan
is now one of them, one of the
top 4, I believe it is, and
that's primarily because New
Mexico quit producing uranium.
So I talk about those things to
show you what you
What situations you can create
if your goal.
If your goal is to eliminate oil
and gas from the. Missy talked a
little bit, you know, about the
fact that maybe we're gonna be
reducing the amount of oil we
need for transportation.
Maybe we're gonna reduce some of
the natural gas we need for
utility generation.
Maybe we're gonna do all those
things and that might be just
super.
But how do you make this
plastic?
How do you make the computer
chips that you need to do some
of the other things. How do you
do that?
Without oil
And you probably do that without
natural gas as well.
So
We're not going to get rid of
it.
Let's figure out how we need to
utilize it the best we possibly
can.
But for New Mexico, that's not
just one side, that's two sides,
the other side is, it is our, it
is our driver of our economy.
And there's just no getting
around that.
So we, we have to figure out
those ways we have to work
together. We have to create
different opportunities for our
state.
Our state. We're not going to
pick stuff, pick and choose,
it's a little bit hard.
But see if we can't make New
Mexico the leader in on the gas
production.
Let's make her leader in wind
production. Let's make it the
solar production. Let's, let's
do those things because we can.
Can and I mean those
opportunities are, are right in
front of us.
I'm not gonna get to, again,
participate in some of those
things, but I hope that y'all,
and I hope those of you in this
room recognize what is available
to you.
If oil and gas stopped tomorrow.
In New Mexico.
How do you fund anything?
How do you fund anything?
And the answer is you don't.
You can't tax people enough to
replace the revenue you get for
more than cash. You can't do it.
And if you could, the people
wouldn't stay here to let you do
it.
So I'm counting on you.
To make this state what it can
be by utilizing all of its
assets.
All of its opportunities.
And I know you can.
I know you have people pushing
you to go this way or that way.
But I know you can.
The bill that I carried last
time, Senate Bill 64, which some
people in this room don't
necessarily like.
Senate Bill 64 allowed for
companies to take their
severance tax it would pay and
let them use that to bring small
wells into compliance.
With our oil and gas, our, our
economic, economic or
environmental rules and
requirements.
That's what he did
It helps New Mexico because so
many of our wells are stripper
wells.
I don't see and I never will see
how that bill was a bad bill.
I think it is one of those
things that is that if we sit
here and we fight about.
Because we don't want to find
solutions.
We don't want to. We want to sit
there and complain about this or
complain about that.
Challenge all of you to start
finding solutions.
Work with both sides to find
solutions.
So Madam Chair, it's kind of a,
a deal for me. I get off on this
deal a little bit. I'm sorry
that I do, but
I've lived in New Mexico all my
life.
And you have opportunities right
now that you have never ever
seen.
And you're not taking advantage
of them the way you should,
because the goal is to do this
or to do that.
Work together
Work together, work together
with these people sitting right
here at this table talking to
you about the asset that you
have, which hardly anyone else
has.
Make this state the best it can
be, and you can. You can utilize
all of them.
All of this stuff
And let's do it.
I should do it. You know, I, I
sit there and I drive to Santa
Fe and I see wind turbines.
Every time I come.
I see those
And I saw pumpjacks.
On the way up here.
I can tell you that pumpjack
doesn't look near like anything
compared to that doggone giant
wind turbine.
I don't know which is the
ugliest, depends on who's, whose
side you're on, I guess.
But uh
It's just kind of an interesting
thing that we all get all worked
up about one deal and think
about how bad it is.
In comparison to another.
And they both stand out.
One just provides a whole lot
more money than the other one
does.
So, Madam Chair, thank you for
that. I'll, I'll get off and I,
uh, I hope genuinely I do hope
that all of you guys work
together to find those solutions
needed.
Because we got a lot of issues
that we need to address. A lot
of money that we need to raise,
and let's see if we can't fix
some of the problems that we've
got, but I know you can't fix
them without working with this
stuff.
And I'm counting on you to do
that, so thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator, uh,
representative, uh, Lujan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Senator Griggs for all that
information and I'm taking you
up on that, um, offer to be a
solution based uh legislator,
but I think we have many of them
around us already, and they've
been leading the way and
To see that we have um.
Support, Madam Chair, for the
clean transportation Fi standard
is, is, is uh
Insight to how we can bring
legislation together and work on
both sides of the aisle, if you
will. I think the energy is
where we are going to have to
meet more than ever in the
middle of finding those
solutions, um.
And we have the hard facts of
science to guide us, and that's
what I use.
And so the science tells us
right now when we're looking at
climate change, that we have to
do something immediately.
And we've waited too long.
So what are we doing? Well,
New Mexico is leading as well,
we, we hear from a lot of the um
information that we, we gathered
just from our executive who is
going around the world and and
finding out uh lots of
solutions, uh, energy types of
solutions globally and working
on those issues, um, myself, I
will be hosting an energy policy
symposium next month on the 12th
and 13th, and I'm bringing.
Um, our stakeholders from it's
very inclusive from all from all
venues, if you will, so we can
work on these solutions because
we don't, Madam Chair, or we
need a, a better plan. Uh, we
need some strategy and how we
get to do that. Um, I know.
It's a plug for what we're
doing, but it goes to to what
Senator Griggs has said, and
what are we doing to problem
solve and like you mentioned and
you mentioned what
representative Artez um did with
some of her energy, uh,
structured bills have really um
helped with the strategy of what
the governor has laid up with
um.
Uh, for the states and we are
leading in New Mexico and
everybody's eyes are on us and
to see what we're going to do
next. We have opportunity, but
we also have a huge issue and
that is climate change. That is
how we are going to decarbonize
what are the best technologies
and in the face of, of meeting
those that challenge, we know
that we are online and the
demand for energy is
So great and increasing, um.
Tenfold or more. I mean, this
is, these are the challenges
we're met with. So what are we
going to do about that? Madam
Chair, I commend the schedule
for, you know, having everybody
here and talking about these
issues. Um, my one question or a
couple of questions I do have
regarding the previous
legislation, um, on the
reclamation, uh.
Issue, um, very specifically to
Senator Griggs and he's left,
but on the strip stripper wells,
I was against that, and I will
say that openly you all know
that I was against that bill,
um, and our tax package, uh, how
much money do these stripper
wells bring to the state if, if
I can ask that, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, Representative Lujan,
I do not know that number off
the top of my head, um, but
happy to get those numbers
pulled for you. One of the
reasons that we worked very
closely, uh, with Senator Griggs
and others on that stripper well
Bill, as we do not intend it to
benefit the larger companies
that have the capital to
remediate those wills wells on
their own. The intention of
those stripper wells, and just
so everybody knows, I'm sure you
guys have heard the phrase
stripper well before. Um, it's
not a super fun well, it's a
well that's not producing at the
level it could have been once it
was very first drilled. Um, and
with a stripper well, they're
typically
Older and because of that, it
has older technologies or it's
just not as lucrative to produce
anymore, but it is still
producing really great barrels
of oil. Um, one example that I
would like to point out in the
room of a really good stripper
well producer is um Dugan that's
in the room behind us. They've
been operating in the San Juan
for many years and their entire
business model is often a round
stripper wells, um, because of
that, they work very hard to not
only be in compliance with
environmental standards, but it
still
continues to raise money for the
state. With that in mind, if we
have the opportunities for those
smaller companies to have the
environmental monitoring that
some of the newer facilities
will have that ensures that
those wells are still operating
on behalf of the state, but also
operating in an environmentally
friendly way. Um, I would
imagine that a lot of people
could say that, oh, this is us
saying it could be an
environmental bill is just a
little bit of greenwashing, and
I would argue that fact that
it's actually not greenwashing
and it's an
Opportunity to make wells better
and still make money for the
state.
In short, um, Representative, we
will definitely get back to you
on those numbers around stripper
wells specifically. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
And a very open and honest to my
my position and, and how we need
to negotiate with climate change
and the demands that we have.
And I would like that
information you mentioned to my
follow up question is, so those
wells are not monitored, is that
correct?
Madam Chair, Representative,
some of them are depending on
how old they are, um, but some
of them could be so old that
they are not, so this provides
us an opportunity to provide
monitoring for them.
OK. Um, I would like, I like
more of that information. I, I
have counter information as you
probably know, and that goes to
the point of the methane
released in the in the continued
um.
Release of methane from these
wells, and if they're not even
monitored and they're leaking
and these are, these are
problems that aren't producing
very much, you know, my mindset
is to plug them.
And to you, you know, to, to
eliminate that, um, that issue
because methane is probably the
biggest issue we have with
decarbonization, Madam Chair.
Um, my next question is, so
thank you for the information.
I'd like to have more
information on that, um.
I'm trying to find my other find
uh.
Land trust. You were talk and I,
and I'll get into that
conversation and we have our
commissioner up here and the
difference between Texas and New
Mexico and our land trusts and
what that means for our states
and making those better
decisions for our state. So
we're looking at all of the
above, and I'm quoting um
Senator Grids again, kind of,
and all of the above equation of
what, what are we, and what are
the factors, um,
And opportunities that we are
creating and some of the
Some of the issues that you've
you've proposed here and talking
about a regulatory issues, um,
and looking at PASTs and water
reuse. What exactly um.
Regarding PFA, are you
supporting and what exactly,
what kind of water use
strategies are you supporting
for our state?
Madam Chair, uh, Representative,
in regards to PFOSS, uh, PFOS is
what is often referred to as a
forever chemical. You can often
find peep foss in, um, for, for
example, fire retardants for
firefighters, um, PFOS can have
chemical compositions that can
create cancer and other
situations. Uh, for several
years, um, and Andrea, please
jump in, um, but when PFAST was
very first utilized, um, there,
it was also used within
fracking.
For several years now, our
companies have not utilized any
type of recognized PPOs chemical
in their, um, in their drilling
systems. We're very proud of
that and are very supportive of
the state, not utilizing PFOS
where we don't have to use it,
um, within the rulemaking, um,
that we're working through some
of our concerns right now focus
on, um, there are some that are
asking that all chemicals be
listed within the drilling
process. The concern
Around that is, is that twofold.
Um, number one, we have a
nationwide system called Frack
Focus that ensures that
companies are not utilizing
chemicals that could be
additionally harmful, um, but
in, in addition to that, there
are several companies that have
trade secrets. There are certain
companies that say, we have a
chemical balance that allows us
to frack better. So if those
companies have to list every
single chemical that they're
using, they use their business
advantage.
you mentioned, um,
and an interesting um point on
that, and I'm going to cut this
short. I don't know if we have
others that need to speak
because I raised my hand kind of
late, but, um, with that, that
information and the chemical
information and and um.
The protection of owners to to
not release that information.
Would it be helpful if we, if,
if there was a list that was
created of those most harmful
chemicals or whatnot, and those
companies would say like a check
box and would say no, we're not
using, you know, check off what
they're not using, um, without
necessarily giving away the
recipe, so to speak, Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair, Representative
Lujan, that's exactly what Frack
Focus does, so that capability
is already out there and as we
continue to evolve through the
rulemaking process. Frack Focus
is 100% happy to be at the table
and have conversations with you
all as well. Thank you. Thank
you, Madam Chair. I'm gonna cut
that short. I have other
questions, but we'll get into
those later. Thank you so much.
Thank you. And, um, we don't
actually have anybody else on
the list. So thank you for your
presentation today. We
appreciate you being here, um,
and we will, um, see you again
tonight, right?
Yes, thank you all very much,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee for having us. We
appreciate your time.
OK.
So moving along, we've got, um,
Stephanie Garcia Richards,
commissioner of public lands,
state land office. She's my ex,
uh.
Uh, my ex for me, yeah, we, we
shared our when we first started
off as legislators, we were in
the same office. So, um, and if
you'll introduce your team, um,
I will hand the
I will hand it over to you.
Is this on?
No.
Test, test, yeah.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I'm
very grateful for this
opportunity to be in front of
you today. Uh, yes, I'm going to
start by introducing the folks
that are with me from the state
land office, uh, and then give
some introductory remarks before
we, uh, really dive into this
presentation.
So,
Some of you may know this
familiar face next to me. This
is Greg Bloom, who originally,
uh, worked with Senator
Binghamman back in the day, then
was state, uh, Senator Udall,
state director, um, lived for
many years in Las Cruces, so the
Las Cruces contingent knows him
well. He now does, um, he's the
assistant commissioner for
mineral resources. So
everything, oil and gas related,
um,
Reg overseas. I also have
another familiar face to some of
you, Chase Hensler, uh, is my,
uh, policy analyst. He worked
the legislature two sessions
ago, um, and, and did a little
bit of training last session as
well, Madam Chair. So you might
recognize his face as well.
But I was asked, um.
Because I've tried to carry this
bill and and pass this bill that
I'm about to speak about today.
Uh, since 2019, unsuccessfully,
I was asked by Senate
leadership.
To take it on the interim
roadshow.
So that some of the kinks that,
uh,
Pop up in debate around this
bill in session could sort of
be,
chatted about outside of that
very pressured environment and
I'm very grateful that, Madam
Chair, uh, took us up as the
first stop on our interim
roadshow. So we are presenting.
Our same pitch that we've, we've
brought to the legislature, like
I said, since 2019, um, to raise
the royalty rate, we would love
to get into a meaty discussion
about what that truly means and,
and what we feel the benefits
are, um, I, I think Missy kind
of teed us off really well by
starting off talking about the,
the great, uh, rock we have in
the Permian Basin that is a
state-owned resource.
There are 2 million acres leased
up or possible to be leased up
in the Permian Basin that are
state-owned.
For the benefit of y'all.
And everyone in this room, in
fact. So we want to talk about,
um, how best to utilize those
resources. We even have a slide
that says we have the best rock,
just like Missy said.
Um.
I did just want to say, Madam
Chair, uh, you know, people get
into this discussion about these
royalty rates and whether or not
it's an additional tax and
should we be taxing for me,
The way I talk about royalty, it
is not a tax. Royalty is the,
the, the price that someone has
to pay to develop a resource
that doesn't belong to them.
Like I said before, the resource
belongs to us.
And you're gonna hear a figure
later on that I just want to
remain with you because I heard
it for the first time today that
the top 5 producers of oil and
gas in New Mexico.
All of their revenue combined.
That they made from New Mexico.
We were only able.
To get from that revenue.
From the from those profits, a
10th of 1% of those profits for
New Mexico.
Through royalty rates.
We feel that that royalty rate
does not meet the market demand.
And we're uh undergoing a
further study with our, uh,
folks who do these auctions,
these, these, these oil and gas
lease auctions throughout the
country to really dig into
whether or not we should be
calling the 25% in New Mexico a
market rate so we can provide
that as soon as it's available
to you all. Um, I want to take
Missy up on her offer to work
with, with the association to
really talk about the cost of
doing business in New Mexico.
I, I, I feel that, um.
Because the resources is
publicly owned.
The public should not be
subsidizing the development of
that resource and until the
market, we can charge market
rate for,
for that development, we are
subsidizing any development of
that resource.
OK, so those are like my opening
remarks and, you know, I'm
getting looks already, but you
know, I'm, I was invited here,
so.
Um, what we're gonna do is I'm
gonna start by, uh, I believe
you all have the presentation.
I'm going to start by just
giving, I need to, I, I do need
to set the stage because land
office is something even, even
myself, when I ran for this
office, I didn't quite
understand how impactful it is,
really what it does. So you have
the presentation. We also have a
side by side comparison sheet of
Texas and New Mexico, what it
means to to lease for oil and
gas and on both sides, uh, in
the same rock, same Permian
Basin, but on two sides.
22 different states. And then
Greg is actually going to talk
in depth about, um, the royalty
rate.
Proposal and and why we believe
you all should pass it in the
next legislative session.
Actually,
uh, and there's mostly only
house members. There's like 2
senators here.
The house, the house already did
their, their job. They, they
passed this bill last time
around. Just I just want you all
to know that. So what we're
going for.
And some of y'all vote
For, yeah. Well, what we're
going for is full passage. All
right, so do I, yes, OK.
Uh, this is our constitutional.
Statutory mandate and uh.
Some people ask me if I see it
as a contradiction in terms. I
do not see, uh, uh, you know,
we, we are.
The constitution, the state
statutes say land office, you
need to raise revenue from these
lands, but you can't do it at
the long-term expense of the
health of that resource. I feel
like those two things, um, are,
are a balance that the land
commissioner has to strike. And
this is an updated figure y'all
since 2019-2010, ba baba billion
dollars for New Mexico's.
Beneficiaries and who are those
beneficiaries? Here they are
here.
We always get this question
about like who decided where the
lands came from, um, you may not
know this, but it was basically
4 sections out of every township
and range or deed it over to the
State. That was a total of 13
million acres.
Um, sometimes when the land was
owned, it was tribal land or New
Mex uh uh state forestry or
sorry, US forestry land. They
gave us other lands in lieu of
these four sections. But for the
most part, if you look at a map,
It's these 4 sections out of
every township and range.
We've got two ways we raise
money for New Mexico's
beneficiaries. The first is
through non-renewable resources
such as oil and gas development.
It's a non-renewable resource.
All of that revenue goes to the
permanent fund.
It's then
Invested
And then a 5% rolling average is
distributed to the
beneficiaries. We also make
money and send a check directly
to beneficiaries on money we
make off the land that's
assigned to them on renewable
sources. So not just renewable
energy, but like business
leases, um, we do affordable
housing. All of those are
considered to be renewable
sources of revenue. That gets
written in a check directly to
the beneficiary every month.
Here are the lands that have
been assigned. You can see for
the most part, they are common
schools. It's like 90% of the
land we have is, is, uh, has
been assigned to common schools
and I didn't know this before.
These beneficiaries were
actually named out in the
Constitution. The land was
assigned to them.
Through that whole process. So
Congress was the one who, who
did that assignment, um, and
then there was an attempt in
like 1936, so very soon after we
became a state, to say, hey,
this doesn't really look fair
like some of the some of the,
uh, beneficiaries and, and I'll
just call out New Mexico
Military Institute at the time
they didn't realize they got
some of the most lucrative land
because they got a bunch of land
in the Southeast.
And once oil was discovered and
they started drilling, they
said, oh well, that's not fair.
They, you know, the Military
Institute has all the best land.
And so there was an attempt at a
constitutional amendment to
actually reapportion the land,
uh, which failed. So we have
this same assignment of land
that we've had since we became a
state.
Um, I got to brag on my team,
190 of the best state employees
you will find anywhere and don't
take my word for it. We have 12
statewide awards from the
Albuquerque Journal and one
national award for top
workplace.
Yeah. And you can see like some
of the reasons, um, these are,
this is all based on employee
surveys.
People think we have supportive
managers, they trust the
leadership and uh they they
think that we appreciate our
employees. We also got a a woman
led top woman led businesses uh
award as well. And this is the
reason.
I take it to heart, the lessons
that I learned sitting in HAFC
listening to the likes of, you
know, Representative Lundstrom,
Representative Varela, you have
to invest in state workers.
And we've got the lowest vacancy
rate.
Um, I mean, you know,
considerably below the state
average. But in general,
Quite low and we've maintained
that low vacancy rate the entire
time I've.
I've been, you know, heading up
the 8.
I always like to brag on the
record earnings. The orange is
the non is the non-renewable
that I was talking about that
goes to the land grant permitent
fund, the blue at the bottom is
the land maintenance fund.
So that's all the renewable
sources of revenue, and you can
see it varies wildly from 200
million in FY19 down to 600
million in FY 21, but we're back
up 137 million this last fiscal
year.
We also have this challenge,
right? We've got the dual
mandate. We've got to raise
revenue, but we have to care for
the land because steward the
land, um, and this is a program
we put into place in um the fall
of 2020.
You heard uh Namoga and Missy
talk about the reclamation fund
that, that, you know, when we
can't find a responsible party
to clean up.
What the taxpayers have to
essentially, you know, use, use
our tax.
dollars to clean up those those
sites. What we have done is made
it our mission to go after
responsible parties. By and
large, people understand that
that's the cost of doing
business. They want to do
further business with us, and so
they clean up their sites on
their own. We've only had to
take about 2 dozen companies to
task, and I'll show you some
pretty worst of the worst sites
of people who are just, you
know, they, they shirk their
responsibilities to care for the
resource. Um, but we have
Not on the backs of New
Mexicans, not at the expense of
our beneficiaries, but at
industry expense, uh, plugged
over 500 abandoned.
Oil wells.
And I think our our uh our
number now is like 540
something.
We figure that has saved New
Mexico taxpayers and our
beneficiaries, about $50 million
and we have ensured that all of
those leases are bonded as well.
So in case the bottom goes out,
there is a bond in place to pay
for whatever happens.
OK.
This is Missy touched on this as
well. It's kind of funny. It's
like we almost like did our
presentation together. So this
is uh Highway 82. This is
between, this is the highway you
drive, uh, but if you want to go
directly from Carlsbad to Hobbs.
It goes through an area called
Loco Hills.
Loco Hills is a bunch of legacy
vertical drilling.
Scars, I'm gonna say.
This is a lot of this is on
state land.
Who's going to be responsible
for cleaning this this up if, if
not us.
Here are some of the sites that
we have to deal with. This one
actually is in litigation.
We've had pretty great success
in recovery from, from our
judgments, from our, our court
decisions. uh, and our awards so
that we are able to use that
money to, to clean up sites such
as this.
And now I'm going to pass it
over to Greg, and he's going to
tell you about why we want more
money for the school kids.
Oh
All right, thank you,
Commissioner, uh, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
again, Greg Bloom, the assistant
commissioner for Mineral
Resources. I see two divisions,
so oil, gas, and minerals,
that's the beginning of of the
value chain, um, leasing our
state trust lands. And then I
also have the fun part at the
end, which is uh collecting and
processing hundreds of thousands
of royalty lines, um, on an
annual basis, uh, which sum up
into the, into the billions of
dollars, uh, just to situate.
Everyone in the middle, uh,
between leasing and cashing
checks and doing audits.
I is the oil conservation
division, which is part of
Energy, Mineral natural
resources just to kind of
situate you.
Um,
This is a very simple bill. We
would replace two words and New
Mexico law, uh, 1/5 we would
replace that with the language
of 14th in 3 places in law. So 6
words will change.
Um, we go from a potential
maximum royalty rate of 20% to a
new maximum of 25%.
Which is the going rate in
Texas.
And can often be a rate found in
New Mexico in private
transactions.
Uh, we ran this bill as the
commissioner mentioned in
previous sessions, uh, most
recently, this was HB 48. You
can look at the FIR, uh, the
land office estimate is that,
uh, once a sizable number of
leasing leases, uh, have been,
uh, sold and and put into
production that uh we believe
the land office believes that we
would earn $50 million to $84
million extra per year.
All this money going in to our
land grant permanent fund.
The LFC uh trimmed that number a
little bit and gave a range of
$50 to $75 million a year.
The SIC weighed in on the FIR
and said that by 2050, uh, this,
uh, raising the royalty rate to
25% would increase the value of
the land grant permanent fund by
between 1.5 billion and $2.5
billion and we would see an
additional distribution to our
beneficiaries of between $750
million and $1.5 billion over
that same period, uh,
approximately 25 years up to
2050.
Um, I, I, I know the state has
A lot of extra money right now
and a lot of it is going into
permanent funds, but I know we
all remember a few years ago.
Not that long ago, we, we were,
we had to furlough state
employees.
So the
And we're we're trying, you
know, cutting, telling people
they couldn't come into work for
4 hours a month, and they're
going to take a little cut on
their paycheck. Those days
weren't that long ago. And this,
this is
Big money, um, by any stretch of
the imagination.
The
one figure we often throw out is
that because of the, the money
which comes out of the land
grant permanent fund, it's now
it's 6% of the five-year rolling
average. Um, if we were to
Try to have our current spending
without the Langer Permanent
Fund. Taxpaying families in New
Mexico would pay over $2000 more
per year. So the the the land
grant, uh, permanent fund in the
land office, essentially saving
all of us in our households
$2000 a year in taxes.
Um, as the commissioner
mentioned that, you know, the
oil and gas companies should
should be OK, you know, should
give that number of um
Uh, I don't know if she actually
mentioned the number itself
between 2021 and 2023, the five
biggest companies in the United
States earned $250 billion in
profits or um $80 billion a
year.
Just the 5 biggest companies,
they're the ones you've, you've
heard of, they're in New Mexico.
It's Exxon XTO Chevron,
ConocoPhilips, EOG and and
Sberse was actually a service
provider.
Um,
And 11th of 1% of that money
would be
What we'd probably make on this
bill in a year, $80 million. OK.
Even with, I'm gonna refer to
this document here. Um, it's an
oil and gas comparison of, of
the leases between New Mexico
and Texas.
Um, our, our, this lease, Mexico
has not raised its top royalty
rate since the 1970s. If you
read this lease, it's arcanee
language. In this lease gives
away massive deductions to the
oil and gas industry.
In fact, over the past
It's 2015, it's been
Uh, $2.6 billion in deductions
that the industry has taken,
that they could not have taken
in Texas. Texas is less friendly
to oil and gas than New Mexico.
This translates to about $800
million a year in deductions
that companies are taking.
So, even if our royalty rates
are equal, they're still
Very large, very significant
deductions that oil and gas gets
to take. And another aspect, I'm
starting to get a little arcane
and I'll, I'll end this
comparison here.
And Texas can, can lease by, by
depth.
And so that they can say you're
only gonna be, you're only gonna
be able to produce with this
lease, the bone spring formation
and nothing else. In New Mexico,
you get all depths.
Depth matter.
The, uh, you know, a few years
ago we took over, um,
Uh, 2nd place in oil production
from North Dakota. They have the
famous Bakken formation. I think
it's roughly 300 ft thick. We
have thousands, thousands of
feet of oil bearing.
Oil and gas strata.
In the Permian and and we lease
all of it.
When we lease our land.
Um,
And like the commissioner, I
would, I wouldn't, I would say
that this is not a tax.
Uh, this is a subsidy, having a
cap on our royalty rates.
Um, we're a fiduciary for the
school kids.
Um, you know, we heard today
from, from President Pendergrass
that one third of her students
are, are, are housing
vulnerable.
Um, we have real needs in the
state, every, every penny
matters. And, and
If you're a fiduciary for your,
your, God forbid your parent,
your grandparents. Imagine
you're trying to sell their
house, they've paid it off their
lifetime of hard work. They want
to sell that house for $300 and
somebody capped you at 200,000.
That's what we're having, that's
what happens here,
we're capped and we're
subsidizing the oil and gas
industry.
I go through these next slides
pretty quickly. We've had a good
conversation about, uh, about
rock today. Um, get back to our
first presentation.
Thank you.
All right.
Oh, this is very important.
On this royalty rate increase
only affects new leases.
Um, so if you're this would
become law starting in July of
2025, we could start selling
leases at 25%. Only those leases
themselves would be at 25%.
Existing leases would forever be
at their current rate, long as
those leases are held by
production, which they are, um,
as long as they keep producing
it, they don't expire. So what's
our average royalty rate in New
Mexico? It's about 15% because
57% of our leases are still at
12.5%, because these leases were
land and they've been held by
production since the 20s, 30s,
40s and 15.
0
Um,
Our best leases, um, pretty
much.
Bit on by by bigger companies,
and newer companies, nobody has
to bid on anything. We do ask
that when people nominate a
track for lease sale that, um,
that they bid on it, um, the,
the, the bidding's blind, and
it's, it's a closed bid and uh
We do it online, and it's it's
true very effective for the land
office.
Only the best tracks would be at
25%. Uh, we would keep uh
leasing uh other lands at 20% or
18.75%. I've talked all these
points already.
I won't read all these to you.
This is just more about the,
the, the quality of the rock.
You know, the Permian Basin
where it's own country would be
the 3rd largest.
Uh, oil and gas producing
country in the world. It's
really tremendous with New
Mexico being about, you know,
quarter fifth of that.
Here's the importance of the
Permian Basin.
New Mexico, you know, one of the
reasons that that this area the
San Juan Basin has suffered
because the Premier Basin
produces associated gas. You
drill an oil well, and you get,
you get a lot of gas.
And that's her places like the
San Juan Basin, unfortunately.
So that little bit of red really
reflects the San Juan Basin
here. Same in Texas, the Permian
really uh dominates.
Here's Leannette County. It's
about 1/3 of permian production,
which is incredible, between New
Mexico and Texas.
Oh, this is tremendous. The past
3 years, New Mexico has produced
more new barrels of oil.
In Texas. I mean, this is where
people want to come.
Pretty proud of that.
Some household names, a lot of
companies you've probably never
heard of. These are um a lot of
more private equity backed.
Um, green, that's unleashed
acreage.
Pink is Lisa this, you can
really see now where the the
best land is. It's already
leased up.
And everything in purple is.
What the commissioner has leased
during her time in office.
This is from an LFC document in
2016 showing comparative tax
structures. New Mexico at 8.5%,
Texas at 8.3%, so very close.
One question we get is.
Well, New Mexico firms and small
firms be priced out of oil and
gas in the state. Well,
They
Not much of a factor anymore.
Um, a lot of people have sold to
companies out of state.
So it's about 1%.
Of uh royalty revenue comes from
New Mexico-based companies.
So out of the.
Total 2.6 that we made last
fiscal year 2.6 billion.
New Mexico-based companies pay.
Thank you final thoughts before
we
That's it. Thank you, thank you
all very much. Appreciate your
time.
You. So we've got, uh,
Representative Luhan.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, uh,
Commissioner, I really
appreciate you being here. I
really appreciate this
presentation. Some of the facts
and information you, uh,
disclosed to us. So, and in your
um purview as as you've stated,
you don't look at this as a tax,
you look at this as a subsidy.
And I just want to be clear on
some of the information I'm
gathering too.
Currently, or we are, we are
making 80 million a year off the
royalties, is that what I heard
just for clarification.
No, uh, last year we made 2.6
billion. OK, I'm just, I'm
hearing different things because
there's mention of 8, 80
million, and I came back from a
conversation. Thank you for
that. So,
OK, so if we divided that, then
my math is going to be off uh
divided that into um our
population, which is from about
2.1 million. That gives us, you
know, what like what each
taxpayer, um.
would be receiving, so to speak,
right? Or benefits from it. They
don't receive it, but they
benefit from it. I think that's
a fair, yeah, it's a fair
assessment, right? OK, and I'm
just bringing this up because
other Alaska does things and I'm
bringing another state into the
conversation and the way that
they, um, they deliver their
revenues to their beneficiaries
is a little bit different than
what we do in here in New
Mexico. Would this be kind of
the equivalent of of our way of
of giving a benefit to taxpayers
as to what, um, Alaska does in a
different system, but it kind of
in the same line of um creating
a benefit, Madam Chair. So I,
Madam Chair, I think, um, well,
first of all, where you got the
80 million figure, um, is our
projections for what this change
would
would earn for the permanent
fund yearly, additionally,
thank you.
Um, so yeah, you're right,
Alaska
the direct checks to citizens.
The reason that we are saying
that this is a actually a tax
savings for New Mexico paying
tax paying households is because
we pay for the things from the
permanent fund and the land
office for things that otherwise
would be paid for by taxes,
things like schools, public
universities, um, are some of
our public hospitals. So because
we pay for those with these
earnings, New Mexico taxpayers
don't have to pay for that.
That's right.
That's what's the argument,
thank you. I appreciate that
clarification. Um, so one of the
things that um.
I'm glad you brought it in. So
in the equation when you're
referring to the top 5 oil
producers, um, with their
revenues and that's only getting
0.1.11% of those profits for New
Mexico and we already have a set
of
rate at 12% from, would you say
most of our wells or most of our
production, um, royalties, and
then we have a 20% what is that
breakdown? I'm trying to find it
here.
We actually don't have the
breakdown in these materials,
Madam Chair. Um, if the
committee is interested, we can
definitely get that, but think
of it as, as something, um, that
is like almost historic. I don't
know if you all realize some of
the leases were signed in the
twenties when, when oil was
first discovered.
Because of the way the laws in
New Mexico work, if you continue
to produce on those leases, you
just hold on to them. They have
basically they never expire.
They always renew because
they're being produced
constantly.
And so, um.
When someone signed the terms of
that time, you know, 20s, 30s,
40s, 50s, and they're still
producing on the lease now
almost 100 years later, they
have the same terms they had
when they first signed the
lease. I mean, obviously, it's
totally different people,
totally different companies.
They've been passed on, but the
terms have never changed.
So because of that historic
nature of some of these leases,
a lot of them still have those
older royalty rates. The 20%
royalty rate that that right now
is the cap at the state land
office. That was actually
increased in the 70s, like, like
Greg said, by a Republican state
senator.
I don't know if any of you knew
Bill Lee. He has passed now. He
actually sought me out at an
event when I was running for
this office to tell me very
proudly that he was the one that
raised royalty rates last time
in the 70s, a Republican senator
understood that the state needed
to get its top value for the
resource that's the best in the
world. Um, so that 20% has only,
you know, that's, that's been
with us since the twenties so we
could get the breakdown of who's
at 12%, who's at 18.
75 and who's at 20% that'd be a
little helpful for for us, I
think, um.
And we know that there's an
issue of projected new leases.
Do we have any of those
projections, Madam Chair, Madam
Chair, great question. Um, there
aren't a lot. There aren't a
lot. So I don't know if we can
do this. We can go back and you
all can just see for yourselves
what's still available and what,
where the prime acreage is, um,
we are talking probably about a
handful of leases. That's why
the number that we're projecting
is so conservative.
But, but once those handful of
prime leases are leased out. If
they're leased at the lower
rate, what did I say about held
by production about historic
terms.
That's our shot. That's our shot
at getting top dollar for those
leases. Once they're leased at
the lower royalty rate, they get
help by production for the next
however many generations. And
we've lost the opportunity to
get top dollar market value for
a public resource.
Um, yeah, I mean, you could see
the green interspersed with the
pink and purple like in Lee
County, for example. That's what
we're talking about.
Those leases right there.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
So that having all that
information together would be
very helpful and I know it's
harder now to get new leases. I
mean, it's just something as a
matter of fact. The other, the
other point that I'd like to, to
bring up and and um having a
Senator Griggs bring this up
earlier was that because of
technology and because of um
demand as I brought up too, that
we have right now, we're not
going to see these, these ups
and downs, these, you know,
these, these tremendous ups and
downs and and
Oil pricing and production like
we did in the past. We're gonna
and we and I went to an energy
um conference, uh, month and a
half ago and we had an
economist, a federal economist
who's neither, you know, on
either side of the the aisle
himself tell us that our
production.
And our um.
Yeah, production and oil
production are going to be
steady and we're plateauing and
we know this, LFC has presented
uh this information with us. We
know that this is, we're going
to have a little bit of a, a, a
drop this year and maybe in the
future, but not much for the
years to come, so.
If we're trying to create a.
Uh, disciplined way of how we're
going to
On the argument, if you will,
the argument of the revenues
that we need for our state
matched with the needs that our
state has matched with
increasing a royalty that could
benefit those public needs, as
we know, we have many.
And as we heard from the
previous presentation that they
do give to, you know, they give
to public um issues and needs
and our teachers and so forth.
So thank you, thank you for
doing that. But if we all move
together to to come to a
solution to really decide that
this is the better way of doing
that and putting all those
efforts together, maybe, and
this these discussions we're
having that this is probably the
better way to do it, more direct
way, and more beneficial way
because then it's evenly
distributed and then it doesn't
take us out.
As the legislators in those
decisions for our public
spending, Madam Chair, if you
will. Thank you. Um, there's a
lot more to this. There's a lot
more information, but I think
that, I think, uh, having these
meetings and I know that you're
having them, I'd encourage you
to continue with those meetings
and, and all the things you're
doing on both sides so that we
can have a a bigger and better
picture of this, you know, from
oil and gas, I'd like to know
some of their projections and
what they're looking for for
permitting um from, from yours
as you control our state lands.
What that looks like for our
future because right now things
are already set in stone. And
one last question, Madam Chair,
can that language, that
historical language ever be
changed.
So, uh, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Ortez did try to
get at the Oil and Gas Act a
little bit, um, and was, you
know, partially sexy,
people have tried, Madam Chair,
uh.
Uh
And I get asked that a lot, you
know, should we just rewrite the
the entire act. Should we bring
it up to the 2.
What are we in now? 21st century
and I'm not gonna have, I'm not
gonna give my view on that. I
think it's probably known what
my view would probably be right
now I am after the royalty rate.
If someone wants to have a
conversation about updating the
Oil and Gas Act. I will have
that conversation. I think the,
the primary thing in it is that
it caps whoever holds this
office. It caps their ability to
be competitive with the resource
they manage.
I appreciate your time. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Uh, Senator Griggs.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
Thank you for your stewardship,
you know, and I know you, uh, I
know you may think it's funny,
kind of coming from me, but I
still, that's what I think. I
mean, you are charged with with
doing the job you're doing and
whether we agree exactly or not,
you know, that, that's just the
way that part is, but right now
your map is showing that.
99.2% of the high production
zones or are leashed. I'm
guessing that's the shale
formation because that's where
the where the horizontal
activity is.
But you and I and explained to
me, be sure I understand that as
you were talking to
Representative Luhan, I mean,
you're talking about $80 million
you think would be generated
from the additional leashes if
they were at 25%.
That is correct, ma'am, but
there's
Uh, 0.8% in the high productive
areas that would be available,
so it, it's not actually going
to make, it's, it's hard for me
to say that that would make a
$800 million deal, but it
certainly could, I suppose, and
I, I'm gonna guess uh that you
have the information to, to back
that up to at least some degree.
So, uh, when you, when you look
at the map and you sit there and
you see where all that is, it's,
it's not a very consequential
deal.
The question and you answered it
a minute ago.
I think, is when we're talking
about HBP acreage and just
everybody understands that
acreage, it's held by
production, which is what uh
Stephanie referred to when she
was talking about leashes being
maintained for years and years
and years because the lease was,
uh,
was leased and it production was
established, and once that
happens, you pay royalties, you
quit paying rents, you pay
royalties, and that royalty
payment maintains the lease.
Uh, and that's what happens
here, here in New Mexico, so
there's not, I guess.
Any, um,
Any loss of acreage ever.
On a leash, it's held by
production. Madam Chair and uh.
Senator, not quite. I mean,
there are from time to time,
there is loss of acreage on on
some of these old leases, but
I'm just going to remind you.
That the figure we're throwing
out, the 80 million, and you
can, you can talk about 75
instead if you want.
The the LFC came to the same
conclusion, looking at the same
maps we look at.
So their number was 75. If you
want to talk about 75, we can
use that number instead of 80.
And
Madam Chair, I mean, I, there's,
there's going to be discussion
about it all. I'm, I'm certain
of that. And uh, you know, that
gives
The fact that that map is
public, and I guess it was been
public, but it uh it gives you
Discussion points and that's a,
you know, that's a good thing.
This, this gives you, I mean,
this gives you good discussion
points too. When you, when you
look at that, the question I
guess right off the top of my
head is we talk about New Mexico
rush land. I think everybody
understands what, what those
are. What are, what are Texas
trust land?
Madam Chair, Senator, uh,
Texas's trust lands, uh,
are controlled by two different
groups. One is university lands,
uh, which does, which forms a
land office like uh service for
uh
The trust lands that were given
to state institutions in, in
Texas, and there's also a
general land office. And so they
that split, I think at some
point from from GLO also into
university lands and um.
That that's uh where Texas is at
now.
And, and Madam Chair, um, is
the, um,
Is the PSL form the same as the
university lands form, is it
same as the mineral classified
lands form, is it the same as
the death and dome asylum lands
form, uh, because they're all
different.
And when you talk about state
lands in Texas, or you talk
about state trust lands and all
of those are specific Texas.
Trushland for specific things
and so.
I don't know in your reference,
if all of those are the same
because
40 years ago they weren't.
So it didn't, doesn't mean it
couldn't be today, but 40 years
ago they, they weren't, uh, I
don't know when you come down
through some of this stuff is if
that's administrative and if
it's administrative, some of
those actions where they're
probably
different forms pick up, you
know, each one,
but it might be that those are
statutory as well, which then
makes it harder to get at just
like this is here. So,
Is that, I mean, am I getting
off base when I talk to you
about the forms, or did you
evaluate all the forms to be
sure all their provisions were
the same. So Madam Chair, if I
could just offer something that
might make just make this
comparison simpler.
That is, and we did talk to the
General Land Office when we put
together this comparison sheet,
um.
The university lands, I think is
the best, um, comparison, and
the reason is because they've
got about the same number of
acreage in the same area that we
do, about 200 acres, um, they
have the 25% royalty rate and a
lot of the provisions that we
line out in this comparison.
Came from university lands like,
like, uh, the, the uh provision
that that Greg talked about
where, you know, they don't,
they don't lease every single
formation in one lease. You have
to lease by formation, those by
depth, those kinds of things
came from university land, so
maybe what we should say is
university lands versus state
trust lands. And, and Madam
Chair, and Stephanie, I'd agree
with that. I think you need to
be, you need to be accurate
because they're not, there's a
whole
whole bunch of different things
and you're talking about one and
not all, and I think it
That dilutes your argument when
you, when you go that way, uh.
But I just, I think as I look
through this, I mean, there's,
there's questions I'd have if we
were if we were actually in a,
in a committee meeting, there'd
be stuff just to be, to be clear
on and what the distinctions and
what the differences are, but I,
I think where, where you guys
need to do, you've identified
this stuff, um, and I think it'd
be important to talk with, I
mean, and, and the mortgage in
the room, I mean, they need to
see these and they need to see
how they can.
How they might can.
can argue with them if they want
to, uh, I'm not certain. There's
a big arguing point. I'd, I'd
love for there not to be, you
know, when this thing would come
to the legislature, there'd be
agreement, you know, between,
between groups and um.
Uh, there's a variety of things,
obviously, it looks like you
could discuss on the lease form
as well, and maybe you need to
discuss those things and, and
avoid the royalty. I, I don't
know, but, uh, but I think um
yeah, I, I think there's a
variety of things that we could
have fun talking about, but I, I
think it that particular one,
when you talk about.
These rush lands, you identify
what what you're talking about.
So thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you and, and hang in
there. You get just 2 more to
go, so good for you.
Uh, thank you. Representative
Alcon.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm just
curious, is that, isn't it
possible to do this, uh, do this
change my room instead of my
statue.
Uh, Madam Chair, no, and the
reason is because of the
statutory nature of the lease.
We cannot make any changes to
the lease itself because it
literally sits in statute. I
would encourage you all to
actually look at it in the
statute books for yourselves
because it's a lease form.
In the statute book with like a
blank for the date and a blank
for where you put the lessee's
name. It's written out that way
in statute.
So, the things that we, that we
do have control over, Madam
Chair, um, the, the lease form
in statute says, you know, must
comply with all state land
office rules. So that is the way
that we get folks to do, you
know, be, be responsible for
cleanup and things like that, is
we've got rules around clean up,
like if you, if you.
Sign a contract with the state
land office, you are signing an
a a a promise that you are going
to clean up after yourself. If
you break that rule, we can take
action. So, so those are the
ways that that we can get around
this, the, the, the, um.
Royalty rate though
unfortunately, Madam Chair, and
representative is set in the
statutory lease.
OK, hold on. Basically what
you're telling me, uh Madam
Chair, what you're telling me is
you have a blank lease in the
statute book.
There's no nothing filled in
other than the blanks, blank,
blank, blank there's Madam
Chair, it's a blank for like the
lessee's name.
But all of the terms are lined
out in statute.
OK, that answers my question.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Brego.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I'm trying to wrap my arm, my
head around this and OK, and I,
and I like, I was in the land
use business for 30 years,
almost, um.
So
Going back in time.
And there was an act that was
created by the state that said
if you drill on these lands that
are leased to you.
Then you have to comply with
certain regulations. Am I
correct?
And in that act,
It whenever that was passed,
maybe before all of us were
born, I don't know.
1930s, um.
Was it a 20% at that time, the
term that's a great question,
Madam Chair. I'm just going to
clarify, it was not at that
time. At that time, maybe 12, I
mean, there's, there are
different actually this gets way
into the weeds, but there are
different um areas that have
different rates and the lowest
rate, I think, is the 12% or is
there?
Yes, um, Madam Chair,
representative, uh,
commissioner, uh,
This, this, uh, the currently
the lease says, uh, that leasing
shall happen uh at a minimum of
18.75% and at a maximum of 20%
and uh this lease form is
actually for what is bizarrely
called restricted lands and
restricted lands simply mean
lands where there's non oil and
gas, so there's two restricted
areas in New Mexico. One's the
Permian Basin, the other is a
San Juan Basin. Anything else
would be.
Non-restricted and leasing in
there is generally at 12.5% or
maybe a cap of like 16.67%, but
I can guarantee you that no
one's coming around asking to uh
to to lease land in those, in
those poorer areas because
there's just no return on
investment there.
So
The proposal that you have here
in house Bill 48.
Would that make it consistent at
20% for all the lands or is it
just for those particular lands
that you identified that are
more um I guess.
That produce more oil. Yeah, so
Madam Chair, it would be 25% and
it would be just for the
restricted land for the
restricted lands. And remember,
it's a cap. We don't have to
charge the 25. You don't have
to, so it's just a cap.
Um, and, and I, and I have to, I
think about this, Madam Chair,
um, in terms of, you know, the
cost of doing business because
we're always saying that
government should be more like a
business and it should be run
more like a business. I heard
that for 30 years almost when I
was in the planning department
is like people opened a
business, for example, whatever
the business was, and, um, you
know, there was a fee that was
paid to open the.
Business and there's a business
license fee and there's an etc.
etc. and
If
A property owner, um, let's say
they own the property and they
opened their business and they
violated that code, then they
were charged fees or fines for
violating now, and I'm doing an
analogy here because I'm trying,
like I said, I'm trying to wrap
my head around this. Um,
And, and it was imperative of
the government not to.
Take
But if that business owner was
not complying, then the city.
In that case, in my case, or the
county could shut that business
down if they were not complying.
And so.
I go back to think about, you
know, if you have a property
owner.
In, in lieu, the state is the
property owner, but they are
leasing the land from the
property owners, so they are
sort of partners in a sense. And
if one of them is not complying,
then the state has a
responsibility to regulate that
property.
And, and then I think a little
bit further, Madam Chair, is
The cost to
If that property owner walks
away, for example, um, to clean
up that situation, the cost of
doing that and then the cost of
increasing it possibly by 5%.
I mean.
Madam Chair, really over time,
are we even getting our money
back as a state because if that
cost exceeds that 5% additional
5%, then the state is really in
a, in a, in the hole,
exactly. And so I, I, I, I did
support this bill, by the way,
and um, so I, I just had to give
that analogy because I, I think,
you know, the state.
has a responsibility to ensure
that that property is clean.
Um, I mean, we're in the
business of, you know, public
safety and the health in general
welfare of the public. That's
our business.
Um, and when we sign those
agreements when the uh the um
leasy signs that agreement with
The state
They are by the very nature of
that agreement taking on that.
That role.
So, um,
I just wanted to mention that as
an analogy, Madam Chair, is
because I, you know, as I was
trying to put all this together.
It seems to me like we're not
keeping up, we, the state is not
keeping up with the cost of
doing business in New Mexico. So
thank you.
All righty. Well, that's, that
was the last person on our list.
I wanna thank you for coming.
Um, I do wanna give you a little
bit of advice, you know, I did a
little bill called the Early
Childhood Trust Fund and that
bill took me several years to
pass, but when it did, it did,
it's done a good job for New
Mexicans and so, um, I hope that
this is the year that this
passes as well. So thank you for
being here today. Um, if we
could get our next group to come
on out, Madam Chair, if I can,
before the commissioner leaves,
if you'd like to learn more
about.
Uh, our state land commissioner,
you can find her on the most
recent episode of the Tres
Leches New Mexico podcast
available on most platforms
except Apple. Apple is the worst
at getting podcasts on so you
can find that Trisle is New
Mexico, the utterly delicious
insight into the New Mexico
legislature. Thank you,
Commissioner.
So we're at, we, I know, I know
it is clean energy transition in
New Mexico. We've got um the
pattern energy group.
Excel Energy.
Um, so if you all wanna come up
and introduce yourselves while
we're getting our handouts here.
Thank you for joining.
And I will pass it over to you.
Uh, hi, uh, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, uh, my name is
Varner Seman. I'm the director
of legislative and regulatory
affairs for Pattern Energy.
Thank you very much for having
me today.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair.
Members of the committee, my
name is Zoe Lee. I'm the
regional vice president of
Planning and policy for Excel
Energy, Texas and New Mexico.
Good afternoon. Justin Smiley. I
am the director of customer
relations at Excel Energy.
Alrighty. We can get the room to
clear out just.
So we can go and start with our
next presentation. Thank you.
All righty, please begin.
Great, thank you. Um, so as I
mentioned, my name is Varner Sim
and I'm with Pattern Energy, um,
we're a developer of uh wind
energy and transmission we're
moving into doing some solar
development, but what I'm going
to talk about today is mostly
just um wind energy trans uh
wind energy development as well
as transmission.
Um, so just a little bit of an
orientation about who pattern is
and our experience in New
Mexico, um, we have, uh, just
listed up here as our activity
in the state so far and I'll
focus a little bit in detail on
the Sunzia project and we've got
a video that we want to show
that we're very excited about,
um, so, uh, we started off our
first, um, wind farm that was
put into commercial operation is
the uh Broadview win with 324
megawat
But um I think our map is a
little bit off in terms of where
things are located. We've got
Grady and Broadview, I think a
little bit further east than
they actually are, but bear with
us a little bit in terms of
that.
Um, but we built the Broadview
End in 2017, um, that was, uh,
at the time a pretty expensive
project at 732 million um
between that and the Grady W
project are both up and running,
um, operating and, and
commercially, uh, commercially
successful projects.
Um, then we moved on to what at
the time seemed like a pretty
big project for us, which was
the Western Spirit project. It
was at that point, um, the
largest single phase development
of wind generation anywhere in
the United States, um, and we
were pretty excited about it and
we thought it was a pretty big
project. Also had transmission,
um, associated with that 155
miles of transmission. Um,
again, doing a linear project of
155 miles is a big deal as we
look throughout the western US,
um.
Uh, building linear transmission
lines, I think is a struggle for
utilities and for independent
developers throughout the West,
so we felt pretty good about
that. And so we thought, well,
shoot, if we've done that, um,
let's see if we can take on the
Sunzia project, um, and so what
we're really happy to report
today is that, uh, last October
in 2023, we started construction
on the project and um we reached
a financial close with our
bankers raising.
$11 billion in capital in
December, a little bit after we
actually started turning some
dirt and we're actively
constructing um the Sunzia wind
and transmission project, and I
want to talk a little bit more
in detail about those. Um, one
of the things that we've just
included here, um, for reference
is a couple of different things.
One is the direct capital cost
for these projects, which is the
direct amount that we're paying
for um the equipment for the
leases, um, for uh the labor.
That goes into producing the,
uh, these projects. Um, but, and
I want to talk when we get into
Sunzi, I'll talk a little bit
about some of the indirect
economic benefits. I think it's
one of those things that I'm
sure as legislators, you hear a
lot, the indirect benefits, and
I think that can seem a little
fuzzy sometimes, um, a little
bit. I've always been personally
a little skeptical of the of the
induced jobs and all that kind
of stuff, but I want to give a
couple of examples that we're
seeing on the project currently
that I think give a, give a
picture and I think for me
personally, um, helped resonate
a little bit in terms of that
broader
Economic impact
Um, so let's talk about Sunzia,
um.
Uh.
It's big, um, it's really big.
Uh, it's 3.5 gigawatts or 3,515
megawatts of wind generation.
Um, the project area is pretty,
pretty, pretty big, um, uh, I'm
gonna come up with euphemisms
for big at some point, but I'll
just, I'll just keep, I'll just
keep using that word for now.
Um, it's 10 separate subproject
zones in an area in Lincoln and
Torrance County, the top, top to
bottom is about 90 miles from
one tip of the project to the
bottom of the project. Um, it's
about 30 miles wide, um, uh, I
was on site yesterday
With some uh federal agency
folks, um, actually some US
Senate staff who were touring
the projects, some of the folks
who work on permitting reform
and the Fast 41 group from DC
and our construction manager who
was showing us around a little
bit, has worked on 23 wind farms
around the country and he said
this is the first time he's ever
had a project so big that they
have to have multiple
construction offices to
supervise it, um, because the
distance that it takes, he said,
take about half a day by the
time you start at the top, drive
to the bottom of the project,
drive back, that'd be about.
Half a day just to drive time.
Um, there aren't, there aren't
freeways in the middle of the
project site, so getting around
is a little bit slow. Um, so
that 315 megawatts, just to put
it in, in perspective, um,
there's a little energy project,
um, uh, in this.
Not, not New Mexico, but, but in
this part of the world, the
Hoover Dam, um, that little
project, uh, puts out, um, about
a third of the amount of power
on an annual basis that Sunzia
wind is going to generate. So
put, put in affirmative word
generating 3 times or when we
were operational we generate 3
times the amount of electricity
on an annual basis that the
Hoover Dam puts out.
Um, I think that's pretty big.
Um, it's enough to serve about 3
million Americans in their
energy needs. Um, I think that
as we talk about this project, I
think one of the things that
comes up is, um, uh, the
relationship of New Mexico to
the rest of the West. This is a
project that's going to serve
Western energy needs beyond the
2.1 million folks who live here
in the state of New Mexico, um,
and I think that it's important
that we talk about how
regionally important this
project is, um, uh, as we look
at that and, and we're just as
proud as you could be about that
3.
0.5 gigawatts or 315 or 33,515
megawatts. Um, if we look
westwide, and I think that uh
the folks from Excel probably
talk about the, the projected
need in their service to but
when we look westwide, we, we
see a huge amount of energy
demand growth, um, as well as
policy changes that are driving
a transition in energy. Um, if
you look westwide, we need about
300 gigawatts or about 90 or so
Sunzias westwide, um, to me.
The renewable energy goals that
utilities and states have in
place across the Western United
States, just the state of
California is about 180
gigawatts. So, um, when we look
at this project, we're very
proud of it, um, but we know
that it is only part of the
development that needs to happen
for both the load growth that we
have as well as to replace the
retiring resources.
Um, so back to the project, um,
we have on site, uh, I got an
update this morning from, um,
uh, Jeremy Turner, who I think a
lot of you folks know that we
have a little over 1700 people
working, um, as of today on the
project, that's divided between
the wind sites and those two
counties working on the 550 mile
transmission line running from
um uh from uh outside of Corona
all the way over down along.
The border um up into Arizona
and terminates in Panola County,
Arizona. Um, we think in a way
that this is a project that's
kind of, um, even though we, we
kind of roll it all into one
with Sunzia wind and
transmission. It's really sort
of 4 different projects. Um,
we've got the wind farm
construction. We've got the
transmission line construction.
We have the construction of the
high voltage direct current
converter stations, um, which is
the, I believe the only one in
construction in the United
States.
States right now. Um, and then
we have all the engineering that
goes into the high voltage
direct current converter
stations. Um, what's really
unique about this project as it
is, uh, HVDC or high voltage
direct current, as opposed to
alternating current. It allows
you to put a tremendous amount
of power on the line with very
low line losses and just to ship
a huge amount of um energy
through that right away. Um,
it's not something that has been
developed a whole lot.
In the United States, other
parts of the world, um, build
HVDC, but there are certain
components that uh we have uh
that we're putting into the HVDC
converter stations this project
that are first in the world
technology. Um, we think it's
appropriate in a state known for
its science and engineering
that, um, is a leading edge
state that we do have um some
pretty, pretty fancy technology
going on into the HVDC converter
station at some point as we're
moving forward on the project,
we'd love to get everybody uh
who's interested.
give you a chance to come and
see what's taking place with the
project. We're pretty proud of
it. Um, so that's kind of a high
level in terms of the project.
Erin, do you mind if we play the
video that we have is, I don't
know if it's the next slide or
if you want to do it.
Bear with us. We're real excited
about this.
We're on a fantastic project out
here doing a lot of good things
for the local communities, for
the state, for the country,
really.
It's a great opportunity for
everybody here to come out here
to do their part for the
community for the environment.
Yeah some apart from.
the.
Pretty remarkable that I'm
actually out here have some
involvement and work with these
guys.
I'm just passionate you know the
grid is struggling right now
with the economy in this area.
There's a lot of people involved
in a lot of stuff you deal with
a lot of problems, but it's the
little winds that you're able to
put together that makes the
biggest difference in the price.
56 years from now,
I was on a new game for our
country and how much on the
line.
So, uh.
Pretty excited about that. I'm
pretty excited about the work,
um, a lot of the work, I think,
uh, even yesterday, we had a
chance to see helicopters doing
some of the line stringing, um,
a lot of sections in the
transmission line route where
there are some concerns about
habitat where it's in very
remote areas we're doing the
work by helicopter, um, and
we're pretty proud that we've
got really good reclamation for
the disturbance that's taking
place. There is some disturbance
associated with it, and we think
that we've been able to pretty
successfully minimize
The footprint, um, from a lot of
the work where it's going on.
So, um, with that, all I'll stop
talking about it because I could
go on for a couple of days about
this project, um, we are very
much excited about it. I really
appreciate the opportunity to be
here to talk about it and again,
um, uh, when I, when I have a
chance to get uh folks on this
committee out to see the project
as we move forward with it.
Thank you.
Chairwoman Gallega, spice chair
Hamblin, members of the
committee, thank you very much
for having Excel Energy here
today to talk to you about um
the economic growth in our
service territory, um, that
we're seeing and some of the
challenges that we have as we um
as we transition to a more
clean, um grid. So you might,
well, I will start off by saying
I was a little nervous that you
might be curious as to why.
The electric utility that is
serving the Permian Basin in New
Mexico is coming all the way up
here to Farmington to talk to
you about economic growth and
providing electric utility
service. Many of the challenges
that we face are shared by all
utilities, but I was preceded um
by the New Mexico Land Office
and by Namoga who did kind of a
nice job of teeing this up for
us as well. So I won't be as
nervous about that anymore. Um,
just a little bit of background,
I won't stay here long. SP.
Yes, Southwestern Public Service
Company is an operating company
of Excel Energy. We operate
across 8 states in the Midwest,
Colorado, Texas, and of course,
New Mexico.
Um, our New Mexico service
territory here's
A map of what it looks like in
Texas and in New Mexico, we
serve from Tan carry all the way
down to Hobbs. We have been
proudly serving, um, Southeast
New Mexico for over 100 years.
Um, and we currently have
approximately 126,000 customers
that we, um, that we serve in
the state of New Mexico. I'll
also share with you that
enterprise-wide, so across all
of our eight states, um, Excel
Energy, um, has
3.36.3 million dollars with New
Mexico-based suppliers just last
year.
Appreciate the opportunity to be
able to present in front of you
today. Um, I want to talk a
little bit about, uh, Zoe
mentioned that we operate in a
couple different states, Texas
and New Mexico were also
regulated by FERC, but we're
also a part of the Southwest
Power pool. Um, and, and you
just heard a presentation about
3500 megawatts tying to the
Western interconnect and if you
look at the graph on the left,
you can kind of see the western
interconnect that sets there. We
are not tied to that Western
interconnect, so this 35,500
megawatts doesn't benefit Xcel
Energy customers or SPS
customers. Um, we operate with.
In the 14 states of the
Southwest Power pool, as you can
see in the graph up there that
dark section is our service
territory, and it's, it's on a
peninsula on its own. So to be
able to move electricity
generation power throughout
that, we've got to have poles
and wires in the ground to be
able to get that energy
transported across all 14 states
that the power pole operates in.
Um, and the graph on the left
there is, is an image of our
transmission system, um, and,
and how we move that energy
across, uh, our, our, uh, two
states that we operate in but
across all 14 states within the
power pool. Um, and something
interesting about, um, the
different power grids, there's
actually very limited
interconnections between the
power grids. So we don't have an
availability to connect to the
Urcot market and to purchase
power or to sell power back and
forth for our market, um,
Very limited opportunity to tie
into the Western interconnect.
There's 3 connections on our
grid, one in Colorado, 2 in New
Mexico, very small aged pieces
of equipment, uh, called a DC
tie high voltage DC tie, um,
that allow power to move between
the two. but that's, that's the
way the grids operate in the way
our, um,
Transmission system works.
So next slide I'll talk a little
bit about our customers and who
we are and what type of
customers we have. We are a
little bit unique, um, SPS is is
extremely high commercial and
industrial customers. We're 75%,
uh, commercial industrial load
with 50% of that being oil and
gas industry. Um,
As far as the way our states are
split, about 65% of our load
currently sets in Texas, and 35%
sets in New Mexico. However,
we've got enough economic
development and low growth
coming to New Mexico that we're
expecting by the end of the
decade, Texas and New Mexico to
be equal load wise or or growth
wise?
Um,
What we've seen in Leonetti
County over the past 10 years
and you've seen a couple of good
graphs talking about the oil and
gas industry in those two
counties and what's happened,
we've seen about 700 megawatts
of growth um in Leonetti County
over the past 10 years. Uh, it
seems tremendous, but on our
table right now, we have 1300
megawatts of economic
development, low growth, wanting
to connect to our grid by 2027.
Uh, so, uh, near double what
we've seen over the past 10
years, wanting to come online in
the next few years.
Um,
During our presentation, you're
going to see a little bit of
kind of past, present, and
future coming from us, um, and
what we look at is our, our past
energy mix. In 2005, we were 3%
carbon-free.
Um, and so pretty heavy, heavy
coal, natural gas, a little bit
of wind, and some other
generation on our system. Last
in 2022, uh, we were actually
39% carbon-free electricity
coming off of our native grid
mix. Um, when you look at 2023,
we actually saw a decrease in
our carbon reduction, meaning we
went from 39% carbon-free to 37%
carbon-free. And a lot of it had
to do with growth and load and
development in our service
territory, um, and no
additional.
Assets that have been added on,
so it actually decreased the
value or the the amount of how
much um carbon-free assets were
spread across, um, our grid for
our customers. And then in 2030,
you see an example of an 84%
carbon-free and that's, that's
a, um, a what if and Zoey's
actually here to talk a little
bit about what our future looks
like and what that generation
mix will look like and what
we're going to do in the future
for our customers.
So thanks Justin for teeing me
up nicely. I'm going to provide
a quick integrated resource
planning and request for
proposal update, um, to you all,
uh, to give you an idea of the
regulatory process that uh Excel
Energy and the other utilities
in the state need to go through
in order to bring on new
generation to meet this economic
growth in the state.
So today, um, the SPS service
territory on our system. We have
a total of about 5200 megawatts
of accredited capacity, um, with
the total system peak of
approximately 4300 megawatts. I
will just say, um, that of that
5200 megawatts, 700,
approximately 700 megawatts is
for planning reserve margin
reasons. It's to ensure
reliability on our system.
Um, today, as you can see, we
serve, uh, we serve our
customers with a variety of
different resources, uh, from
wind, solar, natural gas, and
coal, but this will, this
generation mix is quickly
changing.
In March of last year, uh, SPS
asked the public regulation
commission in New Mexico for
permission to file its
integrated resource plan a year
early. We saw tremendous growth
on our system along with
retiring, uh, natural gas, aging
natural gas units, and an aging
coal unit on our system and
increasing reliability
requirements, those 3 drivers,
uh, we saw a tre
Tremendous need coming in the
near term that we needed to, to
meet and to meet with new
generation and we um decided
that the that the timeline of
resource planning in the
regulatory process in New Mexico
would not afford us enough time
to meet that need if we didn't
file the integrated resource
plan a year early. The
commission approved that
request, um, and in April of
last year we began a 6 month
facilitated stakeholder process
in which we met with local
Economic Development
Corporations, local chambers of
commerces, communities,
community representatives,
customers, um, and nonprofits
and engage with them over a six
month period to discuss what
SPS's needs were and how it was
going to meet those needs. We
held two in-person meetings,
multi-day meetings in the
service territory in in Roswell,
New Mexico, and in Hobbs. um, so
that our customers and our
community members could come and
participate.
Person and ask our subject
matter experts as many questions
as they wanted to and help shape
the modeling that went into that
integrated resource plan.
And we filed our integrated
resource plan in October of last
year. That plan contains the
statement of need, which you
will see in a moment, um, what
our generation needs are on the
system and, and a plan of how we
are going to meet that need, uh,
in the next 5 years.
Um,
In July of this year, we
following a regulatory process
dictated by the Commission
integrated Resource Planning
rules, we issued our request for
production or excuse me request
for uh for proposals, bid
proposals, um,
And that is, has opened up the
opportunity for project
developers to present us with
bids to meet our generation
needs from the years 2027 to
2030.
Um,
That bid window will close in
January and by the 2nd quarter
of next year, the end of the 2nd
quarter next year, we will have
filed approvals for the resource
portfolio with the New Mexico
Commission.
That, um, that process pursuant
to statute in in the state of
New Mexico can take up to 15
months to get those resource
portfolios.
Now we have a tremendous need.
Um, as you can see as early as
2027, we have an accredited
capacity need of 770 megawatts
by 2 by 2030 that need is an
accredited capacity need of over
3000 megawatts. Now, that's
accredited capacity, so that can
translate to over 5 gigawatts of
nameplate capacity on our
system, that is doubling the
system that New Mex
PPS has, um, today. So this is
an all source request for for um
proposals. We are considering
any and all sources to meet this
need, um, and I, I will say it
again, what's driving this need
is load growth, economic growth,
on the SPS system.
Uh, it's retiring, aging gas
plants, and the retiring coal
plant that we have committed to
retiring by the end of 2028.
And it is increasing reliability
requirements by the Southwest
Power pool to ensure that our
grid can reliably and safely
serve our customers.
Um, it is important to remember
that reliability and
affordability of this plan will
have a direct impact on how the
state can attract new business
coming into our service
territory and not just serve the
growing business that's in the
Permian Basin today.
So these, I'll go.
Quickly past this slide. Again,
this is an all source um and all
source RFP we're seeking to
replace um the over.
Over 1000 megawatts located at
the Tolk coal plant, um, just
over the state line in Texas and
Earth, Texas, and we're also
looking for firm proposals to
replace, um, approximately 500
megawatts of retiring gas units
on our system. We are looking
for.
For purchase power agreement
proposals we're looking for bill
transfer proposals, self-build
proposals. We want to see what's
out there so that we can
reliably and affordably um serve
our customers and come up with
the best resource portfolio
possible for our customers.
I want to highlight a few of the
process challenges that you've
heard me allude to today, um,
for your consideration and to
keep in the back of your mind as
you go into the 2025 legislative
session.
First of all, there's little
flexibility in the IRP process,
the integrated resource planning
process today to address
Economic development load. This
is load that might not yet be
captured in our forecasting
because it doesn't represent a
customer that's on our system
today, but it represents
customers that are interested in
coming to the state of New
Mexico and doing business.
So it's, it's very difficult in
the current IRP process which,
as you saw, is a lengthy process
to address that speculative
business that is interested and
we want to attract to the state
of New Mexico. There's also
little flexibility to address
emergent growth in the
businesses that are already
located in New Mexico today.
Um, the forecast that we do, we
call load forecasting is
dynamic. We receive information
from our customers on how they
want to grow their business, and
we take that information and we
plan around it. We plan what our
system needs to provide to our
customers in the future around
what our customers want to
accomplish in New Mexico, um,
today, and as we all know,
business needs business plans
change, and we're seeing a lot
of growth in the Permian Basin
specifically.
As, especially when it comes to
electrifying processes and
helping our customers reduce
their own carbon emission
footprint as they produce oil
and gas in the state.
So right now there's little
flexibility in that IRP process
to address this dynamic this
dynamic growth in the state, um,
and to, to address emergent
near-term resource needs that
we're seeing.
Um, also, we, I, I mentioned it
today, but the statutes in the
state, um,
do signal risk to project
developers. Today to receive
approval for um for a new
generation project that's a
build transfer under a build
transfer, um, design or as a
self-build design, it can take
up to 15 months pursuing by
pursuant to the statute to get
approval. Um, I will say that
the current commission has done
a really good job of giving us
timely, um, timely decisions
when we
We've asked for those and and
communicated kind of emergent
needs from them, but it's still
a fact that we have these
deadlines in statute that create
risk for developers who are
bidding into our RFP process
with prices today that they
might, that might change two
years from now when we finally
get resource approvals.
Um,
As emergent needs come onto the
system, especially with economic
development needs. If a utility
needs to act quickly to bring on
resources to meet those needs in
order to attract that business,
um, in order to get RPS, um,
I, uh, credit towards our RPS
compliance, you need to issue a
competitive procurement for
resources. If you're trying to
attract business, that can be a
real challenge for utilities
that might need to think of
creative ways to bring resource
resources on quickly in order to
meet economic development
purposes, but might not be able
to use um renewable energy
credits, um, issued from those
resources towards their own RPS
compliance. It's something for
us to be thinking about. And
again
And I'll, we'll keep saying it,
reliability and affordability is
hugely important when attracting
new business, um, and growing
current businesses in this
state, um, and reliability and
affordability of the system must
continue to be prioritized by
the legislature and the
commission. I'm gonna pass this
on to Justin to give you kind of
an update on where we are today
on our system and our ability to
meet economic growth that we're
seeing today on our system.
Thank you Zoe. Zoe talked a lot
about, uh, generation need and
creating power. Now how do we
move that power and that power
requires poles and wires to be
able to move that bower to the
customers that are going to
utilize it and our transmission
system is the highway that does
that for us. And what I wanna do
is I want to stick to my little
past present and and future
theme. Uh, and I want to look at
Southeast New Mexico and this is
Leontti County primarily 10
years ago.
Um, if you look at the map, this
is our transmission system and
the purple squares are
substations, um, pretty small
system. We, we, we, um,
Have that ability right there
we're serving about 600
megawatts of load in that
region. Um,
So what's happened since 2014?
Since 2014, uh, New Mexico has
become the 2nd largest oil and
gas producer, uh, in the United
States. Um.
In 2022, Texas produced about
4.8 million barrels of oil per
day. New Mexico was around 1.4.
By 2028, we have one customer
that's looking at producing 1
million barrels of oil per day
in Leonetti County. So there's
tremendous future and tremendous
growth in Leonetti County, um,
as it sets today, New Mexico is
producing about 16% of US total
production around 5% of our
consumption. Um.
And so if you look at what we
have slated and where we're at,
I don't know if they'll
highlighter will work here, but
this small service, this small
red hatched area, that's the SBS
service territory, um, inside
Leonetti County. And if you look
at that area, we're looking at
around 2500 megawatts of, of a
potential peak by the end of the
decade in that region, though,
that area of those two counties
would be greater load or greater
consumption of energy than the
entire PNM footprint.
In those two small counties.
Um, and so we've got tremendous
growth in that region in the oil
and gas industry, um.
and other industries that are
supported in that region, um.
So this is actually where we
stand today in Southeast New
Mexico. Um, we saw this load, we
saw the increase. We saw the
demand coming from our
customers. Uh, we saw the
economic need and the
highlighted, uh, bright red
lines or a 345 KV line, um,
which is kind of a a
superhighway for us to be able
to move energy down to that, uh,
far region of southeast New
Mexico, and you can see there's
dozens of substations, massive
build on the 115 345
had been done, um.
Over, over the past 10 years.
And all of this bailout is not
enough. We're still behind.
Looking at that map and
comparing what we were 10 years
ago, we are still behind today.
So what are some of the
challenges we're facing and why
are we behind? Um, some of it
is, and you've seen some of the
charts either from Namoga or
from others so far, the, the low
growth and the development in
that region is just tremendous
and it spiked, um, uh, recently
over the past several years. But
on top of it, we're facing a
supply chain demand, uh, issue,
meaning, um.
Pre-COVID, if I needed to build
a substation, I could build a
substation in less than 18
months.
Today, if I need to build a
substation, it's 3 years
minimum.
Uh, the 345 lines that I
mentioned, the extreme high, the
high voltage lines that were
coming in, uh, pre-COVID, you
could get a, you could get a
3:45 breaker in less than a
year. Today it's 4 years. So if
we're needing to build something
today, it's 4 years before the
breakers delivered for us to
build that out. And so supply
chain has been dramatic. We've
seen that come from a lot of
other industries building the
same thing we built, whether
it's a developer building it,
whether it's a data center,
whether it's crypto, um, other
entities are purchasing the
breakers that were previously
used by
Just utility type companies. And
so it's really slowed down kind
of supply chain. Um, we've also,
um, seen some study method
methodology changes. I mentioned
we're part of the power pool.
Well, every load that
interconnects to SPS, um, on the
transmission side, we actually
study that with the Southwest
Power pool. Part of the benefit
of the power pool is we find the
cheapest generation available to
operator system and we move
those electrons across those 14
states. And so to be able to
study every load that comes
across in all 14 states, it's a
Very complicated study. It's a
very detailed study and it takes
a lot of time over a year to be
able to look at loads. What does
it take to serve that load? How
do we move that energy? What
transmission lines does it take?
What generation is required and
what's the cost? And is it
affordable to be able to serve
that region.
Um, and so those are some of the
challenges that we've seen uh in
the region, uh, and trying to
serve some of these loads and
where that's left us is this
graphic here.
Um, and this is kind of, uh, the
past, this is our future. We've
got uh 345 line called
Crossroads Hobbs to Roadrunner,
um,
Which
Comes right down and drops right
in the middle of the load pocket
of the oil and gas industry in
southeastern Mexico. But that
green shaded area as we sit
today, we are load constrained.
Uh, that does not mean we don't
have enough generation. What it
means is the load demand is so
high, we cannot keep the
transmission voltage high enough
to stay within compliance,
meaning we are having to tell
customers we can't serve them
until that red line that
crossroads Hob or Roadrunner has
built, uh, in 2026 and that is
not being built by
SPS it's actually built uh by
Nextera. It's a competitive bid
project, um, and so that, that's
where we sit today, um, and we
are truly counting megawatt by
megawatt. Um, Zoe mentioned that
process and over the past 10
years, growth was really easy.
We had ample generation and the
transmission system was built
out and robust enough that we
didn't have to count megawatt by
megawatt. We were counting tens
or dozens of megawatts by
megawatts and adding the load.
Um, as it sets now, we are
looking at every feeder.
And every line to try and make
sure we're keeping the voltage
stable and keeping reliability
to our customers.
Um, and one thing I want to
clarify here, when we look at
these loads that are coming in.
This is not speculative loads.
These are realistic loads.
They've given us horsepower,
they've given us GPS
coordinates. They've told us
what voltage they want. These
are realistic loads that have
been studied between us and are
studied between the power pool.
This is not a customer that
we've not seen or not known.
This is an exact known load in a
known location.
Yes, please.
I'll add
Turn this off while I say it, I
will add um that that growth
that we're seeing on our system,
those non-s speculative growth
that translates directly into
jobs in the service territory.
So for every project that we are
able to connect in our service
territory, there are jobs
connected to that project, uh,
for people that live in
southeast New Mexico, so we do
take our um.
Our obligation to serve this
territory very seriously because
we know it affects the lives of
the folks that live in our
state.
Thank you for adding that. I
appreciate that. And that, uh,
that is definitely a, a, a
realistic thing that we deal
with, um, when you're having to
tell a customer, we can't meet
your needs for the next 2 years,
that is a difficult conversation
to have with any customer at any
level, um, regardless of size.
Um, so thank you for adding
that.
Uh, so what, what are we doing?
How do we, how do we change
this? What do we do moving
forward, um, part of it is, and
I mentioned already, the
Crossroads Hopster Roadrunner,
that new 345 line that's being
built by Nera, that's going to
come in in 2026. That'll open up
some capacity, that'll open up,
uh, some support for the region.
We'll be able to add a little
bit of growth in that time.
We're also gonna be looking at
adding generation. We're also
looking at adding capacitors and
building new substations, um,
but also working with the
Southwest Power pool, we're
going through our integrated
transmission.
plan and what they do is they
look at every load that's
connected to the system and the
forecasted load that was talked
about on what's going to connect
to our system and we look at
what can we build to serve those
loads that we know are coming.
Um, and in that ITP process for
2024, SPS is actually uh with
the Southwest Power pool looking
at building a 765 kV line that
cuts all the way from the north
end of our territory down to
southeastern Mexico to serve
that new economic development
and that growth that's in that
region.
Uh, that is the highest voltage
or the largest transmission line
that exists in all 8 states that
Xcel Energy operates in, um, and
a lot of that has to do with the
demand and the need in
Southeastern Mexico uh for
what's coming, but even with
everything that's done,
everything's pulled together. We
have customers we cannot connect
today.
With all the buildout, with all
the things that we've done, we
have customers we can't connect
today. Um, so in the future,
we're looking to how do we build
that economic, how do we build
that economic development out to
look at those speculative loads
that we
We can't, we haven't considered
that in a forecast now. Um, so
with that, I'll, I'll close and,
and Pastor Zoey to finish that.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you again for
having us here today to talk
about the really exciting future
that we see in our territory, I
think supporting this economic
growth, supporting the
electrification of the oil and
gas industry in the Permian
Basin is exciting, but also
hearing us out on some of the
challenges that we're facing
today. We're really looking
forward to be partners with you
all in the future in addressing
some of these challenges and to
creating a more prosperous New
Mexico, especially for
rural communities in our state.
So thank you.
Very good. Thank you for your
presentation. We do have a
couple of questions starting
with Representative, uh, Zamoa.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you presenters for the
presentation. So much
information that just you know
after a while your mind just
starts. So, so, as legislators,
we're just not experts at
everything.
We, we, we run for these seats
and then we find ourselves with,
with issues like our electrical
grid and and
Man, it's mind boggling. It
really is cause, cause you come
from a farming background and
you just don't understand these
things.
Reliable, affordable energy is
so important. It can cost lives.
When the weather gets cold, it
can cost lives when the weather
gets hot.
I received a.
Email from Bernard Treat the
other day and.
They were calling for for an
energy alert.
Can you kind of explain what
happened there, uh, and, and why
that.
What took place? Sure, and
you're talking about the energy
alert that was this this week,
is that correct?
On the 19th of August, yes, is
when I got the email, um, so
what happened to that event? The
average age of our gas turbine
in SPS is 65 years old.
So as you can imagine a 65 year
old plant takes maintenance. And
when we hit the summer season
and when it's over 100 degrees
for multiple days in a row, we
are running those plants at full
capacity at all times and things
do break and it does require us
to bring down those plants and
so we talked a little bit about
the planning reserve margin, and
that spare generation that's
available on our system that we
have for backup. Um, we had
several plants down, um.
For maintenance
Uh, during that time last this
week, uh, and on top of that, we
had an operational issue where
we were purchasing power, you
know, I talked about that
Southwest Power pool grid and
those interconnections and being
able to buy power and sell power
across that. One of those major
interconnection line had an
event or a fault and tripped
offline. And that was where we
were purchasing power from, so
it left us in a condition where
we were right at the edge of
possibly a loadshed event where
the power turns itself off
automatically, which we don't
have control of.
That's computers and processors
operating and turning off lights
to kind of stabilize the grid.
We want to be in control of
that. And so as we reached out
to our customers, we asked for a
customer appeal to reduce load
so that we didn't get into a
loadshed event for, for those
that are capable, um, a lot of
it seemed to be more the, the
commercial industrial we're able
to step in, um, these large CNI
customers step in and reduce
load, reduce capacity, and help
prevent us from having, um, a, a
loadshed event, an unplanned
loadshed event on our system,
but that's, that's where that
came from.
Um, and
Future-wise, we hope to see new
generation come online, uh,
that'll help prevent and uh keep
those from happening.
And, and it's scary to see, uh.
As, as you guys feel the stress
of the.
Of the load
on your system and and what's
going on, it's scary to see it
from this end because, because
we know.
How much we rely on electricity
today.
Uh.
This question comes
Far left, OK
except my way of thinking and,
and how, how I
Do things, but why is it?
That all the windmills
Looked the same.
Why don't we have a bunch of
different style of windmills.
We have all different styles of
cars, tractors, we have all
different styles of everything,
but when you look at windmills,
it seems like there's one kind
of windmill.
There was actually an uh a guy
that's kind of an inventor in
Clovis, and he produced a
different kind of windmill
lowered to the ground, looked
totally different, different set
There was actually an uh a guy
that's kind of an inventor in
Clovis, and he produced a
different kind of windmill
lowered to the ground, looked
totally different, different
setup, and the rumors I heard
way back when was.
He was, he wasn't politically
tied to people where he could uh
patent this and really make it
work, but it, it was a good
setup. It really worked. It was,
it didn't look as bulky and
everything else, but why is it
that we don't see
Different windmills.
Different styles, different.
What what's going on there with,
with the windmills. Do you, you
want to take that one or you
want to punt at it?
Sure, I'm happy to take that
one, Madam Chair, um, uh,
representative, um, I think
that, well, the one thing I
would say not to be pithy, is if
you look over the history of the
technology, it has shifted quite
a bit, um.
If you go back, if you, you
know, if you ever go to uh the
Tehachapi Pass in California,
um, kind of the Bakersfield
area. You've got these lattice
tower like real small turbans,
um, that are pretty low to the
ground.
Then you kind of, if you go to
Palm Springs, you get um lovely
place to visit, um, uh, uh, you
get these slightly bigger kind
of funny shape looking blades,
kind of short blades with it,
and they're all real packed
together, um, uh having a chance
to stand under a wind turbine
blade yesterday, um, that was,
um.
I think it was about a football
field long, um, and sort of
seeing the curve with it, um, I
think what you ultimately, I
mean, yeah, I mean the, the, uh,
Representative Johnson, I said
recognizing that it's, these
things are huge. And um one of
the, one of the advances in
technology to get more power out
of it is the wind speeds are
higher, um, the higher up you
go. So we've seen over time the
towers get larger in terms of
higher up in the air, each,
each.
30 ft higher you go, um, you get
kind of an order of magnitude
more energy production out of
it, um, the longer your blades
are, the more pressure you can
get even in low wind speeds onto
the generators. And so it's
really kind of a case where, um,
you know, like every, every car
may look the on the the the same
on or they may, they look
different on the outside, but
kind of the engineering for the
engines gets to be pretty, I
mean, it's a little bit, you
know, engine is an engine at
this point, you know, they kind
of, you know, and they've got
sort of standard transmission
and stuff while they may look
the same on the outside, and I
think that what we're seeing is
that we're just in this
evolution of the technology to
really refine it to get the most
energy out of it. I mean, the
thing about New Mexico wind is
it is a hell of a resource. Um,
we, we produce at about, um,
relative to the nameplate
capacity of our of our
generation that we have online
right now. We're producing about
45% relative to the nameplate. I
mean, if you look at a gas
turbine.
You know, even if it's a base
load or coal plant, you know,
getting above 80%, I would say
is probably I for for for fossil
generation, so getting, getting
a wind resource in the mid-40s
is a pretty, pretty energetic, I
mean, compared with other places
around the west where it's, you
know, 2, 25%. So, so long answer
to a short question, but I think
it's, it's largely just trying
to get the maximum efficiency
and sort of an evolution of the
technology over the last 30
years to just get kind of bigger
and more energetic and get more
out of the resource which.
Which makes it cheaper cause you
get a better economies of scale,
it makes it more reliable kind
of back to the points about
affordability and reliability.
And thank you for that answer
and
And as we move, as we move
forward with the, with the clean
energy transitions. One of the
questions that comes up.
With me is
Here in New Mexico, we've been
real aggressive about it.
Uh
Politics plays a lot.
In that role,
My question is, how much energy
like in in southeastern New
Mexico on the maps you were
showing, how much of that energy
is being imported from
Texas and other states to the
east of us and north northeast
of us, I believe you have, uh,
where you're buying some of some
of your.
Electrical power.
And then you, then you're
shipping it into New Mexico, if
I'm correct. And
What percentage?
Of the power that's coming into
New Mexico is fossil fuel
produced.
Um, so I, I'm probably gonna
punt to Justin for this, but
Madam Chair, representative,
thank you for the question. Um,
what I will say when you look at
this map, um, we
We plan the system in SPS on a
system-wide basis. So we're not
yet splitting up resources like
Texas resources, New Mexico
resources, the resources you see
on this map are serving our
entire service territory in
Texas and New Mexico,
um, Representative Zamora, you
are correct though in that
whenever we do need to make
market purchases from the SPP.
We are required by the SPP to be
able to
have enough generation on our
system to meet our load and to
meet above our load to meet that
planning reserve margin, but
when we do make market purchases
Representative Zamora, um, it,
it, there is fossil fuel
generation that is contributing
to the generation of electricity
that we are purchasing. Um, I
don't know if there's more
detail that you can provide.
No, thank, thank you for the
question. I think there was one
portion of the question you
asked, how much is um.
carbon free or how much is
fossil, um, as, as we said in
2022, we produced 39%
carbon-free electricity for all
our customers. So that's Texas
and New Mexico. Essentially if
you have a bucket of generation,
you dump it into the lake, it's
all the same. And that's kind of
what we do between Texas and New
Mexico in 2023 we were 37%
carbon-free uh electricity
provided to our customers. So
the other assets would have been
coal or natural gas to make up
that remainder to get us to the
100%.
And just to clarify, the reason
you see a decrease there is
because we had growth on our
system. We had economic growth
on our system, so we were
serving more load, but we didn't
bring on any new resources
during that time period. So you
see a decrease in the
percentage. And, and, and Madam
Chair and presenters in, in your
company, and then what you're
doing, do you have people doing?
Uh research all the time as to
when, as we move forward.
Where is that balance from wind
energy.
From solar and from.
Whether it's fossil fuel or or
nuclear or whatever it is, we
have to have a balance in there.
We know that we can't rely on
the wind all the time. We know
we can't rely on the sun all the
time, and we know there's going
to be mishaps that we're not
even thinking about a tornado
hitting a solar system, uh, a
tornado.
A nice storm hitting the
windmills. Uh, I mean, you name
it.
There's, there's so many things
that can happen.
Uh,
That we, we kind of planned for,
but we, can we really handle it?
So is, does SPS XL do A? Are
they doing studies as to kind of
something to bring to the
legislature to say we can handle
so much wind energy, so much
solar, but to have the
reliability, we have to have
either this much nuclear and
fossil fuel or where are we
going to get that information
where those balances are?
because, because everybody's
fighting to be the top dog. I'm
sure this young man here wants
to provide
At all with with wind energy,
but in our reality, can, can
that happen?
I don't, I don't think it can
maybe in the future with
technology with batteries and
stuff, but today we're not
there.
So, is there somebody doing
studies and, and trying to
figure out where we need to be
as a legislature, or how we can
be educated so we know where we
need to be.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative,
thank you for the question. Yes,
I'm gonna answer this on a
couple of different levels. Um,
first of all, in 2018, Excel
Energy was the first utility
nationwide to announce its goal
of meeting its um of meeting its
generation requirements with
zero carbon electricity by 2050.
Um, since then we've made
significant investments in
research and development to
figure out how we get there.
Right?
Today, um,
Today we have when it comes to
the RFP that we issued, we have
a team of folks dedicated to
doing the modeling, um, when
they receive bids around what
the resource portfolio will look
like, uh, whether it meets our
reliability needs and whether it
can do so in an affordable way.
The bids that we see come
through that RFP will have a lot
of information in terms of what
technology is available today to
meet those.
Liability needs. Um, right now
today to meet a meet uh resource
needs and an affordable and
reliable way, natural gas is the
resource that is readily
available today. Now, there's
been a lot of tech technological
improvements, the way we use,
um, modern natural gas
generation is a lot different
than we did 65 years ago when we
built these aging units that are
retiring off our system.
Um, and many of these plants are
being built in a way that you
can, um, transfer them over to
hydrogen plants in the future or
add on carbon capture in the
future, but there's more
technology and technological
development being done today
aimed at meeting those
reliability requirements in the
future, and I think that future
is really exciting and it's
exciting for New Mexico. It can
be nuclear. It could be
geothermal. It could be more
advanced batterytechnologies
right now.
at 4 and 8 hour batteries, that
is not an affordable way to meet
our reliability needs. And if
we're looking at trying to
attract business and also
maintain a an affordable
electric service for the
customers in New Mexicans that
live here today, meeting our
reliability standards with
solely batter so solely battery
is not an affordable way to do
so and it's not yet reliable.
Um, Excel Energy has 2 pilots,
um, in the 8 states, the form
battery pilots, those are 100
hour batteries, so.
Those are on our system today
being tested. We are testing new
technologies to see if we can
meet some of these growing
reliability reliability needs
with carbon-free energy, but the
reality of it is today, when you
see a resource portfolio coming
next year in front of our public
regulation commission. The state
is going to need to think about
what our priorities are for New
Mexico, New Mexicans in the
state today. I think that's, you
know, from my point of view,
that's advancing the clean
energy transition, getting more
renewable.
and zero carbon resources onto
the system, but also meeting our
reliability needs in the state
so that we can continue and
doing so affordably so we can
continue attracting businesses
and meeting the needs of our
customers that live here in New
Mexico today.
Yeah, just uh uh
that would be better. OK, thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
like, like you said a minute
ago, we could sit here for days
and talk about this, and it's.
It's very in-depth and and a lot
to look at and a lot of, a lot
for us to understand, Madam
Chair, I understand the, the
time frame and thank you for
that.
Thank you. Um, so I'm gonna just
caution everybody. I, I have a
hard stop by 4 o'clock because
we do have, um, the vans that
will be waiting for us for our
tour, uh, and we do have several
people on the list, so I'm gonna
really ask all of my coworker or
co legislators to, to be very
cognizant of time making short
because we still have one more
presenter and we want to make
sure that they get their time in
as well. So, um, on that, please
be, be quick.
Um, Representative Ortez. I'll
be very quick. uh When did
Sunzi, no, when did Pattern buy
the sunzia
line.
We bought uh Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Ortez, I, I
we purchased, um, I believe it
was 2018, we purchased the
Sunzia transmission line. Um, I
mean, just to note, I think
where you may be headed is that
it took from the point that we
started construction from the
point that the project was
conceived, it took about 18
years. Um, I think that 100%
agree with what Excel is
identifying in terms of the long
lead and the challenge of
resource planning and the
timing, especially with the
rapid growth.
That's happening throughout the
country. Yeah, and I was
thinking also, Madam Chair,
about the just the community
challenges, the challenges of
it, um, engaging in um community
action and and bringing all the
partners to the table. Um, do
you have
Are you experiencing that same
kind of challenge with the other
lines that you've been working
on.
Western spirit and the other
ones
gravy and Madam Chair,
Representative Ortez, um, I
think that community engagement
and um being responsive to
concerns, I think is something
that we take as a tremendous
priority. I mean, Sunsil was
rerouted a couple of different
times for a number of different
concerns. There were species
concerns. There were
archaeological concerns or or uh
cultural artifact concerns, um,
and, uh, uh, you know, just a
whole other thing set of.
You know, their tribal uh
concerns that we need to be
absolutely top of mind and and
cognizant of. And so I think
that um that's a process that
can't be rushed. Um, you got to
figure out how you're responsive
to that and it's something that
um it takes a whole lot of work,
a whole lot of time, and intense
and and energy. You know, our
attitude on it is the more time
you spend up front, um, working
with communities and listening
and being responsive and
modifying your project
ambitions, um, to respond to
communities is going to save you
a whole lot of time on the back
end, so we're we're supportive
of that. Thank you.
Uh, thank you, Representative
Lujan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
those are good.
He questions and to follow up,
um.
Quickly, what is it, um, yeah,
what is the deficit of what we
are.
Um,
That we need of the need needed
um.
Energy right now. What what are
we producing and what is the
deficit?
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative
Lujan, thank you for the
question. Um, I'm just gonna,
oh, wrong way.
I'm lost in my own PowerPoint,
um.
If you look at this chart for
SPS right now, um, our
Total
Uh accredited capacity on the
system today, um.
I
Let's see, what was it? About
2000, 5000. I had it written
down earlier. I, I nailed it
then. I didn't nail it this
time, about 5000 megawatts.
Looking over this 4 year period
of time, we have a total
accredited capacity need of over
3000 megawatts that will
translate and could translate
into over 5000 megawatts of
nameplate capacity. The
difference there is different
technologies get accredited
differently. So yeah, so certain
Technologies have a higher
accreditation to meet our
reliability standards and other
technologies do. So, um,
bringing on 3000 megawatts of,
you know, say just solar isn't
going to actually meet the
accredited capacity requirements
that we have to meet by 2030.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I think
that this is that that to me is
the most is really significant.
And needs to be discussed as
we're mentioned this is a huge
topic. It's very um intricate.
There's a lot of uh.
of information it's it's highly
technical and we're not the
experts here at the table, you
know, I'm doing what I can and
and others of us to really
understand this and put our best
foot forward to, to making sure
that we're going to take
legislation where needed were to
enact that legislation, and from
what I'm hearing from you is it
is it the regulatory process
that we're running into, um,
some, some issues and we'd like
to visit what if and if possible
that there could be some
legislation to maybe curb.
Some of the timelines.
And some of the the through the
process of getting um the IR
IRPs together. I think that that
is something I'm hearing across
the board. I've been to, uh, I
think about 9 different types of
energy conferences this year,
including a PRC regulation
conference for all 50 states,
and that was probably one of the
number one things that was
discussed. What does that look
like? On that note, we have some
federal rules that have been,
that have changed. Can you
mention or and see how we are
approaching those because.
To my knowledge, those rules
have been implemented to make
this process easier and if so,
then would the, the, and we can
have an offline conversation,
but then we, the state need to
work towards the, you know, the
regulation process, um, reform
as well. That's a lot. So maybe
not answering that now due to
time, Madam Chair, I'll skip, we
can talk about that offline, but
I wouldn't put that in your
head. I also want to say that,
Madam Chair, this is a time we
don't really, I mean, the need
and
By the standards that we have
set up and by our ETA, we need
to really move a lot faster and
we're not quite there at all, so
right now, as I think it's
alluded what our legislators
that we do need all hands on
deck approach right now for that
reliability and just even
understanding what that means. I
don't think many of us quite
capture all of that, all this
information that you've, you've
given us. I want to thank you
for this presentation. It is a
lot, uh, because I've been at
this for a few years now. I've
been able to.
you, but I'm still, I'm still
have, I still have lots of
questions. Thank you, Madam
Chair Representative, I just
want to say thank you again and
Excel Energy is happy to bring
our subject matter experts to
the table to have some more
in-depth conversations about
these issues, um, anytime, so
please just let us know if we
can be of service in that way.
Thank you, Senator Griggs.
Senator Greggs
Thank you Madam Chair, and you
guys, I guess right now still
though, the only uh really
reliable, usable on demand
resources still just fossil
fuels. I mean, you guys are
getting better and better and
better at adding to the, to the
supply side and.
Until you get batteries of any,
uh,
You know, length of time, you
still just have to build more
and more and more generation.
And that generation has to be
able to provide power night and
day so that 60 Hz is happening
all the time because if it
doesn't happen, then things shut
down and, and, and don't work,
but.
It's, it's great to see as you
go through there and as you talk
about that, talk about that,
well, if it's.
All solar will all so and then
do what you wanted to do, or win
doesn't do what you want it to
do, but
maybe we're gonna get there, uh,
but I think for our purposes, I,
I, I think it'd be great to see
the, the state of New Mexico.
Also, you look at, uh, at
natural gas as part of its
renewable portfolio in order to
be sure that we hit that 60
hertz all the time and never,
never put anybody down or out
of.
Business. Now
I'm concerned overall as we push
toward electricity because my
house and probably a lot of the
houses here are heated with
natural gas.
When you go to electricity,
well, your cost goes up. So that
probably is related to supply,
but uh we're gonna have to get,
we're going to have to get past
that so we can do that. You guys
are talking about bringing in a
765 KV line and running it from
the, from the northern part of
the state down to the southern
part of the state.
There's not any of those in New
Mexico. I don't, I don't think,
um.
Are you planning to with that,
are you wanting that to be
alternating current or you guys
also considering the opportunity
for direct current as Trace A
Mgus years back were considering
doing. Are you, are you thinking
about that and how challenging
or either one of them gonna be
to get the right of way you need
to bring that all the way down.
Across the state.
Representative, thank you very
much. That is a good question,
um, and it is something we've
considered from an engineering
standpoint.
That is not a real long line for
us. It is a cross of 52,000
square mile service territory,
but when we look towards the
HPDC or the high voltage DC
lines, we need to justify it
through a longer line than what
we're seeing, um, staying AC and
converting to or going from AC
to DC and converting back,
there's some losses there.
And we don't, we don't want to
accommodate for those losses, so
the 765 would actually for us,
the length of that line would
bring more value, um, rather
than going we heard the example
of the, the high voltage DC line
when you're transmitting that
power long distances or trying
to get into California, Arizona,
there you want to consider that
other type of technology to
prevent those losses.
And Madam Chair, and thank you
guys for that. I mean, it's,
it's one of those deals where
you've got those big, big
transmission lines.
You know, we, we talk about
different things. We're talking
about windmills, we're talking
about pumpjacks, those big
transmission lines aren't the
prettiest things you've ever
seen either, but, uh,
You know, when you could get,
it's like, it's like in town,
everybody wants you to bury all
your utility lines and it causes
Town looks good. I, I will.
But, uh, just want you guys to
know that uh that I think
you're, you're moving ahead, and
I think New Mexico is moving
ahead and I hope that uh we
will, we will do that, but I
think as a group here, we need
to also be concerned about our
other opportunities to help them
and help the state meet the
desire for electrical power. So
thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you guys.
Thank you. Uh, last, uh question
by Representative Brego. Thank
you, Madam Chair, and I will try
to keep it down. I'm really glad
that we're talking about
sustainability and energy, um,
and, and when I think about what
you guys are doing, and that
goes for all of you, um, you
know, Madam Chair, I think about
um ensuring first that New
Mexicans are served first.
Um, because a lot of this energy
is sold out of state, it's sold
out of the country and uh I know
like Palm Springs and you know
they're they're.
They're, um, wind turbines, that
energy, some of it is sold to
Canada. And so I think about and
and I say this, you know,
because it, it concerns me that
we have little communities that
are not served at all. And those
little com and not to mention
the res some of the reservations
that are not served. Um, so I
just wanna make sure that we
remember as we talk about
sustainability into the future
that we think that
New Mexicans should be served
first and that's my comment,
Madam Chair. Thank you.
Thank you and thank you all for
your presentation today, um, as
you can tell everybody has lots
of questions and would love to
hear more from you, uh, next
time if we do another
presentation, we would
definitely, uh, schedule more
time, but we are short on time.
So once again, thank you and I'm
going to get our last presenter
up here, um, and like I said,
we've got a hard stop, so I'm
gonna keep us rolling as quickly
as possible. Maybe I'll just say
no questions for the last
person.
All righty. Thank you so much.
If you would, uh, introduce
yourself and I'm very pleased
that you're here with us today
and I think it's very fitting.
It's the last present
presentation before we go to
Navajo Lake. So, thank you,
Madam Chair, good afternoon. Uh,
members of the committee, uh,
thank you for having me here. My
name is Toby Velazquez. I'm the
director of the New Mexico State
Parks division. I've been with
the the agency almost 26 years
now. It started as a seasonal in
high school in Mora County at
Coyote Creek and Murphy Lake
State Parks and
After graduate school, I needed
to get a job and they hired me
as a law enforcement ranger and
here I am with you today. So
it's been a great career. Um,
I'll get going. I know we're,
we're short on time. This is a
great photo of Navajo Lake State
Park, which you'll be at a
little bit uh later this
afternoon or early evening, um,
we are a division of the energy,
minerals, and Natural Resources
Department.
Uh, I want to start off with
setting the tone of where the
majority of this conversation is
going to be focused obviously on
economic development, um, we
have, and I hope everybody's
aware, a scorp what is called
the scorp, a statewide
comprehensive outdoor recreation
plan. This is the state of New
Mexico's outdoor recreation
plan. This is not the state
parks plan. We facilitate the
planning that goes into this
with a third party, uh,
contractor. However, this
comprehensive outdoor recreation
plan is the state of New Mexico.
It's signed off by the governor.
It qualifies us as a state to
receive land and water
conservation funds, which are
averaging between 3 and 3.5
million now and those funds
through formula grants are going
back out to communities, uh, but
it also sets the plan and the
vision for outdoor recreation in
the state of New Mexico.
Um, so much of the data that
I'll be presenting today, many
of the concepts are based off of
the comprehensive outdoor
recreation plan that's uh valid
from 2022 to 2026. Uh, our
agency will start the next 5
year plan process, uh, starting
January 1st of next year as we
look at 2027 through 2031.
Um, outdoor recreation trends in
New Mexico. La Terra and
Cantada, the land of
enchantment, we all invite
people to come to New Mexico
because of the outdoors. Um,
it's a quality of life provision
for all of us who live here, it
makes things better, uh, for our
quality of life. New Mexico is
already a national leader. I'm
not gonna read these all because
we're short on time, but
We are getting the interest in
New Mexico that we have asked
for regarding our outdoors and
outdoor recreation.
Um, it's important to the
economy and and can contribute
to even more jobs and incomes
across the state.
Uh, outdoor recreation has an
important health benefit in
overall quality of life. I can't
emphasize that enough. uh,
during the pandemic, we learned
as state parks were closed, how
important these outdoor spaces
were to New Mexicans and
visitors to our state across our
state.
Here's some information from the
scorp, um, and you can see that
state parks punches way above
its weight.
When it, when you're evaluating
visitation per acre and
visitation interest across
public lands.
Obviously, the Bureau of Land
Management, the US Forest
Service have a lot of acreage.
Um, however, we are able to
better.
Track and report our visitation
at state parks, 5 million
visitors a year on average since
coming out of the pandemic.
Before that, it would average
between 4 and 4.5 million.
And people have held on. It
wasn't something that they just
found again during the pandemic
and, and then let it go once the
malls opened up again. Uh, they
stayed tied to their outdoor
recreation, to their outdoor
resources and their cultural
resources as well.
And every photo that you see on
this slide is one of your New
Mexico state parks, for example,
this is Surreal's Hills State
Park in Santa Fe County.
Um, this is just a real quick
view of what the score provided
as primary interests, favored
interests for New Mexicans and
visitors to the state and your
state parks offer every single
one of those, um, skiing not so
much. We do have some tubing up
at Hyde Memorial State Park and
pickleball, we're gonna have to
catch up with that craze. I
think that was another uh uh
emerging uh interest as the
pandemic as we all came out of
the pandemic. Everything else is
a
primary function that happens in
one of your New Mexico state
parks. Now for those of you who
don't know this, there are 35
state parks found in 25 of 33
counties across the state.
Those 35 state parks are
supported through 41
decentralized locations that's
35 state parks, 5 regional
offices, and our main
headquarters out of Sanofi.
So we're everywhere, just about
everywhere.
Um, what are the actual, this is
Oasis State Park in Roosevelt,
uh, County, economic impact of
outdoor recreation in New
Mexico. Um, obviously it
contributes to our GDP, but we
still lack, we still fall behind
Colorado and Arizona, so there's
more work to be done, uh,
outdoor recreation particularly
supports rural economic
development, the majority of
these 35 state parks are found
in rural areas across our state.
Much of you will see how rural
it is at Navajo Dam. Uh, it, it,
it seems like it's close to
Farmington, but once you make
The drive, it's a little, you,
you have to want to go out there
to get there. It's a
destination, uh, location. So we
support services like shops,
restaurants, hotels, um, the
outdoor rec recreation economy
is huge.
Think about what, who goes
outdoors, who goes camping, who
goes hunting, fishing, think
about how much you spend as an
individual or a family, uh, from
the point you gather all your
gear, buy your gear, leave your
home, and go along that path to
wherever it is that you're going
to camp, fish, hike, etc. and
then come back. There's money
stimulating that economy
throughout your your path of
travel through your preparation
phase for that trip, as well as
when you're leaving that trip,
you're still
In investing in New Mexico's
economy.
Um, this is Clayton Lake and
Dinosaur Trackway State Park in
in in uh Clayton, New Mexico.
This is one of the most uh
prolific dinosaur trackways in
the country.
Um, it, it's, it's a really neat
place to see and to visit, and
we encourage you to go, uh, land
protection supports sustainable
economic development through
outdoor recreation. We're not
only just managing for
recreation. We are conserving
these natural and cultural
resources for generations to
come.
Many of you may go to a federal
land um that doesn't have as
much facilitated management and
you see that that can be abused,
um, there's trash, there's roads
that shouldn't be there, um,
there's little respect for for
nature and cultural resources.
Many of these resources are
ancestral resources, whereas in
a state park it's more of a
facilitated protected and
conserved environment.
Uh, this is Fen Lake State Park
in Sandoval County. The Bureau
of Economic Analysis, this is
all part of the scope uh plan uh
reported that in 2019 outdoor
recreation contributed 2.4
billion.
To New New Mexico's GDP and we
know since 2019 that has only
increased as a result of the
pandemic, uh, recreational RV
camping was a top valued outdoor
recreation activity in New
Mexico and that.
has increased since the
pandemic, um, the
Analysis also provided that
outdoor recreation excuse me,
contributes to over 35,000 jobs.
Um, that is tremendous.
In New Mexico, especially in a
state where we're wage poor and
we need more jobs in rural
areas, New Mexico state parks
are hiring people in different
ways.
Uh, this is a shot from Navajo
Lake State Park. Someone just
wakeboarding, uh, New Mexico's
outdoor recreation economy is
growing quickly, uh, but we
still have work to do.
Alright, New Mexico's tourism
economy is also growing,
attracting more visitors to
enjoy the state's outdoor
recreation amenities.
And that increased by 12% from
2015 to 2019 with visitors
spending growing 18% and that
has increased since the
pandemic, and I'll address that
comment because I'm not giving
you current data right to today
because it doesn't exist at this
point.
The scorp, the next scorp
process will evaluate that data
from 22 through 26.
Um, the visitors survey used for
the score found that the
majority of tourists in surveyed
participated in some kind of
outdoor recreation activity
spending at least $1780 on their
trip.
Uh, that's economy stimulus
throughout the state.
Here's some tables. This is
Siron Canyon State Park in
Colfax County. Here's some
tables from the scorp that give
you a little bit more
measurement and um quantity of
interest when you look at the
activities on the on the lower
table, fishing, hunting, and
alpine skiing, uh, topped out
outdoor recreation for our
state.
And so I, I, I, I, from my
Opinion those fishing and
hunting numbers are modest, uh,
because during the score
process, I think we didn't get
enough outreach to anglers and
hunters. So in the next process
we're gonna really work with the
New Mexico Department of Game
and Fish to make sure that we
get a true feel for the hunting
and fishing impacts, um, but
they're still leading the way.
Um, this is City of Rock State
Park, uh, down south, and um I'm
gonna now transition to how New
Mexico state parks fits in as a
leader in outdoor recreation and
uh a participant within the
statewide comprehensive outdoor
recreation plan. I'll just go
over our mission because I think
it's something that's really
neat in order for anyone who
commits to a career to believe
in their mission to protect and
enhance natural and cultural
resources provide first-class
recreational and education
facilities and opportunities and
promote.
Public safety to benefit and
enrich the lives of visitors.
Our goal is customer service. We
are there to serve the visitors
to the to your New Mexico state
parks.
And again, these are all New
Mexico state parks. These are
beautiful places, they're
cherished places. If you haven't
been, you need to go every
single one. This is Cabiyo Lake
State Park. Outdoor recreation
is a driving force in New
Mexico, and we're a big part of
it.
Uh, we spend money in rural
areas where other agencies don't
have a footprint.
We've been around for 91 years
now. We're a part of New Mexico.
We are the fiber of the land of
enchantment, in my opinion.
We've been around since 1933 and
over the last 91 years we've
expanded to a 3535 state park
system.
Uh, I already covered some of
this information, 41 locations
supporting 205 of 33 locations
in counties across our state,
and 70% of New Mexicans live
within 40 miles of a state park.
That's pretty unique, um,
especially when our population
center like Albuquerque has a
state park nestled at the end of
Candelaria Road right in the
Bosque.
You'd never know who's been to
the Bosque, uh, in, in, in the
Rio Grande Nature Center State
Park. When you're there, you
don't realize you're in
Albuquerque.
That may be a good or bad thing
depending on your perspective.
But it's so natural, it's so
wild, it's so unique to the Rio
Grande and the middle Rio Grande
that it's a special place.
Why are New Mexico state parks
essential? They protect our
heritage, provide low cost and
family friendly recreation that
places millions of adults and
children in touch with nature
while generating essential
economic benefits right now the
day use fee for all of us to go
in one pickup.
Those of us who could fit.
is $5 a day.
It's a great bargain to get
people in the outdoors.
There's really no excuse for
people to be in their New Mexico
state parks from an economic or
cost perspective.
What do we do? Public safety.
We run our own small
municipalities.
We have our own law enforcement
officers. We have our own
building and facilities program.
We provide over last year over
7000 hours in public education.
We provide for resource and
conservation protection,
utilities and infrastructure,
public private partnerships,
grounds and roadways, vehicles
and equipment, and obviously
economic development through all
of this in some of these rural
areas we're the primary vendor
from a state agency.
In exchange for commerce and
utilities in that in that rural
area.
Uh, for example, the village of
Logan.
Ute Lake State Park is found
there. It's in Qui County. It's,
it's the draw to the village of
Logan and so as as good as we do
for that park, we do for the
village and the communities that
are adjacent to that state park.
How do we do it? We're a small
agency. We only have 235
full-time positions, uh, and so
we supplement that with 136
seasonals, mostly high
schoolers, retirees, and college
students.
Um, our, you know, a lot of us
have heard and you've heard this
in your roles, show me your
budget and I'll show you your
priorities. And when you look at
our budget, our priority shows
that it's in the field only 14%
of those 190 FTEs are found in
our Santa Fe office. That's 27
of 190.
We represent in the field where
visitors need people the most.
And I'm proud of that. I'm not
one of those state agencies that
uh can say we're uh top heavy.
We're very lean in
administration, but our field
staff deserve that support and
in order, in order for them to
deliver our product.
How do we do it? We do it with
historic parks. That's Pancho
Villa State Park. We have nature
parks, multiple, that's Eagle
Nest Lake State Park, and we
have dark sky parks like Clayton
in that city of Rock State Park.
We do it with lake parks, lake
lake, uh, boating and lake
recreation in New Mexico is in
incredibly uh popular. We do it
with interpretive and education
state parks and we run a zoo.
Most state park systems across
the country have moved away from
running zoos. Most zoos are run
by nonprofits.
Private
Or municipalities.
Uh, so it's a very unique
offering for our system to offer
a zoo down in Living Desert Zoo
and Garden State Park and uh
Senator Griggs missed an
opportunity for me to recognize
him. He's been a great supporter
with appropriations for living
desert and all of Lee state
parks in his district, and we've
really appreciated his
consistency in supporting
capital improvements at both of
those parks. So someone please
tell Senator Griggs that I gave
him credit for the great support
he's provided us over those
years. How do we do that? We do
that with community.
engagement. Um, there's one
specific activity that is
blowing up for us right now and
I don't know if you've heard of
this. It's the borough race at
Creos Hills.
And it's a, it's, it's a
marathon, but you're tethered to
a burro.
And you have to finish on time.
And, uh, you know, the whole
concept behind Burros is they
don't necessarily respect time
or pace. And so,
It has turned into a.
Tremendous economic boost for
the small village of Cerrios,
which is south of Santa Fe on
County Road 14. The balloon
regatta at Elf in Butte has been
going for almost 40 years now.
One of the most beautiful things
that you can go to outside of
the Bloom fiesta, and I'll tell
you what, it competes almost
equally in my mind because it's
over the lake.
And that's very unique where you
see um this uh huge signature
event bringing a massive
economic stimulus to truth or
consequences, Sierra County and
the village of Elphin Butte.
And then we even have offseason,
and this is not my cup of tea
cause I'm not real good in the
cold, but ice fishing, ice
fishing at Eagle Nest Lake State
Park in Colfax County is huge,
and that brings stimulus.
To Taos, to Cimarron, to Maura,
to Angel Fire, to Raton
primarily because we don't allow
people to sleep in their huts.
So they, they have to find
lodging elsewhere, um, but you
know, it just shows that we're a
year-round offering. This is not
just during the sunny days. This
happens throughout the year.
This stimulus is occurring
throughout the year.
Um, these are rewarding careers
in our state.
When I was coming out of
college, people had to retire or
die in their positions in order
for some of us to get a chance.
Right now our public uh natural
resource and outdoor recreation
agencies are begging people to
get back into these careers. If
you know anyone that's
interested send them our way. We
have jobs in state parks across
the state, seasonal, full time,
law enforcement, education,
maintenance, water operation,
CDLs, we have it all, so we can
fit a job to just about anyone
who wants to work with state
parks.
And work in the outdoors. I
can't tell you how many times
I've been in the field at a
park.
And I have to take a step back
and remember that you all are
paying me to be there.
Because it's a treat to be able
to have a job where that.
Is your office
Um, again, full time, seasonal
and volunteers, we could not
operate without our volunteers.
We have many volunteers across
the state. They're campground
hosts. They'll come and do
litter pick up. They'll they'll
they do everything that you can
think of. Some of them love to
come in and just cut grass.
They love to be able to help the
parks that way. We could not do
it without our volunteers.
So this is Murphy Lake State
Park pre-fire pre Hermit's Peak
Calf Canyon fire. It still looks
good, but not quite as good. Um,
this slide, Murphy Lake State
Park is in Mora County.
Uh, expresses visitation while
we were still in the pandemic
January 1, 2021 through last
week or two weeks ago when I ran
the data we have served 18
million people, almost 19.
Since January 1st of 2021.
Now
We don't have the per cost uh
economic stimulus per person
yet, but we're going to work on
that and I'll get to it in the
slide but New Mexico State parks
alone have served nearly 19
million people in that period of
time.
In those rural communities,
urban areas along those paths of
travel, that's an economic
stimulus that is valuable to our
state and I think needs to be
held in higher regard moving
forward.
Through your support for the
first time in my 26 year career,
I saw multiple zeros behind our
capital infrastructure when you
gave us the 2021 ARPA funds.
I was a little worried that we
wouldn't be able to make it
happen because we're, we are a
small administrative team, but
we are on track to invest that
20 million by June 30th we've
already expended 17 million of
that. We're on the last 3
million, which is peanuts.
That's, that's, that's a layup.
Uh, in your communities, in your
districts across the state of
New Mexico, can you imagine what
that 20 million did in buying
base course and roads and
everything that you can think
of, we've invested in across our
state and we thank you for
having the faith in us to be
able to do that and we're gonna
prove that that faith was well
placed. Next year, we would be
able to say we expended every
dollar and I know there's
agencies coming in front of you
all that can't say that. So I'm
very proud of it.
How do we work with people in
state parks. We have
concessionaires. One of the
concessionaires that you'll see
today at Navajo Lake State Park
is Navajo Dam Enterprises in the
Pine Marina. It's a uh
award-winning national
award-winning marina, uh, in
2017, it's increased our
visitation tremendously. Uh,
they hire people and they
provide visitor services that we
could that the state could not.
So we work with concessionaires,
we contract obviously with
contractors and vendors we
worked with outfitters, uh, the
San Juan River that you'll see
today has the largest number of
guides and outfitters that we
partner with on the San Juan and
across the state, it's a huge
business for the northwest
corner of the state for
Farmington, uh, for San Juan
County and for New Mexico state
parks.
Um, we have a floating burger
stand at Elf in Butte. And I, I
wanna bring that up because when
you're on the water, you don't
want to have to come all the way
back.
And there's nothing better than
floating right up to the burger
stand and get an order and going
on your way. So there's
diversity in uh concessions that
are offered in state parks to
include
Uh, the cost for a concession
permit to be able to have a
burger stand on the on the water
at the lake is only $300 a year.
So it's very affordable because
we're trying to generate
business in state parks and
provide visitors the services
that they're interested in,
which will keep them coming and
staying in the New Mexico state
park.
Um, last year, we're getting a
little beat up about land and
water conservation fund that
program started to get funded,
um, in 2020 and uh vice chair,
you remember those
conversations? And I said, give
me a little time, we're gonna
get this. We're we're on it now.
Uh, since 2018, this number is
from 2018 to current, we've, um,
awarded over 13 million. And
when I say we awarded, we don't
technically do the award. The
National Park Service does it,
but we are the primary
facilitator of the
Grant process to the communities
and then back to the National
Park Service, right? We're the
fiscal agent. That's right. And
so this is a huge win for us and
it's a huge win for your
communities. Uh, these funds are
available to tribes, pueblos,
um, as well as other small uh
entities like counties, uh, and
other state agencies. And so,
This is only going to increase
with more awards pending. We
have 5 more awards pending in
the next few weeks.
The reason why I can't give you
more specific economic data like
representative Alcon left to
Bluewater. How much did he spend
on average to go to Bluewater
and come back on that day
because it doesn't exist yet,
but we have entered into a
general, uh, excuse me, a
governmental services agreement
with the New Mexico with the New
Mexico State University and the
Arrowhead Center, and we're
going to have a partnership with
them that will conduct an
economic state parks specific.
Economic impact study.
We'll have data as soon as the
session and then we'll do more
survey and actual visitor survey
and exposure days over the
course of 2025. And I'm hoping
that next year you all will
invite me back so that I can
really emphasize and define how
important state parks are to the
economy within our state and the
fact that we appreciate your
support and are looking for more
support moving forward. I think
this economic study is going to
be huge for state parks and
outdoor recreation, and it's.
Go to be specific to state parks
and those counties that have
state parks, but it will also
have a statewide economic impact
report attached to it. So I.
I will come with more.
Real-time data next year if you
all will have me and I look
forward to that. And just
remember that this is a
collaboration. The study will
measure two types of economic
effects, county economic impacts
and state economics, but it'll
also evaluate.
Quality of life and social
benefit.
It's hard to really extrapolate
data into what it means to Miss
Bond to be able to go to a state
park on any afternoon and get
away from work.
Or for me to take.
My son fishing.
What does that mean to you? And
we're going to come with some
information to let you know what
that means to New Mexicans. New
Mexico state parks are a key to
your formative experiences that
you all have had in the
outdoors. I bet if I asked you
where did you camp, your very
first time as a kid or as an
adult whenever that happened,
you remember where that is.
Where did you catch your first
fish?
Where did you go on your first
boat ride? Where did you build
your first campfire?
I can remember it. I'm sure as
I'm asking those questions you
all can remember those
experiences that you had because
they were formative and have
kept you doing them and maybe
passing them on to generations
and this economic study is gonna
give us a good idea of what that
means to New Mexicans and
visitors to our state.
Um, I also, uh, shared
electronically, uh, with Ms.
Bond, the feasibility study that
was recently conducted for a
broad Canyon, uh, it was
specific under Senate Memorial
38 in the 2003 legislature that
we bring that back to this
specific committee, um, so it's
available to you, uh,
electronically. It will also be
available on our website, but I
just wanted to spend a little
bit of time telling you about
the results of this because you
were uh prescribed within the
Memorial as a committee for, uh,
presentation to, um, Senate
Memorial 38 was sponsored by
Senator Steinborn and
Representative Small. Uh, this
is for a property that the State
Parks division acquired under
the Richardson administration,
um, and is now being activated
for use as part of the system,
uh, at least activated to seek
support. Um, Senate Memorial 38
requested that our division
considered the establishment of
a state park at Broad Canyon
Ranch for our new.
Mexico State statutes for state
parks. Um, there's a methodology
that has to be taken in order to
consider the addition of a new
state park and a feasibility
study is one of them.
Uh, the Broad Canyon Ranch study
area is located in Donana
County. It's along the Rio
Grande and the study here is
approximately 20 miles north of
Las Cruces and straddles New
Mexico 185, um.
It has 3 study parcels. I won't
get too deep into that because I
know we're short on time, but
this was a comprehensive
feasibility study of the
properties within that
recreation area, uh, for that
would be considered.
Um,
Just to get to the quick
outcomes of the study, there
was, uh, several alternatives
developed as a result of the,
the study. One was no
development, do nothing, leave
it as it is.
Uh, number 2 was limited
development of the riverside and
upland parcels, uh, for day use
as a state park or as a
recreation area associated with
Le Dam State Park. One of the
unique features of this uh
outdoor recreation property,
especially during that really
emerged during the pandemic was
a trail that leads to a place
called Slot Canyon.
Um, it was tremendously uh
popular for people who couldn't
go to other areas during the
pandemic and it has become a.
The annual uh favorite for
people in Southwestern New
Mexico.
And then alternative 3 involves
the development of Broad Canyon
Ranch as a full-fledged and
potentially maybe our
thirty-sixth state park if the
legislative body agrees with
that approach.
We as a division, uh,
Preferred alternative to so we
could build in.
Uh, because in the past we've
learned.
Parks can get designated and
then not get the uh operations
capital or staff that they need
in order to actually operate
them. For example, Pecos Canyon
was designated as a state park
under the Richardson
administration, but wasn't
funded and supported until this
current administration in 2019.
Uh, so sometimes you have to
wait administrations out as you
all know.
Um, and here we go. Uh, we are
an alternative to, uh, that
portion of the discussion and
We're, we're hoping that we get
more, maybe more specific
presentation time with other
committees as we move through
the interim process, but this is
ultimately going to land within
the legislative body uh to
determine what level of support
you want to uh take this
feasibility study and run with
An alternative, uh, the second
alternative or do you all have
the appetite to create your 36
day park, our thirty-fifth state
park was Pecos Canyon State
Park, and we got that up and
running during the pandemic and
it's been a great boon to San
Miguel County.
Uh, San Miguel County, by the
way, has the most state parks of
any one county within its
jurisdiction. There's 4 state
parks in San Miguel County.
So Senator Campos is very proud
of that fact, at least at last
discussion.
Where are we going here in a few
minutes we're going to Navajo
Lake State Park. Navajo Lake
State Park is the 2nd largest
state park in the state. It
serves over 600,000 visitors on
average per year. Um, it has,
it, it's considered a federal
navigable water because it
crosses an inner state line into
the Colorado. So you can
actually come out in arboli, uh,
which is a Colorado State Park
on that side of the line. Uh,
Navajo Lake State Park is known
Not only for its lakeside, but
the San Juan River, it's an
international high quality trout
fishing area that draws people
from around the world. Um, it's,
it's a tremendous option and
then we have the Navajo Dam
Marina, Navajo Dam Enterprises
in the Pine Marina and then we
have all of the camping and
outdoor recreation that is kind
of icing on the top of all of
that.
Um, just to go over a little bit
of the history of it because I
always, when I come to
committees, I try and give it a
little bit of history because
we've been around for 91 years.
Uh, New Mexico's second largest
state park was established in
1963 by the State Park and
Recreation Commission. Uh, they
entered into an agreement with
the Bureau of Reclamation.
One thing that's interesting is
of the 35 state parks, only 9 of
them are owned outright by the
state of New Mexico.
Everybody thinks that the state
owns them all and that we can do
anything on them because the
state.
Can do it. That's not the case.
Only 9 of 35 are owned outright
by the state of New Mexico
Energy, Minerals and Natural
Resources Department. The
remainder of them we manage in
cooperation with an owning
entity.
And the variety and the
diversity of those entities is
huge.
For example, uh, there's 11
federally owned parks that we
manage the state parks.
There's 9 Bureau of Reclamation
parks and 2 Army Corps of
Engineer parks.
But Murphy Lake State Park is
actually owned by the Asea
Associones de la San Josela
Isla.
Therese Associations that uh
built them for irrigation and
then worked with the state in
the late 60s to develop it as an
option for outdoor recreation.
Beautiful partnership, uh, to
accomplish two goals, irrigation
and water delivery as well as
outdoor recreation, uh, and I
can give you examples of that
throughout, but it's important
to know that we don't have full
authority over every acre that
we manage for. We have to work
with others in order to achieve.
capital development, uh,
interpretation, all of those
things.
Um, in 1982 recognizing the
important recreation potential
created on the tailwaters of the
San Juan River, the San Juan
River Recreation Area was added
to the park, and that has made a
huge difference.
In 2017, Navajo Dam Enterprises
for their Pine marina won Marina
of the year for the northern
hemisphere honors from the
industry magazine Marina
Dockage. So there's a lot of
great things happening in Navajo
Lake and as our second largest
lake and state park. It's
critical that we continue to
highlight that park and that you
all are spending time there so
that you understand exactly who
and what you're supporting in
this region of the state. In the
northwest region, uh, that makes
up the state parks region. We
have 5.
State parks, Navajo Lake, Blue
Water Lake, Fenton Lake, Heron
and Elvado Lakes out of those
parks only Bluewater is owned
outright by uh state parks and
the energy, minerals and natural
resources department. All others
are owned by someone else that
we manage on behalf of the state
park.
Uh, gracias, this is Fent Lake
State Park, which is in this
region as well, uh, in Sandoval
and Fen Lake State Park is a
trilateral ownership, where
there's uh ownership by the US
Forest Service, uh, Department
of Game and Fish, uh, and we
manage it as a state park. Uh,
so there's some unique
opportunities, but Fenton Lake
State Park, pound for pound is
the most visited park in the
state. Uh, it's a beautiful
place, but it's uh proximity to
Albuquerque and Rio Rancho.
Make it a quick destination for
folks heading into the Hem
Mountains. And with that, uh,
Madam Chair, I open for
questions. I hope I went fast
enough and uh thank you for this
opportunity.
Thank you so much. I, I didn't
want to miss out on your
presentation. That's why I was,
I was trying to keep everybody
on task and going, uh, because I
know that you put a lot of work
into this and uh we wanted to
really highlight what you're
doing around the state. So thank
you for that and I hope you join
us at Navajo Lake tonight and
maybe we can continue these
conversations. I do have, um,
two,
Two people on the list, uh,
Representative Ortez.
I'll be so quick, Madam Chair.
One, what's the reason why you
don't let the folk, the
fishermen sleep in their tent is
it because of safety.
Because you think they're going
to fall through it's safety. The
winds at night in Eagle Nest are
in the winter are tremendous. So
that'll be drifting across the
lake and not necessarily sinking
down. They'll land somewhere,
representative, uh, yeah, you
know how Taos is as well. I know
those winds are rough and the
Moreno Valley for those of you
not been there in the winter.
That there's commitment for
those folks who want to be
there, even when the sun's out,
it's still frigid, um it's
enterprise, secondly, can you
only buy burgers from the, uh,
is there also beer? I don't
believe they sell alcohol, but
they do sell drinks and and
other refreshments, uh, uh,
yeah, but there's these
concessions, so we have
concessionaires, uh, for
example, at Eagle Nest that, um,
get a concession permit and
they'll go and sell bait,
they'll sell flowers.
You know, whatever people need,
you know how it is once you're
there, you don't really want to
leave, right? Uh, and, and so we
have a diversity of business
partners and state parks. We
have food carts, we have burger
barges, we, we do a little bit
of everything uh with New Mexico
state parks. We have folks who
are now um.
Uh, helping with camping. So if
someone doesn't own an RV, you
can rent one from someone and go
and take it to a state park so
that you don't necessarily have
to buy the cow but still get the
milk, right? Uh, and so there's
a lot of opportunities for
business in New Mexico state
parks across uh, across our
state. Thank you, Madam Chair. I
think, I think everybody here
loves our state parks, and I
think you have also issued a
challenge for us to, uh, to
support our state parks in all
the ways in the.
So thank you so much. Thank you,
Representative.
With the Vice Chair Hamlet.
Thank you. And you know I've
been a big supporter of the land
and water conservation, and I,
uh, want to recognize my
colleague's representative Ortez
and Senator Neville, um, for
also being champions in our
respective chambers, uh, for our
public lands. Um, I don't
actually have a question. I just
want to kind of reiterate and,
and, and support what you've
been saying, um, because we know
that outdoor recreation benefits
local economies. Um, I came up a
day early because I went and
talked to a woman named Linda
who owns the Aztec.
Restaurant right outside of the
Aztec ruins and um to see how
the Aztec ruins benefits her
business, um, through the Land
and Water Conservation Fund road
trip that I did a couple of
years ago. Every single one of
us has a project in our
communities that have been
funded by the Land and Water
Conservation Fund, uh, and it
makes a be the park I got
married at with my wife was
funded by Land and Water
Conservation Fund. And so we,
we, you know, when I think about
all these different things, how
we all work together. We
We all got our respective silos,
but we all know that the end
road is outdoor recreation and
ways to improve our communities,
whether it be national parks,
state parks, national monuments,
recreation areas, wildlife
protection areas. We know that
those bring people to
communities. Matter of fact,
with, um, you know, Senator
Griggs is out of the room, but
when there was the movement to
change White Sands National
Monument to White Sands National
Park. The reason for that
designation was because we knew
it would increase visitation by
75,000 people.
Yeah
That brings money to the town of
Alamogordo. Should they have the
infrastructure to do that also
brings money to Las Cruces
because people like to stay in
Las Cruces and go to White Sands
National Park. Um,
You know, and, and I, I, I want
to bring up because we just
celebrated the 10 year
anniversary of the Oregon
Mountains Desert Peaks National
Monument, and I can share with
you the economic impact study
that we commissioned, uh, to
show that.
Well, when we, we did one in
2013.
And then another one in 2023,
and it surpassed our
expectations by 51%.
Um, 3 things to think about.
Visitation to the monument
tripled over the past decade.
Since its designation, spending
by non-local visitors resulted
in more than $234 million in
cumulative economic impact,
including $35 million in 2022
alone.
Visitation to the monument in
2022 just supported 305 jobs and
the increased visitor spending
and business revenue meant
significant growth in state,
county, and local tax revenues,
visitation to the monument in
2022 generated $1.9 million in
tax revenue in nearly $13
million in taxes over the past
decade. Plus we get local
businesses who create products
of this, uh, we, and also Girl
Scout patches because Girl
Scouts can create their own
patches.
We have the first of its kind
OMDP Girl Scout patch, first of
its kind in the country.
California now has a monument
patch. The Cidan Woods and
Waters has a monument patch.
There are things that we can do
to help that are not only just
talking about the preservation
and the enjoyment of the
outdoors, conservation, however,
but also bringing in the
economic impact and we're
talking about this, but we often
think of, like, don't think
about what it does to local
businesses, which are the
backbone of our community. And
so we get to do that. I get to
do that in my.
And it's such an honor to be
able to do it, but I love
hearing what you're saying,
Toby, because it really does
demonstrate to all of us that
are outdoor recreation people.
I'm flat-footed. I don't camp
anymore. I'm not a camping
lesbian. I'm not a hiking
lesbian. I will do everything I
can to make sure that people
have that access to it. I used
to be, not anymore. I'm just
clumsy, but we know it helps
communities and so I'm really
grateful for the work that you
do, Toby. If you want me to send
you the economic impact study
that we did, because there's
some parameters in there.
That you had talked about that
we looked at for for the Oregon
Mountains Desert Peaks National
Monument that might be kind of
helpful to look at and also some
context. So I just want to thank
you, um, and I'm really grateful
for what you do and I'm grateful
for my colleagues here who also
recognize that these areas in
our communities are really
important to the quality of
life, not just for the people
who live there, but also for
people who come to visit our
great state. So thank you.
Thank you, chair, and I'll just
add one thing really quick. I
know we're tight. Thank you for
bringing up Girl Scouts, uh, you
know, one of the.
Emerging programs that we have
with state parks right now.
There was a national about 4
years ago there was a national
movement for Girl Scouts love
state parks.
And we now are going into our
4th year. We do it every fall
and uh we have last year and
we're going to see more this
year, over 200 Girl Scouts in
their state parks, getting their
badges, doing their service
projects, getting in the
outdoors.
And the reason why I bring that
up is in Santa Fe I was leaving
Sam's Club one day and there was
a Girl Scout troop there, and
they were selling cookies and
doing their fundraising and I, I
contributed and I said, have you
all been to a state park? And
they said, no, we really don't
go camping. I was like, oh wow,
that's not good, right? Girl
Scouts, Boy Scouts, they need to
be out and, and so this Girl
Scouts love state parks program,
uh, was a national movement, but
in New Mexico, we're introducing
girls to the outdoors in ways
that I've never done before. And
so that's something to be proud
of, that's going to be an
boom as they continue
generationally through their
lives and passing it on. And so
everything we do to get people
connected to their state parks
is going to be a benefit to them
as an individual, but a benefit
to our state and its economy
moving forward. And so, um, I'm,
I'm glad to be here. Thank you
so much. I will be out there.
Our staff are waiting. However,
we can facilitate that if
there's a meeting point that you
want us to meet with you and,
and uh we're going to the marina
or are we not? I, I'm not sure
on the logistics there, but I'm
here however I can facilitate
that trip and.
Senator Griggs, I've recognized
you at high level when you're
out, uh, and I'm just gonna say
it real quick. Thank you so much
for your support of Oliver Lee
and Living Desert State Parks
year after year, your uh support
has made.
Not only measurable but noticed
differences at both of those
parks, and I just wanted to
appreciate you publicly for that
continued support for those
state parks. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you. And like I
said, I'm glad you're gonna go
out with this because I know
that the conversation wants to,
we want to continue this
conversation, um, but I, I'm
getting, uh, all the indicators
that we need to get on there on
the buses soon. Um, just wanted
to make sure the committee knows
that we start at 9 tomorrow. Uh,
we will be in this room.
Breakfast will be served again.
Uh, thank you.
Our hosts, they've been
wonderful, um, and I would, I
would like to actually pass it
to uh Senator Neville. He could
probably tell us where we're
going is
Is that OK?
And so
I don't know who all the.
Well, thank you. And with that,
I'm gonna adjourn, but we will
continue the conversation.
Yes, thank you.
