I
Thank you, everyone. Um, if we
could have our table, Melinda,
Allen, and Amar Vakilel, if
you're here. Thank you.
Um, so our next presentation
committee is from Melinda Allen,
president and CEO of the New
Mexico Partnership and Amar
Vakil. I hope I said that right,
sir. Um, executive director of
NMXis Center and so they are
gonna lead us through a
presentation about this
initiative. Thank you for being
here. And if folks could, when
you speak, speak a little bit
closer to the microphone. We've
got some feedback that folks in
the room can't hear, which means
folks
online can't hear. But thank
you.
Press the little person
Perfect. Madam Chair and
committee, thank you for this
opportunity to tell you about
the Mexa Center, um.
Mexis Center, mhm, absolutely.
So my name is Melinda Allen. I
am the president and CEO of the
New Mexico Partnership, and with
me is Mr. Bakil Amar, who is the
executive director of the Mexis
Center, so we wanted to start
with why did we create this
initiative? Why is this
initiative important?
There are several things that
came into play when we were
building this model and this
opportunity, some of them being
that New Mexico, um, has a
harder time sometimes, um,
getting that FDI attention, um,
just for lack of awareness, lots
of lack of education, a lot of
companies are very familiar with
the coasts because that's
traditionally where their their
countries have
settled, yes,
Madam Chair, uh, just may I ask,
uh, to explain, uh, for the
definitions of of that are being
used FDI, I'm not familiar with
the term. That's it. Thank you
very much. Yes.
Madam Chair, committee, my
apologies. FDI means foreign
direct investment, um, so I know
in, in economic development we
use a whole acronym SOUP, so I
apologize and if I say anything
else that, that doesn't, I'm
more than happy to clarify.
Um, and so, you know,
traditionally
countries who invest in the US
like to cluster where they're
already familiar with. And so
breaking into those clusters and
that familiarity level takes a
lot of work, um, and so we are
sometimes underrepresented in
the amount of FDI that we can
attract to the state of New
Mexico. We also were looking at
um
the cost of entry for foreign
companies that Amar will talk
about here in just a minute and
then
I have been with the partnership
for almost 8 years now, and
every foreign direct investment
event that we do and recruitment
activity that we do, the, the
conversation always comes down
to for these smaller middle
sized companies, which the SMEs,
the smaller middle sized
companies.
their business model when they
invest and expand into a new
country is they start with their
business development office
first.
and then they expand to their
import value added, um,
application and then into
manufacturing and they typically
will expand where they sit their
business development office.
And so being able to capture
that business development office
is critical to actually get the
manufacturing, which is what a
lot of states like New Mexico
want to attract.
and in my conversations over the
last 7 years, about 50% of our
conversations follow that
business model and because
companies from certain countries
like to cluster or they go where
they think they need to go, they
end up going to the coast and if
we can't capture that business
development office, we can never
realize the capture of the
manufacturing as well. So we
were looking at all of these
options, um, and
I guess opportunities for change
on what could we do to improve
that opportunity.
Thank you for this opportunity,
Madam Chair, and the committee.
Uh,
coming from a business
background and coming for from a
foreign country making you as
the my home. I
I have realized that what deters
a company to come into a
particular geography is the cost
of entry
uh
we
from outside of the United
States are exposure to US is
either from Hollywood movies.
or
people taking, uh, uh, uh,
vacations in the US which only
cover the cost.
and, and maybe Florida, uh.
and, and the whole middle part
of the country is kind of, uh,
uh, left out. Uh, so when a
company, when they are looking
to expand into a US market.
Uh, they are good to place is
usually the course, because they
have some familiarity, uh.
and, and an entry into the
United States is pretty
expensive, especially on the
coast. So
identifying that challenge with
the small and medium
enterprises, uh, the definition
of it by being, you know,
anywhere between 10 million to
400 million in revenue or half a
billion in revenue. They don't
have the luxury to experiment
for 6 months spent, you know,
250 to $30,000 a month just to
find whether their product is
valid in this market or how, how
do they approach this market. So
that has been a challenge with
most of the companies that come
to the United States seeking a
market.
um
So that leads us to
uh, uh, uh, how do we lower the
cost of entry for this companies
to come in.
How do they
experience
New Mexico as a host
uh state to establish a business
and as Melinda said, most of
them want to have a office
first, understand that the, the,
the, the legalities of operating
a business and then invest maybe
$10 million or $20 million
whatever we, you know, they,
they are here to invest, but
they want that familiarity, uh,
with the Mxa Center, what we are
doing is we are giving them a
platform which is helping
them
have a toehold into this
marketplace, the US marketplace,
and our hope is that what we
think will happen is they will
establish a small office, bring
in a couple of people, and then
grow
in New Mexico. That's, that's
the goal, um
again, you, you want to talk
about the New Mexico Investment
in state or?
or, or, uh, so basically what
hap in New Mexico, the state
invests significant amount of
money in
from cradle to career kind of
programs and if there are no
jobs for once they are out.
in terms of graduating from
school, there is significant
brain drain that goes to
California, to Colorado, to
Texas, and, and one of the
problem statements that we are
addressing here is to
reduce the brain drain or at
least retain the talent that we
are investing in.
Uh, and at, at the same time
building generational wealth for
the families of New Mexico.
Our goal at the center is
bringing in at least $400
million in foreign direct
investment.
and creating 1500 jobs in five
years.
Again, uh, 1500 jars may seem
like a
impossible number at this point
in time, but we have a formula
at which we have arrived at. So
let's say if you bring in 25 to
40 companies each year and our
goal is for each of these
companies to create 4 jobs in
the first year. So we're looking
at somewhere between 100 to 150
jobs in the first year. And
those jobs, of course, 2nd year
they will since they are
growing, they will multiply. And
when we bring a next 25 to 40
companies.
uh, they will create another 4
jobs. Uh, so it, it, it's a
cascading effect that we hope to
achieve.
um
I'm sorry,
you have a question, sir? Yeah,
OK. Uh.
OK,
uh
So again, uh, uh, uh, we are
confident of achieving our
goals.
just by
share the relationships that we
have established globally and uh
the technologies that are the
companies that we are attracting
to New Mexico.
So basically the Mexis Center,
it's not just an incubator, it's
not just an accelerator. It's
not just a soft landing program.
It's all of the above. So it's
taking some of the traditional
models, um, that, uh
uh
a very specifically narrowly
focused for certain types of
activities and mashing them
together and providing those
services all in one location. So
it's really more of a launch pad
for foreign direct investment,
where they're going to get all
of the services, which we'll
talk about here in a few
minutes, um, but it's, it's a
new model that is very unique,
um, in the US. This is the first
model that we could find that
incorporates the level of
services, um, that we're
offering for these foreign
direct companies. There's lots
of places
you can go to get a free office,
but they don't support the
company in any way.
um, and this also doesn't take
away from the programs that
already exist in New Mexico. It
kind of fills in the gaps and
adds that new level specifically
targeted for foreign direct
investment.
Right. And, and I, I want to
talk about uh how this concept
originated like as Melinda said,
this is unique. Uh, we have
never seen such a concept or
such.
extrusion, at least not in the
United States. Uh, I was invited
as a part of uh the delegation
with the governor by by Melinda
to to India. And I was tasked to
set up two roundtable meetings
in New Delhi. Uh, one was
focused on cybersecurity. The
other one was hydrogen
technologies, uh, I was told
that about 1012 participants,
uh, with a 90-minute time would
be, you know, ideal for it.
And when I spread the word
around, we had more than 25
participants at each of the
round tables, and, uh, the, the
conversations that were
happening were, uh, a very
engaging. Uh, the first
roundtable, the cybersecurity
roundtable, was attended by the
then ambassador to India, Eric
Garcity, and he too participated
actively and, and the time for
the discussions, although it was
scheduled
for 90 minutes, went over 120
minutes, and he was engaged in,
in, in the conversations so
intimately that, you know, he
forego a lot of his commitments.
The next morning we had a
roundtable for hydrogen
technologies and uh that was
again very well attended. uh
same thing, 24 to 25 companies
were represented in the at the
roundtable.
and which again extend to be
extended beyond 90 minutes, up
to 120 minutes. And, uh, our
cabinet secretary for Energy,
uh, Melanie Kanraine. She forego
a visit to the.
Parliament to sit with 4 or 5
participants to discuss how
technology is evolving or what
can be done in New Mexico.
uh
that
kind of, uh, Melinda then
approached me and said, hey
Amad, this is great, but how do
we get these companies to come
to New Mexico and then I
identified the challenges that
this company have is the cost
barrier. If we can lower the
cost of entry, these companies
will come, uh, and experience
the ecosystem that we provide.
the market that they can attain
and kind of grow from there.
So that led to the announcement,
uh, on May 13th, uh, uh, at
Washington DC where uh uh the
governor announced the center
and May 19th we had a ribbon
cutting
And we're getting ready to start
operations at the time of the
May 13th announcement, we
announced the 1st 7 companies
that are locating within the
Mexxis Center, um, the Telegona
chamber also announced a $100
million investment, um, across 5
or 6 companies, um, as well,
that will be coming. We have
another 10 or 15 right now that
are in that contract negotiation
stage to locate within the
center, and then we have another
30 plus companies that we're
currently vetting as well.
And so from between May and now
the response has been um
aggressive. Um, it's been really
good to see the amount of
companies who are willing now to
consider New Mexico and be very
serious about it because of this
new opportunity.
What
Center offers is 28 private
office suites, where each
company can have 2 to 3,
uh, people sitting in that
office, uh, we anticipate them
hiring locally.
uh, uh, maybe, uh, a co-founder
or a, or a principal coming in
and running the business, uh, we
have common conference rooms,
admin support, and, and, and uh
back office support. That's what
the center is going to provide,
um.
we have an adjacent expansions,
uh, space, about 22,000 square
feet right next door, which if
when a company grows beyond 2 to
3 employees, they can expand
into an adjacent space. Um
we also are supporting, uh, and,
and beyond, beyond the, the, the
traditional incubator
accelerator model. We are
helping them with the visa
issues, guiding them in terms of
what kind of visas they can
avail, uh, we are helping them
with lead generation. We are
helping them with
converting marketing material to
a US standard marketing
material, all that at the back
office. Uh, uh, helping them
taste success. Our goal is to
help them taste success in the
1st 180 days of their existence
in the US, uh, so we are going
to be very involved with each of
these companies and make sure
that they are able to grow. Um
again, there are success is
going to be our success because
when they had to create at least
4 jobs in the first year, and
that's that kind of ties into
our five-year target of 1500
jobs, um.
uh
and the great thing about these
services that are offered, it's
not industry specific and we've
specifically designed this
center so that we could be a
little bit industry agnostic.
Um, we already have, um,
interest from cybersecurity,
value added agriculture, manu
advanced manufacturing,
um,
some medical devices, um, value,
I said that, um,
energy, sustainable products,
sustainable engineering, and so
we're seeing a wide range of
industries that will be able to
take advantage of these
programs.
Our inaugural partners are from
34 countries, uh, uh,
predominantly India. We have uh
academic tie up with the topmost
university, uh, uh, in India
called IT Kanpur, uh, we have a
tie up with um uh ecosystem in
um
cybersecurity called C3iHU, uh,
SIIC startup incubation and
innovation Center, which has,
uh, successfully brought 430
companies to date to to to at
various stages of, uh, growth.
Some of, some of them have been
public companies, uh, in, in the
past five years, uh, and
Teangana Chamber of Commerce and
Industry, uh, which is
uh, um, organization of uh
industry with over 5000 members.
They are our channel partners,
so they are funneling these
businesses to the center rather
than we going and picking and
choosing the companies. We, we
have, uh, mechanism by we have a
continuous flow of companies
coming to our centers. Uh, we
have built additional alliances
with the traders advocacy group
of Ghana, uh, Oman American
business
Business Network, American
Chamber in Morocco, uh, and the
region of Murcia, uh, which is
in Spain, um,
so these are the kind of
relationships that we have
already established, uh, on, on
the talent side, we have tie-ups
with UNM, NMSU, uh, NMT, CNM,
uh, Donnyana, uh, uh, community
College, uh, so on and so forth,
uh.
And then part of the center, um,
and the goal is to get as,
because this is not, I mean,
yes, we're located in
Albuquerque. The center is
located in Albuquerque, but this
center really will serve all of
New Mexico and so we're trying
to help the companies get
connected with all of the
resources statewide, all of the
partners statewide, um, and also
provide opportunities for uh New
Mexico businesses to interact
with the companies that are
locating with the center and
vice versa. So either to provide
services or concern.
consume services um as needed
and so this is really um
a
the goal is to benefit all of
New Mexico.
So we, we have already, uh, tied
up with the University of New
Mexico to provide us with
interns and, and graduating, uh,
uh, class, uh, students, uh, to
come and work at the center, uh,
at the same time, we have
tie-ups with the, let's say
NMSU, one of the examples I give
here is NMSU where cybersecurity
program will be run with
uh NMSU uh professors.
um, that we also have plans to
do some rural pilot projects in
terms of water technologies in
terms of uh hydrogen
technologies, um, and, and our
long term goal is having 4 such
additional centers in the state
of New Mexico.
And, and the goal of these
centers is to win, of course,
you know, we're, we're thinking
long term years 345 of our
center plan, um, when that EB-5
investment, which is a
investment program for foreign
direct investment. Um, it allows
us then to specialize those
centers based on the economy of
those communities and where the
centers are located so that we
can even get some more in-depth
targeted, um, type of approach.
Ours currently right now we're
all of the above. This will
allow us to get
a little bit more specialized.
Um, this approach has again been
very widely accepted. Um, we
have already been invited to
multiple countries to present
and meet with with companies and
opportunities and we're we're
vetting those for the, the best
opportunities going forward.
Again, we cannot do it
ourselves. We need your support,
your help, and
guidance to help us propel
forward and meet our goals or
exceed our goals, uh, there are
several ways, uh
this committee and, and members
of Congress can help here. Um,
in, in terms of connecting with
various economic development
organizations within the
communities, uh, community
leaders, uh, educators and, and
specifically speaking, I, I, I
want to give you an example in
cybersecurity. Uh, our
first program that we are
implementing in cybersecurity is
targeted towards uh
pig butchering. Uh, a lot of our
rural communities or seniors of
our country are being targeted,
uh, by scams. Uh, we want to
educate, uh, the law
enforcement, uh, in, in these
communities, we want to educate
the community leaders about how
to identify, how to mitigate the
risk, and how to recover from
any such uh targeted uh uh uh uh
uh attacks in terms of scam. Uh,
so our, our,
our first program is going to be
in, in the area of pig
butchering, for cybersecurity.
Again, we would appreciate all
the help that we can get in
terms of visa procurement that
has been a challenge for
foreign uh companies to come to
US, um, and you know, again, any
kind of grants, training grants
would also be appreciated.
And specifically on visa
support, and we know that's
often, it's a federal issue, but
supporting our federal
delegation in New Mexico to um
support that with the State
Department is is often
important, um, we're not asking
you to make visas magically
happen. We know that's, that's
not necessarily your role, but
to support those countries to
follow the process and allow
companies to get scheduled for
those appointments.
Basically, advocacy for, for
visa is what we are looking for.
In
So thank you again, um, Madam
Chair and committee, um, I know
that was very fast and a very,
very broad overview, um, and if
it pleases Madam Chair, we'd be
happy to answer any questions.
Thank you. Uh, we'll start with
Representative Lindstrom, and we
have run out of time for this
presentation. We'll just to keep
that in mind as we're moving
forward, Representative.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
I want to thank the presenters.
I was one of the people that was
in DC at the time when the
governor made the announcement.
I was with the group there. It
was a called Select USA uh trade
show, one where we're
specifically trying to attract
foreign direct investment.
and just uh
for the committee's benefit, the
United States is the largest
market in the world.
um, and many countries would
like to do business here and
certainly their business
community wants to be in here.
this, this service that they're
talking about helps mitigate the
challenges that any foreign
company might have
and as you know, this last
session we just approved the
Tradeport Development Act.
And if those trade, if the trade
board is functioning, uh,
properly. The idea is, of
course, to bring in the raw
product, goes to the FTZ, the
customs agent, and then becomes
uh a value added product for
distribution someplace else or
for manufacturing.
but I think this has probably
been one of the most important
steps the state of New Mexico
has taken when it comes to
foreign direct investment for
our state.
uh, the challenges are just too
much, uh, for most companies
just, just ask yourself what
would it how would you approach
moving to New Delhi, India, and
set up your company.
You have a lot of business
people in the on this committee.
How would you do that? And would
you do it quickly? And would you
do it without help of somebody
there.
so that's what this is about and
I'm looking at Mark because I
know he's gonna open his company
in New Delhi, India,
um
you have oil and gas there. I
mean, that's, we could have him
go and set that kind of thing up
but anybody in business knows
what that's gonna take, and
that's no different than what
these other business people
throughout the world see.
So I want to congratulate you
all and look forward to the next
ribbon cutting and our next
trip, uh, but I think this is a
big deal
and anything this committee can
do to help, I think we should
do. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. uh, Representative
Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I think
my question was answered. One
follow-up question is, uh, I
think that um
those of us, Madam Chair, here
sitting in here and it is
incredibly exciting to hear
what's coming down the pike, but
I think also uh to the listening
audience, we all want to know
that we, as a citizenry, want to
know, it appears that there's
going to be a large workforce.
Initially, Madam Chair, it
sounds like there is going to be
this exploratory piece first.
with the offices established and
then the in some cases, the
manufacturing will come. I'm
curious as to, um, might you
have a general idea of the
estimate, uh, maybe an estimate
of the ratio of the workforce
from this state of New Mexico,
uh, and that that might come
into
begin this uh
take advantage of this
opportunity. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair and committee,
that it's a great question. Um,
typically on the front end when
a company is is getting
established and they're starting
with their business development,
about 25% of that is going to be
imported into the state of New
Mexico. The goal is for them to
hire as many New Mexicans as
they can, um, because I really
do need that New Mexico-US based
workforce to make this work and
then as you grow into that next
step and into manufacturing, the
majority of those are going to
come from New Mexico
Just, just to add to that, Madam
Chair, and the committee, uh,
what we are implementing as of
now is uh a channels of talent
development through our
universities. So although
initial, uh, workforce may seem
to come from outside, uh, year
234, we will have our homegrown
talent working into it.
Thank you, Madam Chair. That's
very good to hear. And, uh,
based on, especially the
presentation that we had this
morning, it seems to tie in very
nicely with the partnership.
and I, as I read through your
material, thank you very much.
That's my last question.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Representative Royal Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you very much for your
presentation
I agree with Representative
Patty Lindstrom and her, um.
assessment and, and uh her
comments and it was a big
supporter of the trade port.
What concerns me and just as I
might add, is that for you for
many years I've been involved
for many years in the state, um,
we focused on quote unquote job
creation.
and many of the job creation
efforts in the state that have
come and utilized a lot of our
incentives and worked with our
institutions, um, have done just
that, created the jobs
but they have not been
sustainable.
And again, it's, it's a question
of how we present language
and how we um
the mindset and the approach
that we take. So I prefer and
and on your page two,
slide 3, you talk their third
bullet says Help build
generational wealth in New
Mexico.
The way to build generational
wealth in New Mexico, in my
opinion, and I think in the
opinion of many, Madam Chair, is
we need to be to focus on career
path
positions that are sustainable
for the long term, which then
also provide a direction and
guide for that building of
generational wealth because once
you see um your, your, the
professions developing and those
career paths, then it entices
the next generation and the next
generation and the next
generation. And then we can
protect our economy in that
fashion, but it requires us to
look at not just reaching the
goal of 11,500, whatever, and
utilizing the partnerships and
the and the um incentives that
go with that, but it's making a
true commitment. So I, I just
want us to make sure that we
follow in that
mindset because we're trying to
get to stop generations of
poverty in the state. We're
still finding ourselves at the
very lowest. And so
excuse me, that's one of my
comments and then the other um
comment I had was, uh, actually
it was a question.
When you
have set up um
along the same line with that
commentary is and you made a, a,
a reference to being a catalyst,
um, and, and, and workforce
training programs, how are you
going to
maintain and um guide these
companies
in making sure that the skills
that the career path begin with
our sustainable by upscaling
their skills as they move up in
their positions. That's very
important again for creating
generational wealth. Thank you,
Madam Chair, if you could answer
that.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, uh, Representative
Roboabeer. uh
as an outsider to New Mexico.
I was significantly encouraged
to see the talent that exists in
this state.
Uh,
we
are, we take pride in having the
highest number of PhDs in the
state.
in, in, in a particular region.
We take pride in having
uh
national labs in our state. We
take pride in having programs
such as Spaceport America, uh,
in our state
And
I I'm, I'm going to blend in
with both your comment and your
question. We are not here to
create, uh, jobs.
which are warehouse jobs or, you
know, not just job creation. We
are looking at uh
pathway for students of the
state to have meaningful future
jobs, so we are targeting
companies which are not of the
past. We are targeting companies
which are of future hydrogen
technologies, uh, uh, water
technologies. I mean, we are
also addressing the challenges
of, uh, the state.
Uh, one of the
ecosystems, if I may call that,
that we are trying to implement
is bringing
a company which builds, which
makes tertiary water treatment
products, which can treat our
brackish water aquifers, we have
a company which is going to
implement a treatment process.
and we have a company which is
going to
offtake that water for green
hydrogen. So we are putting this
ecosystem together and bringing
all this 34 companies together
into the state of New Mexico
and, and I, I, I recognize the
challenge of job creation and
generational wealth.
um
and, and yes.
coming from India, born in
India, I've seen how India has
evolved in the past 75 years,
how it has grown from being one
of the developing nations to be
#4, number 5 nations, and, and
what really helped there was
technology.
Uh
if we try to emulate something
similar here.
I think we have a formula for
success.
And if I may add, just quickly,
um, we're already in
conversations with local
economic development
organizations, local workforce
training, universities, um, so
to make sure that we have that
network to established, so when
that company gets to that point
where they do need to upskill,
um, retrain train new, um, all
of those pipelines are already
in place, those programs are in
place. So this is, this is not a
one and done type of center.
This is going to be an ongoing
long-term project and a
long-term collaboration
with, with all of the workforce
training, um, programs and, and
partners within the state.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
would just end by saying that I
would, um, you might wanna take
your mic. I would strongly
encourage you to pay attention
to the wishes and the wills of
the state of the population of
the state and the communities
that are have been most recently
articulating their desire to
have clean energy, clean
technology available as we're
proceeding with real clean
energy and real uh clean
technology
as we're proceeding with our
economic development efforts in
the state. They have made that
loud and clear around the state.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative. Um,
we are about 10 minutes over
schedule. We have 3 more people,
uh, who are going to ask
questions, so I would just ask
that you keep that in mind, um,
Representative Gonzalez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'll be
brief. More, more of a comment,
um, so in, in my, my daily life,
um, I am, I am fully on board
with building this STEM network,
this high technology innovation
network, and I think this is
fabulous. I think this is, um,
as Representative Lemhiman
mentioned, um, I think the
center can be an absolute a
great resource here, um, for our
state. Just one maybe caution
and maybe more of a statement is
that um I think New Mexico is
great at innovation. We have, as
you mentioned
highest number of PhDs, all of
our labs, but there is a huge
gap between majority of New
Mexicans and our high technology
innovation zones. And so maybe
my my ask or my wishes as this
moves forward, as this
progresses, it's just to keep
that in mind that hopefully this
center is a way to bridge that
gap. Um, you talked about the
manufacturing in the centers and
it's really unfortunate that so
many ideas and technologies are
developed here, and then we
don't have the capacity to
sustain them and then they have
to go elsewhere
for furthering an idea,
furthering an innovation, um,
and then my other just point of
just caution and interest. I
know your slide, you talked
about rural development and the
the universities you listed UNM,
CNM, NMSU. In my opinion, those
aren't true rural colleges,
rural universities, um, you're
talking about Eastern, Western,
Highlands, northern New Mexico,
um, my wish is also that as you
do look at development, um,
there's a lot like that goes on
here in these major hubs around
the state, um, but the rest of
the state also has
talent that could be encouraged,
that could be developed, and so
to please take advantage of the
other resources and the other
projects, but that's my only
statement. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Representative Senator Char.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. So
there are a couple of things and
kind of touched on it here.
So somebody comes to the center,
they start their business and
what's what keeps them here? I
mean, so after the subsidy's
gone, they move off to Seattle
or wherever else. So we've spent
money in our schools, taxpayer
money
what keeps them in New Mexico
Uh
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you
Committee.
Uh
as
there are 22, 2 things that
will retain these companies in
the state of New Mexico. One is
the talent that they.
hire is going to be local
talent.
And, and again, as a
businessman, I know that if I
set up my office in
Chicago, I am not going to move
out of Chicago because it's
going to be an uphill task if I,
if I start. Again, that's,
that's what we are giving these
companies a toehold to
to find a spot in the state of
New Mexico and grow from there.
We're going to not just, you
know, have them create this
small office and go out. No, we
will help them in their growth
trajectory, so to speak, support
them all through, so the center
is just the starting point. Once
they are, let's say they want to
set up a manufacturing
plant.
The partnership comes into play,
and they will help them
with the next step
So, Madam Chair, for anybody
that's building anything,
absolutely once you've built
manufacturing, but for some of
these, you're talking about
cybersecurity
I can do that anywhere
Um
and while I'm great, I want them
to come to New Mexico. Please
don't misunderstand. I think
that's great, but
but, uh, I also know that we've
in New Mexico managed to, we
managed to train an awful lot of
doctors, none of them practice
in New Mexico. We train an awful
lot of other things that then go
somewhere else and so the idea
is how do we take those New
Mexicans, train them to do
whatever it is.
and keep them as New Mexicans. I
think that's an important step
here and so one of the things,
and I may have it, I don't and
don't have to go any detail, but
a, a plan to grow people out of
this center so that we know
they're no longer in the center,
but they're still in the
community. Do we have a plan to
help them make that transition
into the community and out of
the center, but still, New
Mexico community, not somewhere
else community.
and then um finally, one of the
things you touched on right at
the end was, uh, water.
I know that there are New Mexico
companies right now working on
how to deal with brackish water.
Are we going to compete against
ourselves, so we've already got
a New Mexico company trying to
figure out how to do this, and
now all of a sudden we're going
out of our way to find somebody
from India.
to come over here and compete
against ourselves.
Is there madam, Madam Chair, and
the committee, uh, let me answer
your first question, uh, I mean,
the second question first, uh,
we are not here to compete or
offset any local companies. What
matters the most if we are
converting the brackish water
to, let's say, industrial use
water or potable water is the
cost of that water. If there is
any way we can reduce the cost
of the water, it doesn't matter
which company brings that water
to the citizenry of of New
Mexico, uh, uh, the second thing
about the cybersecurity is, is
if our goal is to grow these
companies in our communities.
Our goal is to grow this communi
this, these companies, uh, uh
this is just a starting point
and obviously, as, as I said,
it's, it's inertia. It's, it's
once the growth pattern happens,
it tend to stay here. um,
as you rightly pointed out,
there is significant talent that
is created in the state. I can't
talk on the medical side of
things, but at least from the
engineering side of things, uh,
me personally being a mechanical
engineer, I can see the value
that is being created here, uh,
and, and, and again, for lack of
jobs or or or
just not the support mechanism.
I mean,
that is the reason that was the
very reason I moved from India
to US to get a better
opportunity for being a
mechanical engineer. I didn't
have those jobs there. Uh, US
had those jobs, and that's, you
know, again, I can, I can relate
to it personally, uh, 40 years
ago, I came to
US and, and now India has
changed, obviously, but I, I can
see that change.
in retrospect
Madam Chair,
thank you. I just, as we're
thinking this through, I would
I encourage us to, to say, OK,
so how do we keep them New
Mexican after we get him here,
so that's all. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Uh, and
closing this out, Representative
Montoya.
Thank you, madam. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Um, actually, uh, both uh
Representative Gonzalez and
Senator Sher both touched on two
parts of what is a concern I
have.
Uh, the one being
I, it doesn't appear as if we
have a clawback provision.
in place that if a company were
to come here
and take advantage of the
incubator.
system
and then as Senator Sheriff said
there's a, uh
uh, let's say they don't need
locality specific to New Mexico
to continue.
Um, we all know that
Bill Gates and Microsoft started
in New Mexico.
So, uh
I, I'm just wondering, and maybe
this is a question for the
committee and for the members of
the legislature, do we want to
put a clawback provision in
place. Uh, someone is here,
they're here for a couple of
years, they move beyond the
incubator and then move out of
state.
I, I, I don't know if that's not
something that
that we may want to consider,
um, just so that we're not
uh, it's great to bring them to
the country, but we're, we're
all New Mexico legislators and
we're trying to build this
state.
But the question I have is kind
of to build on
what Representative Gonzalez
said, which is
the, the center is in
Albuquerque.
and
what we see, uh, in rural parts
of the state is
uh,
company will grow in Albuquerque
and then they may do work
outside of Albuquerque.
but the headquarters stays in
Albuquerque. The business is
built in Albuquerque and I, I, I
was just looking at the
uh
at, at, uh, the slides 7 and 8,
which both talk about uh rural
pilot projects, uh, tribal and
underserved plans are underway
um
uh,
support rural rural expansion.
But what we usually, those of us
from the rural part of the
state, generally we hear
our plan or our goal.
is to do that
Um, and we've worked, several of
us have worked, uh, to try and
get more, uh, medical
professionals outside of
Albuquerque and into the, into
the other communities. But the
reality is it's a lot easier to
work at Albuquerque.
or Las Cruces or Santa Fe.
So I guess the question I have
for you and, and I'll, I'll just
let you answer. I won't have a
follow-up, but, uh, just how do
you plan on being able to help
migrate out these businesses
outside of.
the metropolitan areas
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, uh, the committee.
I'm going to answer the second
question first and let, uh,
Melinda answer the first part of
your question.
We are looking at
the ecosystem of rural
communities, as we speak.
San Juan County, the San Juan
Aquifer is one of the
aquifers we are testing in the
lab in terms of how we can treat
that water. So we are focused on
the rural communities.
We are
considering
uh, tribal lads, tribal tribal
workforce.
for certain of our programs. We
recognize that we won't be
successful.
if just
our particular city of New
Mexico succeeds.
We want the entire state to
succeed. So we have with, with,
with some cognizance.
identified what aquifers we are
going to work with. What are the
chem, what is the chemistry of
the aquifer. How can we treat
that in the lab? How can we
pilot that? We are, we are
working on that. Again, it is,
it is a long game. It is not
that we are here for a short
time. So we are setting
foundations for such programs.
and, um, regarding clawbacks,
um, all of the incentive
programs in the state of Mexico
already have clawbacks built
into them. And so any incentive
program that a community takes
advantage of has those built-in
clawbacks already if they don't
meet their goals, um, or what is
promised within, um, the
restrictions of those
incentives, uh, the Mexxis
Center is a paid center. It is
not a free center to these
companies. They do pay
um to be housed there and to get
those services. It's just at a
lower cost than you can find
anywhere else in the US. So
until they move out of the
center and are ready to really
do more than just a business
operations side of things, um,
that is when they'll start
taking advantage of New Mexico
incentives and the incentive
programs that are already on the
books.
Thank you
Thank you. Uh, thank you,
everyone, and thank you to our
panelists for, uh, all of this
information. I look forward to
another presentation next year
when we get to hear how this is
actually worked and it's uh
impact on our New Mexico
economy, um, up next we have
experts on geothermal
development in the state, a
representative from XGS Energy,
Tom Solomon, electrical
engineer, and facilities of
governmental development working
group, Dr. Kelly
Shari and senior
oh, no, you're with Bureau of
Geology and Mineral Resources.
So welcome, thank you all. Um,
we are running about 15 minutes
behind schedule. So, um
keep that in mind as you're
giving your presentation and
remarks and then to the
committee we are supposed to
wrap this at 2:30, which gives
us about 45 minutes for
presentation and questions.
Thank you.
Um, thank you, um, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, I will
start off. I'm a Tom Solomon. I
am the uh facilitator of the
Mexico Geothermal Working Group
and um we're here to talk about
developing New Mexico's
geothermal energy as economic
development.
Uh, let's see
uh, and what, what is that, of
course it is using the Earth's
heat, um, as a source of both
heating and potentially
electricity production, uh, New
Mexico has, um, unique advantage
of having parts of the state
where the earth's crust is
actually thinner than other
parts of the country, uh,
meaning that you don't have to
drill as deep to access those
hot rocks, and that gives us an
economic advantage here in the
state for developing geothermal.
Page 3 is kind of the high-level
list of why we want to pursue
this and have been, uh, it is a
clean zero emission source of
heat and electricity, um,
geothermal energy is always
present, the Earth's heat is
always there underneath our
feet. It is not intermittent
electricity generated from
geothermal is 24 by 7, 365 days
a year, fully dispatchable,
um,
as opposed to other kinds of
renewable energy like
solar or wind, and because of
that, we think it is uniquely
positioned to help with the
energy transition, providing
that last 10% that has been
difficult to identify,
augmenting soul or augmenting
battery and wind generated
renewable energy, lots and lots
of opportunities for sustainable
economic development all
throughout the state, uh, to
develop this resource and in
particular uh providing a
transition path for workers and
the equipment.
in the oil and gas industry as
it transitions in the future,
something like 90% of the skill
set and the drilling rigs in the
oil and gas directly
transportable over to just
drilling for heat instead of
drilling for oil and gas.
Um, there are a number of
different kinds of geothermal
energy that kind of get lumped
together and so I just wanted to
separate, um, the different
kinds and they tend to vary by
depth. So if you're talking
about near surface, uh, like
your basement or maybe a few 100
ft, um, that is a great
opportunity to develop ground
source heat pumps, and there are
a number of buildings in New
Mexico, Rio Rancho High School,
Visu Cleveland, Los Alamos
Public School
s the Sims Building in
Albuquerque that use ground
source heat pumps uh to provide
he heating and cooling for their
buildings. Um, New Mexico of
course has 29 hot springs, uh,
and, um, there is a geothermally
heated greenhouse in less uh in
um Radium Springs. Thank you. um
Masson Farms, and it is um uh
very effective, provides very
low cost heating, uh, and that's
just an example of
direct use. And the third
category is what's called
traditional geothermal
electricity production,
sometimes called hydrothermal,
and that's a case where you find
an existing underground hot
water aquifer, uh, a water
system underground that is in
contact with hot rock. You
happen to locate it, uh,
sometimes it's by happenstance
and drill a well, tap into that
hot water, uh, that hot brine,
pump that up to the surface. It
has enough heat in it that you
can use
that heat to drive an electric
power plant, and that we have
one of those in New Mexico, in
Hidalgo County called Lightning
Dock.
and we'll talk about that
further.
The real exciting possibility
that I think provides the most
economic development for the
future of New Mexico is advanced
geothermal electricity
production using deep, hot dry
rock using closed loop systems
and um that is that we're
talking depths of like 15,000 ft
and um we have an announcement
coming up to discuss what that
looks like.
New Mexico is number 6th in
geothermal potential, geothermal
energy potential in the United
States, and we have both of
those two kinds of geothermal
that I mentioned at the end,
both the hot water aquifers, um,
and the hot dry rock, some of
the best hot dry rock, um,
potential in the United States
because of some unique geology
that Dr. Kelly will talk about
in the future, and we're really
excited about the opportunities
for developing that
resource here in the state
In 2022, Senator Ortizi Pino
launched the geothermal Working
Group, and we established some
goals, basically, uh, to pass a
policy platform to help us
develop this resource in New
Mexico, which is uh right there
underneath our feet, but, uh,
needed some boost to provide the
economic um uh platform that we
wanted to pursue and so we set
two phases, um, phase one was
legislation to help us
expand non-existing sources of
geothermal energy, heat pumps
for buildings, uh, geothermal
heated greenhouses, hot springs,
and our one, lightning dock
clean electricity plant. While
we develop and promote the
longer term development advanced
geothermal electricity that that
final kind that we think can
provide potentially 10% or more
of New Mexico's electric grid, 1
to 3 potentially even 5
gigawatts
of electricity production and
for context, um,
New Mexico's peak load in the
summer is about 10 gigawatts,
so, uh, that's a big substantial
um
fraction of our total electric
load that geothermal could
serve.
The geothermal working group,
uh, as I said, 2022, Senator
Ortizi Pino kicked it off, asked
me to be the facilitator. It has
grown to a group of potentially
40 different people joining
various meetings and we have
representatives from, um, uh, 3
of New Mexico's university
systems, uh, both national labs.
A number of arms of the state
government, including the
legislature, the governor's
office, the Energy Agency,
Economic Development
and state lands, uh, Senator
Heinrich sends a representative,
uh, we have representatives from
the geothermal consortium,
nationally, geothermal rising
Project Interspace. You will
hear from later on after I'm
done. and 6 different geothermal
companies are a member of it as
well as a couple of venture
capitalists and so um it is a
robust, effective working group,
and we've gotten a lot uh done
through that team.
And, uh, as a result of the work
that we've done, we passed in
2024, the policy platform pretty
much that we talked about with
the help of these legislative
champions, a couple of whom are
with us today. So very great
thanks to both Senator or TC
Pino and Representative Royal
Caballero, Representative Lujan,
and Senator Sewells for
sponsoring and passing these
geothermal bills, which
basically did these 4 things
provided recurring funding for
New Mexico Tech for 4 years as
our geothermal Center of
Research and Expertise, a
geothermal grant and loan
program administered by Mnerd, a
pool of $15 million now. that
will provide grants of up to
$250,000 to a state subdivision
of the state as well as the
university or nation, tribe or
pueblo, uh, to get started.
That's an amount of money that
could serve to
do research into the geothermal
opportunities in that
municipality or in that tribal
land.
Um, we passed geothermal
electricity production tax
credits and a gross receipts tax
deduction for capital equipment,
and finally, a heat pump tax
credit up to 30% of the system
cost for ground coupled heat
pumps. So, um, we believe that
that is a good set of incentives
and policies that will help this
new industry get off the ground.
and to that end, we had some
great announcements recently
that one geothermalelectric
plant that I mentioned,
Lightning Dock in Hidalgo County
just announced that they have
repowered that power plant with
a much deeper well that they use
new technology to identify that
there was a even much more heat
deeper down than they had
initially tapped into um and
they had a ribbon cutting
ceremony July 18th. The governor
was there with the Energy
Secretary, uh, and, um,
celebrating the fact that they
drilled this new well, which is
now the most
productive geothermal pumped
well operating in the United
States, um, and so it is now
that plant is operating at full
capacity, where it was having
difficulty meeting those goals
prior to that, and even better,
Zanskar, the operator of
Lightning Dock, believes that
they have the capacity to
further expand that
geothermmoelectric plant in that
location, so that's an exciting
possibility. We hope to see
possibly some announcements
coming up in the near future.
Uh, and with us today, we have a
representative from XGS who will
speak to this announcement that
happened in June of a new
geothermal electric plant, uh,
which I think may be the first
utility scale hot dry rock
closed loop plant in the
country, even in the world. Um,
and, um, I won't steal, uh, Mr.
Phillips Thunder, so I'm gonna
come back to the slide when he
speaks, uh, but that was an
exciting announcement when it
came.
Uh, and then for the last year
or more, uh, uh, Project
Interspace had been basically
chartered and helped us draft
this extensive report, 238 pages
on the future of geothermal in
New Mexico and Dr. Kelly will
cover that in some detail uh as
uh as we bring her to the
microphone coming up next.
At the federal level, uh, we're
pleased to have
support from both the uh the new
Energy Secretary and bipartisan
support in the Senate and the
House. 4 geothermal energy
development and um so that's
gratifying and bodes well for
the developing this resource in
the future. Um, and in addition,
the Department of Defense is
pursuing
building geothermalelectric
power plants inside the fence
line of their defense bases of
which New Mexico of course has 4
as a way to enhance their energy
security of those military bases
by having electricity power
production under their own
control inside their fence line,
and there are active discussions
going on right now with the
Department of Defense to see if
we can get that going in one or
more of our military bases here
in the
states.
wrapping up, we identified, uh,
you know, some future
development opportunities, what
we call low hanging fruit. Uh,
the first of those is done. We
have that announcement of the
meta uh
power plant with XGS, and you'll
hear about that shortly. Uh, we
just talked about the
possibility of a power plant
inside a military base.
Lightning dock is probably going
to be expanded. We have a couple
of our pueblos, OK, Oinga and
Zia who have been looking at the
possibility of geothermal
resource development within
their Pueblo lands, um, and then
in addition to that, there is a
historical geothermal resource
in Las Cruces.
adjacent to the New Mexico State
University campus that was
developed starting in the 1980s,
pretty much ran its course and
has been mothballed since then,
but the underground resource is
still there and so with some
additional infrastructure
investment, it could be
rejuvenated, and that's another
possibility, and there are 3
others that I won't go over.
But lots of opportunities for
geothermal development in the
state.
one of which, uh, of course, is
to decarbonize the remaining
gas-fired power plants in the
state. Of course, with the
energy Transition Act. There's a
deadline of converting these
gas-fired power plants to clean
energy production by 2045, and
if you look at where these power
plants are located.
um,
relative to where the geothermal
resources are located in the
state. There are a number of
them that have, you know,
geothermal potential, uh,
underneath their existing power
plants and of course each one of
those already has a connection
to the grid. There's a piece of
land there. There's a
substation, and there's a real
opportunity to repower some of
those plants going forward into
the future.
And last slide, um, for in terms
of pursuing economic
development, um, we really want
to get the rulemaking completed
for the geothermal grant and
loan program. Mnerd is on the
final phases of getting that
done. Hope to have that
completed before the end of this
year, and the location to apply
for those geothermal grants and
loans is
in the website for uh Mnerd, the
eCAM home, um, up there at the
top of that slide, um, and, uh,
Doctor Kelly's going to talk
about a geothermal graduate
certificate program that'll kick
off in the fall, and then we
really want to develop this
geothermal roadmap, kind of a
cookbook, so to speak, to have a
document that um
helps geothermal developers
coming from outside the state,
answer the questions of, you
know,
um,
where is the geo geothermal
resource located in the state.
Uh, what kind of incentive
programs do you have, uh, how do
I get a permit, accomplished in
the state, have all of that in
11 location to really help these
companies pursue and um
hopefully that and other things
lead to additional project
announcements to develop
geothermal energy. And um with
that, I think maybe I could
stand for questions or I could
turn it over
to XGS and we'll just continue
and have the questions at the
end. So, uh, Logan Phillips, go
ahead. Uh, let's see, you wanted
to speak to the XGS slide, so
I'm going to go back to that
one. That's this.
Perfect.
I'm trying to get this close
here.
Uh, good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, uh,
thank you so much for the
opportunity to be here today
and, and Tom, thank you for the
fantastic lead in. Uh, my name's
Logan Stevens and I'm vice
president and head of
development at XGS Energy. XGS
is an advanced geothermal and uh
technology development company.
Um, our proprietary technology
uses established practices and
equ
ip ment from the oil and gas
industry, uh, to access hot, dry
rock via vertical pipe and pipe
well system. And then we
circulate a working fluid inside
that closed loop system to to
generate electricity, and that's
the most technical thing I'll,
I'll say today, um.
the projects we develop are
intended primarily to to serve
utilities and large load
customers, um, be that data
centers, manufacturers,
desalination plants, greenhouse
facilities, you name it.
um,
prior to joining XGS a few
months ago. I spent 14 years
developing and leading teams
developing other types of
renewable energy and energy
storage projects across the US.
Um, my wife and I moved to Santa
Fe 3 years ago, and I'm really
thrilled to have the opportunity
to to work on projects so close
to home.
um, and my wife is probably even
more excited than I am, to be
honest. Um
the projects we're developing
represent opportunities not only
to generate clean, firm base
load power for those utilities
and large load customers I
mentioned in the state, uh, but
also to invest capital, create
new work opportunities and tax
revenues and help grow and
diversify the economies of
largely rural communities in the
state. Um, as Tom mentioned, we
recently announced an agreement
with PNM and Meta to bring 150
megawatts of new
in-state geothermal power online
by 2030 using our technology. Um
and with support from partners
and stakeholders, we're excited
to advance those efforts, but we
note that it represents only a
fraction of the broader
opportunity here in the state.
um
driven by that abundance of hot
rock geothermal resource, as
well as an abundance of suitable
land, both private, federal,
state, and tribal. We believe
the, the market opportunity for
XGS in New Mexico over the next
5 years, uh, could be several
thousands of megawatts and um
we're really limited only by,
you know, ability to deliver
that power to the grid, uh, and
to the customers and, and our
ability to secure permits.
so.
uh, on that front, as a company
we're committed to responsible
development underpinned by
collaboration with Project
stakeholders at all levels and
respecting the, the vital, um,
environmental, cultural and
natural resources that we're
going to find in our, our
project communities. One key
differentiator that Tom touched
on about XGS technologies that
we require no water during the
operational phase of the power
plant. uh, which enables
us to develop large projects in
water constrained areas without
impacting those water resources
over the long term.
So
in closing, I think, you know,
I believe we're lucky to be
sitting here today and near one
of the biggest rural economic
development success stories in
the state's history up there in
Los Lunas and
in collaboration with all of our
partners, we hope to play a role
in continuing to, to build on
that success for years to come.
Thank you and I, I think we'll
wait for questions at the end.
That's your
Madam Chair and and committee,
thank you for this opportunity,
um,
Tom mentioned at uh a couple of
years ago, the legislature was
generous enough to provide a
state appropriation to uh the
New Mexico Bureau of Geology
where we could establish a
research and education center
and I just want to give you an
update on what we've been up to,
uh, this past year.
One of the first things that we
did is we hired some new people,
uh, so I, I wanted to introduce
you to my two new employees, uh,
Emmanuel Gaima and
Puja Shiva
Emmanuel is an expert in machine
learning and that's a skill that
we didn't have at, at, uh, in
our particular department, so,
uh, now we can um
tackle problems like that uh
required the use of machine
learning and uh Puja is uh our
outreach uh
person
Uh, we've heard from Tom, uh,
about this uh rather large
report that was published in
June, largely to this man
sitting right here, Jackson
Grimes, uh, we contributed, uh,
uh, a few chapters and uh in
this report, it covers the gamut
of topics related to developing
geothermal we, we wrote the
chapter about where are the
resources, um.
we also use that uh our our
state appropriation to uh
help some, uh, help, help with
the writing of two chapters
authored by folks at New Mexico
State.
about
um
basically the current electrical
picture in our state.
and then the other one was about
uh industries that could
potentially use geothermal heat,
but currently are not. So that's
a very interesting chapter, uh,
opening up some potential
research directions, which we'll
circle back to a little later in
the presentation.
So in our report, we highlight
the fact that as as Tom alluded
to, we have some amazing geology
here in our state that
facilitates uh the formation of
geothermal resources at
relatively shallow depths in the
crust. We have a feature, uh,
there's if, if you're looking at
the map, there's this green
feature that bisects the state
of New Mexico. That's the Rio
Grande Drift.
That's where, uh, there's crust
is being stretched and thinned
in a hot mantle material is
coming up closer to the surface
so we don't have to drill as
deep, uh, to find our geothermal
resources and that we also
included in our chapter a map of
the known geothermal resources,
uh, Lightning Dock LD, that's a
location of the power plant, uh,
NMSU as, as, uh, uh, Tom
mentioned had a a direct
heating, uh, facility that
heated the entire east side of
the uh campus for a while, uh,
RS there is is Radium Springs is
which is where our geothermal
greenhouse is. And uh ohjo
Caliente Motezuma and Tres the
consequences are places where we
have, uh, hot springs and the
economy of these areas is based
on people
uh enjoying rec recreational
soaking in hot springs.
Uh, we also, uh, developed some,
some maps that show uh where one
can utilize a geothermal
resources, the Tom mentioned
that there are kind of 3 levels
for heating and cooling of
buildings. In other words,
ground source heat pumps, direct
use where you are heating uh uh
greenhouses and fish farms and
then the production of
electricity.
So we, we used one model in our
chapter and uh Project
Interspace also created some
maps and overall they show
basically the same uh overall
patterns that along the Rio
Grande Rift is where you can
produce electricity and the
Permian Basin is pretty cold,
but you could still use ground
horse
ground source heat pumps to heat
and cool buildings.
Uh, and then here we have a map
that that shows
kind of the same thing
the heat flow map with the
position of all those red dots,
uh, indicate the places with the
highest geothermal potential in
the areas with the blue dots are
places where it's, it's
relatively low. It just shows
that in New Mexico there you can
have a place where you have a
geothermal system and then right
next to it, it's it's not
economic
Um, if you're developing, uh,
traditional hydrothermal
systems, but as Tom noted with
these advanced systems, if you
drill deep enough, you can find
geothermal resources.
Now, one thing that we're
starting to notice if you look
at the the picture on the right
of the temperature of the
location of temperature depth
data in our state.
uh, you'll notice that there are
uh places, uh, especially down
by Las Cruces where a lot of
exploration took place back in
the 70s, 80s, and 90s, but the
trick is when they drilled their
wells, they only drilled them
down to about
maybe
200 m, which is 600 ft.
And so for these more advanced
systems, uh, and, and to really
be able to install them and,
and, and uh uh at
in a way that is not too risky.
We need to know more about our
subsurface.
and
so recently,
at the behest of uh Mnerd
secretary Kinderine
um
there's a group of us at New
Mexico Tech in an in an outfit
called EFI who have put together
a comprehensive energy
transition strategy.
and
uh New Mex the the Bureau of
Geology was responsible for
identifying data gaps and
research needs for geothermal
development, and here's a list
of some of the things that we're
going to be working on in the
coming year or two.
and one of the biggest things is
we don't really understand the
subsurface of the Rio Grande
Rift basins because there's been
little oil and gas development,
and there's very little in the
way of of deep well information
and the way you get at that
information is uh by uh
utilizing a couple of different
um geophysical techniques,
seismic and magnetotellurics,
and it turns out that this lack
of subsurface control is also
important in characterizing
aquifers, and I, my colleague
Stacy Timmins will talk more
about that in the next session.
We've also come to understand
that there's really not much
information about who installs
ground source heat pumps in this
state and how many there are. So
I've just put my uh young
associate Pooja Shivam in charge
of that particular task.
um, also getting uh uh
um
understanding how much water is
used, uh, and then there were, I
mentioned that the two chapters
that were written by the New
Mexico state folks have some
interesting ideas about trying
to match, uh, heat producing or
heat using industries with
geothermal resources.
and I think this is my last
slide. Uh, we are one of the big
things that we have come to
understand is that we, uh,
people in the oil and gas
industry can easily transition
their skills to uh geothermal,
so we have worked with our
petroleum engineering department
at New Mexico Tech to put
together a geothermal
certificate program, uh, trying
to teach folks how to
drill deep
wells and how to manage deep
reservoirs.
and now I'm done.
Good
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, for having me
here today. I really appreciate
this opportunity. Uh, my name is
Jackson Grimes. I'm the director
of global engagement at Project
Interspace and through that role
I find myself often talking to
folks in countries such as
India, Tanzania, Colombia about
the opportunities that those
regions have for geothermal, but
I'm incredibly honored to be
here in New Mexico today because
I don't think there's anywhere
on the planet better positioned
to help push the geothermal
industry forward than here in
the state of New Mexico.
So just a little bit about
Project Interspace first, um,
we're a 501c3. We're working to
drive geothermal across the
globe, um, our team, we're a
multipodiciary,
multi-disciplinary group of
geoscientists, engineers,
policy, finance, data analysts,
um, all coming together to fill
in the missing pieces that the
geothermal industry has had for
so long and what separates us
from most other geothermal
groups is that we believe that
in order to achieve massive
growth of the sector
we need to leverage the oil and
gas infrastructure, workforce,
and expertise and help build
this industry into the massive,
uh, opportunity it really is,
and we began to engage here in
New Mexico with the geothermal
ecosystem back in 2023, which
was to build the future of
geothermal report, which was an
absolute pleasure to work on and
really some incredible findings
within that.
So just wanna give you an
overview of some of the
initiatives that we have, uh,
the first one that we launched
was our Geomap tool. This was a,
um, multi-institutional project.
We are partnered with Google
Earth on that, but also 85
different research institutions
from around the world brings
together hundreds of layers of
surface and subsurface data to
imply where geothermal resources
are found. Um, this data was
actually adopted by the
International Energy Agency in
their most recent Future of
geothermal report, which, uh,
they found that
the technical capacity of
geothermal on the planet could
supply electricity demand 140
times over what our current
demand is, and then even more
for heat use.
Other initiatives that we're
working on are the geothermal
energy from oil and gas
demonstrated engineering funds
that we received from the
Department of Energy. We're
partners with the Society of
Petroleum Engineers on that and
about 200 different subject
matter experts, um, the state of
New Mexico has been great in
supporting us in some of those,
uh, working groups.
folks from New Mexico Tech, um,
and UNM as well and so within
that we've been looking at how
to transfer not only policies,
but training opportunities for
people in oil and gas to begin
to work in geothermal, and those
reports will be published later
this year. Uh, we also host
these events called geothermal
House, which are an opportunity
for people to come and
experience what geothermal looks
like. It's very different than
solar and wind in that you can
see the sun, you can feel
the wind, where geothermal being
a subsurface resource, you
really need to take that extra
step to educate stakeholders and
people across many different
communities, and we would love
to host one in New Mexico soon.
um, and then the last initiative
I want to bring uh to this
committee's attention is our
ecosystem development work and
this is what the future of
geothermal reports are it's that
ecosystem development and
physical form. So far we've
published 3 of these, one for
Texas, Pennsylvania, and
proudly, most recently for the
state of New Mexico and between
working on all three of those
projects, I really do believe
that New Mexico is above and
beyond the place that the future
of geothermal is gonna take
place.
And one of the big headlines
from that report was that no
other state combined such
favorable geology, oil and gas
expertise, political will, and
raw potential, as does the land
of enchantment, and that's what
I alluded to at the beginning of
my conversation here and saying
that I think this is the place
where this industry can grow and
really find a home, um, the
thing in there that is unique to
me is the political will. You
find hot rocks all over the
world. You find oil and gas in a
lot of places, but New Mexico
has done a fantastic job of
creating a political
environment and uh policy
environment where companies like
XGS want to come and develop
projects and I know a few other
startups that are really anxious
to have some.
developments such as that. So,
um, a little more about the
reports, the, the actual data
analysis showed that the state
has 163 gigawatts of technical
generation capacity today in the
future, that number goes up to
600 and the difference between
those numbers is drilling to 5
kilometers versus 8, and if the
state was able to produce even 2
or 3% of that 163 gigawatts. You
could see thousands of
construction jobs, uh, temporary
construction jobs, thousands of
indirect or induced jobs and
then hundreds of permanent
operation and maintenance jobs
at these facilities.
um, utilizing New Mexico's oil
and gas workforce, uh, for
drilling operations and
construction, you know, it's a
very low barrier entry point for
the workforce that exists here
in the state, uh, as Mr. Solomon
said, there's a massive
percentage of those skills that
directly transfer to geothermal
within that geode initiative
we've found that there's already
uh training opportunities that
can transition in oil and gas
expert to a geothermal expert in
a matter of weeks, uh, which is
fantastic when you think about
the opportunity for transition.
Um, the ready-made supply chain
of service providers in the
state. The state has hundreds of
oil rigs that could be
transitioned to geothermal rigs
and the fact that they exist
here really reduces the cost of
bringing them to the, the areas
where geothermal exists and so
that already puts this state at
a competitive advantage to other
states in the West, um, it also
has the ability to stabilize
local economies through this
reskilling and considering that
uh a report came out by Ernest
and Young saying about 30 to 60%
of oil and gas
jobs by 2050 may be automated.
The geothermal industry really
has the opportunity to welcome
those people into the workforce
and give them long-term career
pathways to help the the energy
sector here grow.
Um, so we, there is a policy
chapter in the report. It had
about 8, 15 different
recommendations within that. I
wanna take a moment to say I'm
here representing our C3 group.
We do have a sister, uh, C4
organization Interspace Action,
where I would love to talk with
to anyone interested about more
specific legislative topics
within this, but the five big
buckets that we narrowed those
down to were creating clear
pathways in legal and regulatory
certainty for the industry,
creating the conditions that
will accelerate geothermal
production in New Mexico,
expanding the state incentives
that already exist, uh,
catalyzing development of
geothermal heating and cooling,
and then expand educational
programs for energy workers and
the public.
and just a few of the near term
policy priorities that were
listed within that that I want
to share with you all is, um,
the potential to set a 5
gigawatt goal across the state.
Um, this would help to get the
last mile in New Mexico's 2045
clean electricity goals, uh, as
mentioned, there's massive
resource here and I think 5
gigawatts is absolutely
achievable
Um, prioritizing the
geothermal within the state loan
programs would help to project,
uh, protecting the fragile
ecosystems that are here because
you can create more geothermal
power per square foot with less
water than any other renewable
resource that exists, which is
just pretty incredible and the
allowing utilities to build, own
and operate thermal energy
networks. This was really
exciting because there was
already at such a project like
this in Espinola at their city
hall, and they've reported
saving 4
200 $0 a year on heating and
cooling costs. So if you imagine
every city hall in the state or
every government building or
university building,
transitioning to that, you
really see the savings begin to
stack up.
and so the last one I want to
talk about a little bit further
is expanding the geothermal
production tax credit to match
the previous solar production
tax credit terms.
and so within that, the, the
current incentive and balance
that exists, the solar PTC
granted up to 4 cents per
kilowatt hour over 10 years,
capping out at $8 million per
project, and that ended in 2024.
The geothermal PTC that was
passed in 2024 offers a flat 1.5
cents kilowatt per hour and it's
capped at 5 million across all
geothermal projects, so
excuse me
with the impact of that is that
one solar project had the
potential to earn more than all
geothermal projects combined,
meaning that it left people not
so sure about coming to invest
in the state and to build
geothermal projects here. Um
the consequences of
incentivizing geothermal, slower
development, um, investors
prioritize solar and the
interesting thing about that is
within New Mexico, the potential
for geothermal is 15 times the
current grid demand, so there's
truly a resource here that could
fuel and fund a lot of growth in
the state, not only by keeping
people here working in these
jobs but also attracting people
to come learn how to develop
projects in New Mexico and even
exporting
your expertise to other places
The workforce benefits I've
already mentioned creating local
jobs and balancing their
intermittency of other
renewables with geothermal, um,
obviously, the MAXGS project has
demonstrated that there's,
there's industry buy-in and
desire.
and
yes,
so, lastly, the, the missed
opportunity industrial heat. So
the current production tax
credit only applies to
electricity, direct, uh, use
heat is not included in that,
which is something that could be
utilized by a lot of the rural
industries that exist in New
Mexico and also those within
city centers, but it, it's
incredible to think about how
many industries use um a fuel
stock that they
they produce and then burn it
for heat, where with geothermal,
you can create the heat on site
and deliver it on site, and
greatly increase efficiency
within that.
supply chain
Uh, and so for the opportunities
in this upcoming session next
year is to look at matching the
geothermal PTC to solar's
previous, um, tiered structure.
The solar incentives worked. The
the utility scale solar grew 4
times in the seven years that
that tax credit existed and I
think that geothermal, you could
see that number increase.
you know, to 8 or 10 times. Um,
lifting the annual cap to
support multiple geothermal
projects. This will help get
the, the geothermal
investment rolling
and it can you can deliver that
with the parity and policy
alignment, and be sure, I hope
to include direct use heat in
that eligibility and uh direct
funding from the geothermal
project Development Fund and
geothermal project revolving
Loan Fund toward Clean
industrial heat projects, um,
just one example that I really
like from that is in Chavez
County where the nation's, I
think maybe even the world's
largest mozzarella production
facility is dairy,
pasteurization is relatively low
heat
and therefore this giant um
center could pivot to using 100%
geothermal and become even
closer to the state's net zero
goals, so that concludes it for
me and thank you for your time,
Madam Chair and members of this
committee. Thank you,
presenters. Do we have any
questions from the committee?
Representative Royval Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Chair. This is
really exciting for me to hear
our first uh formal report after
our most recent passage of
legislation and thank you all
for having helped make this
work. Um, I wish I can, well,
I'm, I'm looking forward to
enticing my grandsons, um, to
New Mexico because they were
sold on geothermal technology
and research, and they want to
study it more. I couldn't do
that with their daddy.
who I tried to entice because
he's a film and entertainment.
producer to come and join the
film industry here. So I'm
hoping my grandsons will come.
But anyway, that was just a a
quick sideline because they went
to the fair and they saw how
geothermal was operational. Um,
for those, Madam Chair, that
are, uh, concerned about effects
of the environment and
contamination of water. I wanted
to just ask for further clarity
how geothermal, um, will, what
measures
are in place to minimize water
usage and prevent contamination
of local groundwater, um, in
order to, well, in, in order to
prevent the contamination of
local groundwater while you're
doing geothermal drilling.
That's one part of the question.
And then what is the expected
impact of geothermal development
on local ecosystems, including
wildlife habitats, um, plant
biodiversity, some of these
questions
came up uh after hearing the
debates on the floor and in
committee. So I wonder if
whomever would like to address
those concerns, and I have one
other question after. Thank you.
In, in terms of the protection
of groundwater, uh, most
geothermal wells
have are, are, um
they have to meet the standards
of oil and gas wells, and so
those those casing, you know,
casing through the aquifers and
so on applies to geothermal
wells also
and um and then in terms of uh
water use.
when uh there's a
outfit in Utah called Fervo, who
are in the process of exploring
using these engineered
geothermal systems.
and they've done run some
experiments and the way those
work is you have uh an injection
well and a production well and
you connect the two with
fractures.
And um because the, the
fractures are kind of going off
in, in all kinds of different
directions. Some of the water
gets trapped in the underground
and and doesn't come back up to
the power plant. So you inject
some water, uh, moves of the
fractures, heats up, comes back
up to the plant, and they,
they're losing about 10%
Now,
with XGS's system.
it, it does use water.
You have to charge the system,
right? Once, no. Oh, you can use
another chemical and you
Um,
Madam Chair, members, I'll, I'll
take down since it was coming in
my direction, um, so our
technology does require water
during drilling and
we would expect to be held to a
high permitting standard um for
that activity and then
uh, the wells that are installed
downhole are fully cased and
once the uh the working fluid is
filled inside of the well, um,
and, in our current technology
that is water, it's fully sealed
and doesn't have to be recharged
after that, but it does need to
be filled once.
And and then uh in in terms of
footprint of a geothermal plant
compared to coal-fired fire
fired power plant, uh, boy, what
was it? It's a, it's like 0.3%
of a, it's, it's in the, it's in
the future of geother report,
uh, of a what a coal-fired power
plant is, um, so that, that
really minimizes the
impact.
um
and I think, you know, a lot of
power plants now are, are binary
power plants and you know, back
in the the day when they were
using steam
there would be some water you'd
have to do some uh cooling of it
by using water and that that is
eliminated to a large degree by
the binary power plants because
the way they cool them is air
cooled. They have these big huge
fans. Yeah, there's some, there
were some pictures of the
lightning dock power plant, uh,
in some of the previous slides
and I, I don't know if you know
this, but there were these kind
of conical shaped things that
the very top of the plant. Those
are huge fans that are that help
with the cooling.
Did that answer
it, it, it does. We can go on
into a lot more detail, but
that's not, this was just a
general question to kind of
capture, um, some mitigation
thereof.
So another question that
actually just now came in from
someone listening is, um, and,
and it's one also that came up.
I can't remember what year we
were, we've been doing this for
quite a few years, so I don't
remember what year, and I'm not
sure, um, but anyway, how are
the emissions from geotherm
al plants, including non
- con den s able gasses like
hydrogen sulfide, being
monitored and controlled, and I
remember the question and I
remember saying deferring to
somebody because I was not the
expert on that, but could you
answer that? And then the final
just tie in because there is a
concern, um, from that came up
post uh passage of bills from
various environmental groups and
community groups and in and our
tribal um
uh, indigenous groups around
the, the state, um, about being
kept in the loop and
continuously engaged as these
processes, um, evolve. Can you
just address how that will, I
think that would would be for
Tom and then I don't know who
else can answer that scientific
question that I have no idea.
Thank you.
And for the panel, if you could
keep your answers brief.
Uh,
Madam Chair and committee,
um.
so the these non-condensable
gasses are more associated with
volcanic systems
um, and most of the geothermal
systems in New Mexico outside of
the uh Himas Mountains are
gravity driven, so you don't you
don't get as many gasses, but in
places where there are gasses,
when um in those binary power
plants, the, the geothermal
water, the water is injected, it
heats up, it comes back out and
then it goes uh up to the
surface and there's a he
at exchanger and then there's a
separate loop that's got an uh
uh an organic material in it
that has a lower boiling point
than water, and, and, and, and
that's what drives the turbine,
the, the geothermal fluids uh
they go in, they go get, they
get heated up, they come back
out while they're at the surface
they stay in a pipe. Gases too.
Thank you
And um, Madam Chair, um,
Representative Ramon Capero, an
answer to your question about,
uh, I think it was uh keeping
the Native American community in
a loop, um, certainly pardon me,
and other all all communities in
general.
Um, that's a, that's a big task.
Big, big state, um, but
certainly, um, you know, that's
the intent, uh, and the
geothermal grant and loan
program that um we passed, uh,
with your help.
um, is open to all, uh,
municipalities in the state as
well as uh tribes, nations, and
pueblos, state universities, and
we really encourage um those
entities if they believe there's
a geothermal resource available,
um, in their particular location
to one, download the future of
geothermal in New Mexico report
which will answer a lot of those
questions about, you know
is there a developable
geothermal resource where
they're located, uh, and then to
apply for a grant or a loan, um,
and, uh, do the, you know, do
the study, uh, as the pueblo of
Zia and the OK Owing game
Pueblos have already started to
do. And so those opportunities
are there. We have had also 3
different geothermal workshops
um inviting people statewide
and we have had a
representatives from the Native
American community
representative in both of those,
um, sovereign energy in uh is
one that I can think of. What
group is Jeff Attenia with? I
think he's just he's he's just
a, he's a private entity. Yeah,
so, um
you know, the we have to the
extent that, you know, as we
developed this program and got
it off the ground, we have been
really trying to do that that
out outreach further work is
necessary. And I think one of
the things that we'd really like
to see going forward is to begin
to market this opportunity to
develop geothermal resources
throughout the state and outside
the state and have people take
advantage of
that and when the rulemaking is
done for applying for geothermal
grants and loans before the end
of this year. Um, really want to
start pushing that out and
advertise it to people, but that
report is available online. They
can answer. I'm sorry, you
there. Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you. I was trying to give
the wrap up signal that he
wasn't looking my way. Thank
you, thank you, Madam Chair.
That was it.
Uh, and then we have 3 more
representatives and Senator
Sherra Murphy and Lu Han, if you
could get straight to your
question and help us get back on
track, uh, Senator share. Thank
you, Madam Chair. So
geothermal's not new technology,
uh.
had a hole in the ground in Las
Cruces in 1970 something.
Why now is it, what changed? Why
is now we want to make it a
a big deal we did then, but what
changed? Why can't we now? I can
answer that, but do you, you say
Jackson, yeah
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, um, Senator Sher. So
geothermal technologies have
been around for over 100 years
and what has happened is that as
technology has advanced and
we've been able to learn from
what's going on in the oil and
gas sector is that these
technologies can now be applied
to new geologies and
geographies. For the past 100
years, geothermal was focused in
places like Iceland, Indonesia,
New Zealand, where you had to
have these volcanic systems that
also had water in the
subsurface. Now New Mexico, well
endowed with this hot rock
hot dry rock
you can create those holes in
the ground like XGS is going to
be doing and creating that
electricity much more
efficiently than it was ever
feasible in the past and so that
emerging technology that's
development that's taking place
and really the United States is
leading the way in this, and
that's why New Mexico is so well
positioned to continue to lead
the sector forward is you have
the hot rock, you have the oil
and gas industry and expertise
that's here and you have folks
like yourselves who are trying
to advance this and so there's
just
never been a better time for
geothermal, uh, both because of
climate issues but also of a
federal administration that's
very pro geothermal, um, Chris
Wright and his previous role, he
was actually an investor in
fervo and helped push that um
group to being one of the
leaders in next generation
geothermal technology, so the
time is now for a lot of
different reasons, but mostly
driven by techno technological
advances.
So Madam Chair, so oil and gas
is going to save the environment
because of their technology.
Thank you.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, yes, that is the
thesis of Project Interspace,
and that's what really sets us
apart from a lot of groups.
Thank you.
That's not how I hear it, um.
Representative Murphy, welcome.
Thank you very much.
Now, can you hear me? OK, great,
thank you.
Um
so I am in the oil and gas
industry and um also I'm very
familiar and also very
supportive of geothermal. um, I
think anyone that looks at the
energy portfolio knows that
we're gonna need all the energy
we can get from whatever sources
and having homegrown geothermal
here in New Mexico makes a lot
of sense to me, um, back in my
younger days, I was somewhat
familiar, actually very familiar
with the hot dry Rock program at
Los Alamos National Laboratory
and for the purposes of the
committee, um, I think it
' s fairly well in um
demonstrated or, or, or outlined
in here, but what you do is you
drill two wells. One well
becomes, and I'm gonna make a
statement if I get this wrong,
you can jump in and say, no,
you're wrong. One well is
basically you
inject water down, it gets down
to a very hot area of the earth.
That water then is pulled out of
another well. The thing that it
relies on is the conductivity of
the fractures between those two
wells and back to your point,
you're gonna feel some of those
fractures up. They'll probably
stay filled and so you're gonna
have some loss uh in the cycle,
but not much.
Generally, uh OK, heads are
nodding, so I think I've, I got
that part. On the, on the
technical and the mechanic side
of it, um, the one thing, who
permits uh geothermal now is
that OCD?
Inert, OK, great. And so there
is a permitting process in place
and I guess what I'm trying to
get to are, are, are the, um,
what are some of the obstacles
to getting this going? Is there
anything on the regulatory side
that this body can help address.
Uh, one of the things that, that
also occurs to me is on the
legislative side. This past
session we passed a fairly
comprehensive bill that had been
settled an ongoing dispute for
decades over who owns poor space
um, for and that was decided
that the surface owner, so the
question is who does own the
heat? Who owns the rights to do
this? Is this the surface owner,
the mineral estate, or who?
Um, Madam Chair, um, uh,
Representative Murphy, thank you
very much for the question. Um,
yes, there are, uh, as, as
Jackson talked about 15
legislative and policy topics
that we think would help the
industry.
um, the specific question you
ask about who owns the heat, it
is the contention of Mnerd and
their legal office that it it's
basically the mineral owner, uh,
currently, and so, uh, once the
owner of the mineral rights is
established, that's the owner of
the heat in that particular
area. Um, in Texas, they have
passed some legislation,
clarifying that it's actually
the surface owner, uh, which I
think makes it more simple in
some
ways, um, we haven't chosen to
tackle that particular topic
yet, but it is under active
discussion
within the working group whether
we need to go down that path,
and um we actually it was a
topic in our last meeting last
week. And um we're on the bubble
with it, uh, may need to do that
in the near term, but not yet,
but it's, it's it's an active
question. Thank you very much.
So I guess part of the, uh,
Madam Chair and, and panel,
pardon me, um, would be, would,
would existing mineral leases
then cover this or we are we
talking about a new definition
of mineral.
or do we know
It's the existing, uh, the
existing definitions covered.
OK. Um, what is Nevada done?
You, Texas, uh, Madam Chair and
panel, uh, Texas sounds like
they're leaning towards the
surface ownership internally
here in the Mexico Mineral
ownership, which in many cases
would put it what, owned by the
feds or the state, given, given
the land ownership has Nevada
addressed this in any way
because I know they've had an
active program.
I will say that Nevada has been
moving forward in a lot of
different ways with geothermal,
but I was just there at the
University of Nevada Reno for a
meeting last week and one of the
challenges that they've been
having is that there are so many
different permitting bodies in
Nevada on this topic that it has
delayed projects to the point
where even though they received
federal funding to do this work,
they haven't been able to move
through their permitting process
and the timeline given and
therefore have lost those funds
from the federal government to
do such projects and so whatever
approach the state of New Mexico
decides to take, I think having
very clear, quick pathways to
getting those permits released
will mean that projects will
stop trying to push into those
other states and start realizing
the potential here.
Thank you very much, and I'll,
um, conclude with one last
question, Madam Chair and panel.
Um,
how would you envision that this
be taxed and this is, this is
the reason I'm asking the
question. There's a number
there's, there's been a policy
debate about sort of what
happens uh assuming oil and gas
production drops dramatically in
the next 30 years. We're going
to have a real revenue issue in
this state and we're as a body
gonna be looking for places
to try to get that that revenue.
So the other states tax this on
a
kilowatt hour basis or some sort
of electrical measurement as
it's outputted or is there no
really no tax regime sort of
identified at this point.
There's royalties associated
with it. Yeah, I, I'm not, uh,
Madam Chair, um, representative,
I'm not sure that we know the
answers to those, but, uh,
Sherry, do you want to make a
stab at it? Well, well, in the
you
uh, in the future of geothermal
report there's discussions of,
of royalties that that there
wasn't really specific
discussions of
taxes and I, I actually had a
question for you, uh,
Representative Murphy, um, you,
you mentioned the poor space uh
rule
uh,
would it have any applicability
to geothermal?
Somebody I was talking to last
week thought it might.
I can see where an argument
could be made. I'm, I'm a
geologist, not a lawyer, but,
but my thinking is that you're
utilizing that po space as
whether it be a fracture or
naturally connected pore space
as a conduit. So it'd be
essentially a natural pipeline,
right? And so, um, that then
would, would, in my mind be
owned by the surface owner.
But we just got to get rid of
that, that definition of
geothermal as a mineral.
you could it be that simple? I
don't know. It could be that
simple, I think, um, so.
um, Madam Chair, members, if I
could jump in on just a couple
of points that were raised, um,
number one, just from a pure
business standpoint, it's always
preferable for us if we have the
whatever the geothermal heat
resource is run with the surface
because then you don't run into
as many issues where, um, you
know, the minerals are severed
from the surface and you gotta
figure out how to put those
pieces of the puzzle back
together. That's just a
preference. I'm not saying it
needs to be a requirement, but
that's, that's something that we
look at, um, also, uh,
Representative Murphy gave, you
gave a great description, I
think of uh a category of
geothermal called enhanced
geothermal where you have
injection well, production well
in separate locations with the
fractures in between.
Just wanted to highlight again
that the difference with XGS is
technology is that those two
actually are in the same pipe,
uh, and it's fully case, so the,
the working fluid never comes
into contact with the rock
because it's it's fully
contained in there and then we
have a special cement outside
the well casing that's designed
to draw more heat in into the
pipe.
Uh, so just a clarification
there, that's perfect
description of, of EGS, um, and
then lastly on the question that
was raised earlier about why now
and why is geothermal having its
moments, so to speak, I think,
um, the points that were made
about, you know, the technology
advancements, you know,
borrowing a lot of that
expertise from oil and gas on
things like drilling and and
fracking in the, in the case of
EGS, uh, has definitely played a
role in that and then the other
role is just to demand
growth in the electricity space,
uh, from the electrification of
the country that's coming from,
you know, a lot of different
drivers, but I think, you know,
um
coming from largely a solar
background myself, uh, solar and
wind and other renewables can
play a role in providing that
intermittent cheap energy to
kind of get things rolling, but
eventually you need to have
actual base load power to supply
these types of needs and so, um,
that's the role that geothermal,
I think, can come in and play as
an alternative to nuclear um and
as well as coal and gas in some
cases. Mr. Stevens.
Uh
Be.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'll
just be really quick and, and
just to the point of last point
made of now is the time for
geothermal as a renewable energy
source that is dispatchable,
correct and to put it in some
simpler terms, I think that this
is the well worth the investment
that we're making in New Mexico,
as you, as we all heard that we
are getting the thumbs up from
the federal government and we're
seeing neighboring states where
it's been, it's difficult for
them to um
to take the, the advancements in
this type of technology for for
the reasons stated in others.
What I would say is that we need
to work together to really
streamline this because as a
dispatchable renewable energy
source. It is, it is, um
it is imperative that we really
focus in and kind of stream and
streamline this not kind of, but
really streamline what we're
doing here. Um, we do have the
technology, we have the
advancements made from oil and
gas. That's basically all we are
saying is those are
technological advancements that
we are, um, we are taking
advantage of to move into this
other type of energy source. And
um
that's, that's, that's just New
Mexico and we are, you know, we
are in an energy state and I
think that taking advantage of
that and doing all we can for
this is, is really um
is us doing our due diligence,
um, the, the amount of, um, need
for, um, electricity now and in
the near future is
is incredible
Um, so it can also be, and we
really haven't dived into how we
can take advantage of that type
of um economic development and,
and where the challenges are
there, what we're already doing,
Madam Chair, I just wanted to
make sure that we are, you know,
keeping the um
the forward vision of what this
does for our state, but not just
for our state, but this can be
used into other states as well.
Um, we are fortunate here in New
Mexico for, like I said, what we
have in place already. And
moving into the future, what's,
what, uh, geothermal can do and
mean for um a collaborative
effort with other Western states
is probably another, another
day for a conversation, but this
is definitely part of the
conversation. So thank you all
for being here. Um, let's
continue this conversation. I, I
look forward to knowing where
those challenges are, where the
next steps are in policy and
really with those investments
that we continue, we need to
continue to make. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative, and
thank you, panel for helping us
to advance the conversation on
clean energy opportunities in
New Mexico and its impact on
economic development. Um, our
next presentation is from Stacy
Timmins, associate Director of
Hydrology programs at the Bureau
of
Geology and Mineral Resources on
Aqua fur mapping and monitoring
efforts.
Thank you.
Welcome. Good afternoon, uh,
Madam Chair and committee
members, it's a real pleasure to
be here. I'm Stacy Timmons.
I'm the associate director for
Hydrogeology Programs, which
I'll explain more about here in
a moment. Um, I just want to say
that this is a real honor to be
here for this group, um, as I
think, uh, economic development
really depends on having
certainty of our water
resources, uh, and in some areas
here in New Mexico, there is
great uncertainty and in other
areas we have some good
information about our
groundwater resources in
particular, um, and we are doing
a lot of work to improve that,
um, at the Bureau of Geology.
So, um, there are packets going
around. I will jump right in and
try to move quickly through, um,
for background real quickly and
refresher perhaps for many of
you, the Bureau of Geology is
the state Geologic survey where
non-regulatory. We are here to
provide science and research for
the state of New Mexico, um, and
we've been doing this since 1927
as part of New Mexico Tech.
um, we have a variety of
different categories of research
that we work on, um, some that
you just heard about, including
our geothermal program and we do
collaborate a lot with them
related to our water resource
program as well. Um, geologic
mapping and geologic hazards.
Uh, we have a mineral resource
group which is uh right now
heavily focused on critical
minerals. Um, we have
world-renowned laboratory
resources, um, to do everything
from water analysis to um dating
of rocks.
outreach and education is a big
component of our, uh, mission,
and of course, uh, what I'm here
to talk to you about today is
some of our hedrogeology and
water resource programs, um,
moving on to the slide 3, and
I'm sorry, the numbers are very
tiny and green in the right hand
corner of the slides, uh, but
we're on slide 3. I just want to
highlight, oh, sorry, let me
advance.
Slide 3 on the, um, packet, the
aquifer mapping program is
really what I'm here talking
about today. Our main purpose is
to characterize the quantity,
quality, and distribution of our
groundwater here in New Mexico,
using a variety of techniques
that I'll talk in detail about
somewhat today and, um, also we
maintain a groundwater level
monitoring network.
The water data initiative was
kind of a spinoff from the work
that we do on aquifers where we
realize it's really hard to get
to water data housed within many
of our state agencies as well as
federal and local data
providers. So in 2019, um, the
state legislature enacted the
Water Data Act, and our agency
is named as the convening
agency, working with several
state agencies to improve how
water data are accessed.
Um, and then our newest program
is the Water Education program.
That is a program that is for
you, for legislators, for staff
of state agencies and federal
agencies, people in water
decision making roles. Um, our
goal there is really to increase
the awareness and education on a
variety of critical water issues
here in New Mexico. Um, we try
to get you out in the field and
see some of these issues
firsthand, um, as well as
providing background content in
classroom style, uh,
presentations.
Um, and this is a growing
program, uh, this year we're
adding some new topics around
tribal water issues, um, as well
as increasing just the general
public education through funding
that we have this year from the
Water Foundation.
OK.
slide 4
um
if you guys have seen my talks,
I always have to stick a geology
map of New Mexico in, so you
guys get 2 today. Um, mainly I,
I bring this up just to
highlight that complexity that
we have in the subsurface for
New Mexico, um, and that is
related to, um, how hard it is
to actually give you all the
detailed answers that you want
about our groundwater and our
aquifers. Um, so just for some
of the basics, um, the mental
picture that I want you to have
is what our aquifers look like
is it's actually a pile of rocks
with some
water within it. It's not a big
lake underground, as some people
have visualized in the AI world.
Um, so, unlike the rivers and
lakes, groundwater is very
hidden and um hard to make some
of those quantification
estimates that we have asked of
us. The groundwater changes more
slowly than it does on the
surface. So sometimes it takes a
lot of time to really notice the
impacts that we're having on it.
Um, recharge, which is adding
the water back into the aquifer
happens much slower than it does
for us to take the water out.
Um, and that's, uh, especially
true here in New Mexico, where
we have um
an arid state and less surface
water than many others uh around
us.
Um, some of the deeper
formations in the subsurface of
New Mexico as well as anywhere,
are just generally tighter. So
when we talk about um exploring
some of our deep potential
aquifers just because you have
more rocks sitting on top of it.
It can also make that formation
a bit tighter and harder to get
to the water, and the water
moves more slowly through it. So
it will be, um, interacting with
Iraq and therefore picking up
more minerals. So some of that
deeper water is potentially
salty, um, and have other
interesting
contaminants
Um, I'll talk a little bit more
about that here in a future
slide. I just wanted to bring up
some work that our agency did on
slide 5. related to the impacts
of climate change and how that's
hitting us in terms of our
water. Um, uh, publication was
put out and I know it's been
distributed at the legislature a
few times, and if any of you
would like a hard copy of this
production, um, it is, I can
make it available to you and my
email address is in several
places on the slides here. So
shoot me an email and we'll make
sure you get a copy of that. But
basically, um, this work was
funded by the Interstate Stream
Commission in preparation for
the state water planning effort,
um, and it pulled together
research from a variety of state
and federal experts in the
water, uh, in in New Mexico
specifically, uh, and summarize
a lot of the research that's
been done here in the Southwest.
Uh, some of the big outcomes
from this are highlighting that
uh average temperatures here in
New Mexico are increasing on
the order of 5 to 7 °F. Over the
next 50 years, and that brings
it, uh, brings with it, uh,
increasing aridity. The air is
taking up more of the water.
That's naturally available.
That creates an effect of 25 to
30% reduced surface water flow,
so our rivers and our arroyos
and our surface water bodies
have less water in them because
of this increased temperature
and increased aridity, and that
makes it so that we have an
increased demand and more use of
our groundwater. We're going to
turn to that wind surface water
is not available. Um, and
increasing wildfire is a direct
effect of the warming
temperature effect.
Um, slide 6
highlights a, a longer list of
um outcomes from this report.
So, um, I don't want to read
through all of these. I just
want to leave them with you and
kind of um focus on how this
affects groundwater in
particular. If you look at the
figure on the um slide here, uh,
our estimate is that about 95
million acre feet of water is
received in New Mexico as
precipitation. Um, most of that
leaves the state in the form of
transpiration
plants taking up the, the water
and it going into the atmosphere
as well as soil evaporation. So
that's the 75 million acre feet
and 17 million acre feet going
out.
And then the water that we have
to work with is generally
included in the runoff value,
which is 1.5 million acre feet.
That's the water that runs off
of the mountains and into our
streams and arroyos. Uh, and
then the recharge amount, that's
how much goes in is soaked into
the ground. So only 1.7 million
acre feet for that. And so when
we think about that in terms of
the climate impacts that are
coming, um, these, uh, numbers
that are leaving are getting
bigger, and the numbers that are
going into the ground or into
our
water resource availability is
getting smaller. So this whole
picture changes a little bit
more dramatically as we go
forward.
Um,
and I think, uh, that's the main
point I wanted to make on that
slide. It is depressing and I'd
like to move on to happier
topics, perhaps. Um, so the, uh,
next slide is just highlighting
our aquifer mapping program, um,
just as a reminder of what we
do, we've started in 2006
officially and our funding has
been combined, um, state funding
with a lot of different
philanthropic grants, uh, uh,
grants and contracts
that we have, um, and I'll talk
a bit more about that portfolio
at the very end. Um, and just to
kind of highlight the complexity
of the geology of New Mexico,
um, if you were, uh, just
looking at the map, you can see
all of these different colors.
The different colors represent
different rock types which have
different hydrologic properties
that determine how the water
moves through the rocks, as well
as the kind of chemistry of that
water as it's sitting in those
rocks. Um, and all of that is,
uh, you can see on the map a lot
of
different black lines. Those are
faults that have disrupted or
broken up the um the different
aquifers or rock units, um, and
then that is also uh intersected
with a bunch of volcanic events,
so you can see the hot pink and
bright red dots on that geologic
map. Those are volcanic
volcanic, uh, centers that are,
uh, in fact, affecting our
subsurface and potentially our
water resources as well in those
areas. Um, if you were to slice
across the southern half,
southern very southern
port ion of New Mexico along
that red line that's on the map.
Um, there's a cartoon at the
very bottom, that's a cross
section looking through New
Mexico from that southern slice.
And so you can see how um how
disrupted the subsurfaces. This
is not a flat and simple layer
cake, uh, geology and simple
aquifer system to put together.
So we have our work cut out for
us and we've been, um,
collecting a lot of data to try
to piece together what our um
groundwater resources uh look
like.
Moving on to slide 8. The um
state's 50-year water action
plan has been put out there and
um the one of the highlights of
this piece around new water
supplies is really tasking our
agency, the Bureau of Geology,
to um improve some of the
groundwater mapping and
monitoring efforts and
specifically in this uh water
action plan, it asks us that
once funding is available to
work on characterizing all the
major and minor aquifers of the
state, both the fresh and the
brackish water.
to characterize the major
aquifers specifically by 2032
and to build a groundwater
monitoring network with at least
100 new dedicated monitoring
wells by the year 2037. So we're
taking this seriously and
working to um build the funding
and work the projects that need
to happen to get this done.
Um, and I think that this
50-year water action plan really
highlights two of the most um uh
some of the biggest challenges
we have here on groundwater and
Amanda's slide 9. The first of
those two challenges is that
many of our aquifers, as I've
alluded to, haven't been fully
characterized. Um, you can look
at the map on the right-hand
side of the slide. Um, you can
see areas where we have some
information about our aquifers,
not entirely characterized in
all of those, but, um, the areas
in gray have um historic
information and the areas in
green
are places where we've been
actively working in the past
year.
Um, and to me, a complete
aquifer map really needs to
include these 4 bullet points,
the it needs to really have a
good description of the geologic
and hydrogeologic units so that
we understand how the water will
move through those materials and
what the difference, um, in
chemistry will be for that. What
the depth to groundwater is
currently, so we have to make
measurements to know where that
is. Um, where the boundaries of
the aquifers are. So what are
the margins of it? How does it
look in the subsurface, um, what
faults or other subsurface
features might be affecting our
aquifers and also by knowing the
boundaries, we can also, uh,
make more informed, um
kind of pictures of what the
recharge is looking like for
those areas. And then water
quality characteristics are
really important, especially if
we're thinking about brackish
water potential in New Mexico.
So those are the four things
that a complete aquifer map, uh,
includes, and the little image
on the bottom of that is just a
highlight of some of the work
that we've done on the
Albuquerque region where we were
working to identify recharge
zones in the Albuquerque Basin.
And this is the kind of work
that we can do and we have um a
great level of detail available.
Um
I just want to highlight also
that, uh, the map coverage, I
think points out a lot of rural
areas of New Mexico that are
lacking that um fully characters
characterize aquifer
uh work
So onto the um next slide which
might be 10, um, what the things
that we can um gain from our
improved mapping and monitoring
of aquifers is really just to
have, I think, uh, a better
picture of what our subsurface
and our groundwater resources
look like. We will know the
basic aquifer properties. We'll
have real-time data tracking
what changes are happening in
the groundwater through those
monitoring wells that were
establishing. Um, we'll have a
better understanding of where
exactly our fresh and our
brackish water aquifers are.
and how they get recharged. Um,
and I think it's really
important for this committee to
be thinking about is how this
improves our decision making and
our long-term investments. Um, I
think if we can imagine a future
where um
the, the big picture is that we
have water security as we're
planning the economic
development and growth in
certain areas where we'll have,
um, more certainty and um by
knowing exactly what our
groundwater available is,
whether that's freshwater or
brackish water or recharge
locations. We can have, um, much
less risk in making those
decisions about where we put
certain features or um
infrastructure investments
around water, um, and this is a
desert state, and we really have
to carefully manage the limited
water resources
that we have
Um, the second big problem, the
50-year water action plan
highlights for us is that we
don't have enough groundwater
level monitoring across the
state, um, and the map on the
slide 11 in the center is a map
image showing where we have at
least some measurement in the
last year,
uh, on a yearly basis. And then,
um, other, and then a little
analysis of whether that
groundwater level has changed
for the positive or for the
negative, um, on the map image
So anything that you see that's
an orange triangle pointing
down. Those are areas where
we've seen groundwater declines
in the last year and areas where
the grandmoter is going up or
the blue triangles pointing up.
And so this is data that we've
compiled as part of the water
data initiative coming from
multiple state agencies and
federal agencies and local data
providers. And what I think is
important to note is that we can
take a look at some of these
data and see changes like
Albuquerque where Aquafor levels
have come up, um, and stabilized
and places like out
in Clovis where groundwater
levels have been dropping off
pretty um significantly since
the period of monitoring on this
graph, which is 2018.
Um,
the, the other feature that I
want to draw your attention to
just looking at this map is that
there are a lot of places of New
Mexico not monitored at all, not
enough information for us to
really um make informed
decisions, especially around our
rural communities.
Um, groundwater level monitoring
is important for a variety of
things. It's kind of like your
basic health check on your
aquifer, um, a lot of the maps
and models that people turn to
to make decisions, whether
that's for funding or decision
making or water rights
administration are based off of
having accurate groundwater
level measurements, knowing if
things are changing for the
positive or negative helps them
decide whether new water rights
should be administered.
Um, but with a geologically
complicated state that we have,
um, I think it highlights that
we need to have even more data
to help us, uh, better
understand exactly what's
changing in each of these little
regions where the aquifers are
um smaller or larger, um
and so that, I think one of the
big things that I, I like to,
uh, draw attention to around
groundwater level monitoring is
that when we see trends of
groundwater levels dropping, we
can get ahead of that water
outage so that a community isn't
facing a period of time when
they don't have water supply
available, so this is an
important feature that we need
to continue to work on improving
for New Mexico.
um
slide 13, uh, looking at the,
um, map here again, these are
just uh highlighting the
different uh main organizations
collecting groundwater level
data, the red points are ones
that we maintain as part of our
Healy Foundation funded
collaborative groundwater
monitoring network. We provide
free measurements to any well
owners that would like that done
and we'll add them to the
network if it's in a, a location
or a depth zone that we're
really targeting to measure. The
USG
S also works with the State
Engineer's Office to measure
about 600 wells annually
But again, um, there's a lot of
gaps spatially across the state
as well as a depth where we
don't have any information, um,
and the other thing that I think
is important to note is that
many of these wells that you see
on the map here are actually
somebody's domestic well or
irrigation well or something
that was drilled, not for the
purpose of monitoring. So it
makes it that it, you may not be
capturing the whole entire
aquifer. You may not be getting
a real static measurement all
the time because somebody's been
pumping it recently. So it, it,
um, it's important to
think about um building this
network where we have wells that
are drilled for the purpose of
monitoring that are available
for long-term, um, use.
So I think I'm on slide 14, uh,
which would be, uh, the vision
of where we're going with this.
Um, basically, the goal here is
to complete aquifer
characterization and build a
long-term groundwater monitoring
network. Um, the aquifer
characterization work, we're
gonna take that region by
region. It's really hard to
tackle the state in whole. It's
going to be, um, uh, 11 region
at a time. And with that, we
will do the work of compiling
all of the existing uh
work, the data, the reports, the
models, the maps that have
already been done. Look at what
the coverage is and then figure
out how best to um fill those
data gaps and then from that we
can improve our conceptual and
our functional water models.
And um that will help us to have
that, that decision making
capacity for brackish and
freshwater resources. While at
the same time, we're also
working to build the long-term
groundwater monitoring network.
So as we're moving through these
regions and doing aquifer
characterization, the work that
we also need to do is drilling
wells to um better characterize
what's going on in the
subsurface. So that's the the
best firsthand way is to drill
an exploratory well with no
water rights just to look and
see what's in the sub
s ur fa ce uh, collect data from
each of those wells, uh, from,
uh, downhole geophysics to
geochemistry to age data so we
have a better sense of exactly
when that that aquifer is
recharged.
and then a select few of those
wells, we can set up as
long-term monitoring locations
where we, um, have a device in
there that's tracking exactly
what the groundwater changes are
over time. Uh, so all of that
is kind of where we're heading.
I just wanna highlight a few of
the steps that we've already um
started on slide 15. Um, this is
our first step, and this is work
we've been going on since about
April of this year, um, and for
the last 20 years, honestly, uh,
putting together all of the
existing data. We've done a lot
of work on this, um, and the map
on the uh
uh, the pinkish map on the
screen, basically shows areas
where, um, we, we used a tool to
kind of highlight where is the
most um information available
and the, um, areas that are deep
red are areas where we have a
lot of groundwater, uh, research
that's already been done. There
is in the lighter pink are areas
where there's been very little.
So you can see that again, many
of our more rural regions have
very little um hydrogeologic
information and studies to draw
upon to begin with.
Um, we also use the well logs
that, um, oil and gas industry
has developed. Uh, they've done
exploration in many places
around the state, and we can
pull the data from those, uh, to
help us characterize the, the,
uh, aquifers where that, uh,
data is available. So the map on
the right hand side with all the
dots are locations where we have
some information from that
industry that we can draw from
and the, the logs looks
something like the one down the
middle, um, with the wiggle
lines that help
us interpret exactly what
formation we're in and what the
potential um aquifer properties
are from those wells. uh, Stacy,
um, if you could, we've got
about 8 more slides. I counted,
and if we could wrap up in the
next couple of minutes. Just
give us some highlights. Thank
you. Sure.
Let's see, 12, skip a few. Let
me think here in one second. Um,
let me just, uh, I'll go quickly
through slide 16 is a new data
collection. I just wanna
highlight that we are, um,
working on filling those data
gaps and we have um big plans
this year for, um, collecting
geophysics and drilling some new
wells, uh, starting next year.
This is, um, an example on slide
17 of the type of data we'll be
collecting, which is
uh AEM aerial electromagnetic
surveys. Uh, you can see that
these are flown from from a
helicopter. There's a hoop.
Sorry, I'm not changing the
slides for you on all of them.
Um, there's a hoop hanging below
a helicopter that sends out an
electromagnetic signal down into
the Earth and it reflects back
up and then we can interpret
that data to help us understand
what the subsurface features
looks like. So this paired with
well drilling gives us better
information about what our
subsurface is without having to
drill thousands of wells all
over the state.
Um, and that is something we
are, um, actively working on,
uh, starting hopefully in the
next month. Um, I wanted to jump
ahead now to slides 18, um,
which is a map that shows the
project areas that we have
planned for this year. Um,
starting up in the Estancia
Basin, uh, will be, uh, working
on that. We'll be working in the
members basin, uh, the lower Rio
Grande, the Middle Rio Grande,
which is the, what we consider
the D area there, and then E
potentially at the end of that
in the Animas Valley. Um, these
regions were, um, planned and
selected by our aquifer steering
committee, which is a, a
committee of about 17 members,
where we have, um, considered a
variety of things like areas
that have a lot of work already
done, areas that are mostly
dependent on groundwater, uh,
regions that are more
cooperative and interested in,
um, working with us on this, um,
areas where we're seeing
declining groundwater levels
are, um, high interest for us.
and then, um, as I said, our big
work this year is to, is to
collect to the AEM data and
build up those uh framework
models so that we can make a lot
of progress and then figure out
where exactly we're gonna drill
wells uh for the next year.
OK.
Um, so our, our goal really is
to provide the state with the
answers to these water questions
that many of you have, um, and,
and doing this by, um, setting
up a groundwater monitoring
network with dedicated wells,
um, and a dashboard that one can
pretty quickly go to and say,
oh, I see groundmeter levels are
rising over here and declining
over here, um, let's make land
use decisions one way or
another, uh, based on, on that
data.
Um, I think it's important to
know that we'll have um online
and available uh aquifer visuals
such as the one in the middle of
the page where we can start to
see exactly what it looks like
in the subsurface based on the,
um, new data that's being
collected. And I think, uh, I
just want to highlight that um
the legislature, as well as our
state agencies and the
governor's office are all
considered to be our most
important stakeholders, um, and
I really want to make sure that
the information that we produce
is available for you to make the
decisions that you need to make
around, um, economic development
and water security and
especially arid state with
increasing aridity.
Um
I'll jump to the last two
slides.
to highlight the funding that we
have had in our um program since
2006. We've hovered around
$280,000 of state funding used
annually to support our, our
program and, uh, to try to
answer, uh, a lot of these
questions, we supplement that
with gifts and grants and, um,
contracts to focus on specific
questions in specific regions,
uh, and so you can see in the
last two years there's been an
increase to our recurring
budget. That's really important
for us to have stable staffing
so that we can continue to work
on these problems. If you are
constantly rehiring, um,
contractors. You start all over
each time you get a different
contractor, uh, so it's, it's
better to have that stable
staffing and knowledge base, uh,
developed within that recurring
budget. So we're, we're really
thrilled to be building that
team right now, um, and then
this year we have, um, uh, 7.5
million in non-recurring
funding. Thank you, um, to all
of you for helping move that
through.
Um, we are really working
quickly to get RFPs going so
that we can build that, um,
bench of new data collection,
uh, and get helicopters and well
drillers out there to help us,
uh, fill in a number of data
gaps, uh, quickly this year. So,
the last slide that is of
content really is kind of where
we're at this year, um, which is
our annual recurring budget is
um just over a million for this
fiscal year and we, um, aim to
request this is not an official
request because none of it's
been approved yet, but we aim to
request an additional $1 million
in recurring funding, um, and
as, uh, I just mentioned, we
have the 7.5 million in
non-recurring budget requests,
and we're working to increase
that to 20 million.
for next year in non-recurring
budget, partly because um
drilling wells is getting
expensive and more expensive by
the day, it seems. Uh, so in
order for us to really
characterize the subsurface.
That's a really important data
feature that we need to have and
um
and setting some of those up for
monitoring so that we can build
that, um, 100 well monitoring
network, I think is a good
target and
um
the other thing I would add to
that is many of the questions
that we have had around brackish
water resources, uh, are asking
us to identify brackish water,
potentially quite deep so that
we're not impacting our
freshwater or our surface water,
um, those are generally
resources more than 1000 ft,
sometimes more than 2500 ft
deep, uh, drilling that deep is
an expensive endeavor. And so
we, we do want to drill deep
wells and really, um,
characterize the groundwater
resources at depth, but that is,
um, a little bit more expensive
than a shallow regular
mon it or ing well.
Um, and the table that's
provided on slide 22 is just
kind of the breakdown of how we,
um, envision this is going to
work year after year so that we
can accomplish that goal of, um,
addressing the fifty-year water
action plan and um fully
characterizing our aquifers by
the year 2037, which is coming
right up. Um
that's the table, which no one
in this room can see. Anyway,
um, thank you, uh, for your, uh,
attention and helping us get
this work done. I hope you'll
reach out if you have questions
or if you have a groundwater
well, you'd like us to add to
our monitoring network or
constituents as well. Thank you,
Ms. Timmins, uh, Representative
Lujan.
Great, thank you, thank you,
Stacy, uh, thank you for being
here. I really appreciate your
um
your thoroughness and, in this
report, um, because these are
the things they're going to ask
you when you come to, you know,
in front of us for budget, and,
and that was probably when the
some of my questions were your
budget and what you're going to
be asking for after what we've
given you. um, and it's a lot
and you know, I'm uh checking in
with the geologist and, and just
the real need of that. My
question is I attended a water
summit in Santa Fe, and they
had, um, they're using new AI,
you know, technology and um
mapping. Are you using any of
that new technology and how
expensive is it, Madam Chair.
Um, Madam Chair, and, uh,
committee, that is, so we're
using AI we're just kind of
touching the surface of that
right now. Um, that map that I
highlighted where we've reviewed
all the previous work that was
generated by AI. We basically
chucked a bunch of reports into
the system and had it answer
specific questions for us around
hydrogeology, uh, and that's
kind of a result of that. Um,
the,
the modeling efforts that lie
ahead, which will consume a
large amount of data, I suspect
we'll be using a lot of machine
learning techniques, um, so
it's, it's something that we are
um open to using and um
exploring more and it has not
been an expense that's been very
much actually the little tools
that we've tried so far, so
OK, thank you. And
please update us as, as time
goes by and how you are
utilizing those those new um
technologies. Uh, the other
question, and I just want to say
thank you for um on page 5 when
you're saying you're referencing
the average temperatures warming
to 5 to 7 °F over the next 50
years and are increasing
aridity, um,
I guess with that known, and we
know, you know, from other
mapping, I mean, we have
known information about how dry
our climate is and even the
governor's response in declaring
a crisis, water drought crisis
for our state.
Um, how you are able to respond
to that is determined by how
we're going to fund you and get
this information and this data.
We need more of it. It's where I
guess my question is
at what point do we have enough
data to really give us these
really um
detailed to answer these
detailed questions, particularly
in the realm of economic
development and, um, and
developments in and of itself
for our state.
Madam Chair, Madam Chair, that's
a big question, Representative.
Um, I think that
we, we have some significant
information about certain
regions. Albuquerque and Santa
Fe are two of the most
well-covered regions in Las
Cruces closely behind that, um,
putting together uh a list of
specific questions that economic
development has related to our
groundwater would really help me
to be very targeted in answering
those questions. Um, I, I would
the, the number of questions
that we get span the gamut and,
um, sometimes people want a
quick answer to a very hard
question, and we can work on
that, um, particularly like
Albuquerque Santa Fe and, Las
Cruces. We can get going on
pretty quickly. Uh, so we, we
have chosen this year to kind of
work around those areas, knowing
that they have enough data and
we can be working on generating
maps based on existing data for
a lot of those regions, um
so, yeah, to me, I, I feel like
a, a maybe a dialogue a little
bit more with communities with
representatives and in various
regions and getting together a
list of like what are the top 10
questions that people have, and
then we can work on specifically
answering those, I think would
be a really um more effective
approach specifically around the
economic development questions.
I like that answer. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Representative Murphy
Thank you, Madam Chair. Stacy.
I'm very familiar with your
department. You guys do great
work. Um
couple of questions. um
do we have any shared
aquifers with adjoining states.
or countries I would assume
Texas and Mexico, but yes, Madam
Chair Representative, we, we
certainly do have shared
groundwater resources amongst
all of our borders. So in
thinking about that, um, I'm
looking at your slide 11, and
it's, um, you can see as, um,
Albuquerque's water level, um,
depth of water, uh, has come up
pretty significantly over a
fairly short period of time. My
assumption is that it's probably
due to conservation efforts,
either, either mandatory efforts
or repla
cing water meters or pipe or
something. Would that be fair?
Yeah,
a lot of that is due to their
switch to using San Juan Chama
surface water diversion. So
they're using more surface water
and pumping less groundwater in
the Albuquerque area. Thank you,
Madam Chair and Stacy, I
appreciate that. And thinking
about the, uh, the Ogallala
Aquifer along our shared border
with Texas on the east side. Um,
you have a slide here that shows
that the drop in water level in
the Clovis area of about a
roughly 1 ft a year. It's coming
down pretty fast.
Some of that I assume is because
of industrial use, agricultural
use. But one thing I've, I have
wondered as you, as you watch
that water level sort of drop in
the edge of the saturated
ogallala move eastward. How much
of that is attributable to the
Mexico use and how much of that
is attributable to Texas use.
How much water is Texas pulling
across our borders where I'm
getting to.
Yes,
Madam President, and
Representative, that is the,
the, one of the biggest issues
and a really hard problem to
tackle, and I think the, you
know, one solution or one way to
explore that further is really
to set up some dedicated
monitoring on the New Mexico
side of that aquifer and and
evaluate what those changes are.
Unfortunately, Texas has the
right of you capture so you can
take the water that you have
available, and there's no legal
means for that. And to fight
state to state against
groundwater issues. It's been
done and that that's probably
more of a legal question than I
can handle, but, um, yes, there
are many conversations about
that, and I think that there is
likely an impact from pumping on
the Texas side that's affecting
New Mexico. I'm now going to
make this over simplistic and,
and it's much more complicated
than this, but, but you have,
you have basically a calculation
as to the amount of water that
exists in the, in the aquifer
because of, you know, how deep
it is, or
how thick it is, how much
water's there, so forth. And
then you also measure how much
water is being pulled out of
that aquifer from the various
agricultural uses because in
most cases any large well is
going to be metered, I, I
believe. And so, can you then
back into a calculation as to
how much might be flung across
the border. And I, as a
legislator, I'd be very
interested in that, in that
number because we've got a
number of water fights with
Texas. The Rio Grande Compact is
one of them. And um if we're
already delivering water, uh, to
Texas
vi a other methods, I think we,
as a, as a body
that would be very interesting
to us. I don't know how, how
legally significant it is, but I
think it's important to know and
I guess the last point I would
make is, is that if we do have
shared aquifers, say with
other states, um
are there things that we can do
to make sure that, that, um, we
don't lose our water, um, you
know, the Texas situation is, is
unique in that you have a, a, an
aquifer that's dipping to the
east as they pull water, gravity
is going to pull water that way.
I don't know as much about some
of the other aquifers in the
state, but to me I'm a
conservation side, some thinking
needs to be done about how we
make sure that we protect our
water from being taken by
others, so yeah, Madam Chair
Representative, that's a really
good um
conversation. Uh, I wanna point
out that in the Clovis area in
particular, what's unique about
that region is that we do have a
map of what the bottom of the
aquifer looks like. In many
places in New Mexico, we don't.
So yes, we are able to calculate
a volume of water that's
potentially available for, for
pumping in that region. Um.
so special in that area, I would
say 80% of the state, we don't
know that bottom. So it's harder
to come up with that, that
metric. Uh, the, the relation
to, um, exactly how much water
is being pumped out. This has
been one of New Mexico's biggest
challenges, and I think this is
a really important topic that
this body, the broader
legislature, all needs to be
thinking about is if we want to
know how much water is being
taken out, we do have to meet
her, and that is not the case
across the state. That is not
the case in the Clovis area.
We do not have meters saying
exactly how much water. Some of
the farmers do because they're
paying attention, but it isn't
required. Um, it's required in
some regions. And so I think
this is a conversation that's
coming is to be thinking about
if we want to protect what we
have here in New Mexico. We need
to measure it. We need to
measure it in groundwater
levels, and we need to measure
in terms of metering. Um, really
paying attention to that and its
effects on the regions around us
is, is the, the key next step
for New Mexico for sure, um.
yeah, and I think I did your
last question, you might have to
repeat that back to me if you
want more on that. Sure, um,
just not as familiar with the
other reservoirs in the state. I
assume there's some that border
Arizona and Colorado, and all I
was suggesting is, is that given
what we've experienced on the
east side with Texas, perhaps we
need to give some thought about
how to prevent that either
through early compacts with
these states or something that,
yes, that's that's my only
thought, OK, Madam Chair, yes, I
think in interestingly
in some of those um other
regions around the state, the
water is actually coming in from
Mexico and
adding to New Mexico's, but I
think, you know, one of the
first ways that we can tackle
that is by building up the
monitoring and measurement
efforts that we have so we can
kind of have a better sense of
what that amount is and again,
that's our best way to protect
and uh prevent overuse. I know
the chair wants to move along,
I'll, uh, end with one final
question. It's on 22, your
12-year budget plan, and I don't
need exact numbers, but my guess
is a lot of these wells are
going to be drilled or in your
gray study areas, but are some
of these in,
in other areas that have been um
um
already studied, but you're
trying to make your data set
more robust.
Madam Chair, yes, I think the,
the well coverage we're still
working on what that map looks
like, um, it in some areas where
we do have a significant amount
of coverage on the surface map.
We don't have the vertical
depth, the Albuquerque Basin is
one of those where we'd like to
have a bit more depth, um,
getting way deep into the um
potential brackish water
aquifers. Um, that is a, a
region where, um, yes, so it's a
variety of um locations, but I,
I do, um
really think that many of our
rural areas have been
understudied, and I think that's
going to be a large emphasis of
our, our work ahead. Thank you
Madam Cherry. You'll.
Thank you. Um, next we have
Royal, uh, Representative Royal
Caballero, followed by
Representative Matthews, and I'm
going to ask that you get to the
heart of your question as
quickly as possible and that we
answer briefly.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you very much. This is
critically important and I'm
really impressed with and
concerned with your slide 6.
uh, 10, and 11. So just for, for
reference to climate, the
climate, um, impacting
our aquifers, given the risk of
permanent loss of aquifer
storage from compaction. Are
there regions, um, around the
state where drought-driven um
drawdowns are already triggering
irreversible damage and, and
it's important to know because
we're economic development and
every region is being um
focused on improving the
economies, but only certain, you
know, only certain, uh,
industries and certain
economies uh would apply in
certain areas. So this is an
important question. Do you have
the ability to answer that with
your data and so forth. Uh,
Madam Chair, and, and
Representative, the, uh, the
short answer is no, I don't have
all of the that, uh, mapped out
yet. Um, but the, uh, longer,
slightly, uh,
answer is that, um, yes, in
fact, there are some places
where you will have an
irreversible um effect that you
have compacted the aquifer so
much. It is something that we're
paying attention to and there
are projects happening around
New Mexico for us to monitor the
subsidence of the land, um,
places that don't have a river
flowing through it are probably
the most concerning, thinking
about the fact that they have
very little recharge happening
in those areas. Um, there's
places in the members basin, for
example, where we've already
seen, um, land fissures
um, happening as a result of
subsidence. And so there are
places around the state, um, and
that could be something maybe we
focus on as a conversation
starter is to, to try to map out
our places where we need to be,
um, especially careful and, um,
not have that groundwater mining
and uh subsidence happening.
Thank you and I look forward to
that because that's part of our
mission here on reference to,
um, pages 10 and 11. 1 of the
bullets, um, you mentioned
improved decision making for
long-term investments in water
infrastructure, which is very
important, but the next page you
talk about groundwater level
monitoring coverage is
insufficient. So, um
how do you reconcile, uh, the
use of brackish water if we have
insufficient
uh,
data for groundwater level
monitoring that's important and,
and how does the bureau um
or does the bureau have a
contingency plan if
climate-driven depletions force
some aquifers to cross over from
freshwater to brackish
um
if, if uh within the next time
period.
Madam Chair, and Representative,
I, um, I'm not advocating one
way or another for brackish
water development. Uh, we are
simply trying to find the, the
base
information that is needed to
make those decisions. Um, and I
do think we do not presently
have all of the information we
need to make a decision about
exactly where we should start
brackish water development.
There are some regions where we
have shallow salty water where
we have data, and I have a whole
other slide packet on that. I
could bring to you at a future
time. Um, the, the big thing is
that, um, if we are going to
start developing shallow or deep
brackish water resources, we are
going to need to increase
the monitoring, um, coverage of
that. And so that's the point of
that slide 11 is just that
thinking about alternative water
resource development. We have to
further study it and get, get to
the bottom of exactly
um how that's gonna affect our
freshwater, our surface water,
um, and any other aquifers
around it.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and what
you compile, what you study,
what you provide to us. We,
you're, you're correct. You're
not advocating, but we do have,
we are in the position of using
what you provide to us in order
to make our decisions. So the
more you give us and the better
the better overall. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Matthews. Take us home. Quick
question
and
So for a period of time in
Albuquerque, there were various
efforts to replenish
the groundwater and I haven't
heard much about that lately,
and most of the places where
they were sort of doing that, I
think they're not doing it now.
Was that a pipe dream or was
there any value in doing that
and should we be thinking about
that, and I'm particularly
thinking about it in terms of,
you know, when it does rain,
which is seldom, but the water
flowing out of the arroyos and
things. I mean, you know, it's
just huge amounts of water.
Anyway, that's my question
Is that
on the table or is that silly?
Uh, Madam Chair, and
Representative Matthis, no,
it's, uh, it is happening and
there are a couple of projects
in Albuquerque where there are
actively recharging the aquifer.
They have projects where when
they have excess surface water,
they infiltrate it. Um, that
little map that was on the
bottom of one of my slides with
a cool 3D image that was
basically related to injection
well exploration. They were
going to considering pumping the
water into the ground to
recharge the aquifers. So yes,
and there are other places
around the state where they are
doing recharge projects.
um, to infiltrate potentially
stormwater, um, and I just want
to highlight that one of the
really um exciting outcomes of
this new data that we're
collecting, particularly the,
the aerial electromagnetic
surveys is that it will
highlight areas where their most
amenable to recharge projects.
So we can really um focus that
effort and potentially
stormwater or other excess water
if there is some, and get it
back into the ground. That
reduces the evaporation in
surface water, um, so if it's in
the ground, and hopefully it's
there
for longer term for future use.
Thank you. Thank you. I'm glad I
asked the question. Maybe we
ought to be thinking about how
to do more of that. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you and thank you, Stacy.
Uh, I think that's the highest
note we could leave this
conversation on, um, I
appreciate you being here. Thank
you now we are going to hear
from representatives from
Valencia Water Watchers and the
Environmental Defense Fund on
surface and groundwater use,
particular to the region, um, to
our presenters, welcome. Thank
you for being here and um we
are.
scheduled to begin public
comment at 4 p.m., which is in
about less than 15 minutes, so
I'm gonna ask that you had
originally 45 minutes if you
could kind of condense down your
presentation, so we have time
for questions and then public
comment, um, and with that I
will hand it over to you.
Oh, there we go.
Good afternoon everyone, um,
Chairman, members of the
committee, my name is Linda
Gwenley, and I'm a member of the
Valencia Water Watchers. I'm
here today to speak to you about
our concerns, and I appreciate,
uh, the opportunity. like they
switched him back again. Ah,
they did switch him back. That's
not mine.
Are you able to switch those or
should I go first?
Why don't the two of you go
ahead and introduce your Salas
while we're waiting for like
Good afternoon.
uh
Madam Chair, committee members,
uh, my name is Maurice Hall. I'm
with the Environmental Defense
Fund
Uh, it's, we're a global
nonprofit organization that
works to advance a vital earth
for all. I work in a group, uh,
focused on water resources, uh,
and our, our job is really about
trying to build good water
management into the everyday
business of, of managing water
to make sure all beneficiaries
of our water supplies, uh, have
what they need to, uh, live and
thrive.
And, uh, I will hand it back to
Miss Gwenly and uh
speak later. Thank you,
thank you, Valencia Water
Watchers is a ground roots, um,
organization, um, in existence
since uh January 2025, uh, a few
of our members standing in front
of a uh
the uh village council ready to
protest oops.
Um, it's no question that we are
facing water deflation, uh, uh,
record Brown, uh, water levels
are.
apparent to us all by looking at
this picture of the dry Rio
Grande. This is not the first
time that has happened. This is
not the first summer that our um
farmers and have been asked, uh,
not to, to irrigate during the
end of their season, uh, which
forces them to uh pump
groundwater to keep their crops
alive, um, we are in, uh, a
position with uh Rio Grande
Compacts where we could be in
violation of those
compacts as early as next year,
uh, that could be a twofold
problem, uh, both with expensive
litigation as well as our
farmers not being able to
irrigate and that serious
problem for the economics um of
this state up and down, uh, the
Rio Grande.
Um,
I bring up Niagara, uh, pumping
water in Los Lunas, not because
you can have an effect on that
that is already happened, but I
wanted you to be aware of it.
Should something like this begin
to occur in your own districts,
uh, being aware of what happened
in Los Lunas could help you
avoid such disasters in the
future,
um,
Niagara is allowed 285,000 acre
285 acre feet a year to pump
right now, um, they're being
asked, um, they're asking for
500 acre feet of year to expand
their operations. That's
difficult to visualize what
acre feet of water is, but it
could turn out to be 500 tons of
hay could be produced with that
amount of water or almost 1800
pounds of green chili, uh, that
much water could, uh, supply
6000 households with water, um,
that's a lot of water.
Water rights are paper and that
does not equate to actual wet
water. Um, Niagara is asking PNM
to transfer their water rights
up to the 500 acre feet a year,
but those rights exist in
Albuquerque and the water's
coming out of Los Lunas. It
doesn't make logical sense for
that to occur.
Niagara has not been a good
steward, um, of the amount of
water they have been, uh,
allotted, um, in the last six
years they exceed their
allotment by about 13%, 87% of
the time that's not being good
stewards of water and it's
it's being put into plastic
bottles and exacerbating,
exacerbating the problem of um
what's being done with that
water and, and increasing the
plastic waste.
um, our ask for the legislature
are to modernize and fund the
interstate stream Commission and
the Office of the State
Engineers, uh, to form and fund
regional water councils, um,
including community stakeholders
rather than just um contractors
to perform those functions, um,
and fully fund the Aquifer water
mapping and and data
initiatives, uh, that, um,
Professors Timmons spoke so
eloquently
about water mapping is
essential, um, invest in long
term water planning and that
legislation you require
professionals to fund those
position to fill those
positions, uh, they have to have
technical expertise, modern
equipment, um, and also the
aging infrastructure throughout
the um throughout the state
needs to be upgraded to uh
prevent uh water loss uh
from leaky pipes, uh, I think
Clovis and some of the other
communities in the southern part
of the state are having a great
deal of problems with that
leaking infrastructure.
um, the regional water councils,
um, this, as Stacy pointed out,
um, the water, the aquifer and
the information across state
differs by uh regions and each
water uh council needs to be
created with those limited um
stakeholders that from from
those communities in order to be
able to um give us great um
to let those communities make
informed decisions, um.
um aquifer mapping is, is
essential, and I don't, I think
you've heard enough about.
So let's move on. Uh, but
data-driven, um, decisions are
required, um, and without the
mapping, you don't have the
information to make the correct
decisions, um, and that
concludes my presentation if
there's any questions, I'll.
Chair, committee
uh really pleased to have a
chance to talk with you today.
and um
I will look for my slides. There
we go.
So, um, again, my name is
Maurice Hall. I'm with
Environmental Defense Fund and
uh Dr. Timmons earlier
um, spoke very articulately
about the need for aquifer
mapping and, and, uh, increased
monitoring and data.
and uh I'm a great fan of what
they're doing there. It's the
Bureau of Minerals and Geology.
I've, I've seen, uh, this type
of work done across us across
the west and uh the uh
progress that they're making in
recent years is really dramatic
and I'm gonna emphasize that
it's really critical to New
Mexico. I'm gonna focus a little
more on what we do with that
information, our perhaps what we
need to do with that information
going forward, uh, focusing on
the importance of, uh,
groundwater to New Mexico's
rural communities and economies.
I'm gonna uh introduce a give a
little preview of a report that
is will be out in about a month
by the New Mexico Groundwater
Alliance.
and then I'm gonna make some
recommendations on policies and
investment uh for how to protect
this critical resource going
forward.
First on uh the importance of
groundwater for rural
communities, um.
again, Doctor Timmons described
groundwater versus surface
water.
Uh, basically all of our water,
uh, there may be a few of us who
collect rainwater locally and
and reuse that but for the most
part the water uses in the state
of New Mexico come from either
Service water that's our streams
and rivers or we pump it from a
well that uh is supplied by the
aquifers underneath the ground,
and I really encourage you to
think of those aquifers as
natural infrastructure. We
didn't have to build that
infrastructure, but it provides
an
amazing service of collecting,
recharge from a wide range of
surfaces, storing it underground
and then delivering it to our
well when we pump the water out
of our well, we lower the water
levels in the well. That causes
the water to flow in from the
surrounding aquifer and that
aquifer is a, is an amazing
piece of infrastructure that
does all these things for us.
Um, groundwater makes up a huge
part of the water supply for the
state, roughly half of the
state's total water supply comes
from groundwater.
And importantly for this
committee's purview
most of the rural parts of New
Mexico depend exclusively on
groundwater for their drinking
water, for their everyday use,
and for their irrigation.
If you get off of the main, uh,
main Rio Grande Corridor and the
San Juan corridor, um, we all
pretty much depend on
groundwater.
Um, groundwater supplies about
50% of the irrigation water for
this amazing agricultural
production of New Mexico.
and in many areas it's all the
water, uh, it's 100% of the
water for irrigation
Again, uh, as, as Doctor Timmons
described as surface water
supplies decline, uh, due to
climate change, groundwater
supplies will also decline
because of increased demand of
groundwater and because
groundwater and surface water
are interconnected.
Now, importantly
lack of appropriate groundwater
management has far-reaching
impacts.
from community wells going dry.
to interstate compact
challenges.
Looking at slide number 4
just emphasize that groundwater
sustains rural communities in a
number of different ways.
basic household use needs.
Again, the only source of water
for many of these communities is
groundwater.
We have something on the order
of 570 community water systems
in the state.
More than 500 of those depend
exclusively on groundwater and
really have no other access to
water besides those, those
aquifers.
for the agricultural and food
systems.
uh, outdoor tourism and
community and cultural
economies, groundwater is
critical to that uh just an
extra note on the, on the
cultural economies and tourism
is a groundwater surface water
in connected and as our
groundwater is depleted, those
surface flows, whether they're
rivers or streams or springs are
going to be affected by that.
um, and our federal and military
and border economies depend on
groundwater. Already some of the
military installations such as
Cannon Air Force Base are
contending with operational
threats.
recognizing the chair has asked
me to move forward more quickly.
I'll try to get uh gather a
little ground, um, on
slide number 5, Environmental
Defense Fund is a, is a global
organization, but, uh, we work
primarily in water in the
western US and trying to advance
good water management.
but uh uh we're not the only
ones in New Mexico who are
concerned about the future of
groundwater and uh given that,
uh, given our concerns and the
recommendations of, of the 2022
water infrastructure and water
and infrastructure task force
now known as the Water
Ambassadors.
um, we have chosen to, uh, try
to help organize and support a
group called the New Mexico
Groundwater Alliance.
The Groundwater Alliance is a
group of um water agency
professionals, agricultural
representatives, community
representatives, environmental
groups, and other stakeholders
who are want to raise the
profile of uh the critical
nature of groundwater to the
state and to highlight some of
the things that we can do to be
more proactive in groundwater
management, including, uh,
bringing in uh ideas from other
places that have been
implemented but also making, uh,
uh, practical policy
recommendations for New Mexico.
We are currently working on a
group-authored report, uh, we
call it the New Mexico 360
report that will be coming out,
uh, in about a month. And that
report will provide the an
overview of some of the
conditions that uh Doctor
Timmons and agencies monitoring
is providing
and uh highlighting the current
status and the trajectory of
that groundwater.
we want to highlight some of the
great things that are being done
in New Mexico because
thankfully, New Mexico some uh
great bright spots in in uh
groundwater management.
We want to spotlight the
community experiences. What does
this mean to the people who are
on the ground and who deal with
groundwater every day.
We also want to bring in some of
the learnings from other states
and again some recommendations
from more moving forward that
I'll touch on a little bit
today.
Just a, as a little preview of
that report and we will make
sure that you and your staff's,
uh, are, um, get that report
when it's issued.
but uh one thing is the status
and trajectory of the
groundwater in New Mexico.
Doctor Timmons highlighted uh
uh mention this, but uh
frankly the the overall picture
is one where we do have good
information
It suggests that groundwater
levels are declining across many
areas of the state.
uh, it's important to recognize
that we have big gaps in the
information and thankfully, the
accelerating effort at the
Bureau of Geology is helping to
fill those gaps very quickly.
Again, I really applaud that
effort and applaud your
investments in the past couple
of years to raise that, that
level of of engagement.
Um, climate change and drought
are worsening the conditions and
putting more pressure on
groundwater resources.
Now it's um
important to note
that this groundwater
information that we've been
talking about is not just
valuable for knowing where you
are.
It's valuable for being more
proactive in groundwater
management.
And frankly
without more proactive
intervention, the downward
trajectory of groundwater in New
Mexico will undoubtedly continue
and that
threatens the viability of the
state
but especially those rural
communities that have no other
water choice stay water uh
choices.
The report will also highlight
in in more detail some of the,
the, the authorities of
management of the current and
potential future authorities and
management.
Under US law structures, the
primary responsibility for water
management, including
groundwater falls, first with
the state and in New Mexico,
that's the state engineer's
office.
when it, when it comes to
groundwater quantity issues.
the um groundwater quality is
handled in a different, uh, in
different department.
In the office of State Engineer
has several tools at its
disposal and has begun
exercising some of that to those
tools, things like administering
water rights, meeting orders,
uh, to the point made earlier in
the earlier discussion, uh,
metering is required in some of
the areas of the state, but it's
completely lacking in uh in
other areas of the state, uh,
and we have talented staff at,
uh, the Office of State Engineer
and that staff has, has been
grown in recent years again
thanks to some of
the, the funding that you've
provided
But historically, the response
of the state engineer's office
in Groundwater management has
been more reactive
than proactive
responding when there's an issue
when there's a challenge, rather
than trying to think proactively
going forward.
with good aquifer
characterization and good
monitoring data and importantly
authorities and responsible
authorities with a mandate to
take action. We can be much more
proactive in groundwater
management. I've had the
opportunity to work, uh, with
some of the most uh successful
groundwater management regimes
across the West and I look
forward to helping bring some of
those, uh, some of those uh
really advanced management to
New Mexico.
but that advanced management
Dr. Mullins, if you could wrap
us up in about 5 minutes, that
would be helpful. Very, very
good. Thank you.
It's important, uh, wanna
highlight that some good things
are happening in New Mexico, uh,
on slide number 8, and I think I
have failed to accelerate my,
my, uh, slides.
slide number 8,
the Pecos Valley, one of the
real bright spots in more
holistic groundwater management
in New Mexico, um, doing some
really amazing things including
uh Universal metering, bringing
um
bringing in some uh low interest
water conservation incentives,
uh, etc. um.
earlier was mentioned the
progress that's been made in the
Albuquerque basin and that is a,
a really good example of
conjunctive water management.
requires in both cases it
requires an authority
with the resources or the
ability to raise those resources
and the information and to a
Miss Agunu's earlier comment,
professional staff with the
capabilities to, to think
proactively and take proactive
measures.
Uh, a number of other, uh, areas
in the state where great things
are happening. I can't, uh,
compliment enough and, and, and
applaud enough the uh actions
being taken by the Oglala Land
and Water Conservancy District
in uh near Clovis and uh
especially the farmers who have
voluntarily participating in
that program to dramatically
reduce their water use for
irrigation simply so their
community water supply can exist
in the future and that their
children and grandchildren have
a chance at least to make a
decision to live in a place that
has safe, clean drinking water
and an economy uh to support
that.
So some great things happening
in New Mexico. We need to
elevate those, learn from them,
understand why they have been
successful, what it takes to
make them successful and
helped support replication of
that across the state.
So, um
on slide number 9, I highlight
some of the uh
the
things that we can bring from
other parts of the uh west and
from New Mexico.
want to highlight again the
fundamental science, data and
modeling to inform those
decisions is critical and then
we need to build on that.
And in order to build on that
we need
local authorities
who have
the responsibility and the
mandate
and the guidance from the state
and the support from the state
to take local action. The best
examples of groundwater
management that I've seen across
the West with few exceptions.
are locally driven
that they involve a a range of
stakeholders in the state in in
the in the region so that all
the voices are heard
and they're supported by good
fundamental state policy and a
backstop from the state if the
locals have challenges or are
not able to get the job done.
But if we want to ensure
a resilient New Mexico.
especially in the rural regions
again away from these major
river corridors
we need to take proactive action
and so what we need from the lec
legislature recommendations
first
continue to support
the Bureau of Geology's
investment in monitoring and,
and, uh, aquifer mapping.
It's important to highlight
that.
this is not a short term thing.
Groundwater requires it's it's
infrastructure and just like you
need a skatta system and the
monitoring system if you have a
manufacturing facility.
groundwater's providing the
services we need ongoing support
to ensure over the long term
that the groundwater aquifers
are being managed and the water
uses from those are being
managed so that we have water
over the long term, and that
means sustained investment and
so as the uh this budget session
progresses, really encourage you
to look for those, uh, the
request for ongoing funding that
allows a establishment of the
infrastructure, the internal
institutional infrastructure to
monitor and manage this
groundwater and support
eventual local management.
We do need to modernize
groundwater governance.
We, along with the groundwater
alliance that I mentioned
earlier are gonna be working to
expand and bring in other uh
voices and other insights in
order to come to you a year or
so from now, with more specific,
broadly supported
uh pro proposals for modernizing
the groundwater governance in
New Mexico.
We need to support local and
tribal leadership that's part of
that modernizing our governance
and we need to prepare for water
resilience in the in the face of
climate change.
So thank you very much and uh
together we will respond to any
questions.
Thank you so much, um, questions
from the committee.
of Representative Royal
Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
know we're a pressed for time. I
have, um, it occurred to me
I'm always um wanting
communities and neighborhoods to
own.
their everything
In this case, um, for Doctor
Hall, are there affordable ways
for small communities or
neighborhoods to monitor their
own groundwater levels and a
quality of groundwater.
I'm, I'm curious as to whether
there's something that um
they can do
at
their basic level, which will
also raise consciousness about
proper water conservation and
other kinds of things that go
along with that.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative,
um
Doctor Timmons did mention one
program they have that allows uh
people who are willing to um
allow their will to be
monitored, to sign up for that,
uh, voluntary program.
certainly would encourage that.
Um
on the, on the notion of
self-monitoring of groundwater
levels. It is, um, it is
certainly possible requires a
little bit of training, but
fairly modest training for wells
that are accessible. That's an
important point, is a lot of
wells are, are actually built
not to be accessed, um, and then
for water quality sampling, it's
certainly, um, it's certainly
quite easy to do that. Many
people have spigots that
come right off their wells. Um,
the, the laboratory costs are
not insignificant
um
but, uh, there are labs that
provide that and frankly, I'm
not that familiar with exactly
what, uh, what lab access there
is for that, but I'll, I'm, I'm,
I'm really curious now. I'm
gonna look into that and uh
we'll get back to you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I have a
community, uh, a district that's
very proactive about everything
healthy, and making their
communities healthy. So if we
can all get that answer, that
would be helpful. And for Miss
Gwenly, I have a question also,
and that is, um, have you seen
any changes in transparency with
Niagara, my understanding is
that um they dropped the
petition to bottlemore water,
but have you seen any changes,
um,
in terms of their transparency.
They have not been transparent.
Um, the data that we, that I
showed on their usage uh came
from IPRAs, um, to the village
of Los Lunas, um, regarding
their billing, um, currently,
um, they have an application to
the Office of the State Engineer
for the increase in their um
acre feet allowance. Um, I'm
glad to say that we're in a
position, um, and there will be
many protests, uh, against
that, um, actual approval, so,
um, we'll see how that turns
out, but they are, they're
privately owned company, and so
therefore not real uh responsive
or receptive.
Thank you, Madam Char, but I'm
sure that you'll hold him
accountable. Thank you.
Yes, cheer
Well, if we don't have any other
questions from the committee, I
want to thank you to our
presenters, both of you and all
of our presenters, um, today
very productive day and for
dinner tonight, the pueblo of
Aleta is graciously hosting us,
um, at the Oleta resort and
Casino, which is about 20
minutes up the road.
uh, beginning at 6 p.m. so
please do join us committee, um,
and we will recess until
tomorrow morning at 9:00 a.m.
here and then we will go to Meta
from here.
Oh, no, thank you. I'm gonna get
this right one of these days.
I'm gonna open it up for public
comment, actually.
No one online. Do we have anyone
here in the room that would like
to offer public comment. Please
come up, uh.
Oh, actually, we'll need you on
the microphone because there are
folks online that are listening.
So, um, if you'll come forward,
state your name for the record,
and, um, the floor is yours. OK.
My name is Doctor Gail Goodman
and I live in Los Chavez, and my
comment is thank you very much
for sticking this out. You are
all very tough. It was very
informative, and I appreciate it
a lot. However, you must fix
healthcare. It
is a travesty, a travesty. I'm
82. I don't have a doctor.
So guys,
I learned a lot about water. The
next meeting, healthcare.
Thank you very much
Anyone else for a public comment
Oh, it's not public comment, of
course, but I do have a general
question, Madam Chair, if you
will, about tomorrow, um, are we
driving ourselves to the tour,
OK.
All right, a caravan situation,
I hope, because I will get lost.
Yes.
All right, now we will recess.
Committee, thank you all. We'll
see you tomorrow morning.
