All righty. um.
If I can get you to introduce
yourself, uh, to give us your
position, um.
There's some feedback going on
here and um then go dive into
your presentation and I
apologize that we're starting a
little late, but I'll try to get
this cup back up. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. My name
is Alicia Shaw. I'm with Public
Power New Mexico and the
campaign director, and I'm here
today to talk about a proposed
state New Mexico local solar
access fund. Uh, the fund is
sponsored by House Majority Whip
Rena Sapanski and Senator Harold
Pope.
And so there are some slides in
front of you. And so on the
the next page, there's a chart
that I periodically visit.
There's a great website called
FindEnergy.com that aggregates
very reliable data from federal
agencies like the EIA and ERL as
well as directly from utilities,
and it's a great resource when
researching matters of
electricity generation and other
things related to electricity in
our country. And so this chart
is of New Mexico's electricity
fuel mix.
Um,
that yellow line at the bottom
is our solar uh generation in
our state. And currently, only
11% of our state's electricity
generation mixes solar,
depending on who you speak with,
uh, we have the greatest or
second greatest potential, uh,
for solar generation in the
country. So I just wanted to
share that because there's a
huge opportunity here, um, for
resilience and for economic
development that um we
Can pursue. So the local solar
access fund.
As a proposed grant fund that
would be situated at the New
Mexico Finance Authority. It
would issue both planning and
implementation grants to tribes,
counties, municipalities and
school districts to support the
development of solar and storage
projects that power public
buildings like libraries,
schools, community centers, and
fire stations and
infrastructure, critical
infrastructure like water,
wastewater, and street lighting.
And so the fund would support
both planning and
implementation, planning.
could include funding technical
expertise like grant writers and
federal funding experts, as well
as solar experts who could
conduct feasibility studies and
create plans for solar and
storage systems and
implementation includes funding
the construction, purchase,
installation, and equipment of
solar energy storage systems. So
it would fund both shovel ready
projects and would also help
capacitate communities seeking
to do these kinds of projects to
actually achieve them.
And so,
The benefits of solar are many.
Uh, a few of them include huge
cost savings, um, for local
communities and increased
revenue from repurposed energy
dollars. Solar is very cheap.
It's cheaper than conventional
energy. It might be the cheapest
energy source and rates are
fixed from 25 to 30 years. So it
protects communities from price
gouging and market volatility.
So communities that do this can
save a lot of money to
repurpose.
For other important community
needs. A big benefit of solar
and storage is safety, security,
and resiliency. Uh, if you put
solar and storage on critical
infrastructure like wastewater
or water treatment plants, they
won't lose power if there's a
power outage, if there's a
wildfire, if there's a flood,
and so that's a huge security
benefit. If you put solar and
storage in a community center,
it can be a resource in a time
of emergency as well. It can
provide shelter and emergency.
cooling centers when there's
blackouts, brownouts, storms,
and wildfires. And of course,
reduce carbon emissions as well.
And so, we performed a lot of
outreach to inform the
development of this policy. We
convened a focus group last year
in the summer, um, brought
together stakeholders from
different organizations, local
governments, tribal governments,
and based on that focus group,
this policy emerged as something
that was desired and needed in
our state. We also called and
reached out to every single
tribe, county, municipality, and
school district in the state.
Conducted meetings and we also
paid for a statewide survey, a
poll. On the next page, you can
see the top line of that
statewide survey and a link to
the complete results of it. And
the top line of it found over
70% of New Mexico, um, New
Mexicans support the use of both
solar and wind energy sources.
3 in 4 voters agree that the
state should maximize its
renewable energy production.
Nearly half of voters who do not
already have a rooftop solar,
uh, would join a community solar
program if it was available,
while 30% weren't sure, and a
majority of voters support the
creation of a state solar fund,
like the one we're discussing
now to help local governments
plan and build public solar
projects. And the next slide
looks at the support for
renewable energy, um, that top
line there is about 85% support
rooftop solar, which I don't
know anything that enjoy.
that much support. And then the
next slide, um, looks at how a
majority of New Mexico voters
support renewable energy sources
regardless of partisanship.
So, what we learned from all the
outreach, the calls, the
meetings we did. There's
widespread support for this
fund, um, and, you know, after
we did the focus group last
summer, we went to work and
developed a bill and consulted
with agencies, including Emner
and and MFA and um within that
short period of time, we earned
the support of more than 50
endorsing organizations of many
different kinds, including
tribes, school districts, local
governments, state
associations like the New Mexico
Counties Association and the New
Mexico municipal League, an
intersectional non-governmental
organizations.
We also found that a majority of
the tribes and counties we are
connected with, we connected
with our planning to build solar
projects that could be supported
by this fund.
We found that many school
districts and municipalities
would like to develop solar but
need the kind of support that
would be provided by this fund
to do so.
We found that like accessible
funding was really critical
here, especially for our rural
communities.
We also found that New Mexico
communities have important
public safety and resilience
needs such as power and shelter
for residents and first
responders during emergencies
and disasters that this fund
could support.
And we found that many tribes,
county school districts, and
municipalities do have projects
like these and would like to
develop more because of the
resilience sustainability, and
cost reduction benefits they
receive.
There's a lot of money you can
save by investing in solar, and
it's becoming more and more
accessible and affordable.
And I'm gonna talk briefly about
resilience hubs. Resilience hubs
are something that keep coming
up, um.
So resilience hub is a lifeline
that provides energy, food,
water, and other necessities
during power outages and
emergencies.
Solar energy and battery storage
are key components to these
assuring that power is available
to support critical needs from
running medical devices to
powering critical water and
wastewater infrastructure to
heating and cooling community
centers to preserving food and
medication. Resilience hubs help
alleviate burdens on emergency
responders and give communities
the tools to bounce back better.
So again, this is what I was
speaking of when, you know, a
local government, a tribal
government, a school district
could put solar in storage on a
building.
that could be a resource in a
time of emergency or put the
solar in storage on critical
infrastructure to ensure the
safety and security and
resilience at that. And so this
next page, there's a map. The
Department of Homeland Security
supports and tracks resilience
hubs across the United States.
There are 278 resilience hubs
listed in their interactive
resilience hub finder as of
yesterday. And there was one in
New Mexico that was listed, and
that's in Las Cruces.
And so I want to just share some
examples of that I, I've heard
of, and there are many more of
how these kinds of um the
resources can actually help
during times of emergency.
So these are some headlines. Uh,
my grandpa actually lives in
this area in Florida, um,
there's a, there's a community
called Babcock Ranch. I think
it's the first community that's
ever been completely solar
storage islandable, um, they
also built the buildings to
withstand high winds and be
elevated so they don't flood.
And over the last several major
hurricanes that they've
encountered, uh, they never lost
power and they were able to
provide shelter and resources.
Most recently,
for Hurricane Milton, they were
able to shelter more than 2000
Floridians there and save a lot
of lives.
In Hurricane Ian, on the next
page is a little bit about that.
Uh, the eye of the storm
actually went right over their
community, and they were the
only community that kept their
power, water, and internet in
the county when it passed over
them. And again, they provided
resources during that emergency.
Other hurricane examples, um,
there's lots during Hurricane
Sandy, um, in New Jersey, you
know, a large solar installer
reported.
Very minimal damage to the
panels, even the hardest hit
ones, proving that they're quite
durable, even in extreme weather
conditions, the school in that
state had a 232 kilowatt solar
system with supplemental diesel
generators that operated
independently of the grid, and
so they were able to save um
expenses and keep their power on
when fuel was quite scarce. Um,
hurricane Florence caused a lot
of fossil fuel and nu.
Clear plants in North Carolina
to be shut down for weeks, yet
Duke Energy solar panels were up
and running only one day after
the storm.
On the next page, Hawaii, which
we all know has had devastating
wildfires, has more than 40
resilience hubs and is
developing more to provide
needed resources year round as
well as coordinate emergency and
recovery responses and provide
power shelter and essential
community needs in times of
emergency. And then in Oregon,
which is also had a share of
devastating fires this year, 6
Oregon communities receive
federal funding to develop
resilience hubs to protect and
serve their communities during.
fire emergencies. Each hub will
provide resources and
programming year round and
provide additional support to
residents during emergencies
like wildfire, smoke, or heat
waves. Uh, one of the things
they'll have they'll be stocked
with supplies for emergencies
and also recruit, train, and
activate long-term volunteers
when disasters arise. These hubs
will coordinate emergency
management mechanisms to ensure
swift and cohesive disaster
response. And the key part of
this again is being able to keep
your power.
on and have these resources
during emergencies, which solar
and storage can support. I'll
just offer a couple other
examples. Um, one of the reasons
the New Mexico Municipal League.
is very supportive of this is
they are an insurer for the
municipalities in our state. And
they are, they're actually
working on their own, they're
working on getting solar and
storage on their office in New
Mexico, so they can help other
municipalities get these
resources for critical
infrastructure, particularly
like water and wastewater to
reduce risk.
Because it helps them be more
safe and more secure in times of
emergency. And then the US
military has committed to
turning all of its military
bases around the world, uh, into
microgrids by 2035. Again, for
some of these same
Same reasons, resiliency and
security. So back to this fund,
it'll be structured to
prioritize funding projects that
benefit rural communities. It's
actually language in the
rulemaking uh section of the
bill that outlines different
metrics, uh, for how projects
will be prioritized and it's
mandated that a majority of this
funding will go to our ural
communities because they need
the support the most to develop
these kinds of resources. It
would also serve community
that wouldn't be able to access
solar and storage without this
funding. It would make essential
community buildings and
infrastructure resilient.
would have significant long-term
operating costs would support
projects that have significant
long-term operating cost
reductions, projects that
support workforce development
and training programs and
projects that are geographically
diverse and dispersed.
And there's a couple of
examples. I'll just skip through
that kind of discuss how this
fund could operate and leverage
other types of funding.
And finally, in conclusion, we
found that communities
throughout our state really want
these kinds of projects. They
want to build solar and storage
projects that will save money,
make them safer and more
resilient, particularly in
emergencies and reduce
emissions.
However, most of our local and
tribal governments and schools
don't have capital to build
these projects or the staff to
access, you know, other types of
funding.
We have these unprecedented and
temporary budget surpluses from
the oil and gas revenue, as you
know, and this is really an
opportunity, a time sensitive
opportunity to invest in our
resiliency in our communities,
our safety, our security, and
also, you know, the
diversification of industries in
New Mexico. This fund will help
our communities overcome the
obstacles to build the solar and
storage they need and invest in
our futures for decades to come.
Thank you so much for the
opportunity to discuss this.
Thank you and thank you for the
presentation. We have a couple
of people on the list for
questions starting with
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for your presentation. I,
um, I'm curious when you had
these discussions across the
state, if, um, PNM or local
co-ops were involved in those
discussions.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative. Uh, we have
spoken with some co-ops and, and
I believe our sponsors have
engaged with PNM, um, we have
found that um there is a lot
there, we haven't found any real
significant opposition to this
at all. Um, we did actually
introduced the bill and pass it
last, um, or not pass it,
attempt to pass it last session
and, you know, none of those
groups came out in opposition
to.
This, uh, I think the scale of
the kinds of projects is so
small, but also impactful that
it doesn't really have any kind
of concerning impact on the
status quo in terms of the grid
and and the operation.
This, these kinds of projects
are similar to like a rooftop
solar installation.
OK, thank you for that. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Um,
So this would be off grid.
Uh, solar projects, not tied to
the grid.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
these would be grid-tied, but
the addition of solar or the
addition of the storage
component. It's like having a
diesel generator or something
like that, but it works in
perpetuity, whether or not you
have gas, right? It would ensure
that if the grid goes down,
those resources, whether that's
a wastewater treatment plant or
community center would not lose
power during emergency, but they
would likely be grid tied.
There's no requirement that they
would be but generally people
prefer to have be grid-tied and
then have the storage for
emergency scenarios.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
thank you, uh, Ms. Shaw, because
I know there's no capacity.
In the grid right now.
And so that's my biggest
concern, um,
Uh, is the capacity and the
infrastructure of the grid. Uh,
I know.
Because of personal experience
in my area, uh, they don't want
you tied to the grid.
And so that's my concern about
putting schools in rural New
Mexico, the co-ops don't have
the capacity in the grid for
that. Um,
The other part of it is, you
know, there's, there's some
issues with, uh, local, well,
well, it's, uh, solar
installers.
Um, across the state where we
need to figure out how do we
hold, how, how are they licensed
in New Mexico, first of all, and
how are they held accountable
when they're not doing what they
say they would do to the
individual, like a home,
homeowners. We've, I've had
several issues across the state
like that. So my, I'm, I'm all
for solar. I have solar on my
house. I have, uh, I have
everything you can imagine. I
want to be off the grid if I
have to be, um,
But I, I, there's no capacity in
the grid.
Madam Chair, Representative, um,
Thank you for that. And we
actually did a report recently.
I can leave you, I have one copy
with me. Um, we haven't done a
wide release of it, but I can
email a PDF to this and provide
paper copies to anyone
interested, but we worked um
with the initiative for Energy
Justice to kind of unpack what
we were hearing on the ground
because we've heard a lot of
stories about interconnection
challenges and people not being
able to access and interconnect
to the grid. And so this report
focuses most on the investor.
own utility territory, just
because of the nature of our
capacity with our research
agreement. We do want to
continue to investigate this
more in the co op territory, um,
I would say that
There are, we, we came up with
different, we got, we researched
and talked to a lot of different
stakeholders and came up with
policy recommendations to solve
some interconnection challenges
that are occurring. I would say
that there are areas that do
have capacity. There are open
feeder lines, um, when we, when
we were um completing this
report in uh when we were about
to design it at the end of
August, there was a filing in
I'm very in stock it at the PRC,
uh, interconnection variance
docket that after an independent
study, opened up 18 feeder lines
that had previously been closed
to interconnection. So I think
it depends on the area. There
are, there is some capacity and
you're absolutely right. We do
also need to do more to update
the grid, modernize the grid,
provide more transparency and
have more enforcement for the
interconnection rules, and
there's legislative solutions
and there's regulatory solutions
to that.
I have also heard the kinds of
stories that you've heard about
solar installers, and I think
there's consumer protection, uh,
you know, regulation and laws
that we could explore too that
are very important. There are
some very good solar installers
and I've also heard some horror
stories, so I think that there
are other legislative fixes and
regulatory fixes that can
address these issues and need
to, um, because we're missing
out on a huge economic
resiliency opportunity if we
don't. But there's also places
and people
And communities that could
actually
Benefit from this fund right
now, even in the situation we
have. And if I may interrupt
just for if you would send that
to Aaron.
Aaron will distribute that PDF
to all of us.
Thank you.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
Madam co-chair. I, um,
I, I think if we created this
fund, we might be putting the
cart before the horse. I think
we need to fix the issues that
we have that we know about
already before we create a fund
to implement things that are
actually, they could fail
because we have all those other
problems. And so that's a
concern for me. Um, I, I know,
um, everyone's using these
keywords of rural New Mexico.
Almost every single rural New
Mexico is a co op.
And so, uh, right now they, they
have the choice whether they let
you tie into the grid or not.
I'm not into mandates, um, but
maybe something needs to be
done. I don't know. I know the
co op I'm with right now does
not allow you to tie, you know,
to feed back into, to, to lower
your, your electric bill. Um, I
know PNM, uh, on a, a company
infrastructure that we were
trying to put in.
Said you cannot tie into the
grid because there's no
capacity. And so, uh, the
capacity issue, the, I think we
may just be putting the cart
before the horse, not that I
don't like the idea, um, but I
don't want to create a fund to
go into more things that we know
that there's issues. I think we
got a, we, we need to fix the
issues first, and then create
the fund. Just my opinion, but
thank you, Madam Chair
Representative, I may just
briefly respond to that, um, the
way that we're
approaching this fund this year
is, is like a 3 year pilot and a
smaller amount of money that we
looked at in the first time we,
we introduced this bill and um I
think that that smaller scale
and the geographic diversity of
our state, we would be able to
deploy that amount of funding
and, and bring back to the
legislature really strong uh
stories and evidence of the
benefit for that and the need
for more. The other thing I will
briefly
say, um, and is that there are
systems that include smart
inverters and zero back feed
systems and storage that um
allow for people to have storage
and be grid-tied without feeding
extra solar onto the grid. It's
my understanding that current
regulations aren't really
conducive to that here, so
that's something else that we
could look at, but I think that
this would have impact and not
and be able to be deployed even
with the current situation we
have.
I appreciate your feedback.
Thank you.
Thank you and we've got
representative Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for the presentation.
And my concerns are
With the consumers and Madam
Chair, if you'll let me read a
bio from one of my constituents.
It's, it's a pretty sharp bio.
So
It reads like this. It says, we
decided to put a solar in 2020
with a company based out of
Albuquerque called New Mexico
solar. They evaluated our power
usage and we settled on putting
a 700 kilowatt of power which
covered 90% of our power bill.
After we went through the
regulations, it took 8 months
of, uh, to get approval from the
power company.
We thought we were on the way.
We decided we would finance the
project.
Self-finance projects, so we
wanted 10%, we would finance a
project, so, so they wanted a
10% down.
Then pay as we finish each
phase.
So we were about 90% done, then
they wouldn't show up.
Wouldn't take our calls and
finally heard from them. They
were closing shop.
So 90% was finished, still
needed parts. It took us about 2
months to find someone that was
going to finish it up.
We had the
We had to find the parts where,
where they were missing order
and took another 3 months.
Another month for them to
Check wiring from New Mexico
solar.
All said and done, 60% over
budget.
Delayed one year.
We did finally receive the grant
money for 25% of the original
purchase price.
Then we had a hail storm 7
months ago, and we are having to
replace 20%.
With new panels.
But it has to go back to the
engineering because they don't
make the panels originally put
in.
So we are currently look for
looking for solutions to change
20% of the newer, new to newer
panels.
And trying to salvage as much as
we can to get the other 80%
running.
To me, that's alarming.
And, and, and it's these people
are 3rd generation dairy
farmers.
And it, it brings up the
questions, madam Chair.
About how we protect our
consumers.
And
If we have enough people in the
state.
Trained well enough.
To go out to these sites.
And
And see what the problems and
the issues are.
And in this bio,
In talking to Mr. Van der Dusen,
Offline, he told me that's not
the end of it. We had to go
back.
And we had to put washers on the
bolts that were holding the
panels.
Because the panel, the, the
material that was holding the
panels had wallowed out.
And we had to go back and put
washers and reinforce things and
redo the panels and
So
My concerns, Madam Chair, and,
and presenter are
How do we regulate
Something that's moving so fast.
And what do we need to do as a
legis legislators.
To make sure that the consumer
is taking care of.
And they're not
Buying these
I, I don't know if they're
faulty panels or not.
But
We have to have panels here that
will uphold the wind, the hail
storms.
So
I don't know if you have a
response to that and Madam
Chair, I'll, I'll go ahead and
take the response.
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you for sharing that and
I'm very sorry that your
constituent had those, those
horrible challenges, I think,
um, I think that story really
supports the need for some kind
of consumer protection
legislation or regulation. There
are other states that we can
look to Minnesota actually has
done a lot around consumer
protection and these kinds of
areas, um, but I would love to
work with you or talk to you
about
You know, what, what that could
look like and how that could
support it. I will say that from
my own observations and
experience, there is a very wide
spectrum, right? Most of the
companies I'm aware of that
operate in the area that I'm in
in our state, um, are very good
and upstanding, but I have also
heard stories like yours. So I
think that there is the
opportunity for regulation and
maybe even some kind of vetting,
especially for public entities
that are looking for bids.
on these kinds of projects to
ensure that they're working with
a trustworthy source, but you
know, I just would say that um
there is, there are examples of
many of these kinds of projects
being deployed very successfully
to the benefit of communities,
and that's a standard that every
part of our state should have,
so.
Thank, thank you for that. Thank
you, Madam Chair. And, and I
talked to another uh consumer,
constituent of mine and, and.
He was a retired engineer from
Los Alamos National Lab.
Excuse me, and
He had a rooftop.
Uh, solar system put on his
house.
He lives right across the alley
from my ex son-in-law.
Which, uh, I almost consider my
son-in-law still, but
That's beside the point. Uh,
And he told me that after the
company left, he got up on the
roof.
And inspected it himself.
And it took him months to get
that company to come back and
fix all the issues that they
didn't install right.
So, as a legislator, as we go
forward with these
With these
Promoting uh solar and stuff.
I'm very concerned about the
consumer and, and how we protect
the consumer and, and make sure
Because we're, we're moving
pretty fast on it.
And, and I want to make sure
that the consumer is taken care
of, they're getting good quality
products.
And for us to be successful in
the solar industry as a state.
That needs to be
Upfront
Just like the concerns of my
colleague, uh, Representative
Armstrong.
We need to be careful, we need
to proceed with caution.
And
And take care of these issues
that we have going on on the
ground. This is, this is what
happens.
At ground level, when somebody
is working with the solar
system. So.
Just some concerns as we go
forward and, and we push
legislation and, and everything
on these.
On the solar systems, how we
keep the consumer safe and, and
have a good product out there.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for your presentation.
Thank you, Representative.
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
Madam Chair, I have a couple of
questions, um, on your, uh,
Mexico voters who support
renewable energy sources. Can
you tell me where you got your
info on this. And the reason I
ask is, uh, I'm from the
Northwest and natural gas is 76,
and I'm surprised it's not
closer to 100, um, coal is 50
and I'm surprised it's not
closer to 100 as well. So I, I
don't wanna say these numbers
are suspect.
But I'm wondering where you got
them and who you talked with.
Madam Chair,
Representative, thank you for
the question. Uh, so we worked
with a nonpartisan research
institute called Embold
Research, very respected
pollsters and the full pole is
linked on the first slide with
the top line, if you go to that,
you can see it and I can share
more about the methodology with
you, but it was a bilingual
statewide poll in the full
results, they had some test
questions about demographics as
well as how um the
Respondents voted in the
previous presidential race, and
those responses almost exactly
matched our state's demographics
and the results of that previous
presidential election, which
gave me the impression that it
was a fairly accurate poll with
those test questions. So it was
a statewide survey that we
commissioned with the
nonpartisan respected institute.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, I'll
hold my breath on that then.
Next question, um, and more of
a, a statement. I was invited to
speak at a uh and rep Ellison
has probably been out there as
well, um, been invited to speak
at a ribbon cutting for a 1600
acre solar field.
Have you ever seen one of those?
Madam Chair Representative, I've
seen some of the large arrays up
in uh Taos County that Kit
Carson co op has, so probably
pretty close.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. I
guess my, um, I'm gonna, I'm
gonna take what California says
in this, Madam Chair, I'm gonna
say not in my backyard.
They are ugly.
20 years from now or 4 years
from now when I have a hailstorm
hit, uh, my neck of the woods,
and it, it runs 1600 acres
worth. Where am I gonna put all
those?
Madam Chair Representative, um,
the scale of the type of
projects that this fund would
support is significantly smaller
than the utility scale era
you're speaking of, uh, we're
talking about, you know, spaces
that
Local governments, tribal
governments, and school
districts already have, whether
that's rooftops, whether that's
a parking lot, you create these
shade structures on something
like that. So we're talking
about using existing resources
without taking away, you know,
untouched land and things like
that. And we also believe that
it's important for our
communities to direct their
energy futures and and have
democratic processes around the
installation of these kinds of
things too.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair, I
agree with you on that. I, I
think if there's a structural
already there and you wanna
Take your chances with XYZ Solar
Company and pray that it lasts
you for more than 9 months it
took you to get it in, and I
think you'll be OK. If not,
maybe what we do is we, um,
For every contractor that comes
into the city of New Mexico, we
make them put up a 20 year bond.
So that bond is there for 20
years and the product doesn't
last for 20 years, then.
Representative Zamora's friend
has an option to go back on that
company and say,
I got a, there's a $5 million
bond out there for whatever
amount of work you did, 10% of
it or whatever so that people
can say, OK, there's my money.
I can get it fixed and, and
we'll be able to do that. So
just a thought. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you.
I lost my list. I think
Representative Hamlet or senator
Senator Hamlin is next. I think
mine is just a comment because
of the conversations. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, one of the
things that because we're so
close to El Paso, we have to
worry about predatory solar
companies that come in from
Texas that are trying to sell
solar to New Mexico residents,
and they're doing it just
because they look at it as a
cash cow. And I talk about the
importance of supporting locally
owned solar companies. New
Mexico's solar full transparency
was actually a member of mine of
my chamber, and
um,
that is a horrible situation.
And when, when you mentioned New
Mexico solar, I knew exactly
what you were talking about. Um,
and you know, and, and we've got
a couple of things here to talk
about. And and number one is,
um, and it's, it's not the fault
of of your constituent in any
way. I always encourage people
when you're making that big of a
purchase, you should do research
on it.
And we have multiple locally
owned solar companies in Las
Cruces, and I researched the
warranties, how long the
warranties were, what they
covered, if it covered
installation or if it just
covered replacement of the
panels with the output was of
the panels, and I understand
that not everybody has the
capacity to do that. It's just
for me in my position, I had to
do that because I needed to make
the best decision for our solar.
But I do feel that like if there
is a way that we can either give
preference to locally owned
established solar companies that
have good rating. I mean,
there's something in here
because it's unfortunate what
happened with New Mexico solar
Group, but I have 3 solar
companies in my community that
have been there for 10 years,
um, or more, and they're good
companies. And so what can we do
to protect our good players.
And what can we do to make sure
that we don't have the bad
actors come in and take
advantage of people when they're
investing that much money into
something that long term is a
great investment, but we don't
want them to be hung out high
and dry on that. So that's and
and Alicia, actually, I leave
that to you because I just in
terms of working with you is
like, how can we do that? I love
the idea of a bond so that
people are protected.
Um, but I also want us to try
and encourage more locally owned
rather than companies. We had
Solar City come in many years
ago that had horrible contracts.
That would, um,
Hurt the people. It wouldn't
even give ownership to the
people who own the house if they
had a solar system on their
house. It was a lease.
And it was shady deal left and
right. And when I was getting
asked about it, I said go local.
You always need to go local
because at least you've got
contacts with that. So I
appreciate my colleague's
comments about that because we
know that this is an industry
that can help people. We have
certainly concerns, but I, I, I
would love for us to look at
ways that we can protect our
established good faith actors in
the solar industry and help
support them and do something
for the bad actors that are
going to
are not there for legitimate
reasons that I think many of us
really want to have happen. So
I'm really grateful and I've
loved working on projects with
you before, so I'm very excited
about this. Um, and I do
appreciate my colleagues having
those conversations because I
think there are some things that
we can do to tweak this, to make
this to where this is really
strong and beneficial for every
New Mexican, um, without,
without jeopardizing the things
that make our areas unique. So
I'm really grateful that you
brought it forward. So thank
you, Alicia. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. Is there anybody else
that'd like to be on the list,
uh, representative, uh, Allison.
Thank you Madam Chair.
My only concern is how much land
mass.
Uh, solar farms would take.
Um, past summer.
Uh, Representative Duncan and I
were invited to a solar farm
that was opened near Farmington.
And I think they said they
produced 75 megawatts.
I think it was 75 megawatts over
A field of 400 acres of solar
farm.
And
At nearby the four corners
generating station.
It produces 2250 megawatts of
power.
And they're situated on less
than 50 acres of land.
Imagine how many acres.
Uh, it would take to produce
2250 megawatts of solar power.
I think I would, uh, still enjoy
being surrounded by farmland
rather than a farm of solar
farms. So that's my only concern
with solar farms. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative, if I
may just say, and we've heard
these concerns as well. This
particular fund would be
probably projects that are
kilowatt sized that could go on
a roof or go on a parking lot
and not take up acres and acres
of farmland. So I just wanted to
share that the kinds of projects
we're talking about are small
scale and would have impacts for
the resilience of communities
with minimal impact to taking up
existing land or oversaturate.
creating our grid.
OK, did you say that you're
catering to the small kilowatt
power.
Madam Chair Representative, I
was saying that the kinds of
projects that are, that would be
supported, like we'd be
supported by this fund, uh,
would be
non-existing infrastructure
without taking up a lot of space
on other lands, so it could be
on buildings that, you know,
tribes, counties,
municipalities, school districts
on. It could be on critical
infrastructure like water and
wastewater, but it wouldn't have
that same kind of footprint. You
know, you could take a parking
lot that's already a parking lot
and put shade structures on that
without impacting on used lands.
So these kinds of projects are
much smaller scale than the
large utility scale farms you're
talking about.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Lujan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, uh,
thank you for the presentation.
I've been reading through it.
Can you just quickly tell me
how, what is the asking, uh, for
the fund.
The amount of money, I'm sorry.
Madam Chair Representative,
that's still up for debate, but
we were looking at a much
smaller amount over 3 years to
be a pilot, to, you know, have
some impact, um, at around 50
million to start for the fund
and then you would bond that, is
that correct, Madam Chair?
Madam Chair Representative, I'm
not sure what you mean. Would
you look to as an investment
fund and then look to have it
bonded and Madam Chair
Representative, I believe all of
NMA NMFA's funds are invested to
some degree, and the
consultation we've done with
them, their sense of this grant
fund was that the year we pass
it, they could deploy it by the
end of the year, open
applications and they honestly
didn't think it would, they
thought that there would be so
many interested parties lining
up.
that even though they do have
investment funds, it might not
have much of a return because it
would be deployed very quickly
because of the interest in this.
Perfect. And, and based upon
what MFIA's information and
saying that they could deploy
this in in uh.
A quick turnaround amount of
time, um.
It is important information for
us, uh, for all of us to have
because that tells us that it's
going to have uh the efficacy of
this and the, the need for this
and to deliver those uh the
response of having uh solar
energy, uh, for New Mexico is
really important. Um, I just
wanted to say this, you know,
have some of these comments,
Madam Chair, and if we look at
how, uh, renewable uh energy is
growing and is the demand of it
in.
And really what um.
What is being done in our state
is pretty remarkable, and I
think that this is this is a
forward thinking the continuance
of what we've already
established thanks to many
people and some people in the
room right now who established,
um, what we are doing, uh, with
renewable energies, particularly
with solar, the more that we, we
can, can you speak to what
happens when we have more
renewable energy and solar on
the grid, Madam chair.
Madam Chair Representative, I
think one of the most
compelling, um, reasons to
support this fund that I
discussed a bit in the
presentation is, is the need for
resiliency with disasters. Our
communities have been struck by
wildfires. I know a lot of
people right now are like having
trouble getting insurance for
homes and other things. And so
being able to actually have
spaces and our critical
infrastructure, secured.
By an energy source that's not
going to lose power during those
emergencies so that they're a
resource. I think is one of the
hugest benefits we can have is
that resiliency and that safety,
um, when we're dealing with
blackouts, brownouts, weather
events, uh, but then I think
there's also, you know, there's
an industry that, um, you know,
we have 300 days of sunshine,
the 2nd or 1st greatest, you
know, solar potential in the
country, depending on who you
talk to.
Many states are ahead of us in
solar generation. Our neighbor
Texas is the 2nd largest, they
have the 2nd most, uh, solar
generation in the country next
to California. Most wind, um,
and we're lagging behind and
it's a missed opportunity
because we have the sustainable
resource. It's a cheap source of
energy. I mean, there's so many
benefits, and then the cost
reductions for our communities,
you know, like local governments
that have small budgets and have
a lot of community needs when
they install something like this
and have it established, they
don't have
especially for like
infrastructure that is energy
intensive. If you have that
powered by the sun, you free up
a lot of money for other kinds
of community needs. So there's a
lot of benefits to this, and I
think, um, you know, economic
development and workforce
development benefits as well.
Thank you for all that and I, I
won't take much more time, but I
said, really the, the portfolio
approach, um, I don't think
it's, it's fully discussed in
here, but that you're, you're,
you're starting to talk about
that. There is a whole port.
fo li o approach of all the
benefits, the benefit portfolio
of what this does for for our
economy. And I think that this
is a
This is something we need to
invest in, and I, and I, I want
to thank you for coming and
bringing this forward and for
the continuation of this, um,
The source of energy economic
development uh conversation
because this is really the
direction that we need to head
in, and we already are, and we
can catch up and I think, um,
you, you, you're telling us
about Texas, we all, we, we get
a little competitive, but I
think that um that, that should
uh perk up our ears a little
bit. Thank you so much for the
presentation, the information.
Thank you.
Thank you for the presentation
today, um, you know, we have
solar on our house, and I love,
especially when we in the middle
of summer and don't have much of
a bill. That's, that's great. I
think for, um, for buildings,
county buildings, city
buildings, uh, it's, it's a
solution. Um, I'm just curious
as how long, um, if, how long
will it store that type of
energy.
For those types of buildings.
Madam Chair, um, that really
depends on the battery storage
that you get, um, and there are
many different options for, um,
for the length of that storage,
but it really varies depending
on the kind of storage you
pursue.
OK
Um, and I appreciate that. How
about, um, you know, you, you
talked about looking at some of
the technology to, because you
all are aware of maybe the
carbon footprint of
You know, such, such, you know,
all the, the machinery and all
the, the panels, that sort of
thing, um, has there been any
research or any progress made
into, uh, making that smaller.
Madam Chair, making what
smaller? I know that when we
talk about um.
You know, the panels are just,
you know, having, um, you know,
we talked about the windmills. I
mean, what happens to all that
if, once it's no longer being
used.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I think
there are ways to recycle some
of these components, and this is
certainly a concern that comes
up is also the rare earth
minerals that are used for the
development of all these other
things. There's a lot of nuance
and complexity to that, but um I
believe there are some recycling
options and repurposing options,
and I believe that it is
something that continues to be
explored because, uh, it's
important to the sustainability
of everything.
And I agree. I think that, you
know, we're, we're talking about
trying to
To make sure that we're, we're
using, you know, air and wind
and solar and but we also have
to look at what happens to the
products that we're no longer
using. So I would encourage you
to keep looking at that, um, and
I also, you know, with, I would
agree with Representative Duncan
regarding, uh, being able to
look at bonding. I think that
that's really important because
you know we hear those horror
stories all the time and maybe
we hear more down south because
I know we for a while we were
hearing about it all the time.
Um, and so making sure that
people, um,
Don't get into an investment,
then that does not pay off for
them. And sometimes, you know,
they, you know, you've got to
put a lot of money up front and
then, you know, then it
basically amounts to nothing for
them. So I would hope that you
all would, would really continue
looking into that.
Madam Chair, thank you. I, we
are very interested in looking
at consumer protection policies,
and I'm very interested in
following up with the members
who shared ideas like bonding
and other ways of doing that.
Uh, so we will definitely look
into that and also into the
different types of recycling
that are available. Thank you. I
appreciate your presentation
today. I thought it was very,
um, interesting and lots of good
information so I appreciate you
being here. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you committee
members.
All right, if we can look at
getting our next, uh, group of
presenters up.
And I think this is gonna be
done via Zoom.
Housing stability and economic
development.
All right.
Am I ready to go, madam Chair?
You are ready if you could
introduce yourself, um, what
your position is and then go
into your presentation and if
anybody else will be making a
presentation with you if you'll
have them introduce themselves
as well before the presentation
starts.
Absolutely, thank you, Madam
Chair. So, uh, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, my
name is Serge Martinez. I'm uh
one of the founders and um
member of New Mexico Center for
Housing Law, uh, a housing
policy think tank here in New
Mexico. My colleagues, uh, like
me are members of the faculty of
University of New Mexico School
of Law. We all teach and write
and work in the area of housing,
but I'm here today in my
capacity as a member of the
Center for Housing Law, which is
an independent standalone
nonprofit with me today is our
lobbyist Devram Tuai. I don't
know that he's.
Gonna, I'll be speaking today,
um, but in the event that I have
to, I have to zip out of here
for medical appointment and so
um if questioning is.
Torrid and exciting when it's
time for me to go, um, it's
possible that uh we'll be able
to take over, um, so I, excuse
me, thank you so much for
inviting us to talk today. Um,
I'm, I have a little, uh, a
PowerPoint that I'm gonna try to
share with y'all and um talk
about issues, we'll talk about
housing stability as an issue
that um.
Of importance here in New Mexico
and draw a line between that and
economic development, but also
explain some of the things that
we are pushing for an
initiatives we're working on
with 11 in particular actually
which is related to um eviction,
feeling of eviction cases.
So if you allow me to try to set
this up. Give me 2 seconds.
All right, of course I've
managed to.
All right.
So
Um, as I said, my name is Serge.
I'm, I'm from the New Mexico
Center for Housing Law.
Uh and this is already not
working. There we go, um, New
Mexico Center for Housing Law,
it's a recently formed
nonprofit, um, like I said, a
think tank, uh, that's dedicated
to promoting housing stability
and justice for the people of
New Mexico. We're trying to work
with everybody who will talk to
us to try to think of ways at
the local level, at the state
level, legislatively policy
Uh and this is already not
working. There we go, um, New
Mexico Center for Housing Law,
it's a recently formed
nonprofit, um, like I said, a
think tank, uh, that's dedicated
to promoting housing stability
and justice for the people of
New Mexico. We're trying to work
with everybody who will talk to
us to try to think of ways at
the local level, at the state
level, legislatively
policy-based to increase housing
stability for the people of New
Mexico. Um, the reason that we
think this is.
so important.
it
You know, it's been a long time
since I've tried to drive uh.
Uh, PowerPoint on Zoom, so my
apologies for being a little bit
out of uh out of.
Uh, practice here. So when we
say housing stability, I wanna
make sure um that I'm clear
about what we mean, uh, we
define it.
Not just us, this is sort of
generally how folks who talk
about housing instability use
it, um.
Difficulty paying rent.
Uh, living in poor.
In unhealthy, unsafe conditions
or overcrowded conditions,
having to move frequently or
spending the majority of
household income on housing
costs, right? All of these
things obviously contribute to
people's stability, but also.
Not challenging to draw a
straight line from housing
instability to economic
stability, uh, when you are
spending the majority of your
income on rent, you don't have
the ability to spend it on other
things, um, if you're having
difficulty paying rent because
you are spending on other things
that can create housing
stability issues. Obviously, we
don't want anyone living in poor
overcrowded conditions because
of our general preference for
not having that as well as um
the follow-on effects which we
have um there's been not as.
much attention paid to this from
a scaly standpoint, as you might
imagine, although recently folks
have really been focusing on
this, uh, some of the attention
has gone from trying to study uh
homelessness.
Really large but rather housing
stability, housing instability,
and what it means and what that
data is suggesting is pretty
uniform across the board, um,
especially as it relates to
educational attainment.
Students, housing stability in
early childhood is connected to
all sorts of um negative
educational outcomes, including
delays in readiness, cognitive
issues, um, mental health
issues, um, particularly
depression and anxiety that
students face.
that children face connected to
their housing situation stemming
from their housing situation,
and
Um, New Mexico data tells it
tells us that students who are
unstably housed are much more
likely than their peers to be
chronically absent and no
surprise if that, if you're
chronically absent, less likely
to graduate than their peers,
which we obviously see as a not
only educational but uh economic
development issue here in New
Mexico.
Um
This data that I'm showing you
is a little bit old, but um.
Uh
PD data from a from I guess
about 8 years ago.
Shows us pretty starkly what
happens when people are um
moving uh during school. School
mobility in this case, mobility
means you move from in and out
of a school, uh, during the
school year, um, and as you can
see from this chart.
The the there's very much,
pretty much a straight line in
terms of the number of times you
have to move and uh educational
attainment.
And reading and math.
And as you can see that number
gets more and more uh
pronounced, the older that
students get, there seems to be
a cumulative effect, uh.
And inversely, uh, inverse
effect on.
A number of moves and
educational attainment and so
we're really focused on and
concerned about um stable
housing for those reasons for
educational reasons, but in
addition.
Uh, the data suggests that
people who, children who move
frequently are more likely to
have chronic conditions, um.
But for less.
Um, physical health, um, it
causes destabilizing effects on
communities and neighborhoods
when families aren't able to,
you know, to stay long term to
create those roots and those
ties that happen and recent
there's been some relatively
shocking, I think, data.
Um, coming out that suggest a
close a correlation between
housing instability and being
overweight, obesity,
hypertension, diabetes,
cardiovascular disease, um, the
researchers theorized that it
means it's because if you're
moving a lot, it's harder for
you to make appointments, it's
harder for you to maintain
connections with particular
providers, it's harder for you
to do the things that someone
who has a more stable housing
situation is able to do and so.
As I said, we see pretty serious
effects from housing
instability.
And, uh, the most extreme
version of housing instability
is losing your housing, being
evicted, um, evicted families.
We see a whole panoply of
follow-on effects from that, a
material hardship, right, the
economic costs associated with
addiction, trying to find a new
way to get to your job, trying
to rebuild all of the ties and
supports that you might have had
at the last place you lived,
mental health, behavioral health
issues, physical health issues,
um.
It is uh.
Almost, I, you may have heard me
say this before, right? No one
gets evicted and moves to better
housing. When people lose their
housing, often what happens is,
for reasons that I'll go into in
a bit, right? They end up moving
to.
Neighborhoods that have higher
crime rates have.
you know, fewer services that
are less well advantaged, um,
into housing with that is worse
conditions, um, and the
destabilizing effect, right?
Basically.
Um, is constantly down it's
there's a downward pressure that
we see once folks have to leave
their housing, uh, which to some
extent is a feature of um the
eviction data market that I'll
be talking to you about in 1
2nd, but um this is all way I've
set up by saying.
Housing instability has pretty
serious deleterious effects on
individuals, on families,
communities, and right to our
entire state if.
Because of the educational
attainment and the follow-on
effects that come from that.
So we uh New Mexico Center for
Housing Law, uh, advocate for a
variety of policies uh to
address housing stability.
I'm only going to focus on one
today, but I wanna let you know
we also are keenly interested in
developing more affordable
housing, um, throughout the
state of New Mexico on making
sure that people who are, who
receive housing assistance are
able to use that through, for
example, um.
Prohibitions on discrimination
based on the source of someone's
income, for example, if someone
is receiving uh what used to be
called Section 8 housing choice
voucher, um, often people have
those vouchers and aren't able
to use them and so we think
could be.
It's an important thing for um
for the state to make sure that
folks are not being
discriminated against because of
that, um, uh, mobile home parks,
as you know, are one of New
Mexico's, New Mexico relies
heavily on mobile home parks as
a source of naturally occurring
affordable housing, um, and
many, many parts of rural New
Mexico have 40% or more of their
housing are folks who live in
mobile homes, not necessarily in
parks, all of them, uh, and we
have seen it.
influx in the state, not just
New Mexico, around the country
of private equity buying a
mobile home parks and.
pricing out folks who have been
living there and
Deaffordableizing those, so we
are gonna be focusing on that
over the next few years, uh, as
well, and it would support
efforts to address those and be
happy to work with anyone who
would like to talk to us about
that, um, today I'm just gonna
talk to you about the thing that
we've decided to focus on at the
moment, which is eviction
ceiling, which um
Is
Sorry, I mean back. Well,
broadly speaking, that means
shielding eviction court
records.
from public view, from more
important, more significantly
from uh the companies and firms
that want to use that data at
the preliminary stage of the
eviction process, um.
For reasons that I'll go into,
but give me a second if you
would to explain sort of a
little bit. I suspect most of
you are familiar with this
process of how this works, but
um in case you are not, the
eviction process in New Mexico,
right, you're not allowed to
self-help evict, you have to go
through the courts. Um, it
starts with a written notice.
The landlord will give the
tenant a notice that says.
Primarily, this is a question of
you have, um, you're you're late
on the rent, we also may see
eviction based on conduct,
someone has violated the lease
in some particular way, um.
Either way, it starts with a
written notice that says, I'm,
you have 10 number of 10 number
of days to fix this problem. In
the case of unpaid rent, it's 3
days before I'm going to file a
lawsuit and behavior and conduct
or at least violations, it can
be 7 days, um, or 3 depending on
what's going on, uh, and I'm
going to file this, I'm gonna
file a lawsuit to try to get you
evicted, so assuming that the
remedy the
default is not cured or
whatever, the tenant is being
accused of has not been been
addressed. The landlord will
file a complaint at.
The magistrate courts in most of
New Mexico here in Albuquerque,
it's typically done in our Metro
court, um, and the court will
set a hearing, which usually is
a week, a couple weeks after
that, um.
At that trial, there'll be a
determination of what happens
and if the tenant is found is
found to have violated the lease
or not.
You know, not paying the rent
and the landlord wants to
continue, they can be, have an
order of eviction issued and
eventually the sheriff's office
will come and remove the part
remove them from the, from the
home, uh, so that's what happens
from a tenant side, right? Um.
If the tenant, if the landlord
prevails, sometimes what happens
is the landlord gives a written
notice.
Um, the tenant
Um
Doesn't do whatever the landlord
is asking. The landlord files a
complaint, and for whatever
reason, the case gets dismissed.
Perhaps the
The tenant and the landlord
reach an agreement, perhaps they
have a trial and the court says,
well, the tenant doesn't owe
this money, or perhaps the
landlord, the, the tenant
doesn't have to pay the rent
because of the conditions of the
apartment.
Um
There's a, there's a, a panoply
of reasons, right, that folks
might.
So these cases may not reach a
final judgment of eviction.
And so you can't, you, there's
no guarantee, right? Just filing
of a lawsuit doesn't tell us
much about what's actually going
on.
Um
Uh,
what happens though, uh, is that
these records.
Are being used um by.
Outside sources to sort of
create data sets that.
are intended to inform landlords
on decisions how to help them
make decisions about um
accepting or rejecting a
particular tenant and so um
basically.
Any, any touch point with the
court becomes treated like
someone got evicted, even
though, as I've discussed,
there's a huge range of possible
outcomes, um, there are.
In this country there are over
2000 that we know of, right?
tenant screening companies. This
is a billion dollar industry
that scrapes.
Court records to.
Try to, you know, to create
files on individual renters that
they then sell back to landlords
to to help inform them on, uh,
you know.
Purportedly to help them make
good decisions about who to rent
to, um, studies show that about
90% of landlords report using
that tenant screening data, uh,
it's right, the data are a
little bit on that we have
access to don't tell us exactly
who those landlords are and
whether smaller landlords are
more or less likely to use that,
although one can, um, we, we
assume that smaller owners are a
little bit less likely to do
that, um.
But what happens is.
As soon as something gets filed
with the court, right that that
data gets scraped by, you know,
the, the AI bots that are
crawling the web, uh, going to
court websites and, and trying
to pull this data and then gets
repackaged for a
by one of these screening
companies who then sell the data
back to, back to tenants. These
are more or less ubiquitous,
like I said, 90% of landlords
report using this data, um.
And that presents some.
Potential problems and serious
problems actually because what
they're doing is they're as I
said, they're scraping this data
from court systems around the
country and any touch point with
the housing court.
gets coded as
Eviction, right? Uh, a case gets
filed.
That's treated as a negative,
treated like an eviction. No
nuance as to what exactly has
happened, was this case
dismissed was the, you know, did
the.
Kind of pre prevail at trial,
even if the tenant himself has
filed the lawsuit that will get
coded as an eviction um.
And the algorithms are, you
know, they're like yes or no,
there's not a nuanced, well, you
should think about this, here's
something you need to know and
take into consideration, um, the
algorithms are.
You know,
They're pretty they're they're
binary in what they, what they
are telling us, and that's what
the landlord sees, right? The
landlord doesn't see what goes
into that, they just see the yes
no decision and uh many, many,
many landlords are making
decisions based on this sort of
AI algorithmic approach to
tenant selection that is based
on.
Faulty data or incomplete data.
Right? Because the, the data
that we, that they're getting
doesn't tell you exactly what's
going on, it just tells you this
person has somehow been
connected to the courts, um, uh,
what this does for landlords is
it gives them, you know,
incomplete, inaccurate data that
doesn't necessarily tell them
what they really need to know
about about a particular tenant
and for tenants it, you know,
causes serious effects for their
ability to.
get housing or to maintain
housing of the quality you know
that they are currently living
in the next time they go to find
a place. It marks someone
basically forever, uh.
And having been evicted, right?
what some scholars, uh, in this
area refer to as the scarlet E,
uh, for eviction, it creates
people to have poor future
housing prospects because you
are inevitably gonna be pushed
down the housing market because
of the uh, you know, the, the
difference in landlord's
willingness to take a chance or
to rent to you. There are other
and with all the collateral
consequences that we've
discussed, uh, about that,
right? um, employing.
mental, physical health, um,
education and all of the the.
The negative impacts on the
housing that we see education we
see with unstable housing.
So what we are proposing and
what we're asking the
legislature to consider is
eviction sealing legislation,
right? 12 states and the
District of Columbia already
have some form of ceiling
legislation and it's going on in
other states, um, we've
conducted an in-depth study of
all the current legislation and
talked to lots of policymakers,
lawyers, uh, housing advocates,
um, about this and how it works
and best practices, um.
So basically,
Um, eviction ceiling
legislation.
Wood, seal eviction filings at
the time of filing, right?
Because as soon as those are
filed, right, you can't say,
well, we'll just see what
happens and then decide to seal
it because by then that data has
already been gathered by um by
the AI.
Algorithmic bots, I'm not a, not
a computer person, um, what that
does is, um, what a ceiling
would do is like I said, make it
so we're gonna keep this from
make this not visible to public
view until we see what happens
in this case, and at that point
we'll figure out what's gonna,
whether this will could be
publicly available or whether
we'll maintain it under seal.
Uh, excuse me, the.
Um, the
The benefits of doing something
like this, right? Um, are.
Information accuracy, making
sure that folks aren't being uh
coated as having had an
eviction uh or getting
incomplete information out
there, um, and also protects the
integrity of the judicial
process because.
You know, the
We believe that the folks who
should be making determinations
about this are the courts and
that we shouldn't be leaving it
to an algorithm to decide
whether uh in particular outcome
is going to negatively affect
somebody.
Um
Eviction ceiling, the way it
works as we've, you know, in the
bill that we've um got.
Uh
Proposed and what we've learned
from best practices from folks
around the country, again, is
that cases are should be sealed
at the point of filing. We
already do this in cases, for
example, juvenile cases are all
sealed at the time of filing, so
they can't be seen uh by the
public, but would be unsealed if
an owner is granted possession
by the court, so.
As long as the outcome is
uncertain, we're gonna keep that
sealed, but if, if the tenant is
in fact evicted, um, those would
be unsealed, um, but that also
we would reseal those cases
after 3 years, the idea being
giving folks the opportunity to,
you know, to not be stuck
forever with a, with an eviction
judgment out there on their
record, um.
The um.
Courts, we would want them to
have the ability to seal the
cases at their discretion before
3 years if everybody agrees, if
it's in the interests of justice
and to have limited exceptions
for dissemination of these of
these of this information,
whether that's for lawyers,
judges, court staff who are
working on cases we've heard
about, uh, the District of
Columbia has a law like this
that they thought maybe worked
too well it occasionally kept
people, people's lawyers from
accessing information about the
cases that
They needed to have or folks who
might have another compelling
need, whether that's government
officials, whether that's
researchers, journalists, and
whatnot who could explain to a
court why they need this access
and.
That the court would then be
able to make this.
Available
Um
You know, we
We want to make sure that.
Or I wanna, I guess it
reiterate when I say ceiling,
right, I don't mean expungement
in the same way that we have
currently in New Mexico, uh,
rules about how to expunge
criminal cases. We back in 2020,
right? The, the law was changed
to make it a more streamlined,
straightforward process to
expunge convictions and
non-convictions, uh, in the
criminal realm.
Um, the reason that we say
ceiling, not expungement, is
because of that front end
sealing process that would make
this not this data not available
to uh.
The
The companies that are packaging
this information.
Until we have some sort of
determination by a court of
what's happened in this case,
because they, you know, they do
the, they scrape the scrape the
cords, uh, records daily for
this information. So even
waiting, you know, until we have
a hearing to decide whether to
seal or not is likely to be uh.
Not as helpful as, as we want.
Um
And
Uh
Like I said, we have a lot that
we um wanna do, we've just,
we've been around for just for a
year. This is the first thing we
wanna work on, and um I'll be
happy to take questions about
this.
Let's see if I can get this
right. No, probably not.
Thank you. All right,
Representative Armstrong.
Thank you Madam Chair. Uh, I
have to admit the only job I was
ever fired from was by my
husband for renting to bad
renters.
I, uh, I always took care of all
of that and um and I didn't use
a company, and I, I have a giant
heart, which is really bad
sometimes.
Uh, and so, uh, and this is in a
small town, and we have some,
uh, a 4 plex in Albuquerque.
But ultimately, bottom line is,
The landlord seems to always be
the bad guy.
And um
And Madam Chair, you know,
whether we're trying to protect
our other people that are there
in the 4 plex.
Uh,
Against animals, drugs, domestic
violence, pest control, uh,
where we have a mortgage on the
property, we're paying
insurance, property tax, uh, we
put time, energy and effort into
maintenance, including the pest
control and, and just
maintaining the property.
And so when I, when I look at
this as a whole, uh, Madam
Chair, I'm trying to think of.
Questions in, does it always go
to court? or do you post a
notice and then sometimes the,
the, uh, renter just says, OK,
I'll leave.
So it doesn't always go to
court. Is that correct? Uh the
chair representative.
Uh, correct, these don't, these
don't always go to court.
There's
In fact, there's quite a bit of
data that suggests that the
simple, you know, threatened.
Telling someone, you know,
giving them that initial notice
or just good communication
between landlord and tenant
leads to a lot of informal
resolution or folks.
You know, leaving of their own
accord, um, those don't ever,
don't go to court, and those
also are not going to be
captured by the services, these
landlord information services,
right, that are, that are trying
to gather this data and
repackage it and send it to and
sell it back to landlords, uh,
those things are.
Um, you know,
The small
Informal interactions that
you're discussing are.
They're known only to the to the
two parties who are involved and
that's not really the focus of
of what um we're talking about
here, here with this bill, this
is rather data that has been
taken from the court's own
website and then repackaged and
sold back without really nuance
or understanding or explanation
of what happened back to
landlords.
I thank you for that. Thank you,
Madam Chair. I, I, um, I agree
that sometimes that, you know,
the, the landlord gets a bad rap
and sometimes the renter gets a
bad. I agree with that. Um, and
so who would be in charge of, of
managing the ceiling and the
unsealing of this information.
Um
Madam Chair Representative,
thank you so much for that
question. So this would be the
ceiling would be at the front
end would be the uh
administrative office of the
courts.
Uh, we have.
Uh, sent them a, I believe, a
dis a discussion draft to talk
about this, um, it's our
understanding that this is
something that is done pretty
commonly, like, as I said with
juvenile cases and certain other
types of family, family law,
family matters, um, domestic
matters is the word, uh,
currently, the unsealing would
take place with the individual
judges, uh, you know, who are
working on the particular cases.
Uh,
Then that spread across all the
judges uh throughout the state.
So, uh, Madam Chair and and
presenter, have you done an
analogy on what it would
actually cost the court system
to do this. Additional funding
that they will be coming and
asking us for.
Um, Madam Chair Representative,
uh, I, we have not, we have, uh,
only recently got the most, the
latest, the finalized, I
believe, draft to share with
them and try to get their input
on, so I, I can't answer that
question.
Uh, I'm just curious, uh,
because
Uh, I can guarantee you they're
gonna ask us for more money to
to do the, the job. And I think
they're, they're pretty
overwhelmed right now, just, um,
as it is. The, the other thing
is, I, I think the majority of
these cases are just resolved.
Do you have any idea or any data
on how many
Or can you even collect the data
on how many actually get
resolved and don't go to, uh, to
a judge.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative,
certainly that data is uh
collectible in terms of cases
that are filed that then don't
result in a, an order of
restitution or some other order
by the court that are either.
Dismissed for lack of
prosecution or dismissed for
some other reason, um,
anecdotally, which regrettably
is the best I can do, it's a
lot, right? Maybe 50%, uh,
because folks either self evict
as you, as you discussed, or
they work it out in, in some
way, right? Which actually goes
to the point that I was making
before, even in those cases.
Once the case has been filed,
regardless of who has filed it,
these, um.
Algorithms will pick that up and
code it as a negative as an
eviction, without any knowledge
of what happened and so we're
seeing, you know, even
conservatively, if that's 30% of
the of the cases that are filed,
those are.
Going to be held against
somebody.
Uh, in their future efforts to
find future housing when
there's, you know, there's no
nothing to suggest that that
that is accurate or the way that
it should be used.
Uh, one more question, Madam
Chair. What is the timeline if
you go through the court
process.
Uh, all the way, if it was, uh,
say it was a removal, what is
the timeline on that?
So Madam Chair Representative,
it's
Uh
I can tell you what the the the
numbers are on the statute,
right? You.
The first day you missed the
rent, you're late on rent. The
landlord gives you a 3 day
notice. After 3 days, the
landlord can file a lawsuit to
have you evicted, that is
required by law to be heard
within 7 to 10 days, so, you
know, 10 days minimum from the
first day that rent is due, you
could actually find yourself um
at court once that's a, that's a
trial that's you know, this,
there's none of the um.
The preliminary stuff that
happens in many other types of
cases and eviction matters in
eviction court, they're called
summary proceedings, and that's
a trial you have right there. If
you are ordered at the.
A person is ordered evicted at
the trial, the statute says the
court can give you 3.
I have to give you 3 to less, no
less than 3 and no more than 7
days, uh, before a writ will
issue, that's the order from the
court to the.
A sheriff to go remove you from
the house. Typically, the courts
will give you up to give you 7
days if there are kids or pets
or folks who have particular
needs in the apartment, um,
before that red wheel issue and
then
And then they take, you know,
the landlord can come get that
writ, take it to the sheriff,
and then the sheriff will go do
that as, you know what, as early
as they, as quickly as they can,
some of that is dependent on how
busy the sheriff is at that
time, and what they can do, but
so at its shortest, right, we're
talking about 3 weeks from start
to finish.
Um
Uh, for the whole eviction
process.
OK, thank you for that.
Obviously you can tell I never
have filed in the, in a court
for to evict any of my tenants.
They all left willingly, um,
most of them owing me money and
with major major damages left
behind, uh, or police reports
because of domestic violence. So
not all renters are bad. I, I
get that and I, I feel for the
ones who are deemed on this. I,
I seems like there would be a
better way to, instead of
concealing them, but making the
report different.
Um, and, and managing that
report, but it's interesting,
uh, information, and I thank you
for your presentation.
Thank you, Representative Lujan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for the presentation, um.
Madam Chair, when I was
Young college student.
I, I had, I had to rent. I lived
in Albuquerque and.
I rented in a few different uh
locations and one of the things
I always asked was what was
going on with this information
that they I had to report and I
didn't even have.
At that time, probably, you
know, a credit score at all or
anything like that, but it was
used against me and it was
against my friends, um, and
these reports that were, were
genuinely, you know, with
students that need to to find a
rental places because I, I
didn't want to live on campus. I
lived on campus. I didn't like
it, so I wanted to live off
campus and, you know, eventually
found a place, but I found a
place and maybe not such a safe
area, um, at one time.
And
had to, I guess, wait until I
got older and then had, uh, you
know, had good credit or or
things in my favor so that I
could have some kind of report
or whatever this report was at
the time that
That um landlords.
Um, would get information on me
and and then make a decision
whether I'd be, you know, uh,
high risk, low risk. I'm not
sure all the information, but
thank you for breaking that down
because I always kind of
wondered what was going on with
that, and I always thought that
there was something kind of
maybe, um, not right, if you
will, with uh some of the the
processes, but I do agree it's
not, you know, the risk goes
both ways, um.
For those who are looking for a
place, uh affordable place to
live and rent and for landlords
to really take on the risk, but
can you, uh, explain to me, is
there, do landlords have
insurance to protect them from.
You know, certain kind of risks,
um.
In providing uh housing, Madam
Chair.
So Madam, I, I mean, almost
certainly the answer is yes,
right there is probably
landlords who do not, but um.
It is a standard business
practice for landlords to carry
some sort of insurance, you
know, to cover these sorts of
things, uh, to cover damages
and, and whatnot. I can't speak
to the efficacy or how much that
costs or you know the extent of
coverage, so it's gonna vary.
Tremendously right, especially
in a place like New Mexico that
has such a variety of landlords,
uh, but yes, uh, I would be
surprised and alarmed as a
lawyer if I found that to, to
learn the landlord, there was a
landlord that didn't have
insurance, but, you know, I
will, I, I can't speak to the
details or or how satisfied
folks are or how effective that
is in a particular situation, if
I could just um.
pick up on something that you
said and that um.
We've sort of discussed here,
right? The, the ceiling that we
propose.
Is not an effort to deny anybody
information that might be, you
know, useful to them in, in
making a determination about
whether someone has been evicted
or not evicted, right? What we
are proposing is that the
information be sealed at the
point of filing an unsealed.
Only if someone is actually
evicted because, you know, we
don't, we understand that folks
might be interested, have an
interest in having that
information, what we're pushing
back against is the information
being inaccurate, insufficient.
Um, lacking in nuance and
lacking in sort of explanatory
power.
And being
Plugged into algorithms that
don't have the ability to suss
this out either and waiting
until the point where someone
has actually been evicted before
we unseal that and make that
information available to allow
future landlords to make
informed decisions about that.
And so this doesn't go to good
tenant, you know, shielding,
protecting tenants who um.
Or
Depriving landlords, I should
say, of information that they
may find salient but rather
being judicious in what
information is, when information
is available, what sorts of
information does become public,
um, and.
Making sure that we're not
feeding into this billion dollar
industry that is not looking for
nuance, but just doing a, you
know, red flag, green flag, uh,
algorithm and with my sincere
apologies, I have a pressing
matter that I need to step away
for, uh, our lobbyist Devrim,
who I think many of you know is
um gonna step in, I'm sure ably
and um Madam Chair, committee,
thank you so much for taking the
time to listen to me and on
behalf of New Mexico.
Center for Housing Law, we
appreciate your time and look
forward to opportunities to work
with you to craft solutions for
New Mexicans who are um facing
housing instability. Thank you
so much.
Thank you and we'll go ahead and
just in the presentation I think
uh right now, uh, that she was
the last on the list, so I thank
you for your presentation.
Thank you, ma'am Chair. Thank
you, everybody. Bye now. Thanks.
Bye-bye.
Already.
Thanks, Deren. We're, we're
good.
Thank you, madam. All righty.
um, next we've got.
Earned wage access.
And they are also by Zoom.
Mhm
I was talking without.
My camera on or my sound on
apology.
Madam Chair, my name is Ryan
Naples. I'm uh the director of
public policy from from daily
pay. I, um, appreciate the time
to
Um, for this committee to
Um
To
Hear us, I'm, I'm joined by um
some other colleagues you're
gonna.
You're going to hear from and um
I want to start with, um, a, a
deck that I'm.
going to be sharing
Um, via Zoom, the, um.
Um, one second, and
The, OK, I can't share.
So if we could get uh whoever
you you're have with you they
could everybody could uh
introduce themselves and what
their position or or um how they
are related to, um,
Your, your, your, um,
Agency and then um go ahead and
dive into the presentation.
Yours assemblyman knew.
Thank you very much, Ryan. Um,
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
member of the uh New Mexico
House of Representatives. My
name is Yuy Wen. I am certainly
uh honored to be here. I am
currently the assembly member
for uh Nevada State Assembly
serving in District 8.
Mandy, if you want to go next.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Manny Alvarez. I am
currently the founder and
president of Bridge Council
Strategies, uh, policy
consultancy that helps bridge
conversations around regulation
and policy across disparate
stakeholders, and I am the
former uh uh commissioner of
banks in California.
And I am Nancy Koman Chavez. I'm
public policy and affairs
manager for the Western states
for daily pay.
Thank you and, and go ahead and
start the presentation.
Thank you. Um.
So earned wage access is a
financial technology. It's been
around since about 2012, the
company that I work for Dailypay
was founded in 2015, uh, the way
it works is we signed contracts
with businesses, and then we
integrate with their payroll and
their time and attendance
systems. It takes about 4 to 6
weeks for that integration. At
that point, anyone who works for
Um, these companies that are our
clients are able to download our
daily pay app. Uh, it doesn't
matter if they work one hour,
uh, a payroll period or, or 100
hours. Um, the people who then
choose to download our app, are
able to see in real time how
much they make throughout the
day and the payroll period. Our,
our system updates 4 times, um,
4 times a day, so we know if
someone goes home in the middle
of the day and does not have a
vacation time, so it's an
accurate reflection of how much
someone is making.
and a net amount of income on
our app that people are able to
see. If they choose, uh, again,
this is an entirely voluntary
program both to download the app
or to uh to do anything on it,
people are allowed are are able
through our our platform to uh
pay themselves early, so they're
able to access the wages that
they've already earned, um, on
our platform, people can do
that, uh, instantly for a, a one
time transaction fee of its.
either between $3 or uh 350 or
or um.
Or they're, I think a small
number of people um have a, a
fee of $399 but the majority of
people, like 99% are between
$3 and $350 and
If people want to um.
pay themselves early without a
fee. They're able to do that.
They just have to wait until the
next business day, um, those are
the
Um, the parameters of how people
are able to gain access to their
um to their wages, uh, that
they've already earned. So we
essentially are um like.
Like an ATM for your, for your
paycheck. Um, there are no other
hidden fees. There's no
origination fee. There's no
credit check. There's, um,
there's also no uh uh
requirement to repay. There's um
there's also no late fees or um
or or penalties or interest that
accrues if say the employer goes
out of business and the EWA
amount is not, is not settled
after they've already accessed
their, their earned wages. So
for the, for the consumer.
were very different from the
traditional, from the
traditional lending product
because of how, of how we're
structured, um.
The, you know,
People use daily pay mostly
because they have a uh a
frequency of pay issue. We'd
like to say that we don't, you
know, solve for income
insufficiency. There's no, you
know, financial technology that
can really solve for that. But
what we do solve for is, um, or
help people with is save money
because of how low cost our our
services and low cost or no cost
compared to everything else
people can um
Everything else people will do
in order to solve a short term
liquid liquidity need, um, in a,
in addition,
I would say employers um use us
because of the fact that.
Um, you know, it helps kind of.
Um, uh, it helps retain their
workforce. It reduces employee
absenteeism because they're able
to see the amounts that they're
making throughout the day in the
payroll period, um, employers
also like that there is a
savings tool, so twice a year we
do work with a nonprofit called
America Saves that encourages
people through an in-app message
that we send to see that they're
able to afford if they're able
to afford to do so. And we also
offer a free, um, financial
counseling and education service
through uh a nonprofit called
the.
Coordinated assistance network,
um.
We, you know,
have seen as well that employees
are more likely to pick up
shifts, um, if they're, if
they're.
Oh, after they start, um.
After employers start offering
daily pay, um.
But really, we are a money saver
for, for our users. It's why
the, the people that, um, use us
are are opting to do so and the
research that we've done
beginning in 2021 shows that um
we've, you know, saved people
between $600 and $900.
Based on
Um
Or compared to what they were
previously doing.
Um
The either to to uh solve a
short term liquidity, uh, need,
so things like putting, putting
expenses on a credit card, but
they're not able to actually pay
for that. And then the credit
card interest accruing or, you
know, overdrafting a bank
account or really just like
paying a bill late and having a
bill late fee and then interest
on that. So comparing that to
either $0 or $3.50 that's really
where, um, we help with, with
saving people money, um.
You know
We have had research to, um,
more like, uh.
I wouldn't say quality of life
surveys, but more like mental
health checking surveys about
how EWA does help people feel um
more comfortable and and less
stressed managing their finances
because they know they have
access to the money that they've
already earned. If, if they need
it, um.
And then I would also say, you
know, we are a low, we are a
data minimalization company and
we have um the top of the line.
Data security systems, um,
details here in the, in the
slide which um
I, uh, you know, I can.
Go into more detail and if
anyone has any questions, but
really it's we, um,
We don't need people's uh names.
We don't need people's
addresses. We usually just ask
for, we don't, we only ask for
their bank account information,
the last four digits of their
social and their employee login
ID. That, that's it. Um, we do
ask now for, I believe their zip
code, um, based on the fact that
like the EWA industry is
regulated differently state by
state.
Um, and that's.
That's earned wage access in a,
in a nutshell, and daily pay in
a nutshell, and happy to take
any questions. Um.
If anyone has any.
Many will go now and he would
speak about uh in which access
and good for people.
Ma, thank you so much, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee, um, as, as I
mentioned during my
introduction, I'm the former,
um, I'm the former commissioner
of banks and financial services
in California and during my
tenure as commissioner, the
department, uh, our department
started to see
Um, a number of earned wage
access companies crop up and so
I was really engaged at the
outset and some of the dialogue
around um how to view and how to
regulate earned wage access
products.
Um, uh, to contextualize where I
came in during the in this
conversation, um, there had been
a bill, a legislative licensing
bill, um,
Uh, in California that did not
pass and so when that licensing
bill failed, uh, my department
had to figure out what to do
about this, this new product and
the the tension there was that,
uh, you had a number of vocal
stakeholders that believed.
Uh, that believed that the
product was essentially another
form of a payday loan or or a
personal line of credit.
And as we dug into that, we
realized that that actually
created some difficulty, not
just on the company side in
terms of compliance, but also on
a supervisory side. So, um,
So, so we approached it a little
differently because we also
realized that the cost structure
of earned wage access products
by and large, uh, was much, much
more favorable to the end
consumer than say a typical um
uh triple digit interest payday
loan or um
Uh, or, you know, paw pawnshop
alternative.
Um, and so, as, as Ryan
mentioned, the structure of an
earned wage access loan is, is
fairly straightforward, uh, most
workers in the United States are
paid on the 1st and the 15th and
earn wage is simply provides a
mechanism for um for employees
to to access the money that
they've already earned if it
falls in between the first and
the 15th.
We, um, we thought that was a
net positive for consumers, and
so, um, you know, we, we
undertook this process of, of
supervising the um the industry
in in a manner that wasn't that
wasn't pigeonholed in any in any
one of the uh
The licensing regimes on the
books in California.
Uh, as I mentioned, some
consumer advocates did oppose,
uh, were strenuously opposed to
uh to that form of regulation
because they, they fundamentally
disagreed with the view that
these products are, are anything
but a form of payday loan. Um,
we, of course, uh, we, of
course, took a different view,
and that's, that's why we, we
approached, uh, we approached,
um,
Supervision and regulation of
these products as uh as kind of
a uh uh a custom, a custom
endeavor. Thank you, Man.
I I remember when, can you
please share about Nevada. Thank
you so much, um, again, thank
you for the opportunity, Madam
Chair and member of the
committee. Um,
Uh, Nevada Senate Bill 290 was
passed um in July of 2023, and
Focus is on regulating the
earned wage asset services which
provide employees with early
access to their earned but
unpaid income are bill
stipulates that these services,
which are becoming increasingly
prevalent in our digital age
should not be deemed as loans or
money transmissions by creating
a licensing system overseen by
the commissioner of Financial
Institution, um, Nevada Senate
Bill 290 ensure that businesses
providing these services adhere
to proper practices.
Um
Ultimately, the bill looks to
foster innovation in financial
services, while also ensuring
oversight and accountability to
protect employees' interests.
They're, thereby striking a
crucial balance between
financial flexibility and
security for Nevada's worker.
Um, I was also asked if there
were pushback in terms of
feedback from um the uh everyday
uh citizen of Nevada and the
The most that we had to do was
educate, um, our consumer again,
at the, the digital age that
we're in now and with all these
financial tools that are
available, uh, we just need to
go through an education process
and ensuring that people
understand that this is an
option that
Truly access the fund that you
already earned. This is not a
loan product. This is not
something that there will be um
a um
Some sort of catch, uh, where
there are people
Access these services, um, in my
uh term in the legislature, my
financial uh literacy uh bill is
the main focus of why some of
these legislation that we um
passed in Nevada makes sense
because this is part of
financial education and
literacy, so earn which access,
the way that it's presented and
the way that it was passed in
the badass set the standard uh
across the board for uh our
consumer to be protected as well
as accessing.
things that they have already
earned.
Thank you so much as I remember
when, uh, Madam Chair, now we're
moving to questions if you guys,
if the committee has any.
Thank you. Uh, do we have, we
don't have anybody on the list.
Does anybody have any questions?
Representative. You can do it,
Madam, I believe in you. No, I
just had a procedural question
because I'm a nerd and I like to
do my research. I
like to do my research is for
Nevada was that Senate bill 290
or 209, I think there might be a
typo in the handout. I just want
to know so I can look it up.
Uh, Madam Chair representatives,
uh, that is correct, the handout
have an error. Uh, we fixed it
during the slide show, but it is
set at Bill 290.
OK, thank you. That's all I had.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, uh,
I, I guess my question is, first
off, do we need a law for this
daily pay to become a
Um, a thing for,
Both employees and employers in
the state of New Mexico.
So I would say that the um.
It's true that
We're operating in all 50
states, uh, I think the large
majority of financial products
are
in the country are are regulated
at the state level. I think that
the uh
You know
Madam Chair, I think the um.
The other
The other reason why, um, we
think it's appropriate now is
the um.
The for
We work with companies to, so
we're essentially vendors and
the corporate compliance, um,
Attorneys that we work with, um,
want to see that there is um
government insight into
The um
Into into our industry. So
really this is um something that
is timely now because of just
the maturity of, of the
industry, but also um the like,
uh, I would say.
Compliance needs um of of of the
companies, but then I also do
think that we, we are at a place
of of growth in the industry and
we want to be sure that
consumers continue to be
protected, um, and that the best
practices of the industry are
codified and that there, you
know, we don't, there isn't a
scenario where a company.
Saying that they're earned wage
access actually does not do all
these things that, um, you know,
makes EWA different from Malone,
um, and so, so those are
probably 3 most important
reasons like protecting
consumers and continuing and
codifying that, um, the maturity
of the industry and then the,
the compliance needs.
Thank you, Madam Chair, at the
risk of sounding rude, that
didn't answer my question.
My question was, does the state
of New Mexico need this, need a
law in order for this to be a
reality for the citizens of the
state of New Mexico. Martin, do
you have an answer for that?
Oh
Sorry,
so, and that's my point. If, if,
if the presentation would have
come with, um, an opinion, um,
from, uh, the state of New
Mexico, then we might be able to
understand whether or not we
needed this as a law, and that's
my confusion right now. You're
presenting something, but I
don't know in reality whether it
needs to be a law and so that's
my question.
Right, Madam Chair and committee
members, so I can answer that,
so part of the reason why
We do believe a law is needed is
because
The way that our representative,
the way that we are, um,
The way that we are structured.
We look a little bit like alone.
We look a little bit like a
payroll company. You look a
little bit like a money
transmitter.
So there is not regulatory
clarity about how we should be
Licensed or regulated at the
state level. And so the
I would say the, the main
Like reason for why a law is is
is needed in a, in a, in a very,
like, factual way is because of
the fact that it is not, it is
not clear based on how EWA is is
structured about how we should
be regulated, right? How we
Like, if we should be allowed to
operate, and if so, under what
regulatory regime. So based on
that confusion, it is an
important, it is an important
time to have a wall like this to
allow for EWA to continue to,
to, to continue to operate in
the state.
And it also I should say, the,
the, the bill that we would want
to uh work with you all to pass.
Explicitly says that
You know, there should be no
confusion. This is a EWA license
that licenses UWA's own
financial product. It is not a,
and, and when we operate as
such, it's not, is not also
alone. It is not also my
transmitter. It is not also a
payroll company. It is just EWA.
So that, that is a crucial need
based on the fact that we look
like a lot of different things
at once.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. Representative Lujan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you for the presentation
from everybody, uh, um, and to
further answer, um, rep Duncan's
question. This is a consumer
protection, uh, type of policy.
So can this industry already,
does it already exist? Yes, it
already exists. Does it need
regulation and do consumers need
protection and, and definition
of, of, of what this industry is
or what, what this product is,
yes, we do need to have that
because
You can turn on your television
right now and you can, you know,
there's advertisements either
on, on, on television or
there's, there's advertisements,
you know, on the internet or
whatever for these, this type of
um.
Service, but what we would do,
um, here in New Mexico under
this bill before these this
industry really moves in and
gets a full, um, if you will
control or have um
Have themselves as vendors, we
would be able to regulate them.
And I think that's it. So it's a
consumer protection type bill.
It's something we need here in
New Mexico, um, when we're
looking for, um,
Solutions for our, our
population and myself being
included whenever we did have
the same day pay loans and we
went through all that
legislation and we decided that
we didn't that that was not uh
wise for us to have at the the
that it was predatory and so we
don't want to fall into any kind
of
Place where um we're not
providing the type of service
for those that need in between
money for things that come up
with our families or
individually if you need to pay
on uh a few, something happens
with your car and you need to
get it, uh, get, get it paid for
and you need some kind of
Of service this this vendor,
this service would be provided
for you for those, those in
between, uh, moments when you,
you need to have some.
Uh, they called it liquidation,
um, uh, currency in your budget.
So, and looking at how we can do
that, this, this is a service
that can be provided, but, um,
we do need to have some
regulation and some consumer
protections on that. If we
don't, then we, we, um, we might
be shooting ourselves in the
foot if you will, but in doing
this, it provides financial
security. It provides consumer
security and um
It gives flexibility for for
consumers to have, um,
Liquidable um income when they
need it, but it also reduces the
risk. Thank you, Madam Chair,
and I'm looking, I've been um
looking to help um support this
bill and maybe sponsor this
bill, madam Chair, and
And members because it does feel
a need for um,
From our consumers here in New
Mexico and I first got hold of
this, uh, information in this
bill when I went to CSG.
Um, conference up in Portland
and there's a presentation and
information given out and I
thought that this was
Uh, something that was, that was
uh needed after the discussions
and after all the, the
legislation that we passed when
we were, we, we were protecting
our consumers then, um, against
the predatory loans. This has
nothing to do. These are not
loans. This is not predatory.
This has these are, this is very
much uh not that at all, but
what this does, it gives
definition and regulation to
what this industry does.
Thank you, Representative
Armstrong. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Uh, I have a couple of
questions. I know it's not a
loan because you explained that
it's already earned wages. Is
that correct?
Medicare. Yes, that is correct.
That's correct. OK, thank you
for that. And then, um, it's not
going to be mandated to, uh,
companies or employers, is that
correct?
Madam Chairman Representative,
that is correct.
OK, because I, you know, I, I
was, I was assured other times
that things wouldn't be mandated
and then we passed the law to
make it, um,
Uh
You could opt into this, and
then the next year, legislation
comes back trying to mandate it,
so my a little bit of my fear is
that you will mandate, you know,
we'll pass this law so we can
regulate you or whatever, and
then we'll come back and say,
every employer has to do this.
So do I have your word that
that's not going to happen?
Madam Chair Representative, yes,
you do.
OK, thank you very much.
All righty, um, I don't think we
have any more.
Yes. Of course,
vice chair.
Uh, thank you all, panel for,
for being here. I have a
question for Assemblyman Nguyen,
if you don't mind, um, you
talked about your financial
literacy programs going in
conjunction with this. Can you
kind of expand on that a little
bit because that is something,
especially when we're dealing
with a population of young
people who we've talked about
earlier today. Don't know how to
write a check, don't understand
checking accounts, um, and so
we've had this conversation in
this building, uh,
Since I've been in, in office
about financial literacy and
teaching that to young people.
So I'm kind of curious about
what your program or what your
bill was, if you can kind of
summarize that in partnership
with this bill, because it seems
like that they kind of went hand
in hand. So I appreciate the
opportunity assemblement and,
and thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, Madam Chair, Madam Vice
Chair and Representative, thank
you for the question. Um, yes,
financial literacy, as you said,
is a huge component that's
missing from our uh young people
education, um, not just Nevada,
but across the country. And so
in terms of financial education,
um, as a topic, um, last
session, I also, um, passed a
bill that require high school
students to have a class in
financial literacy before they
go.
graduate high school. Now, um,
you know, even though I'm in
denial of my real age, but, you
know, back in my day, we had
home ec, um, in high school to
learn about uh budgeting and,
and then how to write a check
and um, you know, uh, simple
things that are basic life
skills. Uh, those are not taught
anymore and don't know why it
was taken out. Maybe just too
many things um that they have to
keep up with, so.
You know, my bill, um, separate
from this bill, uh, it was a
selling Bill 274 to create that
requirement so that young people
can go out of high school.
With the basic knowledge of all
these financial tools that are
out there, uh, such as, uh, the
earning wage assets that we're
talking about today with Senate
Bill 290 that was passed in
Nevada is to really educate and
and the the um commissioner of
financial institution here in
Nevada, um, have that
responsibility as well uh in
managing this product from a
regulative standpoint, just to
ensure that consumer are
educated. If, if you all
understand this product,
You don't know what it does or
it does not do. You have a place
to go to, to figure out what
that product is, and then this
is also um adding on to, you
know, daily pay and other
provider in the state as well as
across the country, uh, adding
the educational component in
their um services so that
consumer are educated with the
right decisions. A lot of time
for us even as adults, we don't
redefine prints. We don't know.
Sometimes, you know, when we are
in a hurry or we have to make
decision, you know, in a term of
a dime that we don't read those
fine prints and we're not
educated on it. So sometimes
we're still paying for mistakes
that we have made years ago just
because we didn't read the fine
prints. So the financial
literacy piece is not just for,
you know, high school students,
it's, you know, whether you're
age 5 or 95, you're using
financial tools. So as
legislator, we have
responsibility whether or not
starting from a
um, young age to, when you're in
your 90s, um, providing
educational tools for our um
ever changing, you know,
landscape of, of digital and
slash financial tools to be able
to help our community not fall
into a predatory practices, and
these are things that, you know,
me as an immigrant, uh, coming
to
The US at the age of 11 and have
to learn a whole new language,
has a whole learn a new culture,
and you learn a way of doing
things. I, I'm not alone.
There's thousands of people um
that are part of this
conversation, so, as lawmaker,
as policymaker, we got to
continue to
Prepare folks with the basics
and whether it's learning, uh,
financial literacy in high
school or learning how something
has earned wage access can help
your financial, uh, big picture,
um, this is something that we
all should be, uh, very, very
aware of, and, uh, whether we um
teach folks um on a educational
level or um asking our corporate
um uh entities to assist with
that. So there is
Some corroboration so that we
can move our, our, our state and
our community forward.
Thank you, assemblyman, I
appreciate that, Madam Chair.
Uh, just one other question. Um,
uh, it, it's, and I'm sure it's,
it's kind of a position to, to
be a little bit in, in conflict
with because it's like on one
hand, are we teaching people who
are adults, how to be
responsible with money is that
our role, um, but then also we
know that there are folks who
are in desperate need of money
and and as you've mentioned,
talking about the payday loans,
which we've had that discussion
in this, in this Capitol
building as well.
Um, one last question for you,
and, and I don't know if
assemblymen, if you're, if
you're the, the appropriate
person, but how is there data to
show that if somebody accesses
their paycheck early, and I'm
not, uh, disputing that people
should have access to the money
that they've earned. But, uh, is
there any evidence that people
blow that money before, um, does
it go to what it, it, they're
needing it for early, or does it
go for extraneous things.
Um, things that
That would keep them in the
cycle of poverty, uh, if they
were to purchase. I, I hope my
question's clear. I, I, I guess
it's pretty much, do people blow
the money on, on crap or do
they, they spend the money on
the things that they, that this,
this program is intended to do.
Uh, Madam Chair, Madam Vice
Chair and member of the
committee. uh, thank you for the
question. I, I do see where
you're going with that, and I
think the intent of this early
voyage access is for um the, the
month of
Calendar is 30 days, right? We
get paid sometime twice, that
calendar day sometime we get
paid once a month, sometimes we
get paid every other week, um,
every, uh, organization does
things differently. Now, your um
kids being sick, not gonna
choose a day of the week. Um,
your car breaking down is not
gonna choose that day of the
week. It's not gonna choose the
day where you get paid. Um, it's
gonna happen before you get
paid. So I think these allow for
situation like things.
Like this when folks don't want
to tap into their credit, cause
again, credit is a whole another
road that you can go down in
terms of educating people where,
you know, you max out your card
and then you just pay the
minimum, right? Um, this is a
tool that gives the consumer,
the ability to say, hey, you
know what, I just work Monday
through Wednesday, my paychecks.
Uh, it's hypothetically, I just
work Monday through Friday. My
paycheck's gonna come, not gonna
come for another 7 days, but my
car just had a flat tire, uh, 2
days before my paycheck, I can
now access this fund that I will
get anyway, you know, in a few
days. And so it provide those um
consumer with.
An option. And that's what we're
doing, we're providing for good
options. I think for uh the, the
folks that you were talking
about that make decisions that
are financially uh trouble for
them, for example, where they
access everything and then they
do something, um.
That is not above board for
their own
So, uh, let's see here. I think
I got just a couple more.
There's a website, I think is on
the next slide.
Trying to go through this pretty
quick. Keep going one more.
And here's what I really want to
leave you with is the next
slide.
So from our incarcerated
individuals.
That we talked about. This is
the quote from the attendees.
was plant seeds of hope for
doors that may have closed up,
that may be closed upon release
to future avenues to seek a
decent living.
It gave me a chance at life I
didn't know I had.
Hard work and an adversity
proves the resilience of the
person.
This class is challenging. It
makes me think outside the
walls. Remember, these are
incarcerated individuals.
They're saying this.
The contrasts have been
unimaginable. The tools and
skills have been vivid.
As a convicted felon, I would
like to thank the SPDC providing
the knowledge to show me and
other convicts that change is
possible and be able to start a
business instead of continuing a
life of crime.
This thought of starting a
business is very intimidating.
This class offers you the chance
to see it is not so much as a
giant but something attainable.
I think those quotes say what we
thought would probably happen
with this and we're encouraged
to work with the Department of
Corrections to make it continue.
Next slide.
So questions and whatever. I
tried to go through this fairly
quickly because you have the
paper thing.
No, you did great, Glenn. We
really appreciate it. Um, are
there questions, um, so
Representative Allison, I have
you first. Um, I do wanna, I do
have a question, but I'll let
Representative Allison go first
if you don't mind.
Thank you Madam Chair.
I think um this organization
might be the one to help me with
my two projects in Shiprock. So,
I need more than an email
address because our internet is
very sporadic in my area. I need
a phone number. That's the only
request I'm gonna have is I need
a phone number. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
That sounds great. Um.
Thank you Madam Chair, Madam
co-chair Representative Ellison,
thank you. I'll make sure that
you have that. I'll personally
give it to you in uh, in for, I
think that if there's not a
phone number in there, I'll make
sure that you have it, but my
personal phone number is 505.
710.
6350.
And I can connect you with the
folks that serve that area, you
know, in Farmington, we have an
SPDC. We also have Apex people.
We'd be happy to help.
Are there other questions from
the committee?
I just have one for you. Um, I
love the idea of the partnering
um with, with helping reduce the
recidivism rate and working with
incarcerated and formerly
incarcerated individuals. I'm
thinking down in southern New
Mexico, we have an animal, um,
nonprofit that works with
incarcerated individuals to
teach pit bulls, which often get
a bad rap, um, teaching them how
to be able to navigate families
and, and be home friendly, and
these are animals that have been
abused and so they work with
them.
Uh, to help get them feeling
safe around people again and
around humans again. And I'm
wondering, we've been talking
about in this committee, you
know, uh, a shortage in the
workforce or that there are
areas that are suffering that
don't have a lot of employees.
And I appreciate the idea of
entrepreneurism because
entrepreneurs are one of the
largest growing, um, you know,
in terms of our business sector
in the country, um, because
people are wanting to be their
own bosses or for a number of
reasons. But I'm wondering if
there's an opportunity or just
to kind of marinate on this is,
um, working with folks who are
going to be coming out of the
prison system to address the
workforce needs that we are
experiencing in communities. So
for example,
Uh, and that would be something
that would be a survey from each
community. I don't like money
going out of our communities or
out of our state. And so when I
see, uh, different areas and our
friend Jerry Pacheco knows how I
feel about this. I would much
rather New Mexicans get priority
at the border Industry
Association rather than Texans,
even though I grew up in Texas,
right there in El Paso. Um,
But I'm wondering if there is a
way that we can kind of grow our
own.
Right, that we can help folks
who are ready, um, to make
better decisions than they had
because of whatever life
circumstances and are wanting to
get back into that workforce, if
we can help address those needs
that employers are saying that
they are having.
By working with formerly
incarcerated folks, folks who
were just getting out of prison
to hit those knees. Is that
something that you're seeing in
the SPDC that might be
Something that would be
worthwhile.
Thanks for the question, Madam
Chair, Madam co-chair.
It's interesting because as far
as our services at the SBA
level, federal changes have
occurred where they no longer
have to identify themselves as
being formally incarcerated,
which they did before.
So that change, we don't
necessarily know when somebody
comes in to us and asking for a
loan or even though we don't
give loans, but we help them get
loans.
I think that there are so many
opportunities. Remember that
we're inside all the community
colleges. What are the community
colleges doing? They're trying
to develop a workforce for the
state, so I believe that there's
ways that we could partner,
whether it's through us or
through our community colleges
that we could leverage different
things. So anything that you,
you want to look at in that
arena, just send it our way,
we'd be happy whether we can do
it specifically or we could do
it within our colleges. I think
we can, I think we can make some
good
roads, and I think the idea of
making sure that people feel
worth for themselves.
Is worth any investment we can
make to make that happen.
Thank you. I appreciate that,
Madam Chair. Um, you know, I
know that in southern New
Mexico, um, our returning
president to Donna Community
College, Dr. Monica Torres, uh,
along with, um, Joanne Garai at
the SPDC there. Um, I have the
wonderful honor of working with
them. And I do think that there
is a constant response to the
workforce needs from Doctor
Torres and from, uh, Joanne
Carai. So I, I do think that
there are opportunities, and I'm
wondering, just in terms of your
experience,
if you are finding, it might be
an opportunity for a program,
even though folks don't have to
identify anymore, but it might
be an incentivized program to
help people who may be kind of
just kind of going under the
radar of the workforce vision
and may not think that they
should try and apply for these
particular jobs.
You know, and so I, I, I think
there's an opportunity there
that where we can actually
target, like saying, if you were
formerly incarcerated, here's an
opportunity to apply for these
jobs.
Right? And so that's voluntary
on their part. Uh, they don't
have to identify, but it's, it's
also addressing the population
that has a couple of challenges
before them, just inherent
because of what they've had to
do for their, you know, whatever
crime they did for becoming
incarcerated in the first place.
So I, I think I may not be
making sense, but I think I, I
am kind of making sense as we've
got a population of people that,
um, systemically have a harder
time getting back into the
workforce because of a number of
factors.
And if we can target training
programs for formerly
incarcerated folks to reduce the
recidivism rate that is also
addressing the workforce needs,
and obviously criteria to be
met.
Then we can start growing our
own.
And keeping them here.
In our state. And so I just
wanted to kind of put that out
there. I see Representative
Armstrong, we have these
conversations on a regular
basis. It's like, this is what
we can do. How can we grow our
own and keep money here. And so,
if, if there's an idea that
comes to you at 3 o'clock in the
morning, you're welcome to email
me and let's work on that
because I think that there are
opportunities with the SPDC.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, Madam co-chair,
thank you for that. And here's
the thing that I would uh
mention to you. So,
You know, we have the workforce
boards across the state, the
mid-region consul government,
they have money for this, and
we're actually working with them
now in a program they have. So I
think that what we should be
looking at is these workforce
boards, do they have similar
things because the we owe money
that came in allows for this. So
I think partnerships between us.
As well as community colleges as
well as the workforce boards, we
could actually do some things
like you're talking about. And
I, I, I see that uh Russell, our
executive state director, is now
on whatever. I don't know, he
might have a comment for that if
you would allow that, uh, Madam
Chair, it'd be great.
Sure, um, do you, Russell, do
you have anything to add?
Yes, uh, me and.
I will add that does tie into
one of the most significant
challenges we've seen for
several years for our small
businesses.
I
Being able to
Go into your presentation.
Hold the button the entire time
to speak.
that
We good? We're good. Thank you.
Um.
Hello, um, my name is Doctor
Harrison Fowle, and I'm a
professor in the Department of
Agricultural and Resource
Economics at North Carolina
State University. I was
commissioned by powering New
Mexico's Future to prepare a
report discussing possible
additional policies and actions
needed to achieve the targets of
New Mexico's energy transition
Act. So my presentation today is
a brief, uh, summary of that
report, um, I believe you all
have some slides, so, uh, uh,
Perhaps it's just, if we can't
get it up there, we'll just
follow along there. I've, I've
got them myself.
We're working on it.
That's the report itself, uh.
I believe
slides were shared.
Sides were certainly given. um
OK.
Um
So, uh, as all of you are are
aware, uh, in 2019, um, New
Mexico passed the energy
Transition Act that put in
motion one of the most ambitious
pieces of clean energy
legislation in the US, um, and
while the bill has a lot of
different components, the
centerpiece of this bill is its
renewable portfolio standard,
which requires the utilities and
rural electric.
Distribution cooperatives to uh
there we go. Next slide, please.
Uh, to, uh,
Of electricity, uh, coming from,
um, clean energy sources. Um,
the utilities and rural electric
distribution cooperatives are
well positioned to meet their
interim goals, which are quite
uh stringent relative to
national averages, um.
But as we move to, uh, the 2040
and 2045, uh, targets, um, we're
going to need to require greater
effort and coordination among
the many actors in the state's
electricity sector.
Uh, next side please.
Uh, from a technological
standpoint, uh, when, solar, and
increasingly battery storage.
Ron will continue to be
And there's
At this point, basically very
little to no commercial scale
deployments of these uh big
energy storage, long duration
energy storage or or zero
emission firm power sources.
Um, so to jump start these uh
technologies, the inflation
reduction Act, uh, did, does,
uh, provide several sources of
R&D funding, uh, as well as
funding for pilot.
Projects, so, um, should these
funds remain available in the
coming years there's certainly a
role for the state to help
secure these federal funding
dollars and promote the
public-private partnerships that
can begin these pilot program
deployments. Um, in addition, I
believe that there is a role for
the PRC to perhaps reexamine the
procurement rules for state
utilities, uh, to allow for
greater flexibility, uh, in
getting regulator approval for
these still developing
technologies that require
Particularly long lead times.
And finally, um, in the face of
the uncertainty of the cost and
the performance of these long
duration energy storage and
firm, clean energy sources, uh,
combined with.
The likelihood of growing demand
and the aging natural gas fleet
that we have here in New Mexico.
Uh, I believe it is very likely
that um state regulators will
need to maintain the existing
natural gas generation capacity
and possibly permit some new gas
generation. Uh, while these
technologies uh begin to develop
and uh begin to be deployed at
commercial scale.
Next slide please.
Um
Beyond the deployment of
generation and storage assets.
The state has a clear need to
expand transmission as well, um,
indeed, the DOE National
Transmission needs study, uh,
projects that the Southwest
region of which New Mexico makes
up a significant portion of, uh,
is going to need to increase its
transfer capacity with the
plains region to the east by
914% and to the mountain region
in the north by 41% relative to
2020 levels.
Um, and to that end, you can see
from this map here, uh, what I'm
showing here is um the 10
national interest Electric
transmission corridor, uh,
proposed lines that DOE has has
put forth. These are lines that,
um, receive particular special
funding from the IIJA, the, uh,
infrastructure Investment and
Jobs Act.
Um, and you can see that two of
those, uh, interact with, um,
New Mexico, um.
So while the state has been
pretty proactive in its uh
Transmission planning with the
uh formation of uh
The renewable energy
transmission Authority and the
energy grid modernization
Roadmap Act in 2020. Um, there's
still a lot of challenges to
doing these big, uh, interregion
transmission, uh, lines, in
particular, there are complex
siding permit and cost sharing
arrangements, uh, that, that
have to be solved in order to
get these big lines built. Um,
So I believe that uh the state
regulators and and utilities of
New Mexico are, are particularly
well positioned to take a
leadership role in convening the
interregional transmission
planning, given its unique
geography where it spans, uh,
both the Western interconnect,
so.
Off to California and the rest
of the West as well as its axis
to Urcott, the Texas electricity
market and the plains region.
It's really a linchpin in in a
lot of our, uh, electricity
planning going forward at a
national level.
Um, in addition, the successful
expansion of this is very
important for maximizing the
abundant solar and wind
resources that the state has.
Um, so it needs to find markets
for this, uh, big generation
asset that you all have.
Um, next slide please.
Um, well,
There's clearly a need to build
a lot of big infrastructure, uh,
generators, transmission, um,
there's going to be a lot of
challenges in building that as,
as you all are well aware. Um,
on the other hand, demand side
interventions can be deployed to
reduce infrastructure needs at
relatively low cost and these
demand interventions can be uh
things like um innovative
electricity pricing schemes that
can help move, uh, consumption
patterns to be more aligned with
the
intermittent generation we get
from solar and wind resources as
well as to, uh, incentivize
conservation when we have
relatively low, uh, generation
and high load periods. Um,
additionally, energy efficiency
upgrades can be taken to help
reduce overall demand, which
again reduces the need to build
more generation and more
transmission, um.
New Mexico regulators, I believe
should be working closely with
state IOUs, investor owned
utilities, and, and rural
cooperatives to help form these
innovative electricity pricing
schedules and also to encourage
uh data-driven methods to
identify residential, commercial
and industrial, uh, users for
energy efficiency upgrades.
Next slide please.
Um
Expanding trading capabilities
among utilities in the West is
another potential
non-infrastructure means to more
efficiently meet the targets of
the ETA, um, this expansion of
trading capabilities can occur
through the formation or
participation in regional
transmission organizations which
help facilitate trade of power
among
Utilities, uh, in many parts of
the US, um, there have been
numerous studies, uh, in the
economics and engineering
literature that quantified the
cost savings, uh, associated
with uh RTO regional
transmission, uh, models
relative to the bilateral
trading model that we typically
have among investor owned
utilities. Um, in addition, uh,
regional transmission
organizations provide a more
unified approach.
Approach to transmission
planning over a large geographic
footprint.
Um, given that the state is a
major net exporter of power, uh,
the RTO model might provide more
financial benefit for generators
as well as for the state as a
whole.
Of course, all of these benefits
have to be weighed against the
cost of RTO participation in
particular, uh, lost revenues
among the current transmission
operators, the cost of ceding
some control to outside entities
and potentially the greater
reliance on supply and demand
conditions outside in New
Mexico. All of that said, I do
believe that regulators should
explore the potential of a
Western, uh, regional
transmission organization or at
least greater involvement in
the uh already existing Western
energy imbalance market.
which helps facilitate trade
across there. And so as you can
see from this map, there are
regions, uh, in the West we have
Kaso which is the big uh
regional transition
organization, but there are
these lighter blue areas on
which New Mexico has quite a bit
that are part of this Western
energy imbalance market that is
facilitating some trade, but if
there is a lot more to do here.
Uh, next slide please.
Um
The rural electric distribution
cooperatives also have stringent
targets under the Energy
Transition Act. Um, however,
unlike the state, uh, investor
owned utilities, uh, the REDCs,
uh, have severe limitations on
their ability to deploy clean
energy resources. Instead, they
are contractually obligated to
purchase power from large
generation and transmission
associations, the exception
being Kit Carson Electric
Cooperative. Um, so,
To the extent that these large
generation and transmission
associations do not move quickly
or efficiently enough towards
clean power, then meeting the
ETA is going to be uh quite
costly, uh, for RADCs. So I
believe that there is a role for
state officials to help RADCs
determine if an exit from their
GNT contract is prudent and
possibly assist in finding
alternative energy providers. In
addition, the inflation
reduction Act and the
Infrastructure investment
Jobs Act, um, offer billions in
funding opportunities for uh
rural cooperatives to deploy
clean energy and energy
efficiency programs, uh, the
trouble here is those, these
opportunities are extremely
competitive. There have been
billions in, in, uh, requests
for funding, uh, relative to
the, uh, amount, uh, the
relatively small amount that,
uh, is being outlaid right now.
Um, given the limited staff of
many of the REDCs, uh, and, uh,
The, um
Competitive nature of many of
these grants. I believe the
state can play a role in
assisting RADCs in their
applications for these, uh,
funds.
Uh, last name, please?
Finally, and, and somewhat
dovetailing on the previous
presentation, um,
Deploying all of this
infrastructure needed to reach
the targets of the
ETA will require a well-trained
workforce. Um, a well-trained
workforce is also going to be
necessary to leverage the
ability of the ETA to attract
clean energy manufacturing jobs
which are growing at a rapid
pace in many parts of the
country.
The state already has several
programs, uh, to train workers
and clean energy and to retrain
workers from legacy, uh,
Energy sources, um.
And in addition to this, the IRA
and the IIJA uh offer billions
in subsidies to enhanced
training programs.
State officials, I believe, have
a role to play in coordinating
maximize efforts to maximize its
share of these unprecedented
federal funding opportunities
and to continue the funding of
education centers, um, with that
I'll, uh.
wrap up my presentation and feel
free to answer any questions you
all might have.
Thank you for the presentation.
I've got Senator Hamlin to start
off the questions. Thank you so
much for this, you know, one of
the things that I've been
talking about, and we continue
to have this conversation and
sometimes a very heated debate
about um our oil and gas
industry and, and, and its
impact on our budget. And yet
we're also talking about moving
away from that dependence on
that. And one of the things that
I've constantly said, and I, and
I on this last slide, I'm really
grateful for that because I'm
like, we can't start talking
about
Removing our dependence on one
industry unless we're providing
job training for people who are
working in those industries to
make either equal or more than
what they're making now because
they're busy focusing on trying
to put food on their tables and
pay their bills and all of that.
So I'm really grateful for that.
I hope that we
As a state
increase the focus on that. Um,
if we're going to talk about
that. But also I recognize that
this is not something that's
going to happen overnight. Uh,
nor it would be extremely
detrimental to our state is as
much as it pains me to say it
would be extremely detrimental
to our state, if we did that. So
I'm, I'm grateful for this. And
I'm wondering, and I know that
you were sitting in the back and
you saw the conversation before.
If there are opportunities
For us to bring in folks who may
have had extreme challenges in
Kind of, you know, give not
preference to, but also
accommodate those folks who may
not have the background yet, but
to train them in these areas and
create and grow our own
workforce. If that's something,
I don't know if that's me just
rambling or if you're able to
actually answer that question if
you can pull a question out of
that. Well, certainly, um,
these, uh, a lot of the, um,
infrastructure, uh,
Deployment
positions are high school labor
positions, uh, tradesmen
positions and in fact, under the
inflation Reduction Act to be
able to get the full production
tax credit.
Uh, that goes along with the
generation from the solar and
wind sources, you have to
Have a apprenticeship program in
place.
And the uh largely that is
turned over to the states to, I
mean, there's certainly number
requirements, but the state is
in, in charge of reporting, uh,
and helping in reporting this,
uh, along with the actual
generators, um, and the state
can certainly play a role in
facilitating this uh
apprenticeship program, um, and
most certainly you could imagine
carveouts being made for, uh,
different sectors of the
population for that. Um, in, in
general, uh, New Mexico has a
relatively high unemployment
rate among a 20.
5 to 29 year old, uh, males, um,
and that's certainly an area
that is largely employed in this
sector, if you look at just the
employment numbers, uh, that are
doing the installations and are
doing the transmission lines. So
I, I think there's a, a lot of
opportunities, uh, to, to, um,
take advantage of what the
federal uh requirements uh uh
are set at, um, and, and also
create um opportunities for, for
different sectors within uh New
Mexico. I appreciate the way
that you.
Madam Chair, I appreciate the
way that that you uh phrased it
in terms of carving out and, and
uh identifying those particular
populations. And in New Mexico,
And apprenticeships. And so I
hope, um, that there is a
conversation between those
agencies so that we can open
that door from that pipeline and
and make that a little bit more
aware. But one of the common
threads that's been happening in
this committee meeting and, and,
and this committee's meetings
over the past is creating more
awareness about what programs
are available to everyday New
Mexicans and our small
businesses and people who would
be going into the workforce. And
so I think we need to
As a state, we meaning our state
departments as well is the
outreach.
To those communities because not
many people and as
Representative Allison will talk
about the internet is spotty in
his area. So it's not like
somebody can look this up on the
internet. And so we need to, I
feel, and I expressed this to my
colleagues, is how can we do
better to get the information
that we've got this abundance of
resources that we are not
sharing with the people who who
who live in the state. And so,
um,
If you have an idea, I certainly
greatly appreciate it. You don't
have to disclose that now, but
I, I do want to put that out
there and I know Jessie's back
there and she can, she can make
notes as well. It's like, how
can we increase awareness about
these programs so that every
person has a shot at this.
Yeah, if I may, uh, add to this,
and, uh, not only do the
individuals need to be aware of
the apprenticeship programs, the
training programs that are out
there, but again, because the
PTC, uh, to get the full credit
of the PTC requires you to set
up an apprenticeship program and
document that, uh, uh, that you
are meeting the minimum
requirements of that. Um, they
are
Going to be hungry for employee
or employees and they're going
to be hungry for well trained
employees and they're gonna be
looking for systems that can
match them with the people that
will, uh, allow them to check
the box on on their tax return
forms to get this, uh, credit,
and so I think it's not only
commuting to the, uh, to the
potential employees, but to the,
uh, wind and solar developers.
This is where you can find a
growing, well-trained workforce
here in New Mexico. Um, so I
think there's a lot of
opportunities here for the.
to help facilitate that type of
communication. Absolutely, and I
appreciate that, Madam Chair.
And I think it's also, um,
reaching out to those when we,
when we say the term legacy
energy sources. It's like making
sure those folks know that
there's opportunities here for
them, and I would hope that the
pay is equal or greater than
what they're getting now. And,
and, and I would, in all
honesty, I would hope that those
folks get preference first, um,
because it's, it's terrifying
for somebody to hear that
they're
Legislature is talking about
removing their jobs when they're
like, wait a minute, this is
what I do for a living. So let's
try and like build that bridge
so that those folks have access
to those jobs. Um, but I do
appreciate that that's there and
I feel that like my, my
colleagues here in this, in this
chamber, we're all on the same
page about like making sure that
people have jobs. And making
sure that people are aware of
the resources and, and I, I
don't think we do a good enough
job with that at the state. Um,
and so I appreciate that. So
thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. uh, Representative
Duncan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, just
one quick question for you and,
and, um, you, you may not be
able to answer this question,
but, um, if you title of uh your
uh meeting the challenges and
opportunities of the ETA Act. I,
maybe you will, as you've
watched other states do this,
um.
Such as in our state, um, you
know, a, a huge portion of our
budget comes from oil and gas.
What taxes have you seen take
the place of oil and gas in
these states that have
transitioned.
Yeah, well, I'll, I'll start by
saying that, um, New Mexico is
pretty uniquely positioned.
In that it is such a major oil
and gas producer.
And yet is also
Trying to push forward this very
ambitious transition. So there
isn't a really a, a clear, uh,
state that you can point to and
say you're doing it dissimilar,
um, you know, Texas has a large
oil and gas sector, obviously,
and also um leads the nation in
wind energy and is a growing uh
uh leader in, in solar.
The replacement of the, uh, I
think it's
I I do not particularly think of
this as one replacing the other.
Um, so,
The oil and gas sector is much
more national.
An international.
Then New Mexico electricity.
Right? And
The demand for oil and gas from
New Mexico.
will persist beyond the 2045
targets that
are set in the energy Transition
Act.
So I don't
Necessarily believe that you all
are making a trade-off between
today it's oil and gas, and
tomorrow it's clean energy. I
believe in your 20 year future,
you're going to have both.
And I think it's gonna be really
beneficial in a model for a lot
of other states.
Thank you, Madam Chair. You, uh,
you answered it exactly as I was
hoping I'm a, uh, let's put them
all on the table and let's use
them all. Uh, they're here for
us and, and, uh,
The good Lord put them down here
for us, we might as well use
them.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you and thank you for the
presentation today, um, I just
have a couple of wrap up
questions. Are you, um, in any,
are there any conversations
happening with community
colleges or um universities to
start implementing, um.
Um, the training programs.
Certainly in
Writing this paper, I discussed,
uh,
Some of the, the activities
going on, and there, there is
already, uh, many, um,
different, uh, programs going on
across the state, um.
I
It's hard to say at this moment
if they're sufficient, um, if
they will create a workforce of
scale needed to do all of the,
uh, major infrastructure
projects that are going to be
associated with this transition
act, um, but yes, they're,
they're, they're definitely in
progress and they are, um, most
certainly, um, working on these,
um, but, um,
I believe that there is probably
more still to do here.
Thank you and
So just looking at, you know,
just this picture.
On average, what would somebody?
That works on a windmill like
this, what would, what would be,
uh, an average pay?
Um, or salary for that person.
Yeah, that's, that's, again,
that's, um, very hard to pin
down at this moment. Um, those
are highly skilled workers doing
a dangerous job. They're well
paid, um, um.
Now, relative to other jobs in
the energy sector, it's a little
bit hard to say right now. Um,
one of the things that is
changing here again is that
under the inflation Reduction
Act, there are not only
apprenticeship requirements.
There's minimum pay requirements
as well. So these are helping
support some of this, um, I
think by and large energy, uh,
clean energy job demand is quite
high, which is going to help its
wage, um, and these are again
very highly skilled positions.
Um, they're not the only ones.
It's not.
Simply text up there, uh,
turning screws on, on windmills.
There's lots of different
positions, everything down from
the sales people behind solar
systems to um text out there
actually do the installation to
energy efficiency upgraders
doing HVAC work. Um,
I think it's a wide range of
clean jobs and a lot of wide
range of uh compensation for
those positions.
Thank you. And so in gathering
your information, um, companies
that we are using right now, are
they all from out of state that
we're bringing in workers that
already have that training, and
then are they helping to, um,
Because it's a two-pronged
question. And then are there,
are there incentives to bring
people in locally. Um, did you
find any of that? So certainly
if you look at just the raw
numbers.
Relative to the share of
electricity that comes from wind
and solar in New Mexico. It's a
top 5 state, uh, in that regard.
It's relatively low in its per
capita clean energy jobs, uh, of
its deployment in that sector.
Um, which suggests that there
are probably a lot of
infrastructure jobs, a lot of
building out jobs that are being
done by crews out of the state.
Um, why is that? Probably
because of labor shortages more
than anything. Um, and so I
think again, this underscores
the need for, for, uh, creating
a, a well-trained workforce.
I agree with you. Thank you.
Thank you for your presentation.
I don't think we have any other
questions, um, sorry we kept you
waiting today, um, but we
appreciate you being here today.
Thank you.
Alrighty, um, we're gonna do a
little bit of house cleaning and
then we'll be done for the day,
um.
We're going to our public
comment section of the um.
Today, Is there any public
comment?
I got some comments.
And nothing on the Internet, so,
um, we are done with the pub
with the public comment section
of our, of our agenda. Um, I
wanted to make sure that uh we
will have breakfast tomorrow.
Uh, we'll start hopefully by
we've got 9 o'clock, so I'm
hoping you guys can get here on
time, um, we have had a couple
of people ask for time for
presentation of bills, um, a
couple of people then have
pulled those bills, so we may be
out of here pretty early.
Is that what we're.
OK, so we're down to one. OK.
So, um, based on that we could
be at, we could hopefully still
be eating breakfast when we
adjourned, but, um, I hope we
can start as soon as possible so
we can, uh, adjourn. I know that
they got a little long, but we
had lots of people that wanted
to be on the agenda and I did
not want to hold a meeting next
month. So I appreciate you being
here today and your
participation and I look forward
to seeing you all tomorrow.
Thank you.
We can leave our stuff here.
