Excuse me, I think my comments
will probably fit.
Um, would probably come under,
uh, number 6 of the top of page
2 under Energy, Minerals and
Natural Resources and one of the
things either from them or one
of the other agencies or the
groups, um,
I, I would very much appreciate,
I think the committee would
appreciate, um, sort of an
overview of some of the resource
opportunities in the state and a
couple that come to mind in
particular, um, or geothermal,
um, because I think, um, that
has been mentioned in Energy
Committee and other
I've, I've, I've been in, in
this, in this, I think
relatively non-controversial and
something that, that, that could
be expanded relatively quickly.
Um, we also are hearing a lot
about critical minerals, um,
for, um, AI and, and, uh,
advanced technologies, um, there
seems to be at the federal level
of a move to get away from uh
foreign sources of that and it
could be that, uh, those sorts
of deposits along with
traditional minerals, coal,
silver, gold, um.
But uh uh I I believe this
committee should at least have
some idea of where those are if
they, if they're if they're
economic viability and so forth
and because many of them will be
in rural areas.
Um, I'd also ask, um, some
consideration be given to what I
think of as the uh traditional
industries, it seems that there
will also be a push to um from
some, some of the federal
agencies to begin helping clear
our forests, and that may open
up some timber mill
opportunities. I know there is
one coming online in Lincoln
County, and I wonder if there
are not opportunities throughout
the state for that given our
vast amount of timber and then
um I, I also always sort of come
back to um something economic
development person told me one.
time, and that is, you know,
it's always great looking for
your next customer, but make
sure you're taking care of your
current ones. And um it might be
interesting to look to see if
there's any impediments to, um,
expanding employment and
specifically in dairy, oil and
gas. There's gonna be a lot of
things going on in our
immigration system as well. Uh,
where, where those workers are,
are vitally needed in, um, um,
so anyway, I think, I think
that's sort of gets me through
my laundry list. Thank you very
much.
Thank you, chair. Uh, thank you,
members. So, um, I appreciate
the work plan. I think a couple
of things that I would echo
already from my colleagues, um,
CTE in particular, community
colleges. I know, um, in-house
District 53, I have 3 community
colleges, 2 are in a rural part
of the community and one I know
of is not um running at full
staff and at full capacity.
as it could be. Uh, and so, um,
just echoing a representative
Cullen's, uh, suggestion and
concern about how we're building
that out, especially in our
rural areas. Um, would love to
imagine what um and I don't know
if this is the 3rd rail, so this
is also like me being a new
member, um, how we're
reimagining capital outlay that
can focus on rural communities
or rural projects and have a pot
of funds that is specifically
for
Big rural projects in um
particular parts specific parts
of the state might be uh
interesting and could open up
some imagination for us. Um,
Also, I would love for us to
study the cannabis industry and
the unincorporated areas, so
House District 53, um, is, has
the largest unincorporated
community in the state of New
Mexico, Chaparral, and they have
at least 13 cannabis industries.
They didn't, they're not
incorporated, so they don't get
any of that tax revenue back. It
goes back to the counties, but
in smaller amounts. Would love
to figure out um if there is,
well, first we'd love to know
the
Avenue for um unincorporated
areas that do have cannabis
industries and how they might
further benefit from having so
such a dense cannabis industry
business, but still get some of
that revenue back, um, that
they're not seeing if they were
a city. Uh, so that's another
concern that I have, illegal
dumping, so when we talk to the
environment department, um, many
rural communities deal with uh
larger cities and communities
dumping on their, in their
communities. So we have huge
tire.
piles, um, would love to have a
conversation about how we can
assist our, uh, more rural and
unincorporated communities with
illegal dumping issues, um, and
then finally, uh, in terms of,
uh,
Our economic development, how
can our rural communities
benefit from the recent bills
that we just passed, uh, like
our site readiness program that
came out of HB 2, HB 19, our
trade ports, uh, legislation
that we passed this year, and
then the animal welfare um
program HB 113, uh, since many
of our rural communities deal
with um feral animals running
around, uh, without having clear
animal control. Uh, and then
finally, uh, Madam Chair.
Um, looking at agritourism and
how we're helping bolster rather
than hinder agritourism, so we
have large um pistachio farms
and cherry farms and pecan
orchards um across our state,
and I know that many of them
want to go into or build up,
build up their agritourism and
so how we might be supporting
that industry more. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Are we just going down the line,
Madam Chair?
Yes, Representative, thank you.
OK, just double checking. Um,
Madam Chair, I find it
interesting, uh, I find
interesting, um, on page 2.
Uh, but what I really wanna draw
your attention to is number 4.
On page 4, the impacts of state
policies, and how are we
hindering businesses that are
already here and how are we
hindering businesses, the
bureaucracy part of trying to
start a business here in the
state of New Mexico.
Uh, I met this morning.
Uh, with
Um
Grant's energy.
And uh they're saying it's gonna
take them 3 years just to get
the license for the state of New
Mexico and how it's more
difficult to do business here
than it is in other states. So I
really think that I I am all
about.
Starting new businesses, growing
the ones we have, but I really
think that we should be looking
at some of the policies that we
passed in the legislature and,
and maybe not even policies,
some of the rules that are
coming down by the environment
and improvement board, how they
hinders people from doing
business. Anything to do with
agricultural, um, growth in the
state of New Mexico.
And uh I know that right now
there's a big debate, um,
between
Is water uh best used to grow
cannabis or best used to grow
food. And so, uh, how are we
looking at that as economic
development. The other thing, of
course, is CTE and
apprenticeship programs always,
uh, and as far as locations go,
um, I, I like all of your
locations. It's across the
state, it's corner to corner
and, and, uh.
I think it'd be good for us to
get out of.
You know, main corridor.
So, and I mean, I love your
list, there's so much on there.
How do you pick? Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chan for
allowing us to provide input. I
think one of the largest
economic drivers in rural New
Mexico is, of course,
agriculture, so I'd like to see
us address, um, you know, the
economic impacts of agriculture
and, and more importantly, the
needs of agriculture as we go
forward in here. I also like the
idea to prioritize outdoor
recreation, as you know, we've
made large investments as a
legislator in that industry, but
it doesn't seem to be channeling
down as quick as we'd like to
identify the roadblocks there as
well, um, and I also want to
echo.
the request to address the needs
of the timber industry, maybe
indirectly the hunting industry,
um, based on the mismanagement
of our forests in New Mexico.
Get an update on our forest
health and, and what we need to
do is we know that that
mismanagement has crippled many
of our rural communities where
we can come in and, and, um,
help with that. So thank you for
allowing us to prioritize.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. So I
would, um, I know we have some
workforce on the list, but I'd
like to have some discussion
about the healthcare workforce.
We have thousands of jobs that
are needed around, and that ties
into maybe not just for
healthcare, but other areas,
pipelines for students that uh
is tied into CTE and some
others, um, that we've had, we
passed the uh meat packing
processing uh bill here, and we
might need some.
Training or some certificate
programs developed and so I'd
like to see how the state
agencies could report on that,
and lastly, I'll just mention
grocery stores in rural areas.
We don't have them.
That's all. Thank you.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Um,
So I, I, I'm a D3, D3, we talk
about livability infrastructure.
Um
You know, housing, construction.
That is just huge, uh,
particularly in, in, in, uh.
In my hometown of Albuquerque,
the, the Pew Charitable Trust
Foundation did a study on
On zoning ordinances in New
Mexico and found out that they
contribute greatly to the
housing crisis in our state, the
homelessness, homelessness
crisis in our state and compared
Albuquerque's zoning laws to
Minneapolis, and so in the past
8 years, uh, New Mexico grew 2.9
in housing stock, 60% in in
rents and mortgages. So our
price of housing went up 60% our
stock went up 3% in that exact
same time, Minnesota's rents
went down 2%.
Uh, in, in Minneapolis, rather,
not the in and, and the housing
stock increased 14.5%. It's just
incredible that if we do some
tweaks to our zoning laws.
Uh, it, it's, it's pretty much
guaranteed to lead to more
housing and economic growth. And
so we have to have a serious
conversation and, and look
ourselves in the mirror as a
state and ask ourselves what's
more important. My view of the
mountains when I drive to work
in the morning or overcoming
generational poverty.
I don't mean to
And I would say that in a very
serious manner, even though
it's.
It's pretty heavy duty. And then
also, um, restaurants and bars
on, on paragraph to see, wait,
where is it?
Where to go.
Page 3,
2C, OK, cool. Uh 2C restaurants
and bars.
Um, you know, the restaurant
industry took us just a serious
hit during the COVID years.
Uh, you know, thank goodness we.
We uh did the restaurant B
licenses for spirits, but it'd
be good to analyze how many new
restaurants are coming online
are the mom and pops able to
compete with the national
chains.
And also, uh,
Frankly, the need for more
liquor license reform in terms
of entertainment venues and uh.
And nightclubs and stuff like
that. And then also, uh, 3.
3A
Is that right?
Outdoor recreation.
Thank you, Madam Chair. The um.
Uh
Outdoor recreation, uh,
There's a lot of various
projects up and down, uh, the
Rio Grande corridor on Bosca
restoration, you know, Santa Ana
does a great job. Like if you go
to TRC or calls about, there's
some really neat things
happening on the river's edge.
So I think we should talk about
how, uh, how we could better
utilize uh the Rio Grande and
the Bosque to increase, uh,
quality of life in terms of
access to the bosque.
Uh, recreation in the river and
uh and economic development
component of what that would
look like, so anyway, thank you,
man.
Thank you, Senator. And before
we move on to the other side,
we've had some folks join us,
so, um, we'll go ahead and do
introductions and what we did to
ground ourselves this morning,
um, senators and representatives
is, uh, name one word that holds
the intention for our time
together through the interim
committee. So folks named um
efficiency, which we're already
being very efficient with our
agenda, um, prosperity in other
words, so, um, Senator Pinto
will go.
Marty, madam chair, members of
the committee, and thank you for
being here,
Kean in but uh my district is
District 3, which is McKinley in
the San Juan County area. When
word I think is trust.
Um
Thank you, Madam Chair, said
Representative.
Oh,
Thank you, Madam Chair, Natalie
Figueroa, Senate District 18 and
Bernalillo County in Albuquerque
and one word would be growth.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Janellayornu of
House District 19 in
Albuquerque. Um, I love Senator
Figueroa's words, so I will, I
will copy you a little bit and
thank you and welcome, and do we
have anyone else join us between
now and last time, no, OK. Um,
with that, we'll go ahead and
move over to Senator Gallegos.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, I
would like to start with RLD,
uh, I've had a lot of people
contact me through the years on
some of the organizations in
NRLD that do not understand the
structure, so they pay fees and
it goes up into RLD, but they
see no benefit for it, and so if
we could understand what RLD
does for their
Members would be great for me.
Uh, I did have timber and in the
discussion on timber, I think we
as a state need to make a push
on our fed federal side, so we
have some agreements in place
with them. It is not only
important that we take care of
the state lands, we need them to
allow us to do this.
Federalized too, we have a or
it's not gonna matter if it
starts on federal land, comes
over in the state land and
continue uh damaging our state,
um.
Unter a second one I had was,
uh, page 3.
Or being Broadman and digital
infrastructure. For years we've
been talking about it and um
Senator Padilla is not here. He
continues to push that. I think
we need to stop talking and
start doing it. Uh, there's
areas around the state that are
so
Patching that it's, it's not
worth trying to get anything,
uh.
your computer or anything else,
uh, the next one I wanted was,
and I liked that you guys had
number 5 for uh Federal Military
border economies, I'd like to
see if we can target what the uh
positive impacts are now
compared to where we've been in
the past, and then finally, um,
page 4, item 4,
Impacts of state policies, it
was talked earlier, I had
someone just yesterday that um
explained to me, um, because the
way we do business in New
Mexico, uh, they had a video of
an employee stealing.
So they laid him off and fired
him. Workforce solutions got
involved, and um their pain for
that employee now, it, uh,
because the camera did not have
a day.
In time
Uh, they didn't think it was
sufficient, but in the
discussion,
The judge that's on the phone
asked him if he'd return the
material.
And he did. So if he's stealing,
and we know it as far as
workforce solution, why are we
not holding them accountable,
but I'd like to see what we can
do on some of the impacts of our
state policies also. Thank you,
Madam.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
A lot of good points have been
made, but I think we can't
really rely on any kind of
economic growth without
manpower, and New Mexico is now
number one in adult liter
illiteracy. Um, so I'd like to
see us, um, really have some
strong conversations around how
we can help bolster those
programs around the state, um,
currently we're spending
$750,000 a year and not even
serving 1% of the illiterate
adult population in our state.
So how can we expect private
industry to grow in our state
when we keep.
They can't find employees that
have the skills, um, that are
required for the jobs. So with
that, I'd also look at um over
regulation and taxation and how
it prevents private sector
innovation and growth, um,
streamlining, uh, the permitting
process which several people
have mentioned, um, sunset,
unnecessary regulations that
stifle innovation in our state
and consider corporate tax
reform tied to job creation
metrics.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, I think this is a, a
really good cover of a lot of
the things, and many of the
things have already been
mentioned, um, but I just add a
few things under section B when
the reports from sector-based
economic drivers, including, I'd
say uh, you know, put bringing
key energy partners in
communities, especially rural
and tribal, as we mentioned, to
discuss how federal, state,
local, and rural, uh, uh, real
tribal governments can support
energy goals with funding
sources.
and economic developments with
their, what they're already
doing to build and building that
collaborative um with networks
to drive those solutions. This
needs to be very solution-based
and, you know, what I'm hearing
now is, is we're still thinking
in silos, maybe not, maybe
that's a little overreach for me
to say, but we are still siloed
in a lot of the things that
we're doing in our approach to
economic development and so we
really bring a holistic overview
of how we are all interacting
and and working collaboratively
because of the way that our.
is set up and we're always told
this over and over again, the
checkerboard, um, demographics
that we have for our state. And
so we bring everybody together
and really work collaboratively
and understand fundamentally how
everything is inter interwoven
and working, um, we're not gonna
be able to alleviate all these
types of silos that we are.
Still currently um talking
about. So one of the things that
I've I've done is I've um hosted
with others and, uh, energy
policy symposium, and I would
say that the work from that,
this is the 2nd year we did
that, that, that this is really
fundamentally the way um that we
need to come together to, to
find holistic solutions and
making sure that everybody is
when we're having these, these
conversations and we're talking
about transmission, we're
talking about um our energy and
diversification. It takes
everybody up.
the table, so I would just say.
I would like to see that
represented throughout the
hearings that we have.
That we have those, those
interactive conversations
happening because that's where
the solutions are going to be
presented to us and how we're
going to really formulate the
policy we have, we all have
really good ideas, um, but I
think that bringing broadband
and infrastructure and a
resiliency together. I think
that's the way we're going to do
it. So as we are putting these
um
Uh, committees together and, and
having the hearings that we see
all that representation. Thank
you, ma'am. Uh, thank you,
chair. Uh.
Thinking about uh the economic
development in the state of New
Mexico, uh, we are very diverse
and uh
I think we all have a something
that we can offer in the area of
economic development, whether
it's in the urban area or the
rural area, but I'm thinking
about what is happening in the
country right now.
The turf that has been put in
place, and a lot of the uh
A lot of the equipment or
whatever that we've used to
receive overseas is now uh not
uh it's, it has an impact on
that. So this is, I think, a
great opportunity to begin to
look at what can we do? How can
we replace those items that we
used to receive from overseas,
and what, what can we offer in
that area. I think that's when
one area that we need to look at
and uh see if there's a
any development in that area
because uh we had were um a few
months of hearing this, uh,
frequently and um whether it be
uh
Some kind of industry that we
need to develop, uh, to up our
agricultural activities.
And whatever that needs to be, I
think that's a
That's my uh
concerned, as well as um we need
to develop the tourism, as I
think everybody has seen the big
national parks and, but they
haven't really seen New Mex uh
from, like I said, we're very
diverse, we need to, to expand
upon that, and I like to hear
the reports on what is being
done and what can be done.
Thank you, Representative
Garcia, and I don't want to put
words in your mouth, but, um, is
it particularly in regard to the
tariffs, uh, your first, OK,
thank you. um Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, I have several items,
uh, I like the list. Thank you
so much for having that be
available online, um.
So I'd echo uh the some of the
pieces that have been some of
the items that have been
addressed, but I'm going to
point out those that I think are
uh important uh as well as, um,
in addition to the broadband and
digital infrastructure
throughout New Mexico, it's
still very much lacking in
tribal communities and rural
areas of New Mexico. And so in
relation to that, uh, the some
of my focus is
going to be on pitch for the
updates on tribal and uh rural
economic equity, um.
I'd like to hear from uh EDD who
is already scheduled to make
presentations but specific to um
what might be offered, uh, as
With the changes, uh, in the
small business Administration
and small businesses activities
in rural areas and tribal
communities. How might EDD, what
are the plans they might have
specifically to help these um to
assist these groups in light of
those potential changes are
coming down the road, um,
Uh, specifically, uh, another.
Um, area, I'm aware of uh and.
entity that was established to
provide, and I'd like to see
about getting an update on the
alternative economic activities
Committee, um, they started out
real well, and I know that
they're um going to be
re-established, but I think
specifically uh an update on
that activity would be um
Uh, very helpful.
Um, especially in light of, uh,
tribes diversifying, finding
also the need to have diversify
their businesses and um
Opportunities, opportunities
that exist with for their um
citizens on their nations as
well, um.
Let's see, the other, I think I
is really important and I'm
really glad to see it would be
on page 4, the updates on um on
uh item number 4, the tribal
healthcare, uh, as a model for
rural healthcare. Uh, I'm aware
that in Mescalero there is a
current uh project underway
right now, um, where the
There is a partnership between
Ruidoso, the healthcare facility
in Rioso and the tribe uh
misscular Apache tribe.
And that might be a good example
to, uh, to highlight what's
happening, what they're, uh,
What they're experiencing now in
light of this item and perhaps
that was what was behind it, and
if so, I would second that.
Finally, uh, a couple more items
in the Department of Economic
Development. I understand that
there is a tribal liaison
position that's um is open, has
been open for a brief period of
time.
Um, but I'd like to have, I
think it would be helpful to
find out with all of these
activities going on, um.
Uh
An update on what, uh,
What, uh, um, progress has been
made, what challenges it might
be facing and what they're
looking at in the future, um.
And how we might be able to um
Get a handle on that, um, the
opportunities, uh, included in
that would be, and I think I'll
leave this for later, but the um
LEAD, the local economic
assistance and development
support program, um,
And I believe that is what I
have. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, I think
somebody worked real hard to put
this list together and did a
great job doing it.
Uh, I would like to.
If it's the proper time, Madam
Chair, I would like to announce
that Clovis would be glad to
have a committee.
Uh
Meeting in Clovis, if, if at all
possible, and
I, I'll go back and and
reiterate on the, on the
community colleges.
There in Clovis, we have a
community college. It's been a
real successful and we trained a
lot of nurses.
Uh, we do have some issues in
the nursing program where
It's gotten to a point now
where.
The instructors aren't making
enough money.
To be held at the college that
we're losing instructors because
they can go out and get a job at
the hospital or do traveling
nurse work and they can earn
twice the money as an
instructor, and who's more
important to keep
The flow of nurses going.
If the instructors aren't there,
and, and we've kind of let the
instructors go by the wayside,
and I think it's gonna, it's
gonna come back around and it's
gonna bite us.
In the butt. I'm, I'm sorry for
my French, but
it's uh, I, I believe it's
something and, and I've been
Working on that here in Santa Fe
and talking to different people
about it over the years.
But I think our community
colleges need some help there.
Uh
And then
How, how important our community
colleges are to the different
Uh, cities and everything where
they reside is they're the ones
that can communicate with, with
the, the city government, the
county government, and see what
kind of workforce we need and
what kind of programs they need
to put together. I know they're
in Clovis, we've, we've, uh,
Come together on, on a welding
program on a, on a commercial
driver license program, we
worked on that and different
things that we've worked there
in the community to make
To bring the workforce or train
the workforce that's needed in
the community. So I think our
community colleges are so
important, uh, the egg industry
and how the food banks in the
state of New Mexico can work
with the ag industry.
Uh
I know in the egg industry
we've, we've, we've, uh, here in
New Mexico, we've been working
real hard to, to get the
in-state meat inspection and
everything, but in Clovis at one
time when I was a kid, we even
had a flour mill there.
And we grow a lot of wheat in
the state of New Mexico and how
can we as the economic and rural
Development Committee, how can
we encourage
Uh, I industries like producing
flour in the state. I know
there's a blue cornmeal, uh, uh,
place up in uh in San Juan.
Out in the middle of nowhere and
it's because this guy's
dedicated to doing blue corn
flour.
But we can, we can, as a
committee and, and as a
legislators for the state, I
believe that we can encourage
Businesses and even, even like
We saw, we've seen the breweries
come in.
And seemed like alcohol had to
be made in Denver, Colorado or
somewhere and then at a national
level, and now we've seen the
breweries come in and
Can we grow some of this stuff
for the breweries here in New
Mexico and and how can we?
We, uh, as a committee support
those things, um.
The food banks, uh, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, we've
had some issues in the past
couple of years with food banks
in, in the state on
How they work together and how
they haven't been working
together, uh, we had a, a new
member that came in and started
running the Road Runner food
bank and, in New Mexico and
there was some issues.
I, I think this person
Probably
Wanted to do a lot of good and
kind of, kind of overdid it and
and he was trying to take over
territories of the eastern
Plains Food Bank in eastern New
Mexico. And I think it's better
if they work with each other and
how we can, how they can work
with each other and in eastern
New Mexico, I've heard that some
of the funding, some of the
federal funding has been cut
back. So I think we ought to
look as, as a
As a role in economic Rural
Development Committee, how we
can help the food banks and
cause rural New Mexico is what's
gonna suffer under that, uh, a
lot.
Uh, when, when people don't have
jobs in the and they're harder
to come by.
Um, so the food banks to me are,
are really important.
And uh
Madam Chair, I think that's it.
For now. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I'll
try to keep it.
Fast, um, on the back, on page
4, number 4, the impact of state
policies and been in domain
prevailing wage requirements,
um, electric vehicles, all of
that stuff, that is something
that I keep hearing being
brought up in my city council,
so I didn't even think about it,
but, um, that one's a good one
for me, um, a few things that
fall into a few of these on the
list, um, and I just wrote
myself some notes, uh, the
impact of rising wages,
inflation, um, the
tariffs and the Benefit cliffs
on local businesses and how that
is specifically affecting
workforce participation, um, and
like rising costs, um, the new,
I'm gonna mess up how you say
Nemexis center that the
governor, um, that the governor
announced a couple of weeks ago.
It's the business accelerator
for foreign in New Mexico, um,
just a rundown of like what it
is, what kind of jobs, who's
part?
participating. How do you like
get involved? Um, I think it
could be a new something or
another that we haven't quite
tried before. So, um,
And then on the technology side,
so quantum computing was brought
up this last session, um, and I
would feel that most people
don't understand what it is, so
if we could get a rundown of
like what it is, um, what
projects are floating around,
how that could benefit New
Mexico, um, especially with our
bases.
Uh, a whole bunch of stuff on AI
again, another big thing this
last session, um, so what
federal regulations are being
proposed, um, what other states
have done that has been
successful and really
unsuccessful, um, such as
Colorado and California, who
have both had to go back and fix
some of the regulations, um,
How state and federal
regulations will affect the
businesses not only implementing
but developing AI um in our
state.
Um
What small tech in New Mexico is
building or using AI for in our
state so that we can really get
a grasp of like, and then what
does the immediate future and
the longer term future of AI as
it continues to
You know, progress, look like,
um.
I think the other things uh
would be like power utility and
water, um, right now there is a
bunch of these big tech
companies looking for places to
um put data centers, uh,
Microsoft, Amazon, OpenAI, not
to.
Mention a whole bunch of other
ones who are looking for places
to put data centers who can
provide.
Um, not only the
Crazy amount of power, but also
the um water for cooling for
these data centers and how, you
know,
Freshwater reuse water brackish
water could all be used for
this, um, so that we could bring
in not only the investment, but
also the new jobs, um,
And I think we'll I'll leave it
is um the proposed borderplex
digital, um, campus down on the
southern border, um, what is it
if we could get a tumor if we're
gonna be in the area, um, it,
it, from my understanding, it'll
be one of the first kind of
digital campuses, um, like it in
the entire country. uh, and I
think that seeing.
Kind of the investment and
The goals and you know, how we
can support or, you know, what
they're going to bring to those
communities, especially cause
they're an unincorporated area,
um, on the southern border would
be awesome. And then, um, I'm
gonna agree with Moe that
looking at uh additional liquor
license for what states around
us are doing. I know that
Colorado in the last couple of
years has opened up uh
Specific liquor licenses for
things like air salons and nail
salons and a whole bunch of
these businesses that have never
been able to get them before and
it is um.
Helping those businesses to not
only stay in business but
explode. Um, so some of that
would I think would be awesome.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
people brought up, I don't want
to bring what people brought it
for, but forestry is super
important. I have gotbola
National Forest and it's if that
catches on fire, be devastating
to my area. I would love at the
Forest Department to allow
people to go back in and and
trim that out and they would
take care of that forest. Uh, I,
on the Office Broadband, I am
skeptical on that. I've been
here for years and nothing ever
happens. I like what Cuba did,
uh, the Starli initiative, I
think that's great, especially
in these rural areas where
people cannot get broadband.
And I don't really see it
happening out there, um, on the
same page we have.
Drought mitigation.
I'm having that issue in Asante
ballets are brought up earlier.
We have some severe water issues
out there because it all pulls
into one area, so we have a lot
of people that are wanting to
take water out of there and when
it comes to oversight, we're
having some issues. I'd like to
see. We have a bunch of cannabis
out there and a bunch of illegal
groves and nobody is really
monitoring the water, so I would
like to make sure there's a good
balance between the cannabis
industry and our agriculture
because they just had a big farm
closed down because of lack of
water. Um, I also and was
previously brought up about
increasing housing. There's a
problem with that in my district
is we only have so much water
and there's a huge.
There's a huge complex that
wants to be built with two golf
courses and 4000 houses, and we
don't have the infrastructure,
we don't have the water, so
before we go and start building
a bunch of areas, especially in
rural and East Mountains where
everybody wants to move to, we
can't sustain it there. It's not
gonna happen. We do not have the
water for that, uh, we have a
serious lack as as centeronics
uh brought up grocery stores. We
have a dollar store that doesn't
really cut it. It's not really
for people in the rural areas,
um, medical industry is pretty
much nonexistence and torrent.
County.
And we definitely need to do
something about, I know in other
committees who've talked about
trying to get more healthcare
there, but it doesn't seem to be
happening in Torrance County.
Torrance County seems to be in
this weird limbo of where you're
close enough to Albuquerque, but
they're not. And so we, we lack
a lot of things out there and we
need more diversity, uh, and I
apologize, I can't stay up a
doctor's appointment. I don't
want to be moved to November.
So, uh, thank you.
Uh, Representative. Um, Senator
Pinto, you're good.
Uh
Senator Figueroa.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for a fantastic list.
Um, I'm gonna go through 4
things in D3, people have spoken
about our community colleges,
um, and development of workforce
through education. So when they
do that update, I would ask that
we get an overview of
How the collaboration and
communication is happening
between industry and our
community colleges, and if
there's anything we can do
statutorily to help that
collaboration so that we are
educating the workforce that New
Mexico needs.
Under C4.
I would love to really get an
update on the status, the
impacts of the big policies that
we passed in the last couple of
sessions, everything from sight
readiness to an innovation
department. What's happening
with those bills and what's
changing.
With um item B4B, the broadband,
folks have talked about
broadband infrastructure because
it impacts economic development
in every way from agriculture
and energy to manufacturing and
small businesses, and we need to
know how that is progressing and
how to move it along.
Um, particularly with the right
of way issues.
Right of way seems to be a major
impediment for building out
broadband.
Um, and lastly, when EDD does
their update at some point, I
would like to hear about what in
statute is called the small
business regulatory advisory
Committee. It was established 20
years ago. It is supposed to be
looking at regulation that
impedes business growth and
economic development, um, and I
don't know if it's working, if
it's doing anything.
if we need to change it into
something else, and that is all
from me, Madam Chair.
Um, thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
I do appreciate, I just want to
echo the people who have
mentioned um job force training
and adult education.
Um, having just come from an
adult and graduation event that
is really a frame of mind for
me, how we can support those
programs going forward,
especially in light of the news
last week of the two Job Corps
training facilities in New
Mexico being closed in
Albuquerque and Roswell, um, we
really need to.
Focus and look on how we can,
um, pick up the slack there as a
state, if at all possible. Also,
I want to, uh,
Point out, thank you very much
to Senator Stefaniks and Replord
who stepped out about talking
about food deserts, that's not
just a rural New Mexico issue in
the ID where I represent, um,
which is densely urban, we still
do not have a grocery store to
replace the closing of the
Walmart and that's been 3 years
now, um, that my constituents in
the heart of the city are in a
food desert. And last but not
least, I just want to point out
that I'm really happy to see
MFA.
As part of this work plan, um,
creating stable housing
opportunities for the New
Mexicans or native New Mexicans
and also just creating a more
stable housing market to attract
people to New Mexico, which we
also desperately need, and
that's it for me.
Thank you, um.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um.
Very much want to uh acknowledge
and appreciate the very
comprehensive list, um, I think
just in reviewing the list, the
state agencies, um, and how they
impact uh economic development
is really important and so when
those uh agencies come in, I
think it's, it's um an
opportunity for us to have those
conversations and to really
explore how we can expand on
some of that, um, of course, I
always look at um early
childhood and care development
as well.
one of my priorities, um, going
through the list, um, technology
and artificial intelligence. I
think that we're on the cusp.
Of what is happening there and
we need to look at what's being
done nationally and how um
How the state will either adjust
or be different from the
national, um, I, I mean, I, in
my opinion, I think we need to
try to do something, um, that's
comprehensive and flows easy
between uh state and and uh
national, um,
Technology so we can, we can
make sure that interfaces
together, um.
Being down in the southern part
of the state, Madam Chair, I
looked at the border, uh,
industrial complex in the trade
ports, I think those are very
important, um, you know, we've,
we've made a big investment in
that part of the state, and um I
still see the lack of investment
with infrastructure, and I think
it's so important that we really
start looking at as a state, um,
we are bringing in so much
through those um
Through those those ports and we
need to make sure that we have
the roads to be able to get
trucks in, uh, that we have uh
airfields that we have buildings
um that we have lights.
And so, um, I know that.
Um, that we continue to struggle
in that area and so I would hope
that we could have some, some
conversations around that and
how, you know, a long term plan
or a strategic plan on how we're
going to address some of that.
Um, I'm always very, um,
Cognizant of the medical
industry and the lack thereof
that we we have right now. Um,
I'm, I'm wanting to make sure
that we have a
We have doctors and we have um
we have nurses that can take
care of our constituents. Those
are, I think that's a top
priority for me. Uh, I also had
checked uh off the impacts of
state policies and how we need
to start addressing how, you
know, we're we're passing policy
and law, and we need to review
that every few years. I think it
should be a living document. We
shouldn't just say, oh, we've
now done the best legislation
ever.
never talk about it again. I
think we need to continue to
tweak it and to make it better
and see what's working and not
working, Madam Chair.
Um
Could probably keep going on,
I'll, I'll try to um, I, I will
say this, I was the chair of
this committee last year, and we
had to move our first committee
meeting, Madam Chair, uh, from
Riodoso because of the fires and
um I think the year before that
we had to also adjust because of
flooding and fires, and so that
continues to be a theme that um
we even if
Those of us like in southern New
Mexico may not see the fires,
but we're, we're being impacted,
so as a state we need to address
that and so I hope that we can
really take a look at that
because we as a state are gonna
need to, to start addressing
those issues. Um, water issues
down south that's what my
farmers are talking about,
they're they're very concerned,
especially when we don't see
water flow past the coral. Um, I
hear that on a regular basis.
Um, and
I will end with CTE. I think
that's very, very important that
I know that there's money in the
budget, and I just don't know
how that's always been
implemented, and I sure would
like to know about that.
Um, I will also tell you, Madam
Chair, as the, the chair last
in, this group loves to talk.
And so, uh, and it, which is a
great thing, especially when
you're running committee, you
want people to be engaged and to
be enjoying the committee and we
want you to to have the
interaction with the with uh
community members and with the
public, so, um, I would just uh
put that out there that it's a
great committee, but uh they're
gabbers and so.
You gotta give them either give
them a time limit or make sure
you have enough time, so that
would be my, my suggestion to
you, so good luck.
Thank you, man. Thank you, uh,
Madam Vi chair, I will take
that, um.
And, and I thank you all for
your input.
The lived experience from your
constituents and the intention
that we're going to bring
together, um, to move this these
policy issues forward. Um,
moving us along to the dates and
locations, um, I appreciate
representative the uh the offer
for Clovis. I'm gonna offer a
little bit of insight here for
what uh we were hoping and
thinking July 7th and 8th, uh,
in Corona, New Mexico.
exists the NMSU wind farm and um
we hope that they have the space
and accommodations for us. That
is why it's to be determined.
We're looking into that to make
sure they can actually house us
and that we can be lodged
nearby, so we will get that
information to all of you as
soon as possible, but, um, along
with that site visit, that's
gonna hold all of the
conversations that we are
thinking regarding.
Um, energy and technology, um,
and everything around that and
then August 11th and 12th in Los
Lunas, um, we're hoping to tour
the metadata Center and think
about um all all of those issues
surrounding uh technology
development, September 4th and
5th in Farmington, um, will be
an agriculture focus and outdoor
focus, so bringing all of those
issues to light in that
community.
And then in Gallup where we um
opted for Gallup over uh Santa
Teresa or the southern parts of
the state is rotating, um,
location. It's my understanding
that this committee has met in
Las Cruces previously and to
visit uh a city or a town that
is budding in its transport, um,
initiatives. And so, um, once we
get corona finalized, we will
send that out to all members.
Um, but that's a little bit of
background there.
Oh, Representative, just a
question, are we going to be in
Los Lines, uh, we host the
meeting there or we can be in
Albuquerque, we'll we'll be in
Los Lunas, OK, um, yeah, and,
and to, um, vice chairs comments
earlier, I think it's really
important for us to visit a city
or a town village of loneliness
actually that is, um.
Experiencing some of those
infrastructure, uh, um,
shortcomings as the town is
taking off with AI development
and some of these warehouses,
um, the infrastructure just
cannot support that right now
and how do we think about that
when our rural communities get
to that point of development.
Manure the uh water Natural
Resources Committee did meet a
few years ago at the Corona.
Um, agg station and it is a a
very nice facility for the
meeting um.
Uh, somebody has to bring food
in, but it, it's about 45
minutes from Riodoso for
lodging.
Or coming back.
To the more urban areas.
Um, towards
Albuquerque or
Most luna or Moriarty, so just
keep that in mind that your
second day might want to be in a
community that has overnight
facilities.
Thank you, Senator.
Representative.
Uh, yes.
Speaking on behalf of uh Gallup,
I'd like to uh keep that date,
uh, where we had approved a uh
What is it called? uh transports
that uh has been uh been
approved and it's now under
development and like to see how
much work has been done as well
as what does it mean to economic
development in the area because
it will, um,
On it catch on, it'll be in
other areas too, and we need to
uh make sure that we know uh.
what is happening and then maybe
down the road, we find it, as
well as uh look at the economic
development uh in Gallup, uh,
it's um
It's a, it's a small town, but
over the weekend we have all the
Navajos and Sunnis and other
people come come in and trade
there or do their business and
it's a very interesting uh site.
Uh, to see, I wish it was over
the weekend, so you can uh visit
the famous uh flea market they
have there. Thank you. Thank
you. Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
as far as Los Lunas goes, if you
need any contacts or help with
that, I'm happy to help, uh, put
you in, in um in contact with
the community development
director, Lindsay Count for
Lindsey County and others
because there's a lot going on
there, um, very
We're also building a new
hospital there, so we could, we
could do a lot of touring if you
need help, I'm happy to help
you. Wonderful. Thank you,
Representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair, very
much so I'm looking at the the
calendar that was handed out.
October of 27.
So
We're, we're not just to verify,
we're not meeting on the
twenty-seventh, correct?
That, that's scratched out.
Great question, Senator. Yes,
um, that would have had us
gathering twice in the month of
October and I think by the time
we get to October, we're gonna
have lots of connection, but
maybe twice in one month, I
thought let's give us a break.
So November 10th is our new
date.
C
Uh, manure in another committee,
uh, it came to our attention
that UNM and all of their
campuses are, are willing to
host us
To provide refreshments, etc. So
as you think about any of these
areas you might think about that
as well as I'm sure some of our
other uh community colleges and
for your institutions would as
well.
All right.
Well, um, thank you all for
that. We are well ahead of
schedule, um, but we do have
quite a few folks here in the
audience and I'd love to open us
up to public comments, so does
anyone have public comment here
in the audience.
Please, please come up to the
people.
Ma'am, if you'll take a seat at
the table and turn on your
microphone and state your name.
My name is Sky Debo, and I'm the
current chair of the Small
Business Regulatory Advisory
Commission and so anyone who has
questions about that that would
like to me. Thank you.
Thank you so much for being
here.
Please come up. Madam Chair,
members of the committee, uh, my
name is Julius Rodriguez.
Just wanted to introduce myself.
I work at the legislative
Finance Committee, and I'm the
analyst on the economic
development bloc, um, if there's
anything you all need, I plan to
be at most of your meetings this
interim, so please keep me in
mind and looking forward to
working with you all and getting
to know you all. Thank you.
Have someone on Zoom who would
like to make public comment, uh,
Charles.
I'm, I'm sorry, Charles, could
you go ahead and introduce
yourself.
Anyone else for public comment.
OK.
Wow.
Very efficient, not chatty.
Give him a minute.
Uh,
to my colleagues, we are gonna
have a really good time
together, I believe, um, that
this is gonna be, I look forward
to getting to know each and
every one of you, um, and having
some fun and doing good things
for New Mexico, thank you so
much for your time this
afternoon, um, we stand in
recess.
Oh, I'm sorry, Representative
Luhan uh, just, uh,
announcement, um, here, uh,
tomorrow and Friday there's a
water summit that's being put on
at the Capitol with the, the
green chamber. If anybody's
interested, they're downstairs
registering there's information
if you like, um, and, um, it's a
legislators are interested, just
let them know that you are. I
think that this is a great
opportunity as we're discussing
our economic development future.
It's all dependent upon our
water and our resources and
water being primary.
I think that this will serve us
as far as what it means, um, in
some of the development with
even with our Western states,
which they will be focusing on
and some of the things like
Nevada and how they've worked
towards a conservation effort
for how they developed uh
economically yet conserved on
their water and things like
that. I I really urge anybody
that's interested in that, um,
it's high level. It's a lot of
information, but it's uh, it
will serve our policy
initiatives in a committee like
this too, if you're interested.
