didn't know what to expect and
it's, it feels like uh a bigger
town, uh, but with a very small
town, cozy, uh, welcoming
mentality. So that's so far what
I've gotten and so I, I suspect
that'll carry on, um,
but very happy to be here, uh,
very, uh, very, uh, glad to have
breakfast served, red chili, and
uh I think that the committee
and, and guests will all be
happy about that. So, and that's
being provided today by the
Um
Four corners, is that correct?
I'm sorry, I think I wrote it
down somewhere so that's it. The
breakfast, yeah, 4 corners, uh,
economic development, uh,
committee. So very, very
thankful for that. If we could
give them a round of applause.
Thank you. Thank you. Um, I
wanna also, um, acknowledge my
ride or die here to my right,
Carrie Hamlin, uh, my vice
chair, uh, we, we're both from
southern New Mexico and um we
uh, we always say we're a good
cop back up, uh, we say some
other things, but we probably
won't say that today. um, but,
um, we're glad that everybody
decided to make the trip up. Um,
I think it's really important
that we talk to different areas,
uh, about what the needs are,
especially for economic.
Development. I think it's really
important that legislators are
familiar with, um, what's going
on in the different regions and
that we can be educated by our
local folks, so very pleased
that the agenda. Um, we did have
to move some people around. Uh,
we were supposed to meet in
Riodoso, um, last month and as
you all know, with the fires and
then the flooding, uh, we
weren't able to do that, so we
have had to, to move things
around. So the agenda
It is pretty tight and the next,
the next few agendas are going
to be tight for that reason. Um,
I'm asking that everybody, um,
please make sure to ask your
questions, but let's be very
mindful of everybody's time. I
know that some people are taking
time off work to be here. Let's,
you know, I want, I know we're
starting a little late, um, but
I'm hoping that we can, we can
make up some of that time. Uh,
let's limit questions that if we
can do some stuff offline, we
can do that as well.
I want to make sure everybody
has the opportunity to talk. We
are also doing a tour tonight at
Navajo Lake, and so we do have a
hard stop and I will be
reminding us of that to be
conscientious of that because,
um, we're, we're being provided
rides down there and we don't
wanna, people are, are working
to get us there. So want to make
sure we're always very mindful
of of other people's time. Um,
so once again, um, I'm Dorian
Gallegos. I am chairing the
committee today. Um, I would
the, the committee to introduce
themselves, um, I'm from
District 52, which is down
south, and, um,
That way everybody can know a
little bit about us, but let's
not take too much time about us
because we want to hear about
the, the community here. So with
that, I am going to start with
um Representative Duncan.
Good morning. Um, I'm Mark
Duncan. I represent District 2
here in San Juan County. Glad to
be here.
Yeah, good morning. Thank you,
Madam Chair. I am representative
Elio Lealcon I represent uh
parts of Sibu McKinley County.
Morning. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you everybody for being
here today. I'm Representative
Janelle Eunoru from House
District 19. That's the
southwest quadrant of the
Albuquerque metro area, and it's
the fairgrounds and
International District.
Good morning everyone. I'm
Charlotte Little. I represent
House District 68 in northwest
Albuquerque. So happy to be here
in Farmington. I just love the
drive up and thank you for
having us here.
Morning, um, everyone this
morning. I'm Cynthia Brego. I
represent District 17, which is
in Albuquerque around Cottonwood
Mall area, and Madam Chair and
and vice chair, um, I got up
early this morning, drove around
Farmington. My mom asked me the
other day, how big is
Farmington? I haven't been here
in about 20 years, and it's
grown quite a bit. I drove all
over and it was really a nice
experience.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee and
everybody in the audience. My
name is Martin Zamora. I
represent House District 63. It
covers the south half of Curry,
the north half of Roosevelt, all
debacal Guadalupe, and a touch
of San Miguel County. Thank you,
glad to be here.
Good morning everybody. Steve
Neville. If you look out the
back window across the road,
that's my district. Senate,
Senate District 2. And if you
get up a couple of stories, you
can see my house over there,
just past the mayor's house, as
a matter of fact. So, uh,
anyway, welcome to Farmington.
We are a pretty very progressive
community if you haven't had a
chance to drive around, we'd
invite you to do so. The mayor
is going to tell you all about
it here in a minute, but, uh,
uh, we are glad that the
committee made it up here and
we're going to have a good time
at Navajo Lake. We did that last
summer with
LFC and it was a great event and
uh I think everybody will enjoy
it. So we're going to have, I
think Tony's going to have
buses. I saw Tony come in. You
don't we have buses tonight, so
be sure and take the bus ride
out to Navajo Lake. It's better
than driving your own car and
they'll bring you back
periodically and uh we invite
everybody to do that. It's a
great facility, economic
development, uh, from the
standpoint of outdoor recreation
and right over here, not far,
and I'm given the spiel for
Farmington, but we have a lot
of, uh, four wheel drive
Events and things like that.
We're not far from that to ATVs
and we're trying to rival Moab,
Utah for some of that kind of
thing. So anyway, welcome to
Farmington and I'm glad I get a
chance to sit into the I'm
ditching out on LFC because I
had to have some medical stuff
done. I was, gave me a chance to
come and, and, uh, enjoy this
committee. So, welcome. Thank
you.
Good morning, Madam Chair, and
everyone. I'm State Senator Ron
Griggs. I'm from Alamogordo. So
if you really wanted to see my
house, I don't know how high
you'd have to go and be able to
do that. But uh I represent the
southern part of Otaro County,
the western part of Eddy County,
and I did have a tiny bit of
Donana County, but in
redistricting I lost that. So uh
I'm excited to be up here and
see Farmington. I hadn't been in
probably 2 or 3 years
It really looks like it's doing
some good things, so
congratulations to all of you
and thank you, Madam Chair.
Good morning everybody. I'm
Carrie Hamblin. I'm the state
senator for District 38, also
serving as the vice chair of the
Interim Economic and Rural
Development and Policy
Committee, uh, this year, um, I,
uh, really have enjoyed
Farmington. The last time I was
here was for the outdoor
recreation conference. Um, and,
uh, really love that our hotel
uh looks right out over the
Animas River and uh know of the
different outdoor recreation
opportunities you have and it's
just really just, I'm glad
you're shooting to to surpass MA
because I think it's, it's a a.
Very worthy title and uh I think
you've got a really great shot
with all the outdoor recreation
here. So thank you very much for
hosting us. Thank you for
treating us so well and spoiling
us. Um, and I look forward to
the next two days.
I do want to make a couple of
remarks, um,
My husband wanted me to make
sure that I, I mentioned that,
uh, Senator Neville and Senator
Griggs were going to be
departing and I said, well,
they're not going to die, right?
They're just leaving the,
they're retiring from the
Senate, so, um, glad that one of
our, our last meetings that
you're here with us and that um
you'll be able to, to spend the,
uh, some quality time with us.
Um, I also want to acknowledge,
uh, Mike Stark, who is the
county manager here. I don't
know if you're gonna be
speaking, but I know you said
you were gonna be in and out,
um, they
provide us with these mugs for
the committee. So thank you for
that. Um, my understanding is
we've got Steve Lanai who is a
county commissioner. He's in the
audience.
Thank you for being here. Um,
very, once again, I saw that
Tony snuck in, uh, thank you for
setting up the room so
beautifully for us and for
hosting us. Um, you've done so
much to make us feel welcome,
and I just wanted to personally
say thank you and I know that
the committee, um, is very
thankful for the hospitality.
Um, we've got Rob Mays.
Here. Oh, there we go. Thank you
for joining us today. Uh, he's
the Farmington City manager. Um,
once again, you all have treated
us wonderful already and so
looking forward to 2 days, uh,
to spend with you all. And with
that, I think I'd like to go
ahead and start on our, our
agenda. We've got
The mayor of Farmington, Nate
Duckett, and Tim Gibbs, the
executive director officer of
the Four Corners Economic
Development.
Uh, group.
Good morning, Madam Chair
Committee. Thank you all for
joining us here in the beautiful
city of Farmington. I am
Farmington Mayor Nate Duckett is
an honor to have you and
certainly appreciate the
positive feedback that we've
received already this morning
for individuals who haven't been
here in many years, um, a lot of
work has gone on here in our
community over the last,
certainly the last 20 years, um,
you know, I, I graduated in
1996, so there was, has been a
lot of change since then as
well, but today I'm gonna tell
you the story about the
last 10 years, um, where we have
really diligently focused our
efforts on economic
diversification. And this
community has rallied around the
idea that we can't just sit on
our laurels while our energy
industry is being quote unquote
transitioned where we're seeing
jobs leave this area, long
standing corporate partners like
ConocoPhillips who have
relocated their headquarters to
other places, BHP, P&M, uh, a
lot of big
Names, a lot of high paying jobs
were involved in that.
Uh, this council, myself and
prior councils have determined
that there are things that we
could do and this community said
let's do it. And economic
diversification has become the
name of the game. So let's jump
in to where we're going.
Just to give you an idea.
You know, the city of Farmington
is about 46,000 people proper.
But our trade area extends all
the way into the four corner
states, and we believe that
there's approximately 20,220,000
people in that area that utilize
Farmington probably on a monthly
basis for service, for business,
for entertainment, um, so, and,
and for, for jobs, uh, there's a
large
You know,
Population that that travels
down from southern Colorado and
travels up to southern Colorado,
uh, whether they choose to live
here and work there or vice
versa. It's a very robust group
of individuals, um, and
workforce that we share with
this area.
It's always good every budget
season to talk about where we've
been, and this is a, a just a
glance at where we've been since
2008.
In regards to gross receipts tax
collected here in the city of
Farmington.
I want to point you to the
purple line. The purple line is
where we were in fiscal year
2008 after we lost about 20% of
our GRT due to, um, due to the
crash.
And where that money has gone,
had it not
Had, had we not acted, I should
say.
As a community to enact some tax
increases, uh, to help continue
to fund the important services
that our community values. So
the purple line is where those
value GRT dollars would be today
if we had not enacted, uh, tax
increases, which nobody wants to
do. Um, of course. And then the
green line is where we are now
with those taxes that have been
put in place.
The important line is the red
line, and that's CPI.
And since 2008 until 2023. It's
been over 45% increase in CPI.
And so if we were utilizing the
same dollars from 2008 till
today, that dollar would need to
be $84.4 million. Obviously,
that's not where our grocery
receipts tax are coming in. We
just wanted to show this gap.
Part of that gap.
Um,
has been injured
By the old harmless.
Um, policies of the state of New
Mexico. Uh, we've lost 15% of
our tax base.
And we are paying back this year
$4.3 million to the states, um,
out of that important tax
revenue that provides services
for our community.
Moving into community
transformation and economic
diversification.
2019.
The city came together with its
people and said, look, we can't
sit around, as I mentioned, and
wait for jobs to leave the area.
How can we remain competitive in
this critical job markets? How
do we attract new residents, new
industry, new business? How do
we help our current businesses
thrive?
So we enacted a 0.5% tax in
order to focus on those efforts
of community transformation and
economic diversification.
You will see kind of our
criteria. These are capital
investments and catalytic and
quality of life projects.
They're applicable operations on
recurring and non-recurring
basis.
These funds may be bonded to the
discretion of the governing
body.
What we're trying not to do is
routine maintenance. We don't
want this to become a part of
our general fund. We want it to
be diligently placed in areas
that we believe are strategic
and catalytic for growth in our
city.
This is the results of that
2019.5% tax. So I'm gonna kind
of go through these. These are
fun. This is a fun presentation.
This is my, this is my favorite
thing to do.
When I go to Rotary, or I go
speak to community organizations
is to show them where these
dollars have actually gone.
Major projects completed. I hope
you had a chance to drive
downtown this morning, uh,
Representative Brego.
So we've completed a $12 million
kind of renovation of our
historic Main Street. I highly
recommend if you, while you're
here in town, please take that
drive. Um, it's been a, it's
been a transforming project for
our downtown area and something
that we are reaping benefits
from every single day. Um, Bista
Bay, we had a flat bottom pool,
historic Brookside.
Park that has been transformed
into a water park, uh, something
to meet the needs of the hot
summers here in the city of
Farmington.
Tota theater renovation.
This is a partnership with the
state of New Mexico, San Juan
County, uh, and the city. We
have renovated that turned that
into our kind of our county seat
for, um, the film industry.
There are offices there, there,
there is equipment in there for
movie makers, and it's also a
historic theater, uh, where we,
we get a lot of fantastic shows.
River trails, you know, we've
got 60% of the state's surface
water flows through Farmington,
San Juan County. That's a pretty
big number. So between the
Animas and the San Juan Rivers,
which flow year round. We've,
we've really been diligent over
the years of expanding our river
trail access. We want people to
be able to to get on the river,
walk by the river, jump in the
river, float in the river, um,
all the different things that we
can do there in this past two
years, we completed another,
I think it was right at 2 miles
or 3 miles.
Of additional river trail.
Penny Hill's golf course, many
folks around the country, if you
ask them what they know about
the city of Farmington, Penny
Hills Golf Course is one of
those iconic, uh, amenities if,
if you get a chance, it's just
right.
It's right over here. If you get
a chance to go hit some balls, I
highly recommend it. We put
$9000 in the renovation of this
course, and that included full
irrigation upgrades, all brand
new cart paths, new, new bunker
sand, uh, upgraded carts,
upgraded facilities, and it is,
it is absolutely gorgeous. Uh,
pickleball courts, this is the
case you haven't seen this, this
is the, the newest craze out
there in the world of, of court
sports. Uh, matter of fact,
we're having a meeting next week
to talk about how we can put an
Additional set of courts in
because of how many people are
attracted to that. We see that
is tying into our initiative to
attack retirees, as well as
getting people outside for those
280 days of sunshine that we
enjoy here in the Four Corners.
Additional contributory projects
to this effort, San Juan College
and the Harvest Food Hub, we
have created a kind of a
A centerpiece to where farmers
can interact with the public and
sell their goods. You can order
online for pickup. You can, um,
go down to the store itself.
I've been, it's been a very
successful project. Lake
Farmington, historically had
been just our reservoir for
drinking water. In 2015, we
managed to open that up for more
public use. We have put in a
beach, uh, an aqua park. We've
cleared out really beautiful,
uh, areas along the lakeside to
add additional family.
Areas for people to gather, uh,
and a campground as well, so
we're going to continue to
develop that as we see its
popularity grow.
We've put up signs throughout
this, this community, the
Jolture journey signs showing
people where these outdoor
amenities exist, how to get to
them. That is, that has actually
done a great job of educating
our own community about the
tremendous number of, of outdoor
opportunities that exist here
and why we take pride in those
places, um.
I'm sure Representative Duncan
can share a number of stories
with us, the value of those
outdoor recreation amenities.
Um, uh, we've also worked our
downtown public sculpture.
Program, we, we do an annual
kind of display for sculpture
art and it's all for sale. So
we've, we've put out a call for
artists to submit their ideas,
and we have a jurist, that way
it doesn't fall on a city
council to pick what is good
art, um, and they pick, pick,
they've actually picked very
beautiful um pieces that are on
display. They're for sale. Uh,
we've got a whole new set down
there right now. I highly
recommend that you check it out.
And of course, we've added, uh,
components with our, our
Christmas lights and some other,
uh, nice touches that we've
added to the downtown area.
Another component of the
community transformation deals
directly with public safety,
blight removal, um, light
removal is an important
component of ensuring areas that
have become, um, ransacked with,
with activities that are illegal
activities, dangerous
activities, issues that, uh,
many of our cities are facing.
This money has gone to demo a
number of old dilapidated
buildings, uh, that needed to
come down.
We've also provided uh within
our Main Street area, additional
dollars that businesses can
apply for, um, to help them
provide facade improvements or
build a new kitchen. We need
more restaurants in downtown
Farmington. Historically,
downtown was an office space. So
if you want to go in and
transform an office building
into a restaurant. It's a very
expensive endeavor. Um, so we
have partnered with, uh, for
example, the chili pod, which I
recommend.
Anybody's looked for a great
place to eat.
Um, the chili pot has expanded
into a 2nd building was
purchased from the city of
Farmington. They have utilized
funds through this program to
build a second kitchen.
And in that situation, if the
chili pod were to ever vacate,
we still have a commercial
kitchen facility for another
restaurant to come in.
Uh, continuing our public safety
part as a community risk
reduction. One of our, our
proudest I think programs that
was helped created through our
fire department and police
departments. Um, is the
alternative response unit. The
ARU is responsible for calls for
downed subjects. So if an
individual is on a property in
the streets, on a sidewalk, and
they're mobile for whatever
reason, the ARU responds. They
have an EMS certified, uh,
driver who can then
Triage that person right there
on the scene to determine
whether or not they need to go
to the hospital, if they need to
go to the sobering center, um,
and that is, that is freed up
resources for both our police
department and fire departments
to ensure that they're not we're
not sending out what in the past
would have been an engine, would
have been an ambulance, it would
have been a police officer.
We're able now to deal with
majority of those calls directly
with that one unit.
Um, because our, we've
emphasized the outdoor
recreation in our parks. We've
added a park ranger program to
add an additional layer of
safety. Um, and also customer
service. We want to make sure
the people who are visiting
these areas, whether it's river
trails, Lake Farmington,
Brookside Park, that we've have
somebody there on scene that if
somebody needed assistance,
we've got somebody available for
them. And these individuals are
on foot and they're on bikes or
they're on ATVs, just depends on
where they're at.
We've expanded with San Juan,
uh, County and, uh, Presbyterian
Medical Services as well as San
Juan Regional Medical Center,
our winter shelter expansion,
that used to just be open in the
winter. It's now open, uh, 365
days of the year.
We've added additional lighting
to get there and we have a new
police station that we've
purchased, the Hill Corp
building located on Bloomfield
Highway just on the south side
of town. Uh, we were able to
purchase over 50,000 square foot
facility right around $3
million. Our police station is
very old, uh, if you've asked
our chief, this is a mandatory
must have. So we're in the
process. We've just seen the
plans for the renovation of that
building and we're excited to
get, uh, to get moved in.
You're one of the great focuses
here, um, that I'm proud to be a
part of is, is a, a group of
forward thinking city leaders
who recognize the value of what,
what cannot be seen, and whether
it's our water lines, our sewer
lines, um, our electric utility
services. These are all things
that we value and we do not, um,
Would you not shy away from
spending the necessary money for
that infrastructure. So we have
just recently received, I
believe, uh, Warren, I believe
it was $5000 more.
$500 from, um, state of New
Mexico to assist in the
expansion of a solar generation
project. We appreciate that
support as well, uh, from the
economic development department.
We were recently involved in a
light up Navajo partnership with
the American Public Power
Association that brought power,
uh, I believe to our part it was
a dozen or so residences out on
the Navajo Nation who will
received power for the very
first time, uh, directly to
their homes.
We have currently a, a
Multi-million dollar renovation
of our water treatment plants,
#1 and 2, also supported through
state dollars. We appreciate,
uh, Farmington Lake Dam raise
study. So Farmington Lake right
now provides, uh, roughly on
our, on our peak day, 180, 180
days of water if the Animas
River were to stop running.
We would like to add to that
capacity as we know how
important water is here in the
high desert. Also about 51% of
all the water that we currently
maintain is sold, it's
contracted to our partners in
and around the area, including,
um, those on the Navajo Nation.
So with this,
Dam race study we're hoping that
we could add an additional 25%
capacity, uh, to our water
storage, which would be just a
boost for this area.
And then David Cypher, who is
our community works director,
very proud of this affluent
wastewater study. Basically, we
want to find out if there's
anything else we could be doing
with our, our wastewater that
we're putting back into the
river after it's been cleaned.
David will tell you that water's
cleaner when we put it in the
river than when we take it out
of the river. Uh, but we're
seeing whether or not there's
other things we could use it
for. It could be used for
irrigation, um, because it's
water that we have, you know,
the water rights too, so we're
excited to see where that goes.
Plans and studies, you can't do
anything without a study, um,
and a roadmap in the 2040
comprehensive plan was paid out
of the CTE funds. This gives us
a roadmap for land use, uh, for
the next 20 years. We've
completed a broadband study
that's, you know, obviously a
keyword, broadband right now we
would like to see terabyte
service here in the city and,
um, we're continuing to work
with individuals and groups who
are wanting to bring that. So,
uh, hopefully that's just around
the corner. The animus action
plan, this was an area just
around.
San Juan Regional Medical Center
south of Main Streets. We are
focusing that area. I would like
to see some private investment
there, whether it's in housing,
um, or in other uses.
We've uh excuse me, the Visit
Farmington office completed an
outdoor recreation tourism
impact study, just giving us an
idea of what the impact has been
with the implementation of our
outdoor recreation initiative
and it's, it's, it's amazing and
I wish I would have had time,
I'd have thrown the numbers up
there, but the number of people
who are coming to this area now,
uh, that are utilizing some of
these outdoor recreation areas
has grown tremendously. And a
lot of that has to do with the
messaging and a lot of hard work
from individuals here in our
community.
Uh, including San Juan College,
by the way. Uh, I need to point
out, San Juan College has just
recently, um, well, not
recently, the last few years,
they've built an amazing
mountain bike park. Uh, just
completed a pump track component
of it that's super fun to go out
and watch these kids on. I'm not
getting on a bike to do it.
There's kids out there on
scooters doing flips. I, I don't
know. But again, it's just
adding that quality of life here
and making us attractive, um,
Across the region.
Major construction projects
happening right now. Pinon Hills
Boulevard. Uh, this has been a,
on the last 30 years, I think
it's ranked as our number one
capital improvement project.
That project is moving so
smoothly right now and I'm
afraid to even say that out
loud, uh, but we drove down
there yesterday, saw the first
bridge has already gone up.
We're seeing where they're going
to be pouring the footage for
the 2nd bridge, but this gives
us an additional
Additional bridge over the
Animas River connecting in kind
of the south side of town and
our, our family and friends on
the, on the Mesa to give them a
direct access into the city of
Farmington. We think this will
improve obviously transportation
as well as emergency services,
um, but it's a big project and
we're excited to see it finally
come to fruition.
Thank you, state of New Mexico,
for your, your generosity as
well on that project.
Uh, right across the street,
you've seen, uh, the LDS Temple
that is currently under
construction. They're getting
very close, um, that is
obviously a, a, a, a big project
and be very meaningful and we we
anticipate it attracting
obviously a number of groups
throughout the year and uh
retirees who will be working in
the temple.
We have a new hospital being
built on Pinon Hills Boulevard
and also we're not allowed to
say the word Amazon, but there's
a distribution center being
built by somebody and on the
county assessor's website it
says Amazon.
Um,
So that's a big project as well.
I think it just, it bodes and
speaks to all the, all the good
things happening here in the
city of Farmington.
Additional new uh retail and
commercial developments that
have come through. We don't have
enough Starbucks, so we got 2
more, um, we've got a water
burger now, which is kind of a
big deal. What a burger's really
done well.
Taco Libre is a a company out of
Durango, Colorado. We would love
to attract more of those, uh,
restaurant tours down here, but
they've opened up a location,
all subs truck stop is being
built on the west side of town.
We've got one maverick that came
in here over the last year.
We've got a second maverick that
is planned and then AutoZone,
um, is also building a new
facility.
We've talked through these a
little bit, uh, so I'll just
kind of bring this to the end.
These are kind of our targets.
Initiatives as a city. These are
things that we believe we have
control of, uh, that we can
control the messaging on that we
can directly impact through
investments within the city.
Um, but you look at a number of
these things we're trying to
replace $100,000 a year jobs
without the recreation jobs,
that's not really feasible,
right? So that we're not, this
isn't a one for one activity,
but we believe that through
these efforts, attracting those
companies who will, who will
come to this area because they
need safe places for their
employees to, to live, play, go
to school.
Uh, that we will win in the end.
Um, and a number of these, what
you see here have been adopted
by really the important players
in this community, whether it's
San Juan Regional Medical
Center, San Juan College.
Obviously, San Juan County,
Bloomfield, Kirtland, Aztec. I
mean, everybody's come together
at the right time and I'm proud
to be a part of a leadership
group that recognizes the value
that we, that we have here. New
Mexico is primed.
Madam Chair and committees, we,
we are primed for private
investments and there are
organizations out there looking
for
Pro-business places where they
can come and open up shop, and I
think we've got a great
opportunity and a lot of value
to offer.
Um, some neck things that we've,
we've hit on, um, talked about
the lake Farmington Aqua Park.
Take a look at this picture here
where these people have
surfboards in the river.
So we just completed yesterday
the 60% planned study for what
we're terming now the, the
Farmington ditch and Wavewater
or yeah.
Water wave feature and we're
going to put a wave in the river
that people can surf.
That's what we're going to do.
So you can do everything else in
the river here in this area, but
you can't put a surfboard and
actually surf it, you're going
to be able to do that. And if we
stay on track, you'll be able to
do that next summer when you're
here for your next committee
meeting. So.
Make sure you check that out.
Worley Field is, uh, was a 1960s
era field. We've completed some
major upgrades to that, uh, it's
a beautiful facility, and then
we're working right now as a
part of this, this our, our wave
feature is additional river
trail called the North Animas
River Trail extension.
Yeah
Public-private partnerships are
critical. This is a, a probably
a uh just a testament to the
value of community,
um, the love for community and
the Tibet Solibilities Park
Foundation has worked with us
and our Farmington Municipal
School District to create a
boundless journey adventure Park
that will rival what you see in
Rio Rancho at the park above. We
believe it will be, um, this
will be a centerpiece for our
community and something that
we'll be very proud of. We have
broke ground on this project.
It's a
11 acre park.
And it will contain amenities
for people of all, again, all
abilities. Um, we're very proud
of this and look forward to be
able to show this off to you and
it's progress the next time
you're here in town.
Gateway Park, which will be uh
right next to our museum and
also where the wave features
being, um, going to be built.
We're going to have a new
pavilion. We actually put the
fencing up yesterday to start
construction on this outdoor
pavilion.
Continuing our push for outdoor
recreation, um, the state has
been generous and we've managed
to get a number of grant
dollars. Actually, let me go
back to this real quick just to
talk about the importance of
grants. So this first phase that
we're doing on this park is $5.2
million. Out of that money, only
$500,000 of public local farming
and GRT money is going towards
that project. The rest of it's
been raised by private donors or
it's been received through
grants. So the value of having
somebody like Warren Unsicker,
who's our economic development
director, and Julie Baird.
Who is our deputy city manager
who are just diligent out and
going out there to find as much
money as possible to bring back
to Farmington. We could not do
all of these great things
without their efforts.
Basin Bike Park going to be up
on North, uh, Foothills area
where we, we tie into the
already existing and robust
mountain bike trails there.
Mark, this is gonna be great for
you.
Um,
We have different levels of
difficulty built into the phase
one, which we'll hopefully be
breaking breaking ground on here
soon.
Talked a little bit about that.
Brookside Skate Park is getting
in, uh, a face lift.
Navajo Nation President was very
excited about this project. We
all know if his skating, uh,
accolades.
So we're excited to have him
come out when we get that
completed.
And additional amenities at Lake
Farmington.
These are all future things.
We've got some land out in the
Pina Mesa area that we'd love to
see developed.
Traditional park space and then
at our museum, we're working on
a permanent exhibits that will
kind of tell the history,
geological history of our area,
uh, which is very robust.
And, um, we think that'll be a
great addition to the museum.
And now
I would stand for any questions.
Thank you. I've got a Senator
Hamlin.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
Mayor, thank you so much. Um,
you know, I saw you speak at the
outdoor recreation conference a
couple of years later,
yes, and so it's really
impressive of what you've done.
That's some like there we go,
um, and so, uh, one of the
things that there are two things
that you brought up that I, I
would love to offer, um, any uh
assistance in, and one of those
was the outdoor recreation stuff
in in Las Cruces, um, in my
capacity as the CEO of the Las
Cruces Green Chamber. We've
created a marketing tool kit for
our local businesses to be
thoughtful stewards of our
public spaces. And the idea is,
is that if you want to make
money from it, you got to
protect it.
And but also to teach our
businesses how to talk about
that because when people come to
our communities, they want
experiences, they want stories
to take away and you've already
got some amazing infrastructure
to do that. Um, we've created a
brochure that businesses can put
their information on that shows
them all the different places
they can go in the Oregon
Mountains Desert Peaks National
Monument, for example, and so
I'd love to share that with you
because when you were talking
about all the signage that
you've got, um, and then all the
opportunities, it's like it's a
great way for
Your chamber of Commerce to help
uplift
The members as those stewards of
all of the different outdoor
recreation things. I love to to
chat with you about that because
I always get really excited
about that and it's amazing what
we can be doing when, when it
comes down to promoting what
we've got is our natural spaces.
Vice Chair, I appreciate that
and we wouldn't welcome any of
that insight as well. I mean we
should, we should all be working
together to try and promote this
and, uh, it's one thing I know
New Mexico has.
Strong
you know,
Sorry, it's that's coming up,
OK.
Anyways, that is, this is an
opportunity I think all New
Mexico communities should be
taken advantage of. So thank you
for that. Absolutely, and, um,
and I I'd love to share with you
we did an economic impact study
as well for the Oregon Mountains
Desert Peaks National Monument,
and like you was like this is
amazing because we know the
potential, we know the economic
potential of that. And so, um, I
think we, we can continue to, to
have conversations because
there's some amazing stuff that
you're doing. There's some stuff
that we've done that I think
would really be helpful for your
communities.
And the other thing is, is that
on your public safety slide, are
you familiar with the
Metropolitan Redevelopment Act?
I would imagine my friend Warren
Unsicker is. OK.
Um, I, I, you are, are you
Warren? Are you an MRA OK,
Oh yes, we have an MRA. OK,
good. We have a committee and
they're very active, by the way.
OK, very good, just because of
those areas that are
experiencing blight. Um, we've
got another meeting in Las
Cruces in September on our MRA
zone as well. So, um, I just
wanted to flag that cause
that's, you know, and that's
where 75% of your, your taxes
incurred go right back into
economic development and it's
all your decision, not the
state's decision, which is what
I love.
Uh, because our communities know
what's best for them.
And so, um, thank you very much.
I really appreciate what you're
talking about and I hope that we
can have some opportunities, uh,
to work because I think there
are some really love to
highlight what you're doing.
Vice Chair, thank you very much
and um we do have a very active
chamber of commerce as well, and
Jamie Church is here today is
our CEO of that organization, um
OK, so let's talk.
OK.
And we also have a customer
service training program through
our Visit Farmington office as
well that's geared towards local
businesses training their
employees so they know what
great things are going on and
how to talk to visitors about
it. So that's great that's
great. I'm excited to hear more
about it. Thank you very much.
Thank you very much. Appreciate
it. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Next, I've got, uh,
Representative Ortez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, um, I'm
Christina Ortez. I represent
House District 42 in Taos. Thank
you, Mayor, so much for your
presentation. Um, I love coming
to Farmington, best Thai food in
the state. It does have good
Thai food. So good, yeah,
absolutely like homemade,
incredible, um, I'd like to dig
in a little bit on your Parks
and Rec, uh, support and
funding. Are you leveraging LWCF
or other federal programs to get
that fund.
Because like it's it's a lot of
money that you're investing in
parks and I just like to know
more about how you're getting
that funding and we absolutely
are, matter of fact, it's on a
number of these projects that
you've seen up here that have
been listed LWFC has been a
Very valuable resource. Uh,
we're on screws or economic
development director, and Julie
Baird, who's here. They are the
experts on, on that, but, uh,
take for example, the balance of
journey Adventure Park. Like I
said, $500 for the first phase,
4.5 million has been raised
through grants through LWFC and
other projects as well as local
donations.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Mayor. I think that's
really important. And how are
you able to, because those
grants use those federal grants
usually require some kind of
match. How are you matching that
with state funds, with um,
Local, uh, philanthropic
dollars. Madam Chair,
Representative, um, those are
coming through in many cases,
the community transformation and
economic diversification Fund
that we've created. We're
utilizing funds from there for
those matches. Oh yeah, that's
let's talk offline about that
and I'll, uh, Warren, right, is
that your, OK, great. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
I represented Brego.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Mayor, um, that was quite
impressive, um, and just, uh,
FYI so in like 2003, 2004, I
think the redevelopment office
of the city of Albuquerque came
to Farmington to work with you
guys on your MRA and I was the
division manager. So I, my
memory goes back a little ways
and matter of fact, I was
talking to Senator.
Novelle this morning about that
and I think he was sitting in
the meeting when we were
discussing how to set that up.
Um, you guys have come a long
way and it's just really, really
impressive to see what you've
done, um, I, Madam Chair, I, I
wanted to ask, um, two
questions. One is with regard to
the demolition fund that you
mentioned because I see cities
across the state.
Um, that could actually benefit
from something like that, and
I'm gonna just mention this
because my mom lives there in
Espanola. There's some buildings
that they're looking to try to
demolish and um
They're vacant buildings that
have are falling down and their
public safety issues. So how did
you fund that, uh, demolition
fund?
Madam Chair, Representative
Brego, thank you for that
question. Um, it's funded
through this community
transformation and economic
diversification Fund. Uh, one of
those projects also had a
private partnership involved in
it where they had enlisted some
dollars to see it be torn down.
I believe that site now is going
to be potentially a location for
a Maverick, but I could be
wrong, but um it has come
through through this. Uh, Tim
Gibbs, who's with Four Corners
Economic Development, we were
just talking outside, uh, our
need for brownfield money is
real.
We would, we need better access
to it, I think, um, not the
expert there. I bring warn up to
talk more about that, but we'd
be very interested in additional
dollars for those types of, of
projects.
And um,
I would love to talk with you
offline about that, um, a little
bit more because I also ran a
brownfield, um.
Federal fund when I was the
redevelopment manager, so I
maybe give you some ideas about
that. Um, the, the second
question I have, Madam Chair, is
with regard to behavioral health
authority and how that is set
up, um, because I, I that really
sparked my interest when I
started thinking about
Albuquerque and, you know,
surrounding communities and how.
How that
And, and the ideas that the
governor has for behavioral
health.
Madam Chair, Representative
Brego, thank you. Um,
As far as behavioral health
goes, San Juan County has kind
of taken the initiative.
And taking lead on that uh
component. We obviously support
tota behavioral health, uh, the
joint intervention program
services sobering center as
well, um, with our partners at
PMS and San Juan Regional
Medical Center in the county, so
it's a very broad joint effort,
um, in that regard. Uh, I know
speaking with Presbyterian
Medical Service director there,
we're desperate for additional
um people and resources up here
in this area, but I think that's
probably statewide.
Um, but San Juan County does,
has taken the lead on that and
we appreciate.
Appreciate what they're doing to
to work with us.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Uh, or excuse me, Senator
Griggs.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
Mayor, thanks for, thanks for
being here and bringing us up to
date on, on Farmington. Uh, I'm
glad to see some of the things
happening here that, uh, uh,
that we were a little concerned
about I guess earlier when
We were going through some of
the, some of the revenue
shortages that that Farmington
was, was facing. And there's one
thing that I wanna, I wanna talk
to you a little bit about.
And I want to, uh, to talk to
the, uh, the senators and
representatives about and that's
the, the hold harmless challenge
that communities face because,
you know, years ago when
Governor Richardson repealed the
tax on food, he granted or the
legislature granted, uh,
communities opportunity to
receive uh hold harmless
payments, which covered the loss
of the of the tax revenue that
uh
Those communities were getting.
Then
Then the legislature came around
uh a few years back or right
after I got in the legislature,
I guess 12 years ago and decided
that we needed to
Start repealing that payment and
reducing that payment, I guess
would be better off. Uh, then a
couple of years ago, the
legislature decided for certain
communities that payment would
be um
Uh, would be held at a certain
level. Couple of those
communities were Gallup and
Santa Fe, as it turns out, uh,
Farmington, however, A M Gordo,
however, to hold harmless
payment continues to be reduced.
And so sooner or later, and I
don't know if Gallup or if
Gallup if Farmington has
actually imposed any of the 3H
increments or not, but even if
you have, the loss that you will
receive from no longer getting
the the payments will not cover
the tax, the tax increase won't
cover that loss. So, Mr. Mayor,
could you talk about that just a
little bit and how, how you guys
seeing that and, and are you
going to be able, you think, to,
to aggressively take care of it.
Madam Chair, Senator Griggs,
thank you for that question.
I'll bring up our slide here on
the whole harmless and what its
impact has been, uh, since its
repeal in 2015, you can see the
annual actual annual reduction
that started in 2016 and how
that has escalated over the
years. So this year now we're at
$4.3 million payback the
accumulative loss to date is $19
million.
Um, we, we don't see how we, we,
we have implemented those 3 8s,
um, and on the slide prior to.
That is what the green line
looks like with that addition.
Uh, obviously still a funding
gap exists between
$08 versus now, but you can see
where this continues to go, and
by the year 2030, we have been a
cumulative loss of 60 million
local tax dollars.
And, and, Madam Chair and Mayor,
thanks, thanks for that. I mean,
this is
This is one of those deals
that's the impact of the
legislature, uh, addressing an
issue that they saw, but not
really seeing what it was going
to do to local communities. Some
communities, I'm gonna, I'm
gonna use Senator Hamlin's, uh,
in Donan County and Las Cruces,
they actually passed both the
county and the uh the city of
Las Cruces passed the full 3H
increments that they had
available.
And then just recently.
They still felt like they
weren't, uh, they needed
additional revenue, so the, the
uh city of Las Cruces, they've
been talking about increasing
gross receipts tax. Again,
So what, what the legislature
did in this instance, there have
been some good things that came
out of it, not having a tax on
food is, is certainly important.
But what that's done to these
communities.
I
is really challenged them to be
able to uh provide the services
that they try to provide with
the revenue that we caused them
to lose.
Um, I think if we go back and we
look at the bill that uh allowed
uh Gallup and and Santa Fe and
some other communities, Bortala,
maybe Carl's bad if I remember
right, to stop at a certain
level of reduction.
Maybe we need to look at
All the state
And see if that would be
beneficial. I mean, I'm sure it
would be. It wouldn't help you
to the extent still, but it
would maintain a level at at a
certain point.
When that bill passed, there was
a competing bill introduced.
That stopped hold harmless
payments at 50%.
That bill didn't pass. The other
bill did.
But I, uh.
This is, this is a great
Charred
Showing just what has happened
and these
Farmington's far from by itself.
Far from by itself.
All the municipalities in the
state that are of size.
have this issue.
And so what the legislature did.
was pretty much told
Farmington, you're gonna lose
money with this and you need to
raise taxes on the backs of your
citizens.
We're not gonna do it.
Legislature is not gonna do it.
You have to do it.
But we even when we gave you the
money to do it or gave you
increments to do it, it wasn't
gonna be sufficient and frankly,
it was never fair to do it that
way.
And so
I'm gonna retire in the, from,
from the legislature at the end
of the year, so I'm leaving it
up to y'all, but this is
This is the stuff, you know, we
need to look at the things we
need to be aware of when
When the legislature takes
action,
That
is almost contrary to the needs
of communities. We need to work
with these municipal governments
with county governments in ways
to make sure there's a balance,
there's an equity, there's a
fairness. And we didn't, we
didn't really get that with
fish, um.
So I'm excited that your economy
is has done what it's done,
which allows you to do some of
the things you're able to do.
But that could change next week.
So hopefully, hopefully it
won't, hopefully positive things
will continue to happen here in
Farmington. But I really would
like us to find a solution to
this because this isn't going
away until it really goes away
and you see what the numbers are
in uh in Farmington. So thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Uh,
Representative Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for the great
presentation, Mayor, uh,
And I have a question on your
alternate response unit.
How, how do you manage that? How
do you?
Kind of explain to us how do you
decide if that's the unit that
goes out or something else goes
out, and then, uh, is this tied
to, to helping the homeless
situation does that like if you
come across a homeless person on
the street, uh, do you, does
that?
Alternate response unit, do they
help maybe place this person
with some help and, and if it
is, how's, how's that working
for you, uh, Mr. Mayor?
Madam Chair is more, that's a
fantastic question.
Um, so this particular unit goes
out anytime there's a call for a
down subject where somebody's,
you know, not responsive, for
example, anytime I see an
individual that appears to be
unable to get up somewhere, we
stop, call in.
Give them the information on the
individual who's there, where
are they at? Are they breathing?
They will then determine who
needs to go out to that
location.
And most of those situations,
the ERU does fit.
And they do take them to places
where there are services, so we
have a campus of care that
includes our sobering center,
our shelter, our behavioral
health services, they're all on
one campus. So those
individuals, if they are deemed
that that's the best place for
them, they will take them there.
If it's something that's an
emergency, an ambulance will be
called. The ambulance will
respond and take them to the
hospital if they show up and
somebody's breaking the law,
then they would call in a police
officer.
Thank you for that and, and, uh.
Does that unit, will they be
able to to give care to that
person if there's something
going on and, and say for
instance you don't have an
ambulance there yet or they're
gonna, they decide to call an
ambulance. Are those people
still qualified to give that
person care?
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Zmora, yes, that the EMS is an
EMS certified individual on that
unit. OK.
Thank you for that, Mr. Mayor,
and thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
A representative Duncan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um,
Madam Chair, um, Mr. Mayor, a
great presentation.
Um,
I wanna, I wanna highlight one
thing
Madam Chair and Mr. Mayor, your
presentation was great. It
talked about a lot of good
things that have happened.
It will still not replace.
Power plants
Coal mines and those jobs were
lost with that all the other
businesses that have to do with
that.
Legislature created that mess.
And we still haven't fixed that
mess here and in other areas as
well. So I appreciate what
you're doing, uh, San Juan
County and, and Armington.
Appreciate what you're doing,
but we still need to do more for
communities that we've impacted
as a legislator, uh legislature,
and uh and taking great jobs.
And impacting communities in a
huge way that will take years
and years and millions and
millions and millions of tax
dollars.
To get back to that point and we
won't get there. So thank you
for that presentation. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Finger.
Uh, Senator Neville.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Just a
couple of points that goes along
with Senator Gregg's comments,
uh, uh.
Not only does this affect the
cities, the communities, the
counties, and so forth. It
affects the whole state as a
whole, not just because of their
loss of revenue, which is, is.
In some some communities has
been pretty, uh, devastating.
We did the whole harmless
changes at times when the state
didn't have any money.
We have got money now. We don't
need to be doing uh manipulating
the whole harmless thing. So as
you go back, I won't be there
either next year. But as you
guys go back into session next
year, next, you might look at
some of the stuff. We don't need
to be penalizing counties and
cities, uh, in the future on
grocery seats tax. The other
thing it does is it forces the
communities to raise their 38
increments. So now you've got 6
8s.
On top of whatever you have to
have that you have already
passed and that doesn't do the
state one bit of good when it
comes to economic development.
If you want to bring a business
into Farmington and you say, oh,
by the way, you got to charge
8.5 for what I don't know what
is our rate currently 8.5%, uh,
sales tax, grocery seats tax,
and you don't have to do it
somewhere else because they're a
service business or whatever,
they don't, they don't pay
service taxes in Colorado. So if
you're a service business, you
can go to Colorado just a few
miles up the road. You can set
your business up up there.
And that's the kind of things
that, that do not help our
economic development is when we
mess around with the grocery
seats tax and things like that
because that, uh, affects,
that's the, uh, pyramidding
effect that we talk about all
the time. I'm a real estate
appraiser. I charge 7 I mean 8%
tax on my stuff and then uh
you're a, a builder, so you have
to tack that on then you charge
another 8% on top of that, and
then whatever, you know, it, it,
it compounds and pyramids over
and over again. Uh.
The other thing we've done is,
uh, we changed the law, we had
to do it.
And that's destination, uh,
destination sourcing, is that
what they call it? Uh, where we
tax wherever the service
happens and used to be, I know
Hobbs has had problems with it
because they, uh, their
destinations, uh, all of the
sourcing of the destinations
were outside the city limits.
They used to be taxed inside the
city limits, so the Hobbs.
Even though they got a lot of
money in Hobbs. They don't have
it in the city government, at
least to the degree they had. So
we've messed around with grocery
seats, GRT numbers to the
detriment not only local
communities but to the overall
economic development of the
state. So just one other point I
wanted to bring up. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Mayor. Um, we
also have, um.
Mr. Gibbs from the Four Corners
Economic Development, and we'd
like to turn it over to you at
this time.
Madam Chair, committee members,
um, it's, it's an honor to have
you here. My name is Tim Gibbs.
I'm the CEO of Four Corners
Economic Development. Four
Corners economic development and
for the, for the sake of time
because I hate to get behind
schedule right off the bat. I,
I'm not going to read everything
on every single slide. I'm gonna
try to, to, to focus on the main
points. Uh, I know you have
reference to my slides as well.
Uh, but Four Corners economic
development is a regional
economic development.
agency organization serving San
Juan County. So we, uh, we help
businesses and the first
statement I'd like to make to
you, especially this committee,
is economic development does not
create jobs.
Companies do.
But we have impact on what
companies may go where and who
would have the benefit of it. So
certainly, as a regional
organization for San Juan County
and for the municipalities we
represent and the businesses we
represent, we want to, to expose
them to the opportunities of
this community, of these people,
and of this uh and uh economy.
So we, that's our mission
statement and our vision, um,
but we're like a lot of other
organizations, economic
development.
Organizations. In fact, there's
2000 economic development
organizations in this nation.
And every single day if we don't
measure what we've done to, to
advance our community and help
our businesses, then we're
losing out to the other 1999.
Up some basic stats and the
mayor had a wonderful
presentation that really set the
stage for where we are today. So
I'm going to try to complement
his presentation and the numbers
that I can provide for
conversation and, and for
guidance today, but I don't want
to replicate it in any way. Um,
unemployment rate, uh, 5.5%. Um,
we peaked at 11.6 in 2020. Um, I
like worker participation rate
better than I do unemployment. I
think it tells
A more complete story of what's
going on and how many people in
your community are actually
working. Um, the national rank
is higher than the state rate,
and the state rate is higher
than our local rate, but I'm
sure there's other communities
in New Mexico with even lower
rates than that, but we have
work to do. Currently, 55.6% of
the people that are aged 18 to
65 are working.
Historically that that number
was higher than in the past. Now
a lot of things have happened
post COVID to work in workforce
that we're still recovering to
and it may be a number of years
before we fully recover and we
don't know what that number
looks like. But currently for
the San Juan, the worker
participation rate is 5655.6%.
We have 121,000 people here in
San Juan County. Now, what's
interesting is if you are here
on Saturday, Mayor's right.
There's an additional 100,000
people that are coming here and
shopping here. I have a friend
of mine who says he runs into
more of his friends from
Telluride at Sam's.
Than any other place. Because we
are a regional center for
healthcare. We're a regional
center for, uh, for, of course,
education and for workforce as
well. So, just some, some
numbers that you can see, we
have, we have had a decline in
population, but
It feels like it's, it's, it's
finding equilibrium. Um, so I
think those numbers represent
that as well.
Just the numbers of uh employees
that we have here in in the type
of industry, you would think
with the conversation that we
are solely a blue-collar
community. Let's not quite the
case. Now, the blue-collar
community and the jobs that,
that it represents are
incredibly important because
these are family wage jobs many,
many times and a couple of
slides in, I'm gonna show you
the impact of what happens when
you lose these family wage jobs
and you lose the tax revenues
that comes from that as well.
Educational attainment as well.
You have a wonderful educational
facility that you're sitting
here, but we also have very,
very good school systems here
that are aligned together. So
the schools are aligned from
elementary to middle to high
school to college to the needs
of business and industry and
it's something that we're very,
very proud of. You're sitting in
a building that's School of
Energy and it's this BP on the
front of it. Um, what the
college did, and this is BT
before Tim. I'll be the first
one to say that. But what they
did about working with business
and industry about bringing
dollars to the table to serve
both their needs, the community
needs, uh, is, is substantial
and this was mostly paid for by
dollars coming from business and
industry to meet their needs,
to make education aligned with
opportunity to make this equal
that and that's when economic
development and education are
truly, truly a partner. And Fork
said is a convenor. We, we do
nothing by ourselves, but we do.
everything for the benefit of
the people in this, in this
community. We work with our
cities, we work with the county,
we worked with the educational
partners. We work with our
business and industry to meet
their needs to maintain the jobs
that we have to set the stage
for expansion and we're gonna
talk about recruitment as well.
So the economy.
You probably know all of these
things and, and in a prior
generation of this slide show, I
put these are Timisms, but
they're actually not. They're
San Juan County facts. 90% of
this entire county, which is
about 5.5% of the state of New
Mexico is federal lands. The MSA
here that we're setting in right
now is the only MSA in the
United States that doesn't have
a railroad. We're gonna talk
about that as well. An
interstate or a commercial
airport right now.
Consumer spending drives a large
portion of this economy, making
up 65% of it, and we spoke about
the exponential growth in
population that are here using
the services and the
opportunities that this
community and this region
represents on the weekend as
well.
But there is impacts and
Representative Duncan, um,
mentioned those things as well
to to.
When we are talking about
transitions, when we're talking
about um um impacts within the
energy community and we are an
energy community. Uh, I, I think
it's has to be shown. When San
Juan Generation Station closed,
there was $21 million in taxes
that went away for the state of
New Mexico.
But the local impact for the
county was nearly $4 million a
year for the college was nearly
$2 million a year.
The total job loss for the
closure of that facility was
1,586 jobs direct.
There's an annual payroll of
over $117 million that no longer
exist here in this community.
Now
I'm a very optimistic and I hope
a good economic development
director. But for me to stand
before you and say that we're
going to grow or recruit $117
million
in annual, um,
Payroll is a very, very tall
task to have here.
So
That was San Juan.
Now we have 4 corners generation
station that has a proposed set
closure date of 2031.
It's a 1500 megawatt facility.
It has a, a captive coal mine
directly behind it as well.
Now, it's not quite as large at
this point as San Juan was, it's
900 jobs. But those jobs fall in
between that 6500 to $100,000 a
year as well. So there's still
another potential, large, large
impact to this community, um,
that is still transitioning and
still finding its way from the
last one as well.
Now,
Nava Transitional Energy
Company.
Now has, has a plan to move
forward and I know that I don't
want to get in front of the
schedule, but tomorrow there's
a, there's gonna be a
conversation that's going to
involve sequestration, carbon
sequestration, and I, I'm gonna
be setting in on that one as
well.
And they're working with
partners, federal partners, and
some state and education
providers as well about
demonstrating technology for
carbon sequestration. They're,
they're looking at a class 6
wells and, and there's a lot of
issues around this, but they're
looking at uh at the opportunity
to capture 95% of carbon dioxide
that would be captured from
existing power plant.
If they're able to move forward
on this and they're able to do
it, they actually have a plan
that would invest $5.7 billion
in its local community that has
renewable components to it, has
carbon sequestration to it as
natural gas and hydrogen energy
generation to it, and it also
would invest in, in upgrading
the transmission infrastructure
that's here that leads not just
here but to the west coast and
several other states as well. So
there's a lot of things at play
here and economic development.
Certainly plays a role in all of
these things and
The dye is not 100% cast, but
we're working with our partners
to see how we can assist in the
economy of today and also have
some vision for the economy of
the future as well.
So,
Where we are today, uh, and,
and, and my presentation
certainly covers, you know, uh,
some of the things that the
mayor spoke up for the city of
Farmington, but also for the
county and other, the other
municipalities as well. San Juan
County is working and taking the
lead on bringing a freight rail
to this region. And I want to
say thank you for the role that
the state has played in helping
us along in this process and,
and, and identifying funds that
that could be used for a match
for federal funds as well. Um,
They have worked very, very
closely with the Navajo Nation
collaboratively to develop this
because anything that we would
have to do with a freight rail
would, would impact and involve
uh rightaways, uh, through the
nation as well.
There's a hole where this
region, if we look at the four
quarters region that doesn't
have rail service. So everything
that we have is nearly brought
in by truck.
And it, and it, and I, I
remember someone in the
introduction was was speaking
up, but the lovely road and how
pretty it was. Well, think about
every single piece that has to
be brought into our community
where there'd be a window or
food or a car or a part or
anything else being only being
transported in one way. Rail
line gives us the opportunity to
have, to have competition in
transportation. It gives us the
opportunity to, to assist our
existing industries and even
recruit new ones that would
have alternative sources of
transporting the product and
that.
Um, it also would uh would,
would incredibly benefit Nappy,
which is agricultural producer
for the Navajo Nation, which has
massive amounts of products that
are exported outside of the
state and even to other places
in the United States and even
internationally. So, and it
would help our state highways as
well of uh delineating some of
the traffic and have an
alternative sources to get
things both in and out.
You, I spoke of the whole. Look
at how far in any direction you
have to go before you, you find
a rail line.
That that is something that we
are closer today than we've ever
been to making a historic
investment that will pay
dividends for the next decade
and century to come in rail.
We are a regional organization,
you know, San Juan County, I
mentioned, um, uh, the, the
rail, but they're also looking
at their industrial properties
and brownfield. The mayor
mentioned Brownfield for 100
years, we've had business and
industry here and many of those
sites are now not productive. If
we're thinking about the
environment and the best thing
to do for the environment if
we're thinking about economic
development, repurposing
brownfields and and bring and
taking care of blight in an
environmental issues.
should be paramount to every
single person for different,
even if it's for different
reasons. We have several of
those type things that may be
2030, 40 years old that may have
a chain around the gate. If we
could provide leadership, if we
could find a way to help
redevelop these brownfields, not
only does it give us more sites
for economic development, but
it's a great thing to do for the
environment as well.
The city is Aztec. It has a
downtown Metro redevelopment
plan which is masterful.
Aztec is on the highway leading
from Durango.
And how many people are heading
to Durango for whether it be ski
opportunities or outdoor outdoor
recreation that complements what
we're doing here with the, with
the city of Farmington as well.
But they, they've got a plan
whether developing and opening
up properties, um, for all types
of development that they think
would be advantageous to be
between the city of Farmington
and also Colorado as well to
capture traffic and capture
opportunity and economic
development. Uh, it's brand new.
It's in draft form, um, they,
they've been
with us and we've been marketing
that as well.
Bloomfield is one of the
communities that has some of the
privately held industrial
properties as well on the main
pathway, and some of those
properties are vacant, so we've
been working with Bloomfield to
identify the industrial
properties and help market and
make certain the world knows uh
of those opportunities as well.
Kirtland, and I just was in
Kirtland yesterday. Um,
Caitlin's finding its way. It's
finding its brand. It's finding
its opportunity as well. One of
the things they're working on is
becoming, you know, a, a
patriotic.
Um, um,
City. They, they want to have
flags, they want to honor their
first responders and want to
honor veterans. They want to do
things for people that's
traveling through, whether it's
a ship rock or coming through on
the highway to understand that
that's a very, very unique
community that, that is honoring
both their history in Mexico
and, and the nation. So we're
working with those on that as
well.
The city of Farmington and their
presentation was masterful today
that the mayor provided and what
they're doing, uh, about not
reinventing himself but building
upon their foretas is something
that, that we've been working
with. We've also been working
on, and I'm glad the mayor left
this component to me to talk
about a little bit about
recruitment.
If you're recruiting business
and industry and first and
foremost,
70% of your growth is going to
come from within. I understand
that the companies that are
already here, we want to, we
want to retain them for
retention, but we also want to
help them grow. But we also want
to share to the world the
opportunities that New Mexico,
that San Juan counties that each
one of these communities and in
particular, Farmington for this
conversation, what we offer.
But to do that, you have to have
sites, you have to have
buildings, you have to be ready
for recruitment. You have to be
able to have a product that you
can market. If you get a PRO or
an RFI is most areas would,
would call it from the
partnership, you may have 3
days, you may have 7 days to
respond, you know, it could be
something and I'm gonna make up
a fictional thing here that they
are looking for a 50,000 square
foot building that it has to
have 32 ft eve, eave height that
it needs to.
have full infrastructure and it
needs to be on a four-lane
highway. Well, if you have 4
days to respond to that.
You need to know what you have,
where it is, and, and have the
marketing ready to go because
we're economically competing
with other sites in New Mexico,
we're probably competing with
Arizona and Texas as well. So,
we've been working on
identifying what we have and by
and by going through that
process, we also understand what
we need to be competitive.
City of Farmington was awarded
$25,000 and once again I'm gonna
use Warren's name too, so he's a
little rock star back here, OK?
Um,
They were rewarded $25,000 to a
master plan for a new 200 acre
industrial park next to the
airport.
Almost within sight if you're
high enough. If you get high
enough to see your house, we
could see it too. Uh, but it
would be 200 acres, a brand new
industrial park next to our
airport.
Thank you for that. The, the
same grant cycle, which has
happened a couple of months ago,
um, we were awarded Four Corners
Economic Development $25,000 for
the design of a spec building
that could be located in this
new industrial park. These are
parts and pieces of the market
that doesn't exist that we don't
have that limits our success in,
in recruiting business and
industry to the state and to
this region. So we're, we're
making the investment now.
We're having our grand
opportunity that we had from the
state leads program, making it
aligned with a federal grant,
with EDA grant where we can take
this and apply for that while
we're marketing because we don't
want this to use the word spec.
We want this to be a bird in
hand where we have a recruitment
that if we have this, then it
means that we have growth and
development and we have a
project and we have employment,
and we have tax revenue coming
to this region. That's so we're
trying to align the opportunity
to the needs of business and
industry.
I mentioned, um, you know, that
the $25,000 but Fork said is
also, um, just recently been
awarded the Department of Energy
capacity building grant for
$100,000 and that was announced
about two months ago, 1 month
and a half maybe. And what that
grant is, is understanding that
we are an energy economy, but we
want to, to apply the assets in
different ways. So we know that
we have an abundance. There's a
CO2 pipeline currently in this
community. We know that we have
hydrogen in this community.
We know that we have helium,
natural helium production in
this community. We know that we
have natural gas in this
community. Well, those are
building blocks for
manufacturing as well. They're
not just products that are
shipped out via pipelines to be
used in other places.
Some of the highest quality
lubricants in the world that are
now even being used in electric
cars is made from, uh, natural
gas.
Some of the of the best oil
products, um, synthetic oils is
now being made natural gas.
Delta Airlines just announced
that by 20, I think it's 34,
they want 25% of their, their
jet A fuel to be renewable
fuels.
And they're targeting CO2 as a
feedstock to make jet fuel from
as well. So you can see that
that building blocks of existing
business economy can be
reapplied for manufacturing. And
if you do this right, then
you're divining competitive
advantages for your region,
meaning that we can do it here
and do it cheaper or better than
possibly other places around the
country would be. That's what
that DOE grant is at the end of
the day, that grant gives us a,
a, a
Platform or a plan for segments
of an economy, even to the point
of companies that we should be
targeting to look at the
opportunity in San Juan County,
New Mexico. So that's incredibly
exciting. We also have a just
transition grant that it's a
broadband.
Uh, grant for $100,000.
Currently, there's an excess of
100 different funding sources,
state and federal for broadband.
And the dichotomy that exists
between the city of Farmington
and some of the rural areas,
whether it be in the Navajo
Nation or even in San Juan
County of, of service and the
level of service and the price
point of services is drastic. I,
I, I think all of us in economic
development understand that
broadband is no longer a luxury.
It's a necessity just as water
would be, just power would be or
anything else, you know, every
one of our communities in the
county and municipalities.
are wanting to attract talent
and maintain and hold on to
young talent in particular, that
may leave and go other places
well broadband and connectivity
is a core, core feature of that.
Uh, we are leading an effort to
analyze, to bring together to uh
incentivize in any way possible,
making certain that there's a
collective vision for all of San
Juan County and for all the
players that would, that's in
the space. We recently had a
broadband summit.
We had 300 people at our, at our
summit.
Focusing in, in a lot of state
participation as well and
national as well, focusing on
how we can fill in the gaps and
how we can have a plan to bring
digital equity and broadband and
bring those uh to all the, the
residents of San Juan County.
We mentioned, I've mentioned
several times about the
development of industrial sites
and buildings, which gives us
the platform to be able to
compete and also offer our
existing businesses, uh, uh,
chances to expand and to grow
their operations as well.
Hydrogen hub application, we um
took the lead and worked, um,
with 3 other states is a Four
Corners region for a hydro, a
federal hydrogen hub
designation, um.
There was 9.
Uh, communities, areas that was
invited to participate for 7
spots.
We were one of two that was not
selected on the federal level to
be a hydrogen hub.
That process though brought the
community together and exposed
the opportunities of what
hydrogen could represent and how
it could be applied once again
to give some of our existing
business and industry in
particular Nappy competitive
advantages to reducing their
cost and also having direct
access that they could use for
things like fertilizer and
things like that as well.
In essence, our community is a
regional organization. We, we
are the center spot between
business and industry, our
municipalities are, are training
providers and services that
support businesses here in San
Juan County. We take that
responsibility incredibly, uh,
um, and that it's incredibly
important. We also understand
that we have to have vision for
where we are today and how we
can apply and we redevelop the
assets we have for this the.
The economy of tomorrow as well.
So, Four Corners Economic
Development is very, very busy.
We have been working with our
partners. We've been embracing
outdoor recreation. We've been
in embracing uh healthcare.
We've been embracing education
as means and, and ways to
promote economic health for this
region. Um.
That's where we are as of today.
Uh, we're a complementary
organization. We can make
significant differences and we
help take care of our existing
business communities. We many,
many times are the voice of the
business community and we have
synthesize what we hear from the
business community to make sure
that our elected officials
understand the tribulations and
the opportunities that they face
every day operating in New
Mexico and in San Juan County.
Madam Chair, I'd be happy to
answer any questions that I can
and uh thank you for the
opportunity to be here today.
Thank you so much for your
presentation today. Uh, we do
have a couple of people on the
list, uh, starting with
representative Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for the great presentation.
So, so you stated that the, the
federal
Uh, people didn't pick
Farmington as a good place to
have a hydrogen hub. Am I
correct in saying that?
I said that we weren't selected
federally. That's 7 areas in the
United States were selected and
we were too.
Uh, 2 of the 9 under
consideration that was not uh
selected. Um, I want to be very,
very careful with my words here
because I think there was a lot
of considerations that went into
that.
Uh, including some that actually
may be a little bit political.
And I, I say that with a smile,
but it, it has large
implications because there are
billions of dollars that were at
stake for these designated
hydrogen hubs. Now, whether or
not there's another round of
Hydrogen hub designations we
don't know because of the 7 that
was, that was selected, there's
a couple of those that I don't
know are moving forward and at
the pace that they thought they
would.
So there, there may be
additional opportunities in the
future of that with in
partnership with what's going on
with the United States
government, but what we are also
doing is working with the
private sector as well. We have
um a, a producer, a products
here, a company called Pesco
that actually is manufacturing
uh equipment that produces
hydrogen. So there are many,
many activities going on in the
private size under this uh this
umbrella of hyd
that's outside of that of uh the
activity of the designation of a
federal hydrogen hub.
So, Madam Chen and Tim, uh,
Was there a weakness that we had
here in Farmington that that why
we didn't get picked, is there
any particular thing that you
can point out to or was it just?
Are you still wondering why that
happened or, or where are we on
that? I think it was a highly
political process.
I think there was a lot of
considerations that went into
that other than just the
application from each entity.
Um,
And beyond that, I, I don't know
if there was, uh, that there was
feedback from the application
that says on the scoring metrics
you scored this and the others
scored that and your weakness
was that that was not given. OK.
Because I think it was beyond
those considerations.
Thank you for that and thank
you, Madam Chair.
Representative Conn.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair, I
was listening to both of you and
Wayne to see what what what you
would say anything about it, but
how was your housing situation
here in Farmington? Are you able
to provide housing for these
people that you're trying to
bring in?
Madam Chair, Representative
Econ, that's, that's an
incredible, that's a great
question and it should have been
mentioned, um, there is a
shortage of worker housing.
Um, in this community.
I am new
And I thought I'd get through
this presentation without saying
that. I've been in the community
for 6 months in my, my position.
So when I came in, I had to buy
a house here as well, and, and
usually historically, the MSA
here would have 300 to 400
houses listed, uh, at any one
time, we're about 100 right now.
So there is a shortage of
housing and affordable housing
and there is a backlog, uh, uh,
of section 8 housing. So there's
a shortage of housing from start
to finish. Now as an economic
development organization, just
last week we had a private
individual that had been to
several, several energy impacted
communities and built housing
projects, we hosted him here
about 200 yards from here in my
office, talking
About options for employee
housing and we had the college
participate with the hospital
participate. We had members uh
of our community participate as
well, so we are working on those
type things. My second week on
the job, I met with our
hospital.
And the hospital told me they
had 180 open positions.
And that the average wage for
those positions was $1,100,000.
If I made an announcement, Four
Corners Economic Development, if
I made an announcement today
that we had recruited a company
with 180 jobs at $1,100,000 a
year, we probably would be
headline of every TV station in
Albuquerque on the news.
Yet those opportunities exist
and housing is a core component
of what we have to do to be able
to feel those type jobs.
And bring people to this
community. So.
There is
Efforts underway. There's a new
housing development, uh, that's,
that's, that's underway right
now, at least, uh, they're not
building houses there yet to put
the infrastructure in the
ground, but it's been, it's the
plans have been approved. Um,
there are people looking at
redevelopment of existing
assets. Um, there are people
looking and the economics are
making sense about coming here
and talking about worker housing
and higher density of housing,
uh, for those type things.
But I don't think that problem
is unique to us, but we are
actively working towards um
trying to address that and show
the economic opportunity it
represents as well.
and Madam Chair, I am just
curious if you've been working
with a mortgage finance
authority to the state of New
Mexico and say never
availability of money is there.
I mean, there's federal money
and there's state money galore.
Uh, but nobody can use it
because uh you can't afford to
build a house.
Madam Chair, Representative
Alco, you're, you're exactly
right. There, there has been
inflation to the point that it
makes building incredibly
difficult. And even the
perspective, and I learned this
from a, a friend of mine, I'm
not gonna mention his name. When
you develop housing and, and or
if you develop a subdivision,
you have to have thick skin and
be in for the long haul.
I mean, think about if it's
going to take 10 years or 15
years for something to build out
and the difference in federal
and state policy and recession
and partners and all the things
it takes to, to get through that
process. If you're risk averse
or you're not incredibly stable,
it, it's, it's very, very
difficult to get financed and,
and I had something just came
across my desk that that said it
was a federal uh opportunity to
help with housing.
And it was 60 and it was they
were lending money at 60% of
prime.
So there are opportunities, and
you're right, this is a time of
more federal stimuli that in
probably of the history of the
United States and if we can't do
it now.
Then it's even, it's, it's, it,
it's it, then what are we gonna
do tomorrow?
Um, so it is important.
And Madam Chair, and that's the
thing you got to go out and
change that money because it's
not gonna come to you.
So if you don't chase it, what
can I say? Anyway, I do uh wanna
ask one other question is, uh,
what about baseball? I mean, my
first, uh,
My first, uh, uh, the first time
I ever came to Farmington was
because we had a baseball
tournament and my kids were
playing.
There's a baseball still as
strong as it was. I mean, it's
still bringing in the money to
the city?
Madam Chair, Representative Al
Cohen, thank you for that
question. It is very robust and
strong. We just spent $1.8
million upgrading one of our
fields here, uh, with the hopes
that it will continue to be
utilized for tournaments and
sports tourism, um, as we are a
hub for that. We bring teams and
coaches and players down from
southern Colorado, uh, who play
in our leagues all summer long.
We host the Connie Mac World
Series every year. We just
finished our fifty-ninth year of
hosting the Conomac World Series
and
Um, we anticipate more of those
types of opportunities here. I
will tell you what's really
great is the softball. The
softball organization here has
some great leadership, and they
have created 2 or 3,
very robust tournaments that are
bringing 52 teams from across
all across the United States
here to the city of Farmington
to play softball.
Thank you Madam too. That's all
I have.
Thank you and um thank you both
for your presentations today. I
think they were both excellent
and really gave us a bird's eye
view of what's going on in your
community. So once again, thank
you for being here. Um, I wanna
go ahead and call up our next
group and uh remind our members
we're a little bit behind on
time, uh, while the next group
is coming up.
Which is.
Uh, Tony Pendergrass, Becky
Rley, uh, Vanessa Hacker, uh,
we'll be talking about, uh,
educating the workforce and
developing employment
opportunities where they're
coming up. I wanna acknowledge a
former state representative Tom
Taylor snuck in and I just
wanted to say hello to him and
I, uh, where are you? Did he
walk out again?
He, he's around, I guess, and I,
I also failed to um acknowledge
and uh thank our staff who is
here if um if you all would uh
make sure to, to, if you could
introduce yourselves because,
um, very, very uh important
piece of what we do here is
because of our staff, and I'm
going to start with Erin. Thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Aaron
Bond, a researcher with the
council Service. We also have
Martin Fisher, um, one of the
drafters with the council
service and Andrea Martinez
Cordero is our intern. This is
her first meeting, so we're
excited about our Zoom and we
also have Roberto, um, he is
running the webcast and the
Zoom. Wonderful, thank you so
much and I, I apologize for,
for, uh, rushing through that
cause you guys are probably the
most important piece of, of our
team. I also want to
acknowledge.
Salazar, uh, Henry, who uh works
with me at a at a local level to
help get the agendas done and so
appreciate her as well. So with
that, um, I am going to keep us
going since we're running
behind, but very happy to see
our group. I'm gonna let you all
introduce yourselves and your
titles and so with that, let's
get started.
Is that on now? Thank you. Um,
good morning, Madam Chair,
committee members. My name is
Becky Rowley. I'm the president
of Santa Fe Community College
and the chair of the New Mexico
Independent Community Colleges.
Good morning, Madam Chair
members. I'm Vanessa Hawker. I'm
the executive director for the
Independent Community Colleges.
Great to be here.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. My
name is Tony Hopper Pendergrass
and I'm the president of San
Juan College.
OK.
Go ahead and whoever is gonna
start, I'll let you all just
navigate your yourselves that
way.
How's that? Thank you,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, it is my honor to
present to you, um, a
presentation this morning
regarding um educating the
workforce and developing
employment opportunities. Um, I
will talk about what we've
accomplished this last year here
at San Mo College and basically
everything that we do relates
directly to this topic.
Um.
I'm a native New Mexican. I
actually grew up here in New
Mexico and I just completed my
12th year at San Mo College and
um Becky and I actually worked
together in the 90s at Clovis
Community College.
Do we have a
I need, I think I might need a
clicker.
Here it is. Oh, there we go. OK.
So first of all, it's important
to recognize that San Juan
College is located on the
ancestral lands of the Dane
people, the hickory Apacheche
southern Ute mountain ute, Hopi
and ancestral Pabloan also have
ties and stories rooted in these
lands and waters, and we work,
learn and live on these lands.
Just to give you some
perspective of who we serve, we
serve about 8800 credit students
annually, and I just received
information this morning. We
have surpassed 4000 on the
non-credit corporate training
side with our industry partners.
We're proud that we're a
majority minority serving
institution with 32% Native
American and 21% Hispanic. Our
average age is 28. Um,
We have over 140 different
certificate and degree programs,
and these are in 7 different
pathways at the college and
we're proud that we lead the
nation for awarding certificates
and were 3rd in the nation for
associate degrees among all
1,108 community colleges.
Um, to just to discuss our
economic impact, we add over 300
million added into the region,
which is 4.4% of our GRP which
supports nearly 4000 jobs.
And the the future earnings for
students for every $1 they
invest is about a $5.60 return,
and it's also a positive benefit
for um taxpayers and also
reduced social savings for the
state of New Mexico.
Um, we take our mission and
vision very seriously at San
Juan College. We want all of our
students to thrive, and we want
them, we want to provide a world
class education and experience.
These are the values that we
hold here at the college. We
call them our eye care values,
and all employees are evaluated
based on living these values and
also the accomplishment of our
strategic plan.
So these are the 5 strategic
directions that our trustees
have set for the college for our
5 year plan. The first one has
to do with partnerships. So
these are partnerships with K-12
with universities and with
employer partners. The second
strategic direction is about how
after students finish year, how
we can get them into jobs, and
we have lots of internships and
experiences we'll talk about
later. The third is we want to
make sure
That they have a high quality
experience inside the classroom.
The 4 strategic direction is we
want to make sure all of our
students are successful, and
then lastly, making sure we have
the appropriate resources to
advance our students' success
agenda.
Um, this show's dual credit. So
how are we partnering with K12.
So as you can see, we were up
over 2000 before the pandemic,
but you, as you can see, we have
a positive trajectory, it
actually increased 7.5% this
last year, so we're almost at
serving 2000 students annually,
um, our deans and our vice
president of learning worked
very closely with our faculty
this last year. In the 7
pathways that you see on the
that all of our programs are
broken into. We make sure we
have what, what we call light
the fire courses, so they have
kind of the wow factor and get
students excited about the
program that they're pursuing
early on.
We also host a career pathways
Expo with our industry partners
and we bring every 8th grader in
our county to the community, and
this is all part of creating
that college-going mindset, but
they take a 7 question
instrument and called career
coach, and it tells them what
two pathways they might want to
explore based on their
interests, and they explore
those two pathways throughout
the day and our industry
partners are integral to this.
We also host a lot of recruiting
events with our industry
partners. This is just a
sampling of of some of the major
partners that we work with and
all of our programs, um, host
different initiatives throughout
the year with our partners.
We also host a lot of mock
interview sessions so that the
students do well when they
interview.
These can be either done
individually with courier
services or through their
program.
Um,
6 months after every one of our
student graduates from San Juan
College, we contact them and ask
them about their experience.
Then we prepare these
infographics, so we know others
can know how.
Where are they going to go to
work? How much will they get
paid? What is the perception of
the students that take classes
here. We're proud to report to
you that 89% of our students
have either graduated,
transferred, or continuing their
education or in the military. So
that's something we're very
proud of that 89 we know we're
8 89% are doing well and
continuing.
This is an example of our
instrumentation and controls
program that's through the
School of Energy. Um, you can
see that the average graduate
starting salary is $80,000. The
national average is 46,000 and
then it just shows a sampling of
the companies that are hiring
them.
This next infographic um starts
with a pretty pretty nice entry
salary of 100,000. The national
average is 58,000.
Um, this shows you how many of
our students are transferring.
We have a transfer center
located on our campus and we've
had almost a 40% increase the
past 3 years.
We also host what's called a
National Signing Day, where, you
know, when students are
recruited to work, um, to go.
Um, play sports in a university
they have a signing. Well,
they've started a national
signing day for students that
are interested in career and
technical programs, and we
hosted one, we had 123 seniors
commit and we were pleased that
the assistant secretary for the
US Department of Education said
that she, she contacted me, said
she saw this um announcement and
asked if she could participate.
So Doctor Amy Lloyd was also
here for that.
Um,
we're very grateful to all of
you for your tremendous support
year after year to San Mon
College. It helped us start both
of these brand new programs,
heavy equipment operations,
which is an 11 week program that
started a couple of weeks ago.
We have 68 students on the
waiting list already. And then
um they start
Um, easily mid-sixties after 11
weeks, um, over time, they're
usually up over 100,000. Um,
cybersecurity for
infrastructure, that's another
program that we have started and
that is for individuals that are
planning to do cybersecurity for
utilities or energy companies,
and we recently received the NSA
designation from the National
Security Administration, so we
will be eligible for
Lots of funding.
Um, experiential learning, so we
want to make sure our students
participate in apprenticeships,
internships, or service learning
before they graduate, gives them
their their toe in the door and
we had nearly 500 students that
participated in that, the last
year.
And thanks to your wonderful
support from the state, um,
these students are paid $15 an
hour and through a state grant,
and this is a sampling of some
of the places that our students
are working.
Um, our goal is to also become,
we're a Native American
non-tribal serving institution,
but we also would like to become
a Hispanic serving institution.
So as you can see, that is one
of our goals and we're hopeful
that we will reach it during
this strategic plan.
These are some of the events
that we offer, um, for our
students that relate to this
goal.
And we're always looking at,
this is what we call a leading
indicator. We know that if
students start in one fall and
come back the next fall, they're
more likely to graduate and as
you can see the, the blue band
there we were in that area,
that's we track um the colleges
that are rated the best in the
nation, that's called the Aspen
Award and um this year we think
we're gonna be at 70% is where
we're, we're looking at right
now with our metrics.
Um, we think it's important that
students see role models in the
classroom teaching, so we have a
diversity initiative to make
sure that that our faculty are
diverse.
And we want to make sure that we
have the appropriate technology
resources. So through a program
called Chess in partnership with
several community colleges here
in the state we're converting to
work day and we've converted
our, our financial and HR and
we're about 30% converted for a
student, but this is a very
important initiative that the
state has supported generously
and thank you.
Um, some of our facility's goals
to make sure we provide that
world-class experience. Um, the
mayor mentioned our bike park
we've put in retractable
bleachers. We have new signage
for our entryways and wayfinding
in case of emergency and um he
also mentioned the Harvest Food
Hub, which is in partnership
with the city of of Farmington
to help all of our local farmers
through a co op with a
storefront commercial kitchen
and.
Industrial food storage.
Um, we're very proud that we're
designated as a center of
excellence in renewable energy
and sustainability. You can see
our four priorities up there,
but they have to do with we have
an electric an advanced
certificate, an electric vehicle
technology. We also um are
repurposing, um, and recycling
for the lithium ion batteries,
water security and
sustainability. We've started
new programs and, um, wastewater
management and, and.
Also hydrogen. We've been very
involved in the in the work with
hydrogen and are developing an
advanced certificate.
Um, we are always looking of how
we can support San Juan College
through grants. Um, this year,
we, we have 9.8 million in
grants.
Which is a a nice ROI.
Um, we survey all of our
students. It's actually a
conversation when they enter the
college and we asked them what,
what resources do they need? How
can we help them? And as you can
see, one out of every 3 of our
students are are experiencing
housing insecurity.
1 out of 3 do not have reliable
home technology, 1 out of 5
don't have reliable utilities,
water, electric, or sewer, one
of eight do not have reliable
transportation, and one of 10
are experiencing food insecurity
and um usually the food
insecurity is low because most
people have a lot of pride and
they don't want to admit.
That they're hungry.
Um, we also survey our students
that are located in our housing
development and 1 out of 3 did
not return home during spring
breaks, so our foundation helped
them with gift cards so that
they would have food during the
break, and then the reasons they
don't return home are
transportation struggles, home
life difficulties and food
insecurity.
So as many of you know, we
opened um housing, a couple of
years ago, um, it is full and we
have 50 students on the waiting
list. So this is something um I
know it was mentioned earlier
that we are working towards to
make sure that our students are
in in nice, affordable, safe
housing.
Um, we also last year received
the award from the Associated
General Contractors and
partnership with Jane's
Corporation as the um best lead
certifiable project. Um, we're
also building a student health
center that will be complete
this year to, um, address our
students' physical and mental
health needs, and we're
co-locating them so we can
destigmatize mental health.
And we appreciate the tremendous
support the state provided 1.1
million and then the federal
delegation provided 1.1 million
to build this, our student
health center.
Um, last year we went through
our 10-year accreditation from
the Higher Learning Commission,
we met all 19 um criteria. This
was a huge project.
We also are proud that we've
received excellence in financial
reporting awards for 9 years in
a row for from the government
finance officers association.
And we also received an award um
regarding our high school
equivalency programs that we
have here at the college is
rated um high.
Um, we also received an award
from the New Mexico Hospital
Association for our nursing
program and we're currently
working with our regional
hospital to expand our nursing
program by 16 students and we're
also going to introduce a new
rad tech program here at the
college, but it's a wonderful
partnership.
Um, we surveyed our students and
the last time we surveyed him
with the national instrument,
um, 98% would recommend San Juan
College to a friend or family
member.
Um, Nish is a um website where
you can.
Where they rank um public
schools and then also colleges
and universities, and they
informed us that we were ranked
as the number one community
college in the state of New
Mexico and 38th in the nation.
WalletHub is a website that
helps individuals with their
credit scores and their recent
report um that we'll talk about
in Becky's presentation just
came out last week and we were
ranked 15th in the nation based
on their rubric on educational
outcomes, and 7th, for cost and
financing.
This is a slide, the 2nd to the
last slide that I'm very proud
of that I wanted to share with
all of you. This year, we had
the highest graduation and
transfer rate in our history,
and what I'm really proud of is
that our Native American
students had the highest
graduation and transfer rate out
of all of our populations at
45%.
And then the last slide here is
we strive to increase our number
of graduates each and every
year and our targets are in are
in gold, which is a 5% annual
increase. We've actually
increased it 7.6% per year for
the last 14 years and this last
year, um, is an estimate, those
numbers will finalize next
month, but we had the highest
amount of graduates in our
history.
Thank you.
To shut your mic off.
OK.
Maybe we can figure this out
between the two of us.
Um, Madam Chair, uh, as I
indicated, my name is Becky Rley
and I'm uh the chair for the New
Mexico Independent Community
Colleges. So what I'm going to,
uh, briefly go through, it's
just kind of an overview of some
of our initiatives, um, a little
bit of information about who we
are and what we're doing and
everything. Um, first of all,
these are uh the community
colleges, um, in our, in our
sector. So as you can see, we
range from all the way
from um the northwest corner
here, all the way down to the
southeast corner, um, all of our
community colleges are, are
locally funded. Uh, you will
note that there are 2 in our
group, uh, northern New Mexico
College and Western New Mexico
College that are also 4-year
schools, but they have a
community college mission too,
so, um, we let them come to our
meetings
Um, so this is a, uh, just a
slide about economic impact for
the entire New Mexico.
Independent community college
sector, we had an economic
impact study commissioned last
year, I believe it was, um, the
total, um, added to our economy
and annual is $2.5 billion. We
are 2% of New Mexico's GDP and
we support almost 35,000 jobs.
Our students, we have a little
over 58,000 credit students, um,
almost 18,000 workforce training
students, and then their
annually
We award more than 13,000
credentials and certificates and
awards. Um, and I, I would add
if you combine the um the branch
campuses are also considered in
community colleges in New Mexico
are credit uh population is a
little bit over half of the all
of the enrollment in New Mexico,
so I think it's important for
everyone to understand that
community colleges really do
have the bulk of the enrollment
in our state.
So as, as Tony mentioned, um,
WalletHub recently raided
several of our colleges, um.
Uh, very highly in the state and
then also New Mexico is having
the 2nd best community college
system in the state. Um, these
are some of the programs that
all of our colleges, there's a
mix of these these programs at
different colleges that all have
to do with promoting economic
development, and I want to say
at this point that that really
economic development is really a
central part of our focus for
all of us and our missions
because we're
Such a diverse group, um, and we
range from Central New Mexico
and Albuquerque, which is very
large school all the way to, you
know, Luna and Masa Las are very
small schools in extremely rural
areas that we have very
different approaches to economic
development, economic
development looks different in
all of those communities, but,
um, these are some of the
programs that we're currently
offering uh ranging everywhere,
everything from appraising.
Um, a lot of commercial truck
driving, I noticed that Clovis
just recently uh restarted their
truck driving program, which is
a, a, that'll that'll be a
really smart move. Um, lots of
construction projects. There's a
lot of focus on sustainable
technologies right now in our
communities, so that could also
that could be, um, as Tony
pointed out that San Juan is
doing with the electrical
electric vehicle certification,
but also in natural gas, solar,
and wind.
Um, lots of fiber optics
programs, the broadband
initiative is affecting
everyone, so we are really
trying to respond to that and
then um Tony mentioned the
hazardous material, somebody
mentioned brownfield technology.
I can't remember, um, but that
type of EPA training and then
including the wildfire recovery,
which has been such an important
thing for so many of our areas,
way too many of our of our
areas. Um.
Every time we add a program
we're adding it at the response
of, of or at the request of some
business, someone in our
community that says that there
is a need, um, and, and so these
are some of the things that we
have done most recently. Many of
us have alternative teacher
licensure programs so that
people who already have
bachelor's degrees or master's
degrees can come in and get a
certification to be a licensed
teacher in New Mexico in a
fairly short period of time they
get to.
Work in um as, as teachers at
the time that they're taking
their certification courses, so
it's a really, it's a, it's a
good program for the student
teacher and also for the school
because as you know we're all
still trying to recruit
teachers, um, we really do try
to respond as much as we can.
It's very difficult to the
healthcare needs in all of our
communities and those can be
very far ranging, um, and
So, you know, when you, when I
hear that there are 180
vacancies in um hospitals here.
I don't even want it. The number
is larger in Santa Fe. I do know
that and um and we try to do
what we can to respond with some
short-term training classes that
will add certified nurses and
pharmacy technicians and folks
like that that do not require
nearly as much time to get into
the workforce and then also
really, really trying to
emphasize.
Nursing since that seems to be
the critical shortage, which is
really, um, we're still relying
on travelers way too much. Um,
wastewater treatment, um, and
then, uh, uh, drone technology
and uh San Juan's Teach up
education program, which has
been a remarkable program to um
to level up uh Native American
teachers. These are some of our
success stories, and these are
all short term uh type.
Programs, uh, the Apprendi
program is a teacher. It's an
it's an early childhood teacher
apprenticeship program, uh, that
was developed in Santa Fe that
um really has changed how many
people we can get into the early
childhood pipeline quickly, um,
we also have an English for the
Workplace program and several of
our colleges have that, uh, but
the one, the one in New Mexico
Junior College and Hobbs has
been exceptional where.
The training students receive
instruction in English before
they begin their CDL program and
then uh when they graduate,
they're much more, they're much
more employable in the area. The
Protech program has been a um a
partnership with the county to
train folks in short term
training that meets specific
needs for county jobs. Um, it's
uh provided free of cost to the
student and the um the
employment and retention numbers
are, are really, really high.
Um, and then the Cook
undergraduate scholarship
program, um, has been uh a
phenomenal, a phenomenal program
that providing as much as
$55,000 in scholarship money.
And then we have a quick.
See if I can do this video.
Thank you. To go about just yet.
I wanted to stay local and help
support my family back home when
I first came to Stanley College,
I was involved in the campus
activities board, otherwise
known as CA. I was involved for
about a semester and then my
second semester here at Slin
College I transferred over to
the Associated Students Assembly
College, which is our student
government here. There I served
as our student Senate treasurer
and then the following year I
ended up being our student
Senate president.
My favorite class that someone
College include calculus one and
both chemistry 1 and 2. Calculus
1 is taught by Professor
Williams, and he is the teacher
that got me into math. I used to
hate math before I took this
class and after taking I just
have such a profound love for
calculus, and I guess math in
general in August, I will be
going to Yale University. There
I'll be working towards my
bachelor's of science and
neuroscience. I'm still debating
on what I want to do after that
if I want to go.
straight into medical school or
else if I want to work on my
master's of science and
neuroscience. Since beginning my
time here at Salem College, I
feel like it is immensely help
me prepare for Yale, not only
has it given me a stronger
academic background in
post-secondary studies, but just
the experiences I have made with
fellow students, faculty,
administration and how prepared
you to broaden my horizons and
expand my educational
opportunities. My name is Kate
Allison and I
SJC.
So if that's not a success
story, I don't know what is.
Um,
I didn't touch it.
So I'll just mention really
quickly as I wrap up that um New
Mexico Independent Community
Colleges also participate in the
New Mexico Small Business
Development Center. Um, all of
us have small business
development centers on our
campus that really work to um
help businesses be able to seek
small business development loans
and and thrive through different
federal programs, and then, uh,
as Tony mentioned a minute
mentioned a minute ago that um
there are now 6 of us that are
members of
An organization we call CHES,
which is the collaborative for
higher education shared
services, and I will give credit
to San Won College for coming up
with that acronym, um.
Because they did, um, but this
is our collaborative where we
through which we have purchased
workday, um, as our um ERP
system and we are implementing
that, that tool together and to
use that as sort of a baseline
to to to leverage so that we can
continue to work together on
various shared services as we uh
as we go through that
implementation, but the college
is involved in that are San
Juan, CNM, Clovis Community
College,
Santa Fe, northern New Mexico,
and Luna. So it's a pretty broad
spectrum and it and it's a, it's
a, it's a fascinating and yet
challenging group when you have
the largest and the smallest
working together on a technology
program at the same time, um.
The overall point that I want to
make is that we are very
grateful for the, the support
that we have received from the
legislature in helping us with
economic development, the
workforce money that we are now
starting to receive there was
$20,000 appropriated a couple of
years ago, and now we've been
appropriated $20,000 a year for
the next 3 years so that we can
pay students tuition and help to
expand our own workforce
training programs in the
non-credit.
area. This is a huge change in
policy really in New Mexico that
will really help our students
and so we're very grateful for
that opportunity. Thank you for
allowing us time to present this
morning. I know uh we are, we
have put you way beyond your
scheduled time and I am happy to
answer any questions.
Thank you. Um, Vanessa, do you
wanna
Go next and Madam Chair members,
I am here if there are questions
that need to be answered
otherwise, please proceed. She
made us do it.
Well, then we're gonna jump
right into questions and um.
Let me see who's first,
Representative Ortez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you so much for the
presentation. Um, I think this
is a question for both Becky and
Tony around apprenticeships. Um,
are you also
um sort of helping your
students, uh, go into a
registered apprenticeship
programs that um are recognized
by the state or at the national
level through your, through your
classes.
To
Yeah, Madam Chair and
Representative Ortez, yes, um,
in our career services area we
have an individual that is
responsible for all of our
apprenticeships and internships
and if I think we have about,
I'll double check with one of my
VPs, but I think we have about
15 registered national
apprenticeships.
Yes.
Yes.
15 different ones that we are
participating in.
And, and I would just add to
that, Madam Chair, that all of
our colleges participate in
apprenticeship programs. It
varies by community depending
upon really the opportunity in
the program or in the community.
But the other thing that I would
say is that everyone is getting
much more active in having paid
apprenticeship programs for
students too, because that
really, that seems to be one of
the most significant ways to
keep students in in school and
to help them.
connect with a better job when
they graduate.
Uh, thank you. So a follow up
question to that, Madam Chair,
is in Taos, which is where I
where I represent um the our
local utility, Carson Electrical
Co op, um, is uh doing lots of
innovative work on renewable
energy, um, including this um
creating a microgrids around uh
around the service area. So are
any of your colleges uh working
on developing like a micro grid
uh workforce.
Uh, Madam Chair,
uh, we, uh, Santa Fe Community
College actually is. So one of
the things that I wasn't really
sure how I felt about this when
I came to Santa Fe, but I've
decided it's a really great
thing and we're almost there.
Um, I'm always a little bit
afraid when we're first because
I think that, um, somebody
should figure out the problems
before we, before we go first.
But the colleges um our um our
greenhouse is currently on a
nano grid. And so we, we are
about 3/4 of the way.
Through the implementation of a
full microgrid that will offload
uh Santa Fe Community College.
And, and we have had to work
with P&M on a lot of agreements
and that's actually, uh, this
should have been done 2 years
ago, um, but the contracting was
new because we hadn't, no one
had done this before and so um
it, it took a lot of time to for
everybody to figure out how this
was supposed to roll forward.
Um, and then we do have a
training program for um the
Workers that will, you know,
that we, that we will employ
what's tricky right now is not
getting too far ahead of where
the job opportunities are, and,
and we might have done that in a
sense, um, but, but I feel like
we're kind of squaring that up a
little bit better right now.
Madam Chair and Representative
Ortez San Juan College has not
pursued this opportunity at this
point.
Thank you, and I'm sure it's
hard to be the um guinea pig,
but uh there's a price to pay
for innovation, but I'm, I'm
glad you're doing it. I'd love
to chat with you offline about
it. Thank you.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
presenters, uh, Becky, this
one's for you. You talked a
little bit about uh recruitment
for instructors in the nursing
program.
Uh, I think Clovis Community
College has a little bit of a
problem there too.
And what is, what is your take?
What, what do you believe is, is
our weakest point in recruiting.
Uh, instructors and, and.
You can broaden that out and,
and kind of tell, tell us what
you're doing to, to make that
better and.
And uh.
Madam Chair, thank you,
Representative Zur for that very
difficult question.
Um, so I
It is hard. And, and I think
that um if you ask certain
people, they'll say right off
the bat, and I think this is
significant that pay is an issue
because we're we're asking
people to essentially step out
of the field where they are
making in Santa Fe, I think the
average salary at at Chris'
Saint Vincent is in the 90s or
something and uh we are
definitely not paying that much,
um, and I know that there's a
similar situation.
In Clovis. So I think it's
important to work on the pay
structure and trying to
differentiate pay and pay.
Pay faculty and allied health
fields in particular, more, um,
I also think that there are
things that Clovis has done well
that not everyone may be um.
Has, has done has just even used
this opportunity, but that's
hiring nurses that have a
bachelor's degree enrolling them
in um a master's program, paying
for their master's program and
sort of helping them along in
that regard, you know, in Santa
Fe, we want to hire people who
already have a master's degree,
and that's really, really,
really limiting and really
difficult. So I'm working on uh
broadening our perspective on
how we
approach that, but you know, it,
it's hard and I think that there
are, um, there are
Good nursing directors go to the
hospital and, and recruit
straight out of the hospital.
Um, I, I, in my opinion, um, us
taking one or two really good
nurses out of the field, but
being able to train another, you
know, Tony's adding a cohort of
16, being able to train another
20 or 30 nurses with those two
faculty members is still gonna
be a net benefit to the
hospital, so it
It's difficult and I don't know
if Tony has, you know, your
program has done so well.
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative Zamora, we're
actually in discussions with the
hospital um regarding providing
market disparity stipends for
all of our health science
faculty, um, we currently
provide a $2500 market disparity
stipend that the college pays
for for all of our nursing, but
we've proposed an actual um
It's an actual 7500 to add to
that, so they would receive a
total of $10,000 in a market
disparity stipend and we're
proposing that because, you
know, if, if the economy was to
tank, you would still be in an
OK situation.
And Madam Chair and presenters.
So, so pay, I believe we all
agree is, is probably at the top
of the list.
And as you know, Becky, my
daughter is an instructor at CCC
College in the nursing program
has been for a while and we're
very proud of her. We believe
she's a good instructor. We, we,
we
Really praise her for doing that
kind of work, but the reality of
it is that someday she will
leave closed community college
for higher pay somewhere, and
it's not that you can't do it
today, it's not that she
couldn't do it yesterday. She's
able to do that.
Now,
And has been in the past.
But our concerns are greater
than that. Our concerns are that
we need those nurses, those
instructors in there that have
the capability to train good
nurses.
So.
That being said, if, if the pay
is the, is number one at the top
of the list, which I believe in
my heart also that that's,
that's true.
Where does that pay need to come
from? Does it need to come from
the legislature, from from the
state of New Mexico or do we
need to do something to help the
colleges.
Uh,
Be able to, to put that pay
together to, to make more money
so they can pay their
instructors better? How, how do
you look at it and where does
that money need to come from?
What do we need to do as a
legislator, and I hope all the
legislators are off the phones
and really paying attention to
this because this is really
important and, and Becky, where
do you feel this money needs to
come from or how can we as a
state help this, this situation.
Madam Chair, Representatives
Moore, I, I think that the
legislature, and I know the
legislature has already funded
nursing, nursing education at at
a pretty high rate. Um, but in
states,
Where I am aware that they have
had more significant
improvements in metrics with
hiring, the investment has been
much more substantial than it is
than it has been in, um, in New
Mexico. For example, I think
it's the state of Maine invested
$100 million in their in their
nursing in nursing education to
be able to really make this a
systemic thing where everyone
who has a nursing program is
able to pay nursing.
Instructors at a at a certain
rate. Um, and that is not
without problems, you know, we,
uh, you know, Tony and I both
have unions and so we have to
negotiate a lot of this and
then, and then it's there's
going to be ripple effects among
other groups. Um, I see nursing
as a really specific case. I
think going to your local
hospital is a brilliant move.
And, and there are some areas
where hospitals have
participated in Clovis, um,
Presbyterian for a very long
time paid.
For all of the nursing education
for um nurses who are working on
master's degrees and so it's
really easy to say, well, we're
going to pay for your master's
degree because we got the money
for it. Um, and, and so
partnerships like that are
important. I think everybody has
that has a stake in this is
going to have to make it a
priority so that we are all
putting in, you know, we all
have a little bit of uh stake in
in what the outcome is, um, but
I think that for, you know, if
you're
Talking about however many
faculty, 1015, 20 faculty that
we have, you know, at different
community colleges, and if
you're really talking about
paying them at the market value,
uh, some colleges are way under
that, um, in Santa Fe, we're
under that for nursing for sure.
Um, so to, to be able to
systematically meet that metric
every single semester, that
would either require us cut
a lot of programs to be able to
pay for it ourselves or getting
some sort of um assistance for
it or having a different funding
stream that came from the
legislature, maybe in
partnership with some of the
healthcare nonprofits or the
hospital in in in the community.
I don't understand, Tony.
I think Becky did a great job
with her response.
And Madam Chair, and I agree
with that, but I, I think as a
legislature, we need to start
looking at this. It's, it's
gonna hurt us down the road, uh.
On top of, on top of some
legislation that has been done
that has hurt our recruitment
for doctors in the state and,
and I think we've got a long
ways to go on this.
Subject and, and I look forward
to working with everybody in the
legislature to fix some of these
problems as we go forward. Thank
you.
Uh, Senator Hamlin.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you all for your
presentation. You know, one of
the things that I
Think of is community colleges
are really able to quickly
respond to especially economic
needs in communities, and, and
I'm not, I'm not slamming
universities. My household is
very much a university
household. I have two master's
degrees. My wife is a full
professor, but I see the value
in community colleges,
especially in responding to.
The workforce needs that we
have, uh, for example, Donana
Community College in partnership
with Union Pacific, started the
Industrial Training Academy to
nurture that growing that
workforce that Union Pacific
needs, and I see that you're,
you know, doing those things as
well, um, and I'm wondering, you
know, we, we are talking about
the opportunity scholarship, and
I was wondering, how have you
seen the Opportunity scholarship
help your enrollment because
their enrollment numbers that
you've, you, you're already way
ahead of what you wanted to do.
In 2030. And so, um, I'm
wondering how have you seen that
impact your enrollment and where
your students are going after
that so far, Madam Chair and
Senator Hamlin. Yes, absolutely,
um, we think the opportunity
scholarship has greatly
benefited um the entire state of
New Mexico with our enrollment,
um, currently, um, we're about 4
days from the start of classes
are headcount enrollment is up
5%.
and then our, our um student
credit hours are, are up 7%. So
we know that it has helped
tremendously and thank you.
That's fantastic. That's, that's
all I had, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Thank you. Representative
Perego.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, ladies. Um, it seems to me
like the community college
network is really strong and it
seems like it should have been
done many, many years ago to
make to build those connections
and those linkages, um, can you
discuss how you work with
unions, um, or is there a
process or how?
I'm just curious about that.
I, I, um, Madam Chair, uh, S, I,
I can start with that. I, I
don't know that there is a
process we all kind of have our
own process and our own
relationships and connections
that we try to build on, um.
You know, uh, I, I
I know Tony is going to be able
to tell you more about what San
Juan is doing because I think
San Juan has really worked well
with, with unions, um, in, in
Santa Fe, we're primarily
working with the film union, and
part of that is that, you know,
you're required to be union
certified before you can
actually, you know, work on
films with any in any kind of
capacity, but they're at the
point where they're they're
coming to us and so we're
working on a partnership with
the local AAT and
Stagecoach Foundation to create
um a training program on our
campus that will bring film
students into an active, an
active uh back lot situation
which apparently is unusual. It
seems like the most logical
thing in the world to me, but
apparently it doesn't happen
that much, so those, you know,
it, it generally happens when
the workforce need is pretty
critical and, and then there is
like um more of a mechanism in
place for us to work with the
unions, but I, to your point, I
think.
That
We could do a better job, and
I'm speaking for my own
institution in this instance, we
need to do a better job of
connecting with unions on our
training programs because
otherwise we just kind of cross
each other like that, and that
doesn't do our students or
employers, much good. And thank
you, um, Madam Chair, and just
as I was thinking this through
and, and I, I was afraid that
you're gonna say that and um you
know, I, I know that there's a
lot of the unions that have
their own certification.
programs and it seems sometimes
that, you know, what you just
said is that we're crossing
wires here a little bit with
and, and somehow repeating
trainings through the union or
through CNM and maybe somehow
there needs to be a little more
connection there. um, so that
people don't have to be trained
twice for the same kind of work.
Um, so I just, that's just to my
point, Madam Chair. I, I
I, I worry about that a little
bit. Um, the other question I
have is on your list that you
had um the different
certification programs and I
only briefly glanced at it, but
I didn't see public safety up
there and I just wondered if you
have a public safety, uh, if the
community colleges have a public
safety. I think CNM does with
APD, but I didn't know if others
do.
Madam Chair Representative
Brego.
So the list was only a very,
very small sampling of our
programs. Yes, there are many
public safety programs within
many of our institutions, CNM
does have public safety or
working closely on the police
officers certification. New
Mexico Junior College in Hobbs
has a very significant program,
as does the military institute,
and I know there are others, but
I can't recall off the top of my
head. So not everywhere, but
many of our institutions are
serving the state in.
That way.
OK. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you. And uh Representative
Johnson, I know you weren't here
for uh the introduction, so if
you would do that and then uh
proceed with your questions.
Thank you, Madam Chair, Vice
Chair and colleagues, audience,
and guests and presenters. I'm
representative Doreen Wanda
Johnson. I'm your neighbor. I
represent McKinley in San Juan
Counties and that entails East
Gallup and 15 Navajo Nation
chapters, and I'm glad to be
here today. Thank you. My
question is about the
Alternative teacher licensure.
I'm curious to know how that is
going, What is the interest?
What are the graduation rates
with the Central Consolidated
School in McKinley County School
District being your neighbors
and under your umbrella and then
speaking with constituents and
how we need teachers, we lack
teachers. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair and Representative
Johnson, um, it's going very
well. The alternative licener as
well as our teachup program. So
this is some the teachup program
was funded through the state of
New Mexico, 4 colleges received
$1000. San Juan College was one
of them, and we were to partner
with Western New Mexico
University and it was a grow
your own program and job sharing
program and um where we looked
at people that were already
working in the
Public schools and we, um, such
as substitute teachers or
educational assistants or even
students that want to become
future teachers. Um, our goal
was to have 40 students the
first year, um, in partnership
with Western, we actually had
1066. I personally meet monthly
with all the superintendents in
our service area, which includes
central Consolidated schools,
and we talk about, um, what
things are going well, what
challenges
We're having, how can we help
them, um, feel their, their
jobs, so I don't have the exact
um numbers, but I work very
closely with Superintendent
Carlson, um, on a monthly basis,
and, um, the programs are going
very well. We have great
leadership. They just hosted a
workshop at the college last
week. They had over 100 teachers
there, um, it's part of the Teup
program, we even follow um the
teachers for years because we
I know that a lot of um teachers
leave within the 1st 5 years. So
we work with them to mentor
them. We, and we've started a
program specifically for Native
American teachers. It's called
HT for indigenous teachers, and
then we've, um, it's just going
great.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for that wonderful news. I'm
so happy to hear that. I fully
support Grow Your Own
initiatives. I've introduced in
past legislation to support uh
grow your own initiatives under
um substance abuse licenser, and
then Beth McKinley Christian
Healthcare Services internship
program, and then the uranium
mine clean up with um affording
high tech jobs.
So I
Really support grow your own
initiatives. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. And, um, that's the
end of our presentation today. I
want to thank you all for being
here and uh very good
presentation. So thank you for
that. Um, what I am gonna say is
to keep us on track, I'm gonna
ask the committee to get lunch,
um, I think that's what
prevented them from asking too
many questions. They could smell
lunch behind us here. And, um,
if we could maybe take a
10 minute, um, little break and
then keep working that way we
don't.
get too far off. I know that
there's plenty of people here
that um, they are ready to do
presentations and we don't want
to get off schedule too much.
So, um, I will adjourn for, for
just a bit, but we will be back
in about 10 minutes. So, uh, we
can eat eat while we're, we're
listening, so keep that in mind.
