That, I think we're just gonna
get started, so, um, unless
anybody else has anything to
start off with, Vice Chair.
No, I'm good. I think we've got
a great day in store for us and,
and, uh, echo, uh, the light
show and just the wonderful
hospitality that we've had. So,
uh, let's get rolling. We've
got, uh, our first.
panel today and we're starting
only 4 minutes behind, so that's
awesome.
We have been the taskmasters. So
it sounds like we're getting the
updated, the updated, um.
Slides up
So if Senator Sherr, thank you
very much for welcoming us to
your town and then Mark
Pedratti, if you don't mind, uh,
coming up and we'll, uh, we'll
get ready to, to start.
It's Mark here. He's right. Oh,
he's right there. Oh, OK.
Just
You're welcome to,
to start, Senator Sher, so
while, while Mark pulls up his
slides as the technical expert
here, uh, he is actually from
uh.
Uh
The, uh, CO2 rescue company.
It's a direct air direct air
capture carbon capture, uh,
thing, and today we're gonna be
talking about.
How and why, mostly why we would
want to do anything like this.
So certainly there's carbon
capture and sequestration, uh,
and what does all of that mean?
And uh last year, uh, Senate,
uh, sorry, Representative uh
Meredith Dixon and I
co-sponsored a bill, uh, with
our expert witness here, Mark,
about poor space and the reason
that the poor space is important
is because that kind of gives us
the legal background. So for
you.
Go, poor, what's that? Well, it
doesn't mean that we lack money.
It's the space between the
granules of sand underneath our
feet.
That's so it's, it's more like
the pores in your skin, not the
pores in your pocketbook.
Um,
And so the idea with the poor
space is who owns it, for one
thing, and what kind of
liability do people have if, if
they actually put something in
the ground. So,
We've been told we don't need to
define poor space because poor
space is already defined
anything that the surface owner
owns everything to the center of
the earth.
Unless they sold mineral rights.
OK.
That is true.
Except that the companies that
want to do this really want a
better defined definition. And
so part of that is that if
you're drilling for something,
if you're mining for something,
anything, um, uh, the, the oil
isn't just under my piece of
land. It could be under yours
and yours and yours. And maybe
just a little bit and so the
definition of that, then how do
you, how would you get that? Uh,
we already have that in law
about how, uh, how each, uh,
Property owner is paid royalties
based on where that might be.
Well, this is the same in
reverse. Now you'd be paid
royalties for based on where the
CO2 would go, even if it in San
Juan County is 8500 ft below
your feet.
So, which is where it would be
here.
Uh, muscle meals, you know, I
might be off by a few feet, but,
um, so that's that definition is
what the, the industry wants.
They want that clearly defined.
They also want clear definitions
of liability. So what happens,
uh, afterward? Are they
responsible for it for 1 million
years or what? And, and last
year, uh, from New Mexico Tech.
Uh, they came up with a, a set
of 6 things so instead of being
uh liable for it for 100 years
or 15 years or 10 minutes,
whatever it is. They said if you
do these six things and they're
all checked off by the
appropriate regulator.
Your liability is covered.
OK. Uh, and also part of that
was set aside some money, uh,
the industry would.
For potential future issues, so
they would pay into that.
But before that's relevant, we
need to know why we even want to
do it, so with that I'm gonna
let uh Mark Pedrotti explain
what's going on now.
OK.
Yeah, thank you, Senator Sher,
um, and thank you, uh,
chairwoman, Gallaggos for
Glegos, sorry, it's my
Massachusetts part of me. I, I
did that 40 years ago at UNM. He
said the wrong word. Um, could I
get the clicker, please? Thank
you.
Um, so
I'm Mark Pedrati. I'm president
and CEO of, uh, CO2 rescue if
you want to look up my website
CO2 rescue.com.
Um, and I'm a one person shop
and I do education consultation
and investment uh concepts on um
on CO2 rescue basically on um.
Global warming is is my my
focus.
So I'd like to uh thank you
chairwoman, uh Callegos and the,
the committee here to allow me
to speak. And I just want to say
that I um I'm here in uh I'm
missing my colleagues from New
Mexico Tech, uh, they couldn't
make it today, so I'm the one
giving the the talk.
Yep.
So
OK, OK, so, um, can, can
everybody hear me? Good. So the,
the key here is, uh, what is the
problem? What are the solutions?
What is being done and what
needs to be done and to hit
question and answers. I really
would like us to focus on
question and answers. If you all
know all this stuff, just give
me that sign to speed it up and
I'm happy to speed it up. Um.
Because there's two elements to
this that we're talking about.
It's the hydrogen, so we'll go
over the hydrogen uh kind of
quickly, and then we'll talk
about uh carbon capture, which
is a little complicated, but
again we'll hit it quickly so we
can figure out why we're trying
to figure out any of this stuff.
Um
Uh, so the, the problem is, is
fairly straightforward. I think
most of us already know this,
uh, there's increasing global
warming. It's causing
significant climate change. Uh,
there's a carbon budget if you
want to talk about the carbon
budget. That's the essential
piece to this actually is there
is a budget about how much CO2
you can throw out into the air
before things really get
terrible, um, so you can look
up, uh, the IPCC website for all
that information, uh, many
countries are working on
reducing their use of fossil
fuels to get to.
Net zero emissions by 2050 to
prevent a catastrophic climate
change and the US is investing
billions of dollars in
developing alternative energy
sources, resources including
hydrogen and technology to
remove CO2 from industry is
difficult to decarbonize, uh,
and in the air. And so I just
came back, um.
The first, uh, I think it was
the first week in uh.
In August from um from the
conference at the Department of
Energy and ETL labs.
Uh, they have a one week long
dog and pony show of all the
research they're doing out there
on on basically this specific
issue.
So, uh, the solutions, uh, and
the key to this is all solutions
are needed. This is not, we're
going to pick one and then go
with it. It's really all
inclusive because we have to do
everything. Uh, so there's
multiple actions are being done
globally and in the US to combat
global warming. There's a
decreased use of fossil fuels in
all sectors including power
plants, building,
transportation, and agriculture.
There's the increased use of
renewable energy such as solar
panels, wind turbines,
hydropower, battery storage,
nuclear power, geothermal and
hydrogen.
Uh, there's the building of more
efficient homes, appliances,
manufacturing process, and
retrofit or renovate old
buildings we are building
electric vehicles and
alternative fuel vehicles such
as hydrogen, um, and there's
also the importance of change in
behaviors to reduce CO2
emissions. So there's things we
can be doing as well, uh, to do
this in some industries are very
difficult to do without fossil
fuels. We can't replace fossil
fuels fast enough with renewable
energy, so it is impossible.
Excuse me, it is important to
catch CO2 at the source of
emission and to capture the
excess CO2 in the atmosphere,
and that's where we are today in
talking about this.
So as you know, there's a New
Mexico House Bill 6 Clean Future
Act, um.
In 2022, uh, and basically it's
kind of set this up for us all
to be talking here today as well
so it's it's relating to climate
and acting the Clean Future Act
establishing greenhouse gas
emission limits requiring
reporting providing power and
duties enacting new sections of
the Air Quality Control Act,
blah blah blah.
Statewide direct emission of
greenhouse gasses shall not
exceed 50% by 2000 of 2005
levels by 2030 that's right
around the corner.
And then uh section 3B total
statewide greenhouse gas
emissions so achieve at least
net zero emissions by 2050
provided that total statewide
direct emissions of global
greenhouse gas emissions shall
not exceed 10% of 2005 levels or
any subsequent year thereafter.
So then they go on to say, um,
Section 4B requires an annual
report on July 1 by the Energy
Department and the EM R&D, uh,
on the state's progress towards
meeting the greenhouse gas
emission limits established in
Section 3. so, so we're already,
you kind of locked and loaded on
this, you know what you need to
be doing and now we're going to
talk about possible ways to get
there. uh, there's also this,
uh, climate action, uh, in New
Mexico that was done by the NRDC
that give suggestions.
in this as well.
So the first thing is we'll roll
through hydrogen, uh, the first
question is why hydrogen? Well,
um, according to the IEA, uh, it
can be stored, it can be stored
source of energy to be used
later? Can we replace coal and
natural gas using industrial
processes we know how to safely
transport hydrogen can be
blended into natural gas
pipelines, offers an alternative
with batteries are too heavy or
cost restrictive can be used for
transportation.
And this is just a very busy
graph, um, on your, on your
black and white handout, it's
probably even harder to read,
but the key to this is just to
know that, uh, hydrogen is a
market that's going to grow over
the next few decades, and so
it's important to try to get on
this train now and and be part
of the, the beginning of this.
And then this is just you go,
well, what are you gonna do with
hydrogen? This is a nice slide
that just says here are all the
uses of hydrogen and how they're
gonna grow and, and.
So
And then this is the issue of
where do you get hydrogen from?
So this is where the arguing
starts, uh, and there's another
slide on this where you can,
it's like rainbow. It's like all
these different types of ways of
getting hydrogen. So this is the
basic way that's done. It's
steam methane reforming, which
is uh SMR, not to be confused
with small modular reactors, uh,
but they have the same acronym,
or initials,
um.
So this is where you're getting
basically hydrogen from fossil
fuels, and then you have the CO2
component that you have to deal
with. So this is uh this is gray
or black hydrogen, and then what
you do to make it blue hydrogen
is you use this thing called
carbon capture to pull the CO2
out of the air that is actually
going to be created by doing
this process, and then you put
that in the ground or you use it
for something else. You can
recycle CO2. Uh, you don't have
to just.
Put it in the ground, but it's
all about cost. So you go from
gray to blue, uh, using CCS
carbon capture storage.
So that's one of the keys. The
next one is green hydrogen, and
this is where you don't have uh
CO2 being escaping or anything
because you're using
electrolysis to make this
happen.
And so that's the key to this.
Um, and so you're looking at how
to to do that, how much power
you need and and all those
things and I'm not here to talk
about the technology part of
this just so you can know that
is uh grade and then there's
blue and then there's green and
that's what we're trying to
figure out.
Now this is the really busy
slide and uh you don't get this
on your black and white handout.
You get it on the one that you
were given that's electronic,
uh, but this is the one that
just explains all the different
colors of hydrogen, um, you can
go uh gray black, which is from
the oil or coal, uh, you can go
blue where you take the CO2 out
of the air out of the emission,
which is point of source, you
put it in the ground, then you
can go solar or the energy part
for electrolysis which is green,
then you get orange, uh which is
a reactive formation.
And then you get white, which is
the oxidation seraperainization
radiolysis, I can't say these
words. Um, and there's that
process, so, so that's what you
need to know about hydrogen is
really we're trying to go from
blue to green.
And these are what, uh, this is
what a hydrogen hub could look
like, uh, where you basically
are trying to figure out how
you're going to produce it in
this picture here, you get in
the back, how you're using solar
wind and and uh to to to use
electrolysis parts, so this
would be green hydrogen. If it
was blue, then you'd have to
have a place to put it in the
ground and then you basically
have a pipeline and then you
send it out into the into the
market.
This is, I put this slide in,
this is OCED this is so you know
that the the DOE is dropping a
lot of change on, on this issue.
There's billions of dollars
going into this, and this is one
of their ideas of what a sample
hub would look, uh, uh, this is
a sample blueprint for a
regional clean hydrogen hub.
And then this, this is the whole
deal. We, um, as you know, New
Mexico put in for a um a
hydrogen hub. It was called the
Western Interstate Hydrogen Hub
or wish, and it was not
selected, uh, and there were 7
hydrogen hubs selected with an
average award of about $1
billion.
All right, that's a lot of
pennies.
So the, the 7 sites where
Appalachian hydrogen, California
hydrogen Pacific Northwest, Gulf
Coast, Heartland, Mid-Atlantic,
and Midwest. Now, the key to
this for me is that even though
we didn't get the award.
Uh, the, the companies that were
involved, Tallgrass and API A
and grid and uh Libertad Power
Managing Part remain committed
to hydrogen in New Mexico. So
the point to this is that there
is a group that is interested in
developing hydrogen in New
Mexico. Uh, in hydrogen use is
expected to grow sixfold from
today's levels by 2050. So it's
a market that I think it would
be important for us to be a part
of.
Uh, this is just a picture of
what the Appalachian Hydrogen
hub kind of looks like and what
it's about, you know, the
challenges, the demonstrations,
and what they're going to do and
this is sort of what we would be
doing in New Mexico as far as
identifying what our challenges
are, what we're going to do, and
then the real impact. Uh, so the
elements of a hydrogen hub are
co-location of companies
interested in developing clean
hydrogen supply and demand,
ideally near near term scalable
demand with the diversity of use
cases in the long term.
Supporting infrastructure and
suitable geography are also
critical, including electricity
transmission, multimodal
transport options, CO2 pipelines
in proximity to hydrogen and CO2
storage locations and lastly a
support of policy and regulatory
environment is viewed as key,
including incentives for con to
lower their emissions in the
regulatory framework to enable
them to do so using hydrogen.
So you're looking at
decarbonizing the heavy
industries such as the, the big
trucks and things like that, uh,
transportation is big, uh, to
basically use hydrogen.
And then the transition to
hydrogen uh between now and
2050, the main ways to make
clean hydrogen will likely be
green and blue. You want to
produce blue blue hydrogen in
the near term to get
decarbonization off to a fast
start and at the same time
establish a green hydrogen
economy to further accelerate
it.
Uh, Blue also makes sense as a
stepping stone to green because
it can be very quickly uh
produced at scale which gives
you the oomph to convert lots of
consumers to hydrogen and build
the hydrogen infrastructure,
then customers can switch
seamlessly to green, and by 2050
Green will have the largest
share, but blue will still have
an important role to play and if
you want, uh, Connecticut's
Department of Energy and
Environmental Protection deep
recently published a draft of
the Cleaned hydrogen roadmap
that they put together so
So states are working on this.
We are working on this, and you,
I, I encourage people, this is
2024, this is like a 25 year
plan and you gotta get on it now
is what I'm encouraging.
This is carbon capture, moving
on to that one,
And I know I'm rolling fast, but
I just hope that we have time
for questions, you know, if I'm
talking too fast, I know I'm at
the 2.0 speed on PowerPoint
presentations from the East
Coast, so I do this so if I'm
going too fast just tell me to
slow down, please. OK, so carbon
capture, big, big, uh, it's,
it's a lot of stuff, but in the
big picture, all it is is
capturing carbon from the
environment now 20 years ago
when we were talking about this,
um, people saying it couldn't be
done, but no one then.
said, well, you know, we've been
doing this on the spaceships for
astronauts and submarines
forever. And then the issue of
of putting it in the ground,
we've been putting it in the
ground for a very long time.
This is not new. And the other
part is uh from a safety point
of view and piping it, as you
all know, we've been piping CO2
from bravodome down into the
Permian Basin through New Mexico
for at least 20-30 years, maybe
longer.
So there, there's a dome in on
the New Mexico-Colorado border
that has naturally occurring CO2
in it and it's they just pump it
out of there and then they send
it down the Permian for enhanced
oil recovery EOR, and that's
been going on for a long time
now.
So, so in the big picture, this
isn't new. The big problem is
cost. That's the issue, and
we'll roll through this so
carbon capture includes carbon
capture and storage, which is
CCS carbon dioxide removal,
which is CDR in carbon capture
utilization and storage. The,
the CCUSDU is what's key there.
That's recycling the stuff
that's making it into other
things. There is funding through
OCED and several DOE resources
such as carbon
N ETL and FECM to support
various elements of carbon
capture, storage, and recycling.
D E N ETL is working on making
carbon capture affordable their
their goal is to get it to $100
a ton. Right now it's anywhere
from $5000 to $1000 a ton
depending on who you talk to,
uh, and building the carbon
market right now at the last
conference this I just came from
their focus is really building
the market.
Uh, in providing at least 1
gigaton of CO2 storage by 2050
as part of the White House plan.
If you, you can hear the website
you can go to. There's a carbon
capture network, uh, a carbon
capture newsletter as well.
So, so we're going to break it
into the at least the two main
components. We won't get into
CCUS, but we'll touch upon it.
So this is carbon capture, uh,
this is CCS, which is otherwise
known as point of source. The
picture there on the right is
what it would look like. You
were basically putting um this,
this technology on a power
plant, uh, to basically capture
the CO2 as it's being emitted.
So this is also known as
shutting off the hose, right?
Because right now,
We are dumping CO2 into the
atmosphere like it's coming out
of a fire hose and you're trying
to put a lid on that.
So that's, this is why this
industry is key. Um,
So it's an essential part of
stopping global warming by
reducing the emissions of CO2,
CCS captures CO2 as it is being
emitted from the source, such as
the power plant where it is in
high concentration, uh, the
captured CO2 is then injected in
deep saline geologic uh
formations which New Mexico is
prime kind of location for this
stuff. Uh, it can also be
injected in cement and disposed
of or recycled in other ways.
The DOE as NETL has uh has pilot
projects on injecting CO2.
In cement where they can reduce
the amount of of uh concrete
they need to make the cement.
Um, so in, in New Mexico, we
could be encouraging the cement
industry to actually be using
this technology.
Um, the Kleen Act Air Act
section 111 provides carbon
pollution standards for power
plants to protect public health.
We'll and we'll talk about this
with the Four Corners power
plant plans to use CCS in the
Navajo Transitional Energy
Company and its partners will
invest 6 to $8 billion into that
project.
So 40% of the tribe's general
fund comes from the mine and
power plants. So this is an
economic driver for them, and
they know it's an investment and
we we look at the carbon safe
project next, which is actually
Trying to help, uh, it is, which
is working with them to get this
online.
So this is just so you have a
sense of what the DOE and ETL
carbon safe projects are doing,
uh, carbon safe initiative
projects aim to permanently
store hundreds of millions of
tons of CO2 emissions every
year. It will reduce technical
risk, uncertainty, and the cost
of commercial scale sailing
storage projects focuses on
projects with capacity to store
more than 50,000 tons over the
lifetime of their well.
And you can go to the website
and you can see that the that
New Mexico does have a a a spot
on this. There's a blue dot
there, so ya, New Mexico.
OK, and we'll get to that, but
the point is this is being
looked at across the country.
Uh, Texas is big on it. North
Dakota is open for business.
Louisiana is hot right now. Uh,
Arizona, New Mexico, Utah are
working together. California's
big, um, and there's some other
parts what's called the Illinois
Basin where there's a lot of
geologic storage.
So, so this is just some slides
on what is happening here in New
Mexico. This is the San Juan
Basin carbon safe phase 3,
Doctor William Ipopa is the the
the lead person on this, um,
and, and, and so he's not here
to talk today. He would have
liked to have been here, but he
had some other uh commitments he
had to do. And so this is what
he presented at the uh at the
DOE NETL early August in
Pittsburgh.
One of the points to this though
is looking at all the people,
all the companies that are
involved in this. That's the
beginning of this. You see tech,
you see University of Utah, you
see Tallgrass Energy, uh, you
see Department of Energy, you
see the labs, you see these uh
business company Schoburger, uh,
Schumberger, and then you see
Wheaton College, UNM, University
of Wyoming, Los Alamos and India
National Labs are involved. They
do this stuff. They love to be
involved in this stuff, so we
have a huge resource in the
state to help us with.
This. And then a high court and
Robert Bayliss and so on is uh
sergeant in Lundy, which is big
and, and so on. So the point is
this is a team effort and
everybody when they invest in
this, uh, really throw their
resources into it.
This is some pictures of uh of
of William Gibbon talks at at
the community, uh, at the
commissions uh board or whatever
he was, I think it was up here
in Farmington, so it's made the
news.
Uh, and this is the key to this,
and this is Project fact sheets.
Uh, the DOE NETL on this carbon
safe stuff are really keen on
community involvement. Uh,
there's there's social justice
stuff, there's environmental
justice. And so they require you
to have a community benefits
plan.
And so this isn't just sneaking
into your backyard, putting up a
plant and then sneaking out and
then people wondering what just
happened. This takes years of
planning with communities.
Communities have to sign off on
this to get the funding.
So here you have, this is one of
the fact sheets that they use uh
to basically begin to explain
what are you doing in my
backyard and why should we do
this? Now, just so we're really
clear, San Juan Basin, Permian
Basin are essential for this
because that's where the saline
geologic storage sites basically
are in New Mexico.
So this isn't something you're
going to stick in the middle of
Albuquerque just for grins and
giggles. Unless you want to have
a pipeline coming out of
Albuquerque. I don't think
that's gonna happen.
OK, so, um, so that was CCS,
that's point of source and the
beauty of Point of source is
that it takes concentrated
amounts of CO2 that are coming
out of factories such as fossil
fuel power plants and pulls it
out of the air. Now the, the
good news about that is it's
less expensive than basically
directly capture a CDR because
you have a higher concentration,
you can pull it out of the air.
Now, so it runs anywhere from, I
don't know, maybe $50 to $100 a
ton, maybe $30 a ton.
Depending on who you talk to,
and you put it on the power
plant and if you're lucky you
have a storage site that's
close, uh, in, in proximity to
the plant. If not, you have to
get into pipelines, but it's
really, really the best way
because it's, it's stopping the
emissions.
Now, the key to carbon dioxide
removal is, is that when you do
the math and you figure out
parts per million of CO2 that
are in the atmosphere and how
many parts per million of CO2 in
the atmosphere, you need to to
keep it under 1.5 °C warming,
which is the key here if we have
to go to 2 °C warming, great,
but let's not do that. Um, you
have to pull CO2 out of the air,
IPCC, the IEA, they've all said
you have to use CD.
are at some point. It's the most
expensive part of this whole
process of trying to kind of
avoid 1.5, but it's the
necessary part.
It they're all important, you
know, uh, photovoltaic electric
vehicles,
stop using carbon,
all that stuff, but this is an
essential part to make the
transition. So, um, so
basically, if we move CO2 from
the atmosphere, so that's
removing the atmosphere is about
412, maybe 400, 420 parts per
million. So it's basically like
putting a filter in the middle
of your room.
It's what it is. It's like a
HIPA filter.
Or whatever they call those
things. So there's 7 different
technologies available. There's
liquidsorbent and solvent.
There's solidsorbent. There's
passes versus active. There's a
bipolar membrane
electrodialysis. There's
mineralization, weatherization,
biochar, etc. So there's all
these ways everybody's talking
about how they want to pull CO2
out of the air and it's not uh
picking a winner, it's getting
them all on the table and seeing
how they all work together and
trying to encourage the
advancement.
This technology.
Several companies are at
commercialization level, so
there's this thing called
technology readiness level. It
starts at like one and goes up
to like 9 or something. uh NTL
really focuses on, uh, groups
that are in 3453 is like on the
bench. I think I can do this. 4
is like I can build one that I
can put in my backyard. It works
outside, it's big, and then 7 is
like that's ginormous. That was
good. And then 8 and 9 is like
we can make a lot of these and
we can really get rolling. Um,
there's one company right now
Uh, that is building 2 500,000
ton plants.
Using carbon engineering
technology they purchased it
this is Occidental their
subsidiary is 1.5 and they
bought carbon engineering's, uh,
uh, that's the liquid solvent
and um they think they bought it
for like $1.2 billion or
something. This is a company
that Bill Gates invested in a
long time ago, uh, and carbon
safety is out of Canada.
Um, so anyway, they're building
these two plants, 500,000 tons,
they got DOE money for a DA hub
in Texas, and uh one is called
Stratos and it's on King Ranch
and they're going to sequester
the the CO2 into the ground at
King Ranch and then the other
one is, I don't know, closer to
Houston or something, maybe
Dallas. It's down the road.
They're gonna build another
500,000 ton plant.
So, um, so I don't have a
carbon, uh,
uh, I don't have carbon
engineering on this plate here,
but if you look them up though,
you'll you'll see. So, um, so
climbworks is another company
that you've heard of probably a
long time ago, um, it's based
in, in uh, in Switzerland, and
it it they started out making a
CO2 machine that could pull CO2
out of the out of the air and
then we're putting it into a a
greenhouse
Now they just got a contract
with DOE. I think they're at
40,000 tons and they, they have
a lab in California and I think
they're gonna scale up to
400,000 tons, um.
Carbon capture is, is a group
out of California and they have
a project bison in Wyoming where
they're gonna be uh
Basically pulling 5 million tons
of CO2 out of the air by 2030.
You can look them up they're
they they have a website they
say they will sell you a ton for
a CO2 ton for $500 or $533
heirloom is the one, the top
pitcher, they're doing
mineralization that um that's an
interesting technology. There's
a few other companies that are
doing that. They have, they won
an award for Louisiana, so
they're gonna be scaling up in
Louisiana. And then, um,
And then 1.5 is the one I
mentioned was carbon engineering
occidental, uh, Spirit is, it
just sort of popped up and it,
um, it's coming out of uh the
Los Alamos National Labs, and
it's gonna, I think it's going
to do some work in Colorado.
Carbon collectors on the top
right, that's a passive system.
So basically there's no fans
involved they send up this uh
this column with these uh
sorbent uh contacts on it, the
passive goes through it.
And then when it fills up
enough, they drop it into a big
bucket on the bottom and then
they they heat it up and they
pull the CO2 out and then they
send it back up again. This the
prototype for this is on Arizona
State University's campus in,
uh,
And is it Tempe, um.
So you can see it there, and
this is, this technology is, um,
is going to be in place in this
neck of the woods by 2025, 2026,
because this is part of the
Southwest hub. So this is
coming, um, and carbon captures
on the bottom there, um, and,
and they are, they have some
nice research lab stuff going on
where they can really try to
improve their their what their
filter is there, what's called
the sorbent, so that they can
keep improving and trying to
drive the cost down, um.
So, so that's a lot of what's
going on. Uh, this is what a
director of CaptureHub could
look like, uh, if you have, you
know, this is farmland, I guess,
but you know, the point is, is
that you, you need to have your,
your plants and then you need to
have a hole to put it in and you
need power. That's the key to
this and in some, some
technologies you need water,
more water than others. Some
technology need a very little
amount of water, um, electro
dialysis doesn't use water, so
you have to begin to figure out
all these different um.
Kind of combinations of what
fits for your location.
Uh, so this is the DOE DA hub
selection, so this was a piece
that um that made news a while
ago. So Project Cyprus in
Louisiana is doing climb works
in Healloom carbon technologies,
and then um South Texas and I
think it might be a half.
What is it? 100 $500 million or
something I'd have to look at
it. Uh, and then South Texas Dak
Hub is the one that's
occidental, which is 1.5 that we
just talked about and that's the
rendering of the Stratos. If you
go to, I think it's No Trees,
Texas is where it's at. Uh, you
can drive there and you'll see a
fence and you'll see them
building it because that that's
that was supposed to be online
this year and it says a delay. I
don't know if it's still making
online this year. Um, and so
then there's a Southwest deck
hub that's Arizona.
Mexico, Utah, and that has
carbon collect, which is a
passive DA in New Mexico Tech is
involved with locating the Class
6 wells. Um, so that's really,
really important.
Um,
What else? And just so you know,
uh, I was a part of working with
New Mexico Tech and we applied
for this DA hub, what's called a
feasibility study, the initial
part is to just say, can you do
it here? And we didn't get
accepted.
So the key to all this, I'm just
going to say it this way because
it as much as this is wonderful
technology, there is a crisis
here. There is an urgency here.
If you go by the standard that
engineering likes to go by, yes,
in 20 years or in 30 years
they'll have this really neatly
tied up in a bow and it'll be
great, but you, the carbon
budget tells you you do not have
that much time.
So when you start, so what the
DOE is doing is perfect. It's
good science, it's doing it in a
in a lockstep fashion it's
investing, it's making people
show what they can do. So what
we need to be doing is figuring
out how to coordinate
construction of Class 6 wells in
carbon capture plants. Uh, so
the one thing we didn't talk
about here today is the
essential component of classics
wells in New Mexico is prime for
classic swells, um, in Classic
Wells require EPA regulation to
get
Permit and we're working on home
primacy which is basically New
Mexico is the one who can then
permit a classics well instead
of waiting on the EPA, there's
about 140 permits pending in the
uh the EPA at this point. And so
by getting New Mexico to have
home primacy, then basically
they can uh they can speed up
the process instead of waiting
on the queue and EPA. Louisiana
already has a home primacy, I
think, uh, Wyoming does it.
Well, there's several other
states are in application
process and we are in the
process of actually putting the
application in, um, so New
Mexico Tech, uh, got an award to
help the state do this. So
basically the, the concept is
time is money and so when you're
looking at people investing in
these things you don't want you
don't want a well sitting there
for years that it took $21
million to drill, and you don't
want someone who's built a plant
that costs hundreds of millions
of dollars to build sitting
there not.
Functioning. So you want to be
able to put these two things
together. It takes about 3 to 7
years, 4 to 6 years to do a
class 6 well permit. It's really
intense. Uh, the one for, uh,
the one that's here, that the
carbon Safe is doing is waiting
on NIPA uh to basically see if
that site's OK or not.
And then they're working on 2 or
3 other uh wells as well, no pun
intended. Um, and then it takes
about 3 to 5 years to complete a
feed study, build and make
operational that plan because
every DA plant needs you have to
at least understand where are
you putting it, uh, what are the
resources around it, and so you
have to do this feed study, uh,
to make sure that you understand
what you're going to build. You
can't just put a 7-Eleven up and
say it's done. It's a lot of
engineering.
So, uh, and if pipelines are
needed, it's important to safely
permit and build these as
quickly as possible, uh, so to
minimize risks and costs and
maximize investment, startup
time is essential to coordinate
these two processes that they
are as ready as much as possible
at the same time.
So that's, that's another key to
this.
Um, I think I'm taking too much
time.
right
Um, sorry, I, I, I, this is a
lot. So, all right, so what has
New Mexico done to date? We've
applied for Hydrogen hub. Uh,
you can see the handout. We've
applied for a DAubb. There's the
carbon utilization storage
Partnership, the Western states
at New Mexico Tech, Carbon safe.
We have research into renewable
energies, battery storage, and
carbon capture CN in National
Labs in in Los Alamos National
Labs. We submit legislation to
develop hydrogen in poor space
so um we we commit to net zero
emissions.
By 2050 there's the Ebon Solar
down in Albuquerque, and uh
we've created an energy
management and conservation
division, which is working on
the climate change task force.
so other states are involved in
this stuff we can talk to
Louisiana. They are, they are
already moving. North Dakota is
locked and loaded. Wyoming is
already moving. California is
already developing things.
Arizona is working with us.
Texas is already moving and so
there's states that are already
doing this and we are able to
just talk to them and get going
with them.
Uh, economic development,
hydrogen carbon capture provide
excellent jobs, provide and
maintain and operate the plants.
The boilermakers union supports
these industries and Mexico's
invested in apprenticeship
programs already. We have an
existing workforce that can
easily transition to these
industries. Uh, it's an
excellent opportunity to
transfer from fossil fuel and
capitalize on our our other
resources, uh, economic studies
are needed to provide specific
information on the economic
benefits of each project
proposed, you can review the
Connecticut deep Hudgen roadmap,
um, Los Alamos, UNM.
India, they can all do the
economic uh kind of uh studies
that are necessary. There are a
variety of funding sources to
support to develop these
industries and markets and it's
important to work in decreasing
the risk of investment in
classics wells and carbon
capture technologies. This is
the pie. This is all the pieces
we have. We are ideal for this.
So we have storage, we have
power, we have weather, um, we
have the workforce, we have
industry, we have community, we
have the labs, we have
everything. And so we just have
to deris
These nascent industries and
that's what Carbon Safe is
already doing, and ETL is doing
it, the government's doing it,
the inflation Reduction Act
credits for hydrogen, which is
45V and carbon captures 45 q, so
this is to incentivize people
and then we have the other
pieces financing such as low to
no interest loans, tax
incentives, considering
different investment models and
engage all elements of
government, community finance
and business.
And so this is the what is
needed and then the summary so
to continue to invest in the
workforce development can you
develop attaining home primacy
to collaborate with National
Labs, neighboring states, tribal
nations, universities, blah blah
blah, can develop plans with
communities.
We have to develop the
regulations for space that
Senator Shea mentioned and just
to develop nesting appropriate
infrastructure and it has to be
sped up. I'm hoping we're going
to have 10,000 tons of DA
storage by 2032 in New Mexico
and if and then we'll just do
maybe hit 250 by 2050.
So that's the summary, uh, this
is that, I'm just all feeling
anxious because they want us to
talk, so sorry.
Who
All right, Madam Chair, I can
talk more than that, but we're
ready for questions. All righty,
thank you.
Um, let me see who we've got on
the list first, uh,
Representative Lou Hunt. I just
raised my hand, armchair. I
thought it was going to the
bottom of the list. That means
there's no one else on the list.
So I hope others have questions,
madam Chair, because this is
This is where we're moving
economically. This is where,
this is one of the most
important, um,
Innovation, uh, technological
innovation times in history.
Now, it means we have to get it
right. It means we're going to
have to invest. It means we're
gonna have to, I mean, you were
in depth, this is a lot of
information and probably over a
lot including some of it over my
head, um, and I've been
following this for quite a
while. Um, my question is,
Um,
Couple of questions. What, what
is the, what is the amount of
carbon in the atmosphere now.
That is not being captured or
that needs to be reduced. Are
you looking at those measures?
What is the input output is what
I'm getting at and
What is it going to take to get
to that 2030, 2040, 2050, um.
Uh go
Thank you, Senator,
Chairwoman,
um, great question. The IPCC and
the IEA have you can map that
and there's websites out there
that track where we're at, uh,
the globally we're probably
dropping about 35 gigatons of
CO2, give or take 5 gigatons a
year and then you have to look
at um CO2 equivalents, that's
the nitrogen and methane. We can
talk all day about how we have
to cap methane and figure that
out because that's gonna be
essential.
And so at this point we are,
it's a drop in the bucket. There
might be a few million tons that
we're pulling out of the air
right now. Um, and we have to
get up to if you follow the
IEA's estimates it's 800 million
tons by 2030 and then about 1
billion tons by um,
2050 and that's using DA and
then point of source is key and
it's like probably 1 billion
tons by 2030 and then I don't
know up to 5 billion tons by
2050, but that's globally.
And that's the key. There are
countries that are huge
polluters that they're also
working on it and our uh Clean
Air Act part, um, is really
causing us to really put a lid
on our emissions from fossil
fuel plants quickly.
So it's a complicated model and
I would love to talk to you
further about all the different
pieces and how what we're
supposed to be doing, what is
happening globally.
Thank you, Madam Chair. And, and
that's thank you for.
Going down that that road
because that's exactly what um
we're facing and that's why I'm
saying we're in this, this time
in history where this is, this
is our this is our present and
our future and our technologies
are trying to, to, to catch up.
And my next question is, how
many um class 6.
Um, sites do we have in New
Mexico? Class 60 at this point
if I understand correctly, we
have one pending that's for the
San Juan tall grass, tall grass,
that's probably, that's the one
I think for San Juan, and that,
that permit is in cu.
So, um, so the work has been
done on it and it's waiting at
EPA right now.
Thank you. And for all of us
here that don't
Probably don't really understand
what primacy is. Can you give us
a definition? Yes, so, so
primacy, um, so the EPA
establishes regulations for
something. So for the classics,
well, there's there's stringent
regulations on how you can
permit a classics well.
So then they said, OK, what,
what you can do is that if you,
you, your state wants to then uh
follow our guidelines and add
things that fit to your estate,
go right ahead. And so if you
can convince the EPA that you're
following the federal
regulations and then you're
adding whatever you need to add
for your state, then you can get
primacy and so there's a process
of an application where they
they walk you through it, they,
they basically say, please talk
to us, uh, and let's look at the
application before you even
submit.
so we can, when it comes time to
submit it, we can know that all
the problems been worked out. So
it really is the state taking
over the permitting process
instead of the EPA doing it,
which then allows you to have
control over that as a state.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and also
the EPA has issued new rules
that that affect or have some
Um, maybe benefits or some
things that are not seen as
benefits for our industry.
Are you able to talk about
those, those changes? I'm sorry,
I cannot today. Thank you. I
appreciate that. I think that's
something we need to have a
discussion about because um,
They have, they just changed up
some things for us, if I may 1
of the changes is on pipelines
if you're asking about that, the
issue with the pipelines were is
that um they're trying to figure
out what the what CO2 is, is a
mixture of his doing inside the
pipes and they want to make sure
that the corrosion in the in the
monitoring of pipes is actually
up to the 21st century because
of what we're using in them now.
If that's what you're referring
to, yes, that is in process.
Thank you, Madam Chair. That was
something that came up in North
Dakota.
for the Energy Council from our
neighbors up in Canada and our
and their engineers and also
legislators in their own rights.
And so they're having an issue
with, with, um, exactly that,
and I followed up with them and
I've followed up with some other
engineers, Madam Chair, um,
because they're moving on it.
They're already having their
mixtures, they're already using
these technologies and they said
that that that erosion and that
or corrosion from from the
mixture of of those gasses, we
have to get that science right
because it's not right, right,
right.
Now. So are we tech ready, Madam
Chair, in New Mexico, you're
saying we have all the pieces of
the pie, but where we are
technologically, Madam Chair.
Um, could you please, uh,
clarify the statement I'm trying
to rush through things cause I
is New Mexico tech ready for
these new technologies and
infrastructures that we are, we
are looking to create. I will
defer to anybody else, but I'm
going to say yes, because we
have the oil industry here, we
drill wells, we know how to do
this just fine. We're not
talking about piping it across
the state at this point and once
we do, we can ask about the
issues about are the pipes safe?
That's going to be.
Essential because they are, but
they're they're increasing the
the regulation on that. So as
far as I know, we have solar, we
have geothermal, we have
industry, and so, and we have
the boilermaker. So yes, we're
just taking one industry and
switching over to the other one,
so I'm going to say we are
locked and loaded. I mean, I, I
don't know what else we need to
be adding. Thank you. Thank you
for that. um, Madam Chair, um,
The cost.
So
This is highly expensive, so
what are we doing here in New
Mexico to incentivize.
The cost. I know we have
federal.
Yeah, there she is. Come on, New
Mexico Tech is here, Madam
Chair, and if you want to ask
her to come and sit, she did a
presentation earlier this
morning on carbon capture, but
that was carbon sequestration
we're talking about direct air
carbon capture in this
discussion, is that correct?
So we're doing both, um, we're
doing CCS, which is the carbon
capture sequestration, and the
director captured. My focus is
directly to capture the CCS
stuff is on power plants and
things like that, so if you did
it at like a cement plant,
that'd be one thing, but
Our plant is the the Four
Corners.
So I yeah go ahead we should
introduce if you could introduce
yourself.
Hello, members of the committee.
My name is Jennifer Rainey, I'm
the deputy director of the
Petroleum Recovery Research
Center. Uh, we largely focus in
the characterization work that's
required to implement a carbon
sequestration. So knowing a lot
of the geological
characterization and identifying
some of the sources in the
region. And so we have a number
of Department of Energy grants.
We've been doing this work for
over 20 years. So we would like
to consider ourselves one of the
experts in the region, if I may.
I only just recently joined this
past year. So thank you for
having us.
And thank you for being here and
thank you for this this
educational piece and it's a lot
to, to capture, if you will, um,
informational wise, um,
But uh I'm going to keep if I
have I'm sure to have a couple
more minutes and so thank you.
Um, so when we're looking at the
infrastructure, um, investments.
What is the incentive and we
have something that we've
created even through the Clean
Fuels bill that we passed, and
then we had HB 6.
Which
is different but similar. And
what I'm trying to like get out
right now is.
We need to work in a circular
manner, if you will.
If we're going to look at uh
building an economy to scale and
that is called and what other
states have done primarily and
started in California and we
have it on the west coast. Our
circular economies were reusing,
recycling, and using all these
other mechanisms so we can get
to an economy of scale because
the truth of the matter is, what
I started with this cost. We
can't afford this right now.
Anywhere.
Because we have met that we
haven't met what we, you know,
for that demand and that output.
Of what carbon is and what we're
trying to establish through
these technologies to capture
those those the carbon and and
do all these uh technological
things. It's so expensive and
it's so expensive and we're at
the, at the same time, Madam
Chair, we're developing our
renewable energy where we have
to modernize our grid. We have
to replace, you know, antiquated
um systems and um lines and all
those sorts of things. The
is huge, beyond huge, um, but
this is a piece of the pie, and
I'm, I, it's something we have
to talk about. It's something we
have to establish, but in the
realm of a circular economy and
incentives, um, can you just
maybe talk a little bit about
that because one of the
incentives we have is creating a
carbon economy.
The carbon economy is the the
trade of of what you talked
about earlier this morning, and
what that means for some of the
industries when you're
multiplying 85.
Time 8, is it 8 billion.
Or 6 billion and what that means
as an incentive for industries,
but also, um,
I would just like you to educate
us a little bit more there. OK.
Senator, do you want to comment?
I can comment.
Go ahead. Alright, um, there's
two very important points to
this is that one is that uh the
cost of not doing anything is,
is extraordinary, um, I'm a
psychologist by trade, and when
we talk about, well, what did
you do? Well I kept him out of
the hospital. I kept him from
killing themselves. They're
like, 00, what was that? Well,
you go figure it out. I mean, I
saved money by doing that.
Um, if we don't do anything,
it's gonna be so bad. And the
whole point to this is that one
of the problems with humans is
that we don't understand crisis
until it's a crisis, and this is
a crisis it's already here and
it's only gonna get worse and by
the time people want to figure
out how to fix it, it's going to
be too late.
So I want to be really clear
about that, and you all can kick
me out tomorrow right now, but I
am so worried about this. This
is why I'm here.
So yes, um, point of source is
not that expensive. It, it's
expensive, but it's not a
terrible thing and everybody's
going to have to do it, and
that's going to scale up. And so
that is, I we don't point of
source is not our main game in
this state. It's important for
the Four Corners plan and then
when they have any any other
power plant you can speak of
that's using fossil fuel or
natural gas or anything, but the
federal government is already
working on that part director
capture is kind of a boutique,
right? Because everybody's going
to tell you, we should
Just be investing in
photovoltaic or we should just
be doing electric or whatever,
which means you have to get that
power someplace, but when you
put this on a scale and say, are
you going to scale up
electricity that fast, and are
you going to put that many EVs
on the market that fast. Your
answer is no.
I'm gonna be really clear about
this. It's no. And so you have
to get a straw and suck this
stuff out. And you do have to
work globally to make sure
people stop dumping CO2 into the
air. This is clear.
So, it is expensive, but it's
not for me, I'm not saying that
the burden is on the state. The
thing I didn't talk about is, is
that one of the things I'm
involved in is pre-sales of
carbon credits 10% of the of the
wealthiest people in the world
uh uh basically, uh, creating
50% of the CO2 emissions.
So yes, uh, if you look at my
website, my goal is to
decarbonize individuals this
isn't, uh, you know, you're a
poor state now, you have to pay
$500 a ton to pull CO2. This is
not what this issue is. This is
the social justice part of this
is that people who are emitting
this much CO2, need to figure
out how to pay for it and then
you're stuck on if you ask
government to regulate this in
time, it'll be too late.
So what I'm saying is, is that
you open the door for companies
to come into the state to put up
DA plans, millions of tons, and
they will get the money from
someplace else. You, you create
the a welcoming place for them
to do business here, and they
will come. If you, if you build
a Class 6 well, they will be DA
plans to put the CO2 in the
ground. I, I, I'm pretty sure
that I won't bet my house on it
because my wife is here looking
at me going, don't be doing
that.
So, but I, I'm, I'm, I'm clear
on this. Yes, it's expensive,
but this is not the burden of
the state.
I, I.
Thank you. That, that's clear.
And if you want.
Madam Chair, on that that carbon
um
Sure. Thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee,
representative, the, the comment
on the investment and the cost
that's absolutely undeniable,
and that is a very astute
observation. However, any
technology when you're getting
over that barrier, that
threshold of the initial
investment that is, that's
typically a challenge. The
beauty of the carbon capture and
sequestration technologies we're
talking about is that you are
utilizing existing
infrastructure. That alone is a
massive incentive.
A lot of the lines, a lot of the
grid that you already have in
place, that comes into the
portfolio. And so that is the
beauty of this kind of operation
is that really your targets are
just the retrofit of a facility
to capture and compress that
carbon. And so that again that
parasitic glow that I have
alluded to this morning, that
additional energy that is a
cost, but combining that with
the market for the carbon as
well as the carbon credits that
are available that completely
offsets it. So if you look
globally, this is being done
very, very
a commercial scales, there is a
growing interest in that. There
are 86 different plants that are
coming online to to implement
this. So that should be evident
that the analysis written and
done, I am not in the business
realm. This is not, I'm not, I'm
in research, I'm a lowly
researcher, but that should show
that the market is suitable to
make those investments and the
industry from high emitting
industries they are also looking
at anywhere that they can get
those carbon offsets. So yes,
the capital costs do seem
enormous, but
benefits
Grossly outweigh them. Thank
you. So thank you.
That that's, that's, that's what
I'm getting at, and that's why
I'm, I'm gonna bring us back to
circular type of economy if
we're going to get this done.
Everything has to be working
well together and we have some
of the constructs.
In place with some of the the
legislation that we've done and
in your opinion, and this is my
last question, what legislation
I'm hearing what, you know, what
Senator Sheer's bill is, but
additional to that, what, what
other pieces of legislation are
you thinking that we need to
implement for those types of for
these types of scale uh economic
to scale um improvements and
To save our future really,
actually.
So, Madam Chair, the, the poor
space issue is the ground level
there. Uh, once we have that,
Settled, then industry is going
to happen. Industry is happening
right here, right now, uh, tall
grass Navajo Nation, uh, they're
doing it and they don't care
because the land under under
their feet is Navajo land, and
they don't need anybody's
permission to do whatever
they're gonna do. So it's
happening.
Uh
So the poor space issues the
first thing. The second thing
is, uh, when the governor tried
to um.
Um,
What's the word? The hydrogen
hub when she was pushing the
hydrogen hub, there were some
bits and pieces in there that we
also should do just to try to
clarify, uh, for industry,
what's right and, and how we do
that. The hydrogen hub portion
of this, again, we're sitting in
like the perfect place in the
whole planet for hydrogen and
for carbon capture, uh, in, in,
in literally it was the Obama
administration that said San
Juan County is the place for
carbon capture on the whole
planet.
So it's not, it wasn't a Trump
scheme. This was, this was
President Obama's um.
Department of Energy and
hydrogen is President Biden's
thing. So again, not a Trump
scheme.
Not a share scheme.
Obama and Biden said this is the
place to do that and so most of
what we need is just some simple
clarification, most of which
could be done by regulation.
Except for the the poor space.
Thank you.
the
Well, I mean, I have many more
questions, but I think I'm going
to get more of most of those
things, uh, talked about
offline, but, you know, when we
have the poor space and some of
the, the science behind it is,
you know, we could
That cars can be stored for
life, but then there's another
portion of it that can be
utilized for um
offsets, if you will, for
industry and then for like for
use for CO2, um, itself for like
Coca-Cola, but also but for the
the oil and gas industry.
Um, so that they can have higher
and better production. I
understand all that. I would
like to just get some measures
of that, because the majority of
it by what I'm reading and
understanding is going to be
stored for life. And if we have
this cleanup and this output, we
have, we're obviously not even
able to catch up to
How, um, how much space are we
going to need? And then once
that space is filled, then what
do we do? And those are for.
I don't know if we have more
time for that, but that's
Yeah
Have an answer on me?
I haven't
Thank you. No, stop. Thank you,
Madam Chair and members. Uh,
the, the space that we need, we
have calculations to tell you
that off the top of my head,
that's a struggle, but as I did
say in my presentation this
morning, from the work that
we've done and the
characterization of the San Juan
Basin alone. We estimate between
on the conservative end 6 to 10
billion tons of carbon dioxide
using a stack storage approach,
and then that's just targeting
saline formations that's not
addressing the depleted oil and
gas reservoirs, and as you
stated that
that we're talking about, the
end use for carbon. This would
be an interim or a stop gap. So,
so harnessing the geological
reservoirs that would be stored
permanently and then moving to
other advancements with
manufacturing materials and
other things, that market gives
it time to prove it up, deploy
those systems and help support
it. That's, you don't need to
answer and that's what I'm
saying. We need a plan. Like we
need, you know, uh, a full plan
and and how we're going to get
there.
From start to finish and in
between. And that's like 2
years, 5 years, 10 years, 30
years, 50 years, and I'm not
seeing that, but I'm, I'm, I'm
trying to produce this
conversation so that we do that.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Madam
Chair, there's a couple of
things here.
Uh, technology advances all the
time. So, uh, certainly the
first barrels of oil that came
out of the ground here, uh, most
of that was a waste product.
Um, and today we use all of the
barrel of oil. OK, we're
technological advances we've,
we've done that. Uh, same with
natural gas. Most of what you're
wearing.
Is natural gas and you don't
even know it, OK? Uh, most of
the things you use are natural
gas. This is all of this and the
same is, is already developing
with CO2. How do you take CO2
and turn it into something else
and that's not a plan that any
of us are going to come up with.
That's somebody going over
there, wow, I'll bet you that. I
bet we can make coffee cup out
of CO2, and then they'll develop
and off we go. So that's the
commoditization of things happen
and not necessarily
by a plan of government.
Thank you, Senator. If we could
go on to Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
could I ask a question? Can you
tell me who the largest uh
natural producer of CO2 is or
what it is.
Throughout the world.
Who's the largest, what's the
largest contributing um factor
of CO2 in the world today.
Would I be wrong if I said the
oceans?
By far
By far, much, much, much larger
than any man manmade uh industry
in the world.
So can you tell me what the US
um portion of the CO2, um,
pollution in the world is.
I didn't come this morning with
those data if you gave me, I can
get back to you on that though.
I'm happy to have this
discussion with you.
My, my point is, what we produce
here is extremely small to what
the rest of the world produces.
And what the rest of the world
produces is extremely small to
what the oceans produce.
Um
I'm convinced we need to take
care of our resources.
I'm convinced of that, uh, but
At what expense?
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, if I may, um.
Was there a question embedded in
there? No.
OK, would you like me to respond
to your comment?
You bet, absolutely.
Um,
There is a natural CO2 cycle
that's very important and we
have blown past that natural CO2
cycle.
And I agree with you that we
have to maintain our resources
and we have to compare our
resources to the globe because
we are not here to weaken the
United States.
I, I firmly believe that and so
it's important that we act
locally and globally, and we
work on this globally as well,
and I believe that New Mexico is
in a prime real estate to
participate in an industry
that's going to be a $1 trillion
industry by 2050.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm not
opposed to using this as an
economic benefit, not at all.
My, my point was, don't blame us
for such a small amount that's
that is in the world today, when
the world itself creates a huge
and then the oceans creates much
larger.
That's my point. Thank you,
Madam Chair. So if we can go to
Representative Lundstrom.
Alrighty. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and good morning
everyone. I apologize for being
a little late today, but I, I
did have some que I drove up
here specifically for this
presentation uh in 2022 for the
benefit of the presenters in
2022 I carried House Bill 4,
which was the governor's
hydrogen hub bill. And in that
bill, what we tried to do was
create a statute that would be
similar to a mirror image of the
federal, uh, legislation and
DOE.
requirements, um, inside that
bill we also included incentives
to help, uh, you know.
Industry look at us seriously in
our state that included things
like P3s. It included the carbon
credits. It was a fairly
complicated bill that we put
together. Unfortunately, that
bill didn't get out of House
energy. I said in that in that
presentation for 6 hours and we
didn't get out of that, out of
that uh committee, lots of
reasons, uh surprised about how
that vote went down and who
voted against the bill, but
that's, that's history now.
I did want to ask the uh lady, I
I'm sorry, I didn't catch your
name. Jennifer Rainey, Jennifer,
I did have a question for you.
When you're looking at carbon
sequestration and carbon
capture.
What is the value the industry
puts on that?
What is the value, uh, at the
end of the day for that.
And then I'm gonna ask you once
you tell me what the value is,
what's the multiplier for that?
So I, I would say thank you for
the question, representative,
uh, the, the value is really
twofold. So on one hand you have
the immediate value of the
carbon credits and the other
incentives that are available
right now and for the next 12
years, but the other value is
maintaining operations
prolonging the existing lifetime
of plants, of your uh
infrastructure, of your
workforce, having to do a
switch, having to switch over a
That is a monumental task,
having to educate new workers,
having to train them, make sure
it's done safely and securely.
So prolonging the lifespan of
existing operations that are
already lucrative and coupling
that with other systems where
you can get these carbon credits
and transition to a new realm.
There, there's 22 sources of
value, if that is what you were,
what we need to talk about, I
think when we're talking about
economic value, we need to be
able to explain to 112 people,
what that mon
value would be.
And we're talking about carbon
credits that are valued for
somebody else, basically, and
then the revenue comes in for
development of the project.
So what I'd like to ask, and we
don't have to try to put a sharp
pencil to it right now, but I'm
very interested to know.
If the state of New Mexico could
come up with a policy I have not
seen it yet. A carbon
sequestration or uh carbon
capture policy. I haven't seen
that. Maybe I'm wrong and maybe
there's somebody that can
correct us today. Uh, is there a
policy in place by the New
Mexico Environment Department or
Energy and Minerals Department
regarding this.
Once that policy is in place,
what would the value then be of
the product?
Do, is there a policy, do you
know?
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative, I believe that
we are, we as a New Mexico, New
Mexico is developing that policy
and reframing it and that's with
the oil Conservation division
and so a lot of the, the model
statutes based on the revenue
that is received from those
assets right now that is being
built into that picture and so
to provide you numbers on the
economic benefit. There's
different ways that you can
analyze that, so you could have
potentially additional revenue
from the increased oil
production that you could
receive from using utilizing.
Carbon, we could be up to 30%
depending on the fields. And
when you're talking about the
scale of what you're looking at
in the Permian Basin, that is a
national leader, and so that is
transformative. And so I don't
have the material to present
those numbers to you, but
certainly that can be a part of
our discussion. Yes, Madam
Chair, I think what's important
for the committee to know is if
we're trying to set up an
industry.
And the industry has a product.
What's the value of the product?
That's what I'm trying to get to
and, and if we have the value of
the product, we can add the
multiplier, which is the job
creation, infrastructure
creation, construction, grocery
receipts, tax, whatever it is.
But that's the part that's never
been clear, and I had a heck of
a time trying to explain that.
In 2022 to the world. So if
we're going to try to do that
again, which I'm interested in
bringing this bill back from a
different perspective because
for my county I have the same
problem that San Juan County
has. I have a retired coal-fired
power plant that was actually
put into the federal hydrogen
hub application. It was in the
application for a lot of
reasons. Uh, when you think
about how federal dollars are
allocated and how.
They look at wanting to help
poor areas and disenfranchised
areas and to help stimulate the
economy.
So I was very supportive of that
as well as helping up here. So
I, I think that it's important
that when these presentations
happen while they're technical
in nature, most people are
yawning, and I'm gonna be honest
with you. I mean, I run into
that all the time with the kind
of bills that I carry, but I
think if we could, if you could
actually talk about it in terms
of um establishing a new
industry.
And what that value proposition
is because I don't, I don't
think it's clear to everyone
what that is.
Um, I'd be interested to know
that, uh, will be.
I'll be looking at bringing this
bill back. I know the governor
is super still super interested
in hydrogen development and
certainly my part of the world
in this county is too. So thank
you, Madam Chair. So Madam
Chair, if I
I, I don't have current numbers
for you, representative, but I
know when, uh, Enchant Energy
was, was attempting to build
carbon capture here, so that
would have been a direct capture
on San Juan Generating Station,
which we're going to actually
kill Saturday and I'm gonna be
there holding my friend's hand
as she dies.
What we were looking at then.
was about 300 jobs for 3 years
to build this 300 of the best
paying jobs in the state of New
Mexico with salaries around
$100,000.
For 3 years, each $100,000 each.
Then in the long term, there was
going to be about 30 or 35
permanent jobs to, to maintain
the, the, the facility again.
high paying jobs. Now this of
course was now what, 3 years
ago, 4 years ago.
Um, so those numbers, and, and
that's not happening, obviously.
But that was the first thing is
that we were going to do that.
The second thing is that we were
going to keep San Juan
generating station online with
1500 of some of the best paying
jobs in the state of New Mexico
which we've now lost or
a lot of the miners are still
mining. They're just mining in
Wyoming now. Uh, they're not
here, they're not paying taxes
here, they're not buying houses
here.
Um,
So that's, that's part of the
economic development 1500 real
life people, 1500 families, and
then we were gonna add some more
to that. And this was going to
be a huge tax base. This
building right here, this
building already is set up to
teach people how to, how to do
the carbon capture and the
hydrogen already. We had a, we
had an opportunity to be the
center of the carbon capture
universe.
And instead we chose not to. We
chose to destroy a power plant
instead of making us the center
of the universe because once
that plant was built out there.
Mitsubishi was going to build
that plant.
Because they wanted a floor
model so that they could sell
hundreds or thousands of those
plants and they wanted people to
come here and touch it and feel
it and smell it and train here.
And then they would sell more
all over the world.
So those are, those are massive
economic real life.
People that we chose not to do
because we got, we decided
perfect wasn't that good wasn't
perfect and therefore we
shouldn't do it.
Those are real.
May I,
it still has to be quantified,
and I think that's the issue for
us, and I mean, I run into that
all the time with the bills that
I carry. We still have to be
able to demonstrate to 112
people and then the governor, of
course, why and what the
economic numbers look like. I
mean, I, I know exactly what
you're talking about. My county
went through the same thing.
With the closure of a power
plant.
I under I understand that, but
we're talking about the
development of a new industry.
Those of us that are close to it
understand why it's critically
important, but you have to talk
to everybody else about it, and
I, and I don't see it as any
different as an industry is the
early days when people talk to
me 20 years ago, but gee,
outdoor tourism is gonna be a
big thing, and I kind of laughed
and I thought, yeah, sure, sure
it is.
And now what we've seen is the
evolution of that particular
industry, and they, they have
been able to demonstrate what
their value proposition has
been, and they're growing and
they're a big part of tourism
and everything else.
But I don't think we've done a
good job when it comes to
hydrogen development.
Having been the person who sat
there and had it handed to me, I
understand, you know, and it was
all the public that I believe
was misinformed.
Uh, we need to be able to be
better at explaining it.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, uh, Representative Brego.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
thank you, Senator.
Sure, sure.
Sure. Great to meet you today.
um, Mr. Pedrati. Are you related
to Gus Pedrotti in Albuquerque.
um Gus's dad, that's who I'm
really known as.
So Gus ran for mayor for those
of you who don't know, and he
was like 30 years old, but now
he's a firefighter, so he's a
great guy,
um, 22, yeah, I know he's really
young. I didn't know he'll be
30.
He'll be 30, but he was 22 when
he ran and Ray.
Um, you know, listening to my
colleagues, I think about um
Oh
I mean, I, I love your passion
for this whole industry and I
think back to when I was
younger.
And thinking about, you know,
industries that have come into
New Mexico and how they've
developed um some of the
questions, Madam Chair, that
have been brought up were, were,
I mean, some of us are still
learning about all of this, and
I, I certainly don't claim to
know enough about this, but I
will tell you, um.
I worked as a land use planner
for 28 years, and as a city
councilor, so I worked in the
regulatory and the legal areas
of industries and businesses,
and one of the areas that I
didn't hear anything about today
and I just for future reference,
I would, I would have a lawyer
sitting there talking about land
use rights about mineral rights,
about water rights, about air
rights because.
you in this presentation, you
guys talked about, you know, I
mean, I was really fascinated to
hear that you could actually
have, um, what was it air?
Um,
Capture or.
I mean, that was fascinating to
me, but knowing land use as I
do, um.
And especially like water rights
when we were transferring water
rights and mineral rights, um, I
didn't hear any discussion in
your presentations, and I think
that it's imperative upon us as
legislators to look at all of
the facets of an industry.
Um, and so I'm just mentioning
that because I think that that's
really an important point is how
these rights are being
transferred,
um, especially when you're
taking out of the ground, you're
taking your, you're touching
upon all of these issues when
water is being affected when the
air is being affected, um, and
I'll just give you an example.
When we were working on the rail
yard in Albuquerque, and we were
trying to run a pedestrian over.
Pass over the railroad tracks.
We were actually stopped from
doing that because of the air
rights.
And I mean, who would have
thought, right? Um, so I'm just
suggesting that this is an area
that we have not even touched on
today, and it's a huge area that
I mean you're, you're building
on right now on the Navajo
Nation, that's what I heard, um.
And they have a different set of
regulations. Um, when you're
dealing with, um, smaller
communities and especially in
rural areas where, you know, the
county commission usually is the
one that you have to go through
to get your permits approved
along with the state, um, you
know, these are not industries
that are typical in New Mexico.
And so if you're moving forward
and, and, you know, it
Sounds like there's support from
the governor's office, but I
think all of these things need
to be addressed because you if
this does move forward, and when
it does, I think it's a matter
of when, um,
All of these things are gonna
need to be addressed and they're
gonna be need to need to be
addressed at, I mean, what are
other communities doing
regarding these issues, and I,
I, you know, I, I'm still.
There's a lot more questions in
my mind, um, as to what other
communities are doing and how
they're addressing those issues.
So I bring those issues up
because and the other thing that
I saw was um,
Just with regard to um.
You had a, you had a graphic,
madam chair, up there, that
showed, you know, the whole kind
of process of extracting out of
the ground and then going into a
manufacturing plant and then I
mean, so I think to my mind,
well, what kind of zoning would
even that would even like, what
would that bring up? Would that
be heavy industry, um, I mean,
I, and that's why I'm saying I
have a lot more questions and
then just the transfer into um
an
Industry, you know, or or a
building or I don't know. I
mean, I, I don't know. I'm, I'm
trying to figure that out in my
mind as I see, think about the
whole process of this, and each
one of these has a different
process. There's not, I don't
think that one is one process
fits, you know, green or blue or
gray or whatever. I think
they're all different. And so it
seems to me like it's a matter
of processes and how that
affects community, um, so I just
wanted to mention those issues,
Madam Chair, because, you know,
when I think about exchange of
water rights and people buying
those in the credits and all of
that kind of stuff, I wonder
about, like, if I own a piece of
land and you come to me and you
say, hey, there I could probably
extract this out of your
property. Can I buy those
rights? Is it similar to that?
And so those are questions that
I have in my
Mind, Madam Chair, that I don't
think we're privy to.
And I think that it's imperative
upon us to know some of those
answers, so I appreciate your
presentation and you know, I
appreciate that you guys are
looking at all of this, but
there's like a somebody missing
at that at that end of the table
and it's illegal advisor.
Madam Chair, the poor space bill
that we presented, uh, really
did address most of that, uh,
that's what the ownership,
mineral ownership, water
ownership, land ownership.
That was all part of the poor
space and that's why I say
that's the base of what we need.
Um, so today, when, when we
extract minerals, if, if each
one of us is a landowner in
here, um, the, the bulk of the
minerals might be at this table,
but some of them go out there,
so.
That's all built into our laws
today, how much uh royalties
does everybody get? What are
your rights as a as a landowner?
How many of us have to agree
before anything happens. The,
the exact same thing happens if
we're putting stuff in the
ground instead of pulling it out
of the ground, and that was part
of the poor space bill. Uh, we
basically took Wyoming's bill
and turned it into New Mexico's
bill, so we, we wrote it in New
Mexican. Uh, we looked at Louis
bill, but none of us spoke
Creole, so we couldn't
understand it at all. Uh, so
that's why we took Wyoming's,
but yes, those, those things are
part of that course, exactly
those things are part of that
poor space bill and Madam Chair,
thank you for that and thank you
for that, Senator. I think also
the fact is though that it
becomes much more complicated
than just water rights and
mineral rights. It's sort of
these things are all intertwined
and how the law actually
affects.
You know, when you, when you're
dealing with multiple types of
legal questions and so that that
really is kind of my point is
that this is complicated and um
it is imperative upon us to be
fully informed. So if you want
to sit with me and chat about
that, I'm happy to do that. And
also the regulatory pieces is
how local jurisdictions would be
dealing with this. I mean.
Would we put it into a heavy
manufacturing or light
manufacturing, you know, how
does this, um, how does this
impact local communities and
small rural communities when it
becomes, you know, when it comes
to fruition. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you and thank you for the
presentation today. I think, um,
that we had the opportunity to
at least, you know, I, it's,
it's such a big topic and I
think it's really hard for
people to understand and I know
that when we've brought this
type of legislation up before,
um, that was the problem that
people didn't understand and
people were scared of it, um, I
think that representing a
Leinster made some really good
points that if added on to this
presentation, how to, how to tie
that together. Um, I think that
that would really help, um.
To move the the legislation
forward, so, um, that would be
my recommendation is to get with
some of the people around the
table who gave you some good
suggestions offline and to to
keep working at it. So thank you
again. I know that you worked
really hard on this
presentation. You can breathe
now, um, and I'm, I'm glad that
you were able to join us today.
So thank you for that. Um, I'm
gonna go ahead and ask, um, for,
for our next presenters to come
up, um, and.
I'll give it just a minute, but
since we have a Representative
Lindstrom here, we do have a
quorum, and so what we'd like to
do is um in your packets, there
was the, the minutes and so I'd
like us to be able to move those
forward if possible.
Make a motion to approve the
minutes from the last meeting.
Do we have a second.
OK.
Is there anybody opposed?
All right.
OK.
All righty. Well, our next
presenters are at the table. Uh,
the topic is outdoor, uh,
recreation economy. Um, I'm
gonna have each presenter, um,
introduce themselves to the
committee if that, if that's OK.
That way we can get going and um
I'm assuming that you guys kind
of have a flow of how you want
to present.
Or is it separate presentations
for each you can just pull it
out of air as well.
We'll let it flow. I, you
basically are allotted, um.
From 10:30 we and then we'll
start, so maybe, you know.
We've got, we've got some time,
so, um,
You can also just do rock paper
scissor that's right.
How about if we just go with
who's on the on here first,
Karina Armijo. we'll start with
you. How's that? OK, thank you.
OK, you do have to push that
little talky person.
OK, you can hear me OK? All
right, thank you. Yes, my name
is Kaine Armijo, and I'm the
outdoor recreation division
director. I'm happy to be here.
So, um, and this is our little.
Liquor.
Clicker.
Um, as of two weeks ago, we are
staffed up for 4 full-time
employees. We, um, are, are
newly hired marketing
coordinator, so we're a small
but mighty team.
Um, we were created in 2019, as
most of you know here, um, so we
celebrated our 5 years, um, in
April and focused on the mission
of increasing equitable access
to the outdoors for all New
Mexicans, guided by our core
values. So all we do, um, is
definitely guided by these um
these values.
So when our office was
established in 2019 through
legislation, there were only 8
other state outdoor rec offices
across the country today, thanks
to the positive impact we've
seen in building healthier, more
resilient communities and
economies, that number has grown
significantly. Now 23 states
recognize the vital role outdoor
recreation plays in enhancing
the well-being of their citizens
and strengthening their
economies. While these offices
might differ in structure and in
setup from state to state. They
all
share a common mission to serve
as a resource, a partner, and a
leader in fostering
collaboration across state
governments and communities to
support and grow the outdoor
recreation economy.
Outdoor recreation has been
recognized as one of New
Mexico's 9 key target industries
and for good reason. The sector
generates $2.4 billion annually
for our state's economy and
accounts for 1.9% of our GDP and
supports nearly 28,000 jobs
according to the latest data
from the Bureau of Economic
Analysis. These figures clearly
illustrate the substantial
impact of outdoor recreation on
both our economy and the
livelihoods of New Mexicans.
I want to talk about our one of
our two we have two really major
programs in outdoor equity fund,
obviously is one that we're
really proud of since 2019, the
Outdoor equity fund has awarded
$5.7 million to 250 grantees
across New Mexico, providing
transformative outdoor
experiences for 72,000 young
people. And just the 1st 7
months of fiscal year 24, the
outdoor recreation division
distributed a record 3.7.
$1 million to 113 programs
reaching over 36,000 youth.
Thanks to a one-time ARPA
allocation, we expanded our
reach by 11 times, supporting
diverse youth programming across
urban, rural, and tribal
communities.
So for FY 25, which is year 5 on
on the graph above, we have
$851,400 to distribute 382,000
comes from General Fund and
$468,800 comes from the land of
enchantment Legacy Fund, which
we we're really excited to have
that reoccurring fund.
Grant applications close on
August 31 just next week, and we
currently have approximately 118
applicants in the pipeline with
an average award request of
$33,000 we're anticipating
around $5 million in requests
for FY 25, despite only having
$851,000 available in funds. The
success of this grant program
coupled with a significant local
and national media attention it
has received has attracted many
new applicants from across the
state.
The impact on our young people
is profound, and we see this as
just the beginning. I urge our
legislators to consider
additional funding for the
outdoor equity fund, continued
investment in this program means
investing in our youth, our
future workforce, the outdoor
economy, and the dedicated
stewards of our lands and
waters.
I'd like to highlight 3 outdoor
equity funded programs that
really truly exemplify the
incredible impact these
initiatives are having on our
youth. These programs showcase
not only that diversity and
creativity involved in engaging
young people, but also the
essential needs are meeting
within their communities. First,
we have the partnership in
Farmington between 4 kinship and
make life skate life as a two
great at the two rey Hills skate
Park located on the Navajo
Nation. This program
Introduces and teaches tribal
kids to skateboard. The funding
supports the instruction,
provides the necessary gear,
transportation, and supports the
organization of skateboarding
events like Ghost Skate Day.
With over 100 boys and girls,
mostly teenagers, finding
inspiration through
skateboarding, drawing families
for miles around to support,
watch, and cheer on their
children learning to skate at
the skate park.
Next, I'd like to spotlight the
collaboration between Trout
Unlimited and uncivilized
outdoorsmen, which reaches youth
from Sandoval County, Rio Riba
County, and Santa Fe County.
This program focuses on
introducing Hispanic and
indigenous youth to fly fishing
by providing gear and pairing
them with
the multi-day program not only
teaches valuable skills, but
also brings families together
for a full day experience. This
ongoing initiative has made a
lasting impact on youth
engagement thanks to a
thoughtful cultural programming
component and nearly $400,000 in
outdoor equity funding. We have
heard from multiple outdoor
equity funded programs that
family involvement is key to the
program's success. It ensures
high participation and return
rates.
Finally, there's the Water jobs
Pathway project led by
Riversource, which operates
across several locations
including El Rito, Pecos
Penasco, Las Vegas, Mora, and
Santa Fe. This project offers
school-based outdoor activities
that reach over 11,200 students
and it trains 30 youth aged 15
and older to become members of
the Youth Conservation Corps.
These young individuals are
gaining hands-on experience in
water monitoring, river
restoration, and conservation.
to potential careers in fields
fields like water resource
management and stewardship.
These 3 programs are just a
snapshot of the incredible work
being done across our state.
They demonstrate the power of
investing in our youth and the
vital role outdoor recreation
plays in their development in
our community's future.
Yes
Next program, I want to
highlight is the trails plus
grant. Since it's its inception
in 2020, the trails Plus program
has awarded over 164 grants
totaling $18.4 million across 30
New Mexico counties and 11
tribal communities. In FY 24
alone grantees estimated that
trails Plus funding would create
949 jobs, adding to the more
than 1600 jobs generated since
the program began.
In FY 24 we awarded $10.8
million which helped leverage an
additional $11 million in
matching funds. In the final
round of distributions for FY
24, the outdoor recreation
division awarded $3.2 million to
support 17 projects. The most
applicants and funding
distributed in a single round
since the program's inception.
This growth reflects the
increasing awareness of the
program and the opportunity it
provides for communities to
develop, complete, and manage
outdoor recreation
infrastructure projects. These
projects have a direct positive
impact on local communities and
contribute to the overall
momentum we're seeing in the
outdoor recreation industry.
Investing in trails plus
infrastructure projects, not
only benefits local communities,
but also strengthens the outdoor
recreation businesses that
depend on these resources.
As you see on the map, there are
not a lot of yellow dots on the
eastern side of New Mexico.
This week, um, our outdoor
recreation planner Carl
Collonius is in Curry Quig
Harding and Union Counties to
address um project uh try to
generate projects in that area.
So we're working hard on the
rural communities and tribal
communities.
Let's see.
For the trails plus funding, um,
in year 4, that's FY 25, we have
approximately $11.2 million to
distribute. 10 millions comes
from the special appropriations
that was passed, um, this past
legislation. Thank you for that.
Um, and 1 point4 or $1.2 million
from the land of enchantment
Legacy Fund.
The application deadline for
round one is September 30th. 3
rounds of distribution for FY 25
or until funds are expended.
One of the challenges we face in
managing projects that must be
complete is managing projects
that must be completed within 24
months. Our staff oversees
multiple projects
simultaneously, each at
different stages, from newly
awarded initiatives from this
past year to those nearing
completion from 2 years ago. All
managed by essentially one
full-time employee. The outdoor
equity fund presents a similar
situation with an 18-month
completion deadline deadline for
its program. To address this
workload, we
proposed hiring a dedicated
grants coordinator to support
the administrative aspects of
these projects. We appreciate
that legislators allowed us to
allocate a portion of this
year's $10 million special
appropriation to a grants
administrator contractor. And we
hope that support will continue.
This will enable our current
staff to focus more effectively
on guiding projects through
their entire life cycle and
better assist communities in
integrating outdoor recreation
infrastructure into their plans.
Another project that we um
finished up this past fiscal
year, it was the outdoor
marketing grant. In January,
outdoor recreation Division
awarded $873,000 in grants to
eligible applicants in response
to $1.6 million in requests,
making this a highly competitive
grant. Recently, we conducted a
survey to understand the needs
of the outdoor recreation
businesses and identifying the
challenges they face. Over 64%
of respondents
Highlighted marketing support as
their most significant need,
underscoring its importance for
their success. The outdoor
marketing grant was funded
through a one-time EDA
partnership with the tourism
department. Moving forward, we
strongly believe that continued
marketing support for outdoor
recreation events and programs
would greatly benefit these
businesses. And we hope to see
such opportunities like this
grant program available in the
future.
What we do for outdoor rec
businesses. Um, there are a
number of things, initiatives
that we work on. I wanted to
highlight quickly, but, um,
you'll hear more about this
fantastic partnership with CNM
Ingenuity later today. So I'll
keep it brief. But the activator
outdoor reck business
accelerator program has been a
tremendous opportunity to
demonstrate how the outdoor
recreation division tailors its
programming specifically for the
outdoor recreation business
community. Traditional
Methods of business support
don't always fit the unique
needs of this industry. So we
went straight to the source. We
asked business owners and
operators, how do you define
growth and then developed a
curriculum that truly aligns
with their needs. Growth isn't
always about adding hundreds of
employees or dramatically
increasing profits. For some,
like a 3 person shop crafting
custom bicycles or tour guide
offering small intimate
experiences or 20 plus year old
outdoor business in need of a
secession plan.
Growth takes on a different
meaning.
The goal of this accelerator
program is to help these
businesses define what growth
looks like for them, whether
it's hiring an additional
employee refining their customer
base or planning for the future
with a secession plan. We are
excited to hear about the
outcomes for its first year of 3
for this program.
Oh,
Uh.
Um, the outdoor recreation
division feels strongly about
partnerships. We wouldn't be
able to be as successful with
any of our programs without the
many partnerships that we have
and this only lists just a few,
but I wanted to highlight the
the partnership with Future
Focused Education. Over the past
3 years, the $45,000 granted by
the outdoor recreation division
has successfully catalyzed more
than $177,000 in additional
funding for youth internships.
Additional support has come from
participating in outdoor
recreation employers and the
public education department's
summer internship program, which
is designed to expand work-based
learning opportunities across
New Mexico. These internships
have provided young people with
hundreds of hours of hands-on
experience where they've learned
about outdoor education,
grassroots agriculture, land
management and conservation,
watershed, health, and more.
This program is not just an
investment in our youth but also
in the future of outdoor.
Recreation and conservation in
our state.
The other partnership that's
actually not listed on here that
I wanted to highlight was the
partnership that we have with
Search and rescue. Um, a search
and rescue, um.
Uh, person is on our advisory
committee, and we want to
strengthen that relationship in
order to make sure that as we're
encouraging more people, folks
to get outside that we're doing
it in a safe and responsible way
and that we're providing
um safety and planning um to
them as as their increasing
their um going outside. So that
that's a good partnership and I,
and I apologize for not putting
that on here.
So what's next? Um, challenges
and opportunities, I find
challenges to be a great place
to um excel, uh, increased
funding for outdoor equity fund
we just spoke about expand
staffing capacity to effective
effectively manage our grants
and bolster new and established
programs, um, allocate funding,
uh, dedicated funding stream for
the outdoor marketing grant
program or a program similar to
the marketing grant program.
We did an outdoor recreation in
Mexico's economy report in 2020.
That was during the uh pandemic,
we would like to update that to
reflect um what this, what's
going on today, 2024 and 2025.
And then the last one, working
with other states and their
outdoor recreation, state
offices, um, now that we are 5
years into the outdoor equity
fund in other states have picked
up on it or are creating their
own funds similar. Um, I would
love to be able to analyze um
more the data behind um how
these um the impacts for youth,
um, in the last 5 years, um, for
these programs. So
Those are
What I have, and thank you for
having me here and
I either stand for questions or
we can move on to the next
presenter.
Thank you, Karina. It's nice to
see you and Carrie also, um, I
get to to work with the two of
you and like I'm looking forward
to that. Why don't we go ahead
and go through everybody's
presentation and then we'll open
it up for questions from the
committee afterward. So Carrie,
you're, I guess, in line, you're
next.
And then William, you'll be,
you'll be.
Sure. Or you can rock paper
scissors and have. We're gonna
rock paper scissors and so
because he, he says that his
presentation kind of pairs a
little bit better with with uh
director Army Hill, so I'll let
him go.
That'll work.
And by the way, I was actually
expecting to see Uncle here
cause the representative Ortez
and I got to white water raft
with him, uh, a couple of months
ago.
Down up in,
I don't believe he owns the
company anymore, right? You're
the new owner,
you're, you're, you're the new
owner, am I correct? Oh, there
you go. He does not. So yeah,
I'm surprised to be here as
well. OK, well, we're, um, but
still have a very fond uh and
wonderful experience with your
company. So thank you for being
here. Awesome. Thank you. Uh, so
yeah, my name is Will
Blackstock, uh, my own far flung
adventures. We are a, uh, you
know, outdoor guiding company
based in Tallas, New Mexico. Uh,
it's a family business. We have
been in business for
closing in on 50 years here in
uh here in New Mexico, so quite
a, quite a long time, two
generations and all kinds of
different
administrations and even climate
regimes. So, uh, what I was
going to talk about today is
just to kind of continue with
what Karina was, was, uh,
speaking about and uh I want to
thank her for all the uh all the
data points and stuff that that
I'm not going to provide. I
think that was a great overview
and
I want to talk about is more
kind of the ground level of some
of the effects that we felt and
saw working with the outdoor
equity grant money that was
available in 2024. Um, talk
about two different programs
that we're able to do and just
really try to reiterate that I
think it's a.
It's a program that needs to,
you know, not decrease in
funding it needs to probably
grow going forward and uh try to
illustrate why I think that's
the case. Uh, so here's us at
the end of a big community event
that we did. A lot of those kids
in there were part of a program
called the Outdoor Academy,
which was a, uh, you know, grant
funded uh outdoor education
program we put together trying
to kind of funnel kids into the
outdoor industry in my case
specifically.
that would be uh rafting,
working as a river guide, um,
one of the first things we did
that was, you know, cause we're
trying to figure out how to, how
to get these kids together and
get them involved in the
programs and stuff and initially
we were running into some issues
there, um, but, uh, we ended up
teaming up with a, a high school
there in Taos, um, a vocational
high school actually, and uh got
to do a lot of great work with
them. They actually hired
somebody.
To manage their outdoor equity
grant money and really work at
putting together a lot of
programs for the kids. Uh, so
one of the first things we did
is, uh, we did a trip with some
kids to the Lower Gila River in
Arizona. Um, in the springtime,
we go down and kind of set up a
shop in Silver City and do some
business down there on the GA.
Uh, we also go across the state
line and do some stuff there.
What I think was really
interesting about this trip is
that, uh, a lot of these kids
had never left the state of New
Mexico before. So I think for
them.
You know, it was a pretty
special experience. Um, our
intention with this trip was to
give these kids this experience
and really trying to funnel and
uh get them interested in doing
the outdoor academy. Um, so you
can see there, you guys will
have to excuse me for my
somewhat dinky little slide show
here, but I just have some
pretty pictures.
So there's the, the lower hela,
you got a nice band of cliffs
there, some kids taking in the
views. There they are.
relaxing on the raft there.
Um,
Uh, in the middle there is the
woman who is managing the funds
for Vista Grande High School on
her on our left, the left of her
is just another chaperone. Uh,
the young woman there, she was a
senior there, um, got very
excited about it and uh ended up
signing up for the course. Uh,
it was interesting working with
this high school in particular,
you know, there was a lot of
kids from pretty disadvantaged
situations and um some of them
even living in like the group
shelter and stuff going to high
school.
School and they ended up signing
up for the course, which I
thought was uh, you know, that
was, that was a really cool
thing, um.
So several of those kids ended
up signing up for the outdoor
academy. This was a program put
together by friends of Rio
Grande del Norte National
Monument, um, the Tao's fly shop
in real life to other
businesses, they kind of handled
the, uh, a fly fishing portion
of it and we did an intensive 6
day course with um there was
kind of a cohort of kids from
Santa Fe that came up. It was
interesting just to kind of see
the
The excitement, you know, um,
with the families they organize
kind of a whole crazy schedule
where they camped out near our
property on the river and then
parents drove up and left and
came back, you know, and they
really did everything,
everything they could to make it
work for the kids to uh to take
the class. Um, then we had some
kids from Espanola, kids from
Taos, kids from Questa, uh, and
had a very, very successful
course. Um, by the end of it,
you know, a lot of these kids
had never even been on the river
before. They hadn't had
Opportunity. By the end of it,
they were, you know, guiding
their own boats down our little
Class 23 white water section, so
it was really cool to see them
kind of grow into that and and
be comfortable there. Um, one of
the big, uh, the impetus for the
outdoor academy is we were kind
of chatting and some somewhat to
some degree where the idea came
from is just uh post COVID, you
know, we have, I have
personally, and I know many of
the other outfit.
have really struggled, uh,
staffing, you know, we are
advertising our positions
locally and nobody is filling
them, so you know, every winter
and spring, you know, I, I
advertise on a national website
for outdoor jobs and I have
people coming from across the
country to work for us for the
summer and uh it would be a lot
easier if we could get locals
involved and have some more
long-term employees, um.
So that was somewhat where that
came from. So trying to
encourage the youth to get
engaged in this. I think it's
important, you know, with all
the, all the great work that's
being done at the state level to
foster this kind of outdoor
industry and economy. I think we
also need to remember at the
base level that we need to be
creating people to fill those
jobs and that can be in an
outdoor guiding that can be in
the BLM in the Forest Service
and conservation and all of
these things, but I think that
uh kids having the
to have those experiences is
where that desire will come
from. And so that's, you know,
where I think that that
investment will just pay off in
the end. At the end of uh of the
course, working with a couple of
other organizations we did a big
community river float, so
basically it was just a free
rafting trip and lunch there in
Taos. We had 100 people
attend. This was kind of
graduation day for the outdoor
academy, so a lot of the
attendees were family members.
Of of the kids and then we had a
lot of, we had a good group of
folks come up from Santa Fe and
Albuquerque as well. The way we
structured it is we had the
kids, um, kind of lead the whole
thing, you know, they did all
the safety stuff, the paddle
talks, they guided the river
trips, um, took their families
and even some strangers down.
couple of the kids got a little
tip, which they were pretty
excited about.
Um, and then there's some of the
graduates at the end of the, uh,
at the end of the course,
they're all pretty excited and
definitely looking forward to, I
mean, I would, I would hire any
one of those kids when they turn
18. So I'm hoping to hear from
them when they get out of high
school.
Um, like I said, there was a
fishing component as well, um,
they structured theirs a little
bit differently. Uh, they did
about a month and a half of
weekends as opposed to one block
after school got out, uh, they
also had a very successful
course, and I believe the young
man on the right there is
actually working and interning
at one of the fly shops now, so
nice little success story.
Um, our plans for the future,
you know, assuming that we can
uh figure out the funding, you
know, I know on a personal
level, I, I hope to be able to
continue the rafting portion,
you know, and try to figure that
out financially regardless, um,
but if we can continue to get
the kind of funding we got this
year and hopefully more, um,
first off, you know, expanding
into other aspects of the
outdoor guiding industry, uh,
hunting, horseback.
rock climbing come to mind. I
think there's a lot of great
outfitters that we could work
with in the Taos area to make
that kind of stuff possible, um,
additional course dates in the
spring and fall would be
amazing, just more, more reach,
work with more kids, um,
depending on how the funding
works out in the future or
maybe, you know, regardless of
that, uh, might change our
funding structure, you know, how
we like a tiered uh pricing
approach, you know, um.
And scholarships depending on
the the situation of the kid and
the family and stuff, uh, like I
mentioned briefly, we also do
things in the southern part of
New Mexico. I think it would be
awesome to take this program to
try to service the southern
portion of the state, um.
And then one takeaway I had just
from this year as far as like a
learning place for next year is
just to kind of organize our
funneling mechanism coming out
of the academy and going into
internships and employment
opportunities, you know, and try
to like get that organized a
little bit better. Actually just
yesterday, the uh the Tows
County reached out to uh friends
of Rio Grande del Norte, and I
guess they're wanting to
Figure a way out. They have some
some money available to do some
paid internships for kids, uh,
next year, and so we're excited
to figure that out and work that
into our, into our program next
year as well, um.
I think, uh, as far as the
business impact of all this
stuff goes,
what I saw is, um, you know,
having as much money as was
available this year. This was
the first year that I really saw
kind of the trickle down effect
of of the funds, um, across the
outdoor industry, you know,
across all of the, the guiding
companies in the Taos area and
us as well, um, we, as far as
doing trips with like kids and
school groups and stuff like
that, we do.
One, maybe they have funding to
take out one part of a class for
half a day, one time, um, but
the amount of money that was
available this year really
allowed for some more expanded
and recurrent type of
experiences, which I think are
important if the goal is to a
degree to kind of foster a
workforce, you know, um, and it
also created kind of a new
season for us typically we don't
start doing business until
schools close to a certain
extent, um.
This, you know, we brought our
staff on 2 months earlier, you
know, we were at a busier march.
We had a busier April and we had
a busier May uh working with
schools and programs around the
state. Um, so I think the impact
for us, you know, economically
was was important and I think
all the other businesses would
stay stay the same.
Um, so, you know, with such, if
we do see this cut, you know,
uh, next year, which looks like
it's over two-thirds, you know,
I'll be curious to see what what
next spring looks like, um, as a
result, um, you know, the, uh,
in the last few years, we've
seen a lot of increases in our
cost of doing business, uh,
equipment costs for us are up 10
to 15%, um, cost of living is
up, so wages are up, um, you
know.
Even just like buying a van is
up like 500%, you know what I
mean? So, um, we have had to
raise our prices. Uh, we like a
volume-based business, so you
know, on each ticket, you know,
that's not a tremendous amount,
but we are also up 20%, um, I
haven't seen that that that that
has affected our ability to sell
our trips, we still, you know,
are taking whatever 8 or 10,000
people down the river and um but
I can't say we're able to.
Sell it, people can't afford it,
but it's less common for those
people to be New Mexico
families. And so that's where I
feel like this funding and this
kind of thing is so important,
especially if we are trying to
foster people to kind of step up
and step into these roles and
take over these jobs.
Thank you, William. I appreciate
that. Thank you. Carrie, you
ready to go? I'm ready. All
right. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair, Madam Vice Chair
and committee members, I
appreciate the opportunity to
speak to you all today. My
name's Carrie Cox Romero. I'm
the executive director of the
New Mexico Council of Outfitters
and Guides. We are a 501C6
nonprofit trade association, we
advocate the interests of New
Mexico's hunting and fishing
outfitters and guides.
So today I'm going to be
speaking with you all about the
importance of hunting and
fishing to New Mexico's economy?
I want to specifically focus on
the importance of hunters and
anglers as well as outfitters
and guides to the economy of San
Juan County as well.
I don't have a formal
presentation, but I do have a
white paper that you all have
received up on the screen and
just outlining some of the more
important aspects of what I'll
be presenting to you today. I
also wanted to mention that I, I
don't have any outfit or
business owners in the audience,
and there's two reasons for
that. One is because August is
the height of the fishing
season, and the San Juan is just
crazy right now with Outfitters
every summer day is a great day
to fish, so
They are all out on the water
and 2, because antelope season
actually starts on Saturday. So
pretty much every hunting
outfitter is already in the
backcountry. This time of year
is crazy for our industry and
extremely busy for everyone who
earns a livelihood as an
outfitter or guide. But I did
want to give a quick shout out
to Soaring Eagle Lodge, uh, Fish
Heads of the San Juan,
Wilderness Outfitter Productions
in La Platte Lodge. Those are
all outfitter operations in San
Juan County, and they helped me
put together the information for
The local portion of the
presentation.
I should also mention just for
information's sake that the term
outfitter, uh, applies to the
business owner of the company
that is providing the hunting
and or fishing trip and the term
guide repla uh refers to an
employee of the Outfitter. So in
New Mexico, an outfitter can be
a guide, but a guide cannot be
an outfitter. Uh, also, hunting
and fishing revenue, whether
it's generated by a resident
hunter or angler or a
non-resident.
Hunter Angler is all tourism
dollars.
Um, I'm not gonna be giving many
hard numbers today because the
Council of Outfitters and Guides
is actually in the middle of a
comprehensive economic impact
study um that we're conducting
on both the hunting and the
fishing guided segments of um
that we're conducting on both
the hunting and the fishing
guided segments of the industry
and that study is being
conducted by a research firm
called Southwick Associates.
They're out of Florida and they
specialize in uh wildlife
research. They've done studies.
For Department of Natural
Resources all across the country
including the New Mexico
Department of Game of Fish.
They've also studied outfitting
industries in both Canada and
the US. So I don't want to say
any numbers that are going to
conflict with what, what comes
out of that study. That study
will be completed by January
2025, and each of you will
receive a copy of the final
report. The study is just a
follow up to these internal
study that we did back in 2014.
Some of you guys might remember
receiving that and uh of the
guided hunting industry, but
it's actually
The first ever study of the
guided fishing industry in New
Mexico so we're super excited
for those numbers. I think
they're gonna come out really,
really high. Super excited for
you guys to, to see the results
of that study.
But if you're not a sportsman or
sportswoman, you might be
surprised to learn that hunting
and fishing is the highest
grossing segment of the outdoor
recreation industry in our
state. So yes, skiing brings in
a lot of revenue and they get a
lot of recognition, but it's
actually hunting and fishing
that sustains New Mexico's
outdoor recreation tourism
economy, and hunting is
basically essential to all of
New Mexico's rural economies.
Fishing is also important, but
due to our state's lack of
water,
It kind of limits the reach of
that industry. Hunting, on the
other hand, takes place in
basically every remote location.
In the state and there is some
form of hunting opportunity
offered basically at all times
of the year, so you don't have
to wait until fall to experience
hunting in New Mexico. New
Mexico offers spring, winter,
and then there are some summer
hunting opportunities. And the
money generated by hunters
supports all of New Mexico's
rural communities. Additionally,
hunting outfitters provide
employment in rural areas, and
they generate direct and
indirect business revenue in
some of the
Poorest communities in our
state. And they pay New Mexico
grocer seats taxes, which I
actually didn't add that to the
white paper, but I should have
because New Mexico gross
receipts taxes are just like
vital to New Mexico's rural
counties, uh, and the outfitting
industry provides over 6 million
in GRT statewide annually.
Also hunting is by far the
highest earning individual
outdoor recreation activity in
New Mexico. So for example, the
typical outfitted New Mexico elk
hunt costs an average of $10,000
per person. So that just blows
skiing completely out of the
water.
From a statewide perspective,
there's hunting opportunities in
every corner and in every tiny
rural community across New
Mexico. We may not have the
wildlife population densities
that some other states have, but
we have more diversity of
Hannibal big game populations
than any other US state other
than Alaska.
So, in fact, New Mexico elk
hunting is like top 3 in the
world.
New Mexico has honnibal
populations of elk, of course.
We also have mule deer at
pronghorn antelope, another
claim to fame is that we have
the highest elevation, pronghorn
antelope herd in the world. So
there's a herd of antelope that
are over there kind of by ratone
and Bermeyhoe Park Ranch that
live above 10,000 ft.
Um, we also have two species of
bighorn sheep. We have black
bear, cougar, javelina, and we
also have 3 species of honnibal,
exotic, big game, and they're
all free ranging, so they were
introduced to our state in the
1960s, and they are all now free
ranging and their populations
have grown to the point where
they are honniable and free
ranging basically means they're
not behind any high fence or
anything. So we have, uh,
African or hunting kind of down
by the white sands.
Area and we have Persian ibex
hunting on the Florida
mountains, which is kind of near
Demming and that, that economy
is just vital to the community
of Deming.
And then we have a large
population of African adad,
which you might have heard more
commonly referred to as barbary
sheep, and they are located all
across the southern portion of
the state, and as far north as
Corona. Uh, we also have
multiple types of small game
hunting opportunities. We have
Upland bird game hunting
opportunities and also
waterfowl, so ducks and geese,
um, so lots and lots of hunting
opportunities. Fishing is, of
course, also very important in
the areas where there is
sufficient water. So
And Fishing outfitters too, they
bring, they uh provide
employment, they generate
community revenue and they also
pay New Mexico grocery receipts
taxes.
But New Mexico's fishing
industry is smaller when you
compare it to other states, and
that's just simply due to the
fact that that we don't have as
much water as most other states
other than Arizona, of course.
But despite our lack of water,
New Mexico has many fishing
opportunities for anglers of all
different types. We have several
large lakes, including Navajo
Lake, where anglers can catch,
uh, you know, bass, catfish, we
have northern pike near Eaglet
in Eagle Eagle Nest Lake, and
then we have tiger muskie and
Bluewater, uh, kind of by
grants. Um, New Mexico's rivers
offer catch and release
opportunities for New Mexico's
two native trout species, that's
the Rio Grande cutthroat trout.
And also the Gla cutthroat trout
and then also the Department of
Game and Fish stocks all of the
rivers in New Mexico with
rainbow trout, so that uh people
can catch and keep fish and feed
it to their families. So New
Mexico has great trout fishing
in all of our cold water rivers
across the state, but we're best
known for the 17 miles of river
that's located just right here
below Navajo Dam, and uh that
stretch of the San Juan is, is,
it's seriously famous. So people
come from all over the world to
The tail waters of the San Juan.
The fishing is just that good.
And it supports a massive guided
fishing industry. That's
essential to all of New Mexico
tourism, our state's economy,
and especially the local
economies around this particular
area.
San Juan County is actually the
only county in New Mexico where
guided fishing, where the guided
fishing industry is actually as
large or possibly larger than
the guided hunting industry. The
San Juan Rivers guided fishing
industry, which it technically
is 17 miles in length. It
generates the bulk of the
revenue along the 3.25 miles of
quality waters located within
the state park.
These waters in the state park
are catch and release, and they
serve the vast majority of the
guided clientele, so roughly 70%
of the anglers who come to the
San Juan are guided and 90% of
the guided clientele are
non-resident. So these are all
outside dollars coming into the
county from all parts of the
world.
Fishing on the San Juan can take
place year round, but the
majority of the guided fishing
happens between the months of
February and the end of November
in the height of the fishing
season, so basically right now
along that 3.25 mile stretch.
The San Juan can see up to 30
boats per day. That's 2 anglers
and 1 guide per boat, per boat,
so it gets very crowded.
In addition to guiding anglers,
many outfitters also um provide
lodging. They, some of them have
restaurants and they provide fly
shops, so a community resource
where people can come by fishing
gear, um, in the local community
of Navajo Dam.
Um.
The average outfitting operation
on the San Juan hires between 99
and 11 guides per season, and
currently guided fishing,
whether on the lake or on the
river, is the bulk of all
business taking place within the
community of Navajo Down.
Uh, there used to be a
convenience store and a gas
station in Navajo Dam, but those
businesses, they went out of
business during COVID. And
that's because during COVID the
state parks were closed to
non-residents and because
there's such a high dependency
on non-resident clientele in
this area. This area really,
really struggled, but
fortunately, it's coming back
and we're almost to the point
where we were pre-COVID levels.
San Juan County also has a well
established hunting economy and
in fact San Juan County is a
little unique in that it
actually has two hunting
economies. So there's the
economy that's generated by the
hunting opportunity provided by
the Department of Game and Fish.
But there's also the hunting
economy that's generated, um, by
the Hickoryia Apache
reservation. So the tribe has a
hunting program that's separate
of all of the Department of Game
and Fish programs and actually
all
Tribes in New Mexico have the
ability to manage the wildlife
on their reservation, the way
they see fit to best, um,
support their people and the
hickoryia chooses to sell their
hunting opportunities to
tourists from outside of New
Mexico. These hunts bring in a
significant amount of revenue to
the tribe, but they also support
the local communities in San
Juan County. So for example,
many of the hickora hunting
clientele, they also book
fishing trips with outfitters
along the San Juan River.
Additionally, the hunting
program on the hickory also
supports the Department of Game
and Fishes hunting program by
providing wildlife. The
hickoryia have a very aggressive
predator management strategy and
that results in very robust
populations of deer and elk on
the hickoria, and so as the
hickoro wildlife populations
grow, they spill off into the
private land and the Forest
Service land and the Bureau of
Land Management land around this
area, and that helps to support
the other.
Deer and elk populations in this
area, and this dynamic is
particularly important because
in this area a lot of the deer
and elk populations are
migratory, so they live in
Colorado for the majority of the
of the year and then they moved
down into New Mexico during the
winter months, but the hickorya
population is more resident, so
it's, it's not as migratory, so
it stays here year round and it
provides hunting opportunities
on the Forest Service and BLM
lands much earlier in the fall
while the migratory herds are
still in Colorad.
Oh.
You also see this dynamic in the
southern portion of the state,
where the wildlife on the
Mescalero Apache reservation
augments the wildlife population
in the Lincoln National Forest.
Uh, San Juan County is also
unique in that there is a large
percentage of outfitted
clientele that are residents of
the state of New Mexico in every
other county, 95% of a hunter
and a hunting outfitter's
clientele is going to be
non-resident. However, in this
corner of the state there is a
substantial amount of resident
hunter opportunity and there's
more limited amounts of
non-resident hunter opportunity.
Um, all of the deer hunting
opportunities on non-tribal
lands in this area.
Go through the New Mexico big
game draw and that includes the
private land deer tags. So this
is a deviation from how it works
in the majority of the state and
so it creates some confusion. It
prevents nonresidents from
applying for hunts in this area.
This corner of the state also
has 3 wildlife management areas,
the Humphreys, the Riochama, and
the sergeants, and by statute,
all wildlife management area
hunting opportunity is resident
only.
So, hunting outfitters in this
area depend on resident hunting
clientele, which does reduce the
overall economic impact and
that's just simply because the
resident money does not multiply
at the same rate that
non-resident money does within a
community. But resident $100 are
still considered tourism and the
demographic is extremely
important to the hunting economy
in this corner of the state.
All hunting outfitters and also
all fishing outfitters,
statewide, also, um, you know,
they contribute to the the local
economy, so they help support
businesses indirectly by
providing meat for meat
processors, um, taxidermists
are, of course, dependent on the
industry, as well as just gas
stations and grocery stores, um,
so I know, I know we're kind of
running short on time, so I kind
of want to wrap it up.
could probably go on and on
forever about the, the benefits
of hunting and fishing
outfitters and guides to New
Mexico's economy, but, um, at
the bottom of the page, you'll,
the white paper, you'll kind of
see we've I've listed some local
industry concerns. We're not
proposing any legislation or
policy changes at this time.
These are just kind of some long
term things to think about. I'm
happy to go into any of that
further if you guys desire.
Other than that, kind of uh
concludes my presentation and
I'm happy to answer any
questions. Thank you very much.
Thank you so much, Carrie
Committee, the chair is, is, uh,
offered to let me go ahead and
kind of coordinate this panel
since this is something that I
get the wonderful honor of being
able to do in my job. So, uh,
very excited about that. Um, I
do have representative Ortez,
uh, wanting to ask questions.
Are there other folks that I can
put on the list? Representative
Brego.
OK. And then I'll finish off. So
representative Ortiz, thank you,
Madam Vice Chair. Madam Chair,
thanks so much for your
presentation, super helpful I
think for us to contextualize
like how our state funds can
work,
um, so effectively in community.
I,
I've been working on outdoor
equity, outdoor recreation for a
long time now, I think probably
decades, so I've seen the
transformation and how
When state funding gets
introduced and what the
difference it can make in terms
of being able to hire staff and
present programs for young
people so that we can basically
create the next generation of of
stewards, right? You can't
really protect a place until
you've seen it and further, I
mean, I, as I'm reminded every
day by my children like fun, um,
teaches, well, fun is just fun
and it makes um a lasting
impression, right? It really
kind of rewire
and changes your brain. So if
you can have fun outdoors and
some of my committee members
really know what that means.
Um, I'm looking at crash over
there, um, more, more on that
later. Um
anyway, uh, I'm just, I'm really
impressed by the program that
you've really um brought to
life, Karina, and as you know,
a, I don't know if you still
live in Taos, but you know, as a
longtime Tania, you know, I, I
think you, you have brought that
passion and um real focus to
this program. So I, I
I want to let the committee know
that when I was an executive
director of the TAS Land Trust,
which was up until April, so I'm
having some growing pains around
that. Um, we were able to really
take advantage of the state
programs, um, both with the
Youth Conservation Corps and the
outdoor equity fund, getting
kids outdoors, um, giving them
jobs through ICC, but also
giving them the the ability to
have that experience outdoors so
that they can see themselves in
places um that are
You know, I think have been
typically very Anglo, right, so
it's really important for um all
of our, all of our children in
New Mexico to have that
experience and to really
identify with this sort of
burgeoning economies. Um, I, I
also sort of want to remind the
staff how important it is that,
you know, we all know how
important partnerships are,
right? Um, and, you know, Will,
you're talking about Vista
Grande High School, um, that is,
I think, a sort of emblematic of
a high school.
That has been able to work with
all kinds of different
organizations and programs not
only at the Taos Land Trust,
but, you know, with the state,
with you guys, um, it's an
alternative high school, um, you
know, for a long time, a lot of
those kids did not go to
college. I think that it just
really, really shifted because
of the investment that the state
has made in these kinds of
programs. So I'm just like, now
I'm rambling, but I just like
I'm so thrilled by, you know,
our ability, the state's
ability.
To get funding into community,
um, for fun, but also for, you
know, to, to build up this next
generation of stewards, so
thanks.
Really, really appreciate your
work and I think that the Madam
vice chair would love to go on
another rafting trip, so if you
can make that happen,
really, really soon because you
can't protect something until
you've seen it and until you've
had some some fun with it. So
thanks. Thank you. I've got
Representative Brego, uh,
representative Gallegos,
representative Duncan, and then
myself, so, uh, representative
Brego.
Thank you, Madam Vice Chair and
chair.
Um, thank you for your
presentation. I especially like
the piece about working with the
schools and, you know, I, when I
was city councilor, that was
really important to me, um, and
I will tell you that, um, I
don't know if you guys know Dave
Simon, but if you don't, I would
really like for you to know him.
He is the um the director of
Parks and Rec for the city of
Albuquerque, and I worked really
closely with Dave.
I hope that I can develop that
relationship with all of you. I,
I grew up in New Mexico, so I
grew up hiking and camping and,
you know, doing all the fun
things and I think about kids
that don't have the opportunity
to do these things, so it's,
it's a, it's really deeply
important for me to see that you
guys are reaching out, um, and
offering those opportunities um
to our kids, um, and for someone
who has and.
has a, uh, uh, is a neighbor to
my representative to my left,
um, Charlotte Little, we have
the petroglyphs in our in our
districts and, um, you know,
when I was counselor, I found
that 27,000 people visit that um
monument on a yearly basis, and
that was like for almost 4 years
ago, um, so Madam Chair and
Madam Vice Chair,
Um,
I, one of the things that I did
and I, and, and, you know,
Representative Ortez mentioned
that.
You know, groups working
together, um, I would really
love for you guys to reach out
to Dave Simon because one of the
last things that I did as city
councilor is I created the West
Side Trails plan and, you know,
I left right after that, I mean,
I literally did that in a
December and that's when my term
ended, and so, you know, it
would be great to to to see
where that's gone to see how the
state could coordinate with the
city to ensure that those
connections and those networks
are built on the west side
because the west side is still
developing. Um, it's one of the
areas in Albuquerque, Madam
Chair, and and Madam Vice Chair
that were still, you know, but
there's a lot of really
Culturally significant trails,
um, and sites that we were
trying to connect, so I
mentioned that only because I
would really love for you guys
to reach out to Dave and see if
if maybe the state could be
involved in the development of
that plan and uh thank you guys
for your presentation. Thank
you, Madam Chair, and Madam Vice
Chair. Thank you, Representative
Brego chair Gallego.
Thank you, Vice Chair and thank
you for the presentations today.
I am, you know, growing up, uh,
we, we would go camping. That
was our, our vacation every year
and so, um, just to see how
things have progressed through
the years and just the different
activities, even going to Navajo
Lake last night was just such an
eye-opening experience of how
beautiful the lake is, just the
different activities, um, how
you could do recreational sports
there. Um, I think that that's
really been, um, highlighted.
In the state of New Mexico, and
I'm really glad to see that, um,
I guess I was, I was concerned
when I when I heard you talk
about some of the struggles as a
business that you were
struggling with and um, if maybe
you could talk a little bit
about that and how maybe the
state could help with that. Um,
I, I see that you know, that
you've partnered with at least
one of the the high schools.
Um, but it seems to me like
there would be such a a
statewide interest in that and
maybe tapping into that a little
bit and, and why is it hard for
you to to hire?
Um, so I'm gonna, I'm gonna let
that go, but um if you could
start talking about some of that
and then I've got some more
questions.
Um,
you know, I
I don't know what all the
reasons are. I just know they're
not taking the jobs, um, so
trying to address that by kind
of engaging the community and
trying to get people, I think
for me personally, like in my
industry, I think that there's
some education and maybe some
cultural, cultural things around
rafting as like an adventure
sport and being kind of
perceived as aggressive and
dangerous, they could be uh.
That could be something that we
work on as far as getting
families to go like, oh, our
kids should go be rafters or
something, um.
I think that, uh, at least in
Taos, you know, one thing that
we, and this is, you know,
across probably all industries,
especially seasonal ones, you
know, housing is a big deal,
obviously, um, and that's a
whole other thing we don't have
to get into that, but, you know,
so that's another thing we're
having to address. I mean, we
have to because also we're
hiring more of like a transient
workforce, we have had to invest
in housing. I mean, we, we
basically, we have an RV park
we've had to invest in like
small.
One room apartments and stuff
like that, just trying to like
give people a place to live so
that we can, um.
You know, have, have employees,
um, and then typically, you
know, that kind of person is not
necessarily a long term
employee, you know, if we get 2
years out of them or something
like that, then that's, that's
pretty good, honestly, um, it,
you know, there was a shift the
kind of the disruption in COVID
we definitely see prior to that,
I would say 5 to 3/4 of our
employees lived in Taos, had
lived in Taos. They had homes in
Taos or their family had.
Holmes and Taos and stuff like
that and uh after that, um, I
mean, I was trying to think
about this before coming up here
and I think aside from myself.
I think
I don't know, we have like
there's like one native New
Mexican that works for us and
some other people that are
local, the Taoists that have
lived there for a while, but as
far as people from the Taos
community, I mean, it's, it's
almost nonexistent. So that's
where, you know, trying to
foster this.
This desire to get out there and
do it, you know, even maybe not
even as a long term job but just
has something to do when you're
young, when you're in college,
maybe in your twenties or
something like that, um, is
where I'm, I'm hopeful that a
program like the Outdoor Academy
or any of the other things that
are going on will just give
these kids the experience to
love it and become guides and
work in in our industry or like
I said, move into all the other
sectors that that involve
working in, you know, in
Outdoor industry.
So I had actually identified
housing as probably blue being
one of the barriers, um, you
know, back, back in my day, um,
you know, we'd have where we
would talk about, you know, you
know, we want to be a, you know,
between.
Probably high school and college
and you know, probably between
18 and 23, maybe 24, um.
Having ski instructors, then you
know, rafters, I mean, it just
seems like there would be kind
of at that that age and it seems
like we're not capturing them
there. Yeah, definitely. I mean,
and people are going elsewhere,
you know, or we'll have somebody
that comes in and they go, I
love it here, I want to stay. I
can't afford to live here.
You know, or like, you know, you
sleep in a tent for so long and
then they're like, I really want
to live in a house, you know,
like
that's what I get I get for sure
OK for a little bit, but that's
not my long term plan.
I guess I don't know if
apartment living or kind of what
we're moving towards and trying
to address and stuff like that
because it just seems, you know,
unless there is a pretty quick
turnaround, you know, I, I don't
know, uh.
We're probably looking at
continuing to have to provide a
significant amount of housing uh
to our employees.
Um, so one of the other things
that I wanted to ask and I, I, I
think, um, you know, every time
my dad's a big hunter and he
always is talking about it's
hard to get a hunting license.
Can we talk about that a little
bit and how that, how they're
issued out to New Mexicans
versus people from out of state.
Sure, yeah, it's a long, long
conversation. So I will try to
uh condense it.
I think part of the problem
between the resident and the no
non-resident, um, I guess you
call it a divide is perception.
It's perceived to the resident
hunter that the the opportunity
is all going to the outer
staters. That's not.
Really what's happening. Really,
it's that there's a very, very
high demand for hunting permits.
Across the board.
Non-residents and then also
within the residence. So it
makes it seem like there's very
little opportunity. And so then
people just kind of want someone
to blame, and it's easy to blame
the non-resident, but really in
New Mexico, all of the public
land, opportunity for hunting is
um predominantly resident. So we
do have a quota.
Which 84% of the total tags go
to resident hunters. There's a
10% outfitter pool, which can be
resident or non-resident, and
there are some residents that
apply in the outfitter pool. And
then there's a 6% uh
non-resident do it-yourself. But
there's also two statutes that
are resident only, and that's
all of the public land cow elk
tags, and all of the hunting
opportunity on wildlife
management area tags. So when
you
You are looking on a total tag
basis on the public land side.
It's 90% resident already. Um.
And you don't ever want to cut
out the non-resident. I mean,
they're vitally important. All
of those license dollars are
going to the Department of Game
and Fish non-residents pay
anywhere between twice as much
to 20 times as much for a
license than a resident hunter
does. So really, the
non-resident is keeping resident
licenses low, so just that 10%
of opportunity to the
non-resident keeps resident
licenses low and um affords the
ability for people to hunt
resident New Mexicans to hunt
that.
That wouldn't otherwise get that
opportunity because that the
prices would be too high.
Then in the private land
segment, those tags, so in New
Mexico, um, our land makeup is
roughly 50/50 when it comes to
public land versus private land.
So there's an enormous amount of
huntable populations of wildlife
on private land. The Department
of Game and Fish would allocate
those tags on the private land
regardless of whether they did
it through a draw or some other
process. The way that they do it
in New Mexico and have for like
40 years is to allocate the
permits.
To the landowners directly. And
then the landowners can do what
basically what they want with
those permits. They can use it
themselves for um sustenance for
their family and, and there are
a lot of New Mexican landowners
that do that. They can donate it
to a to a charitable cause, or
they can sell that tag in order
to recoup costs associated with
dealing with wildlife on their
private property. Those tags can
be sold to anyone. It doesn't
matter if it's a resident or a
nonresident, it's a.
Capital market. So they
basically go.
To the highest buyer. And so
because they're going to the
highest buyer.
A large portion of them do end
up going to nonresidents because
you're, you're competing with
the money from all from
everywhere. So just, you know,
Kind of based on supply and
demand, they're going to
non-residents primarily because
that's where the bulk of the
money is. There, that's not to
say that New Mexico residents
don't have money because there
are New Mexico residents that do
have money and there are New
Mexico residents that buy
landowner tags every year, but
The bulk of the landowner tax,
especially.
For elk go to non-residents, and
that is kind of what creates, I
think, a perception issue, but
really the issue is so much more
complicated, as you can tell.
We can probably talk for days
conversations about that in
committee during the session, so
you know. Well, I did.
Thanks. I did take notes on the
percentages so I could give that
information to him. Uh, one of
the things he's also asked me to
run a bill a couple of times is
for um uh retirees, uh, our
senior cynics, I think is what
he keeps calling it uh to be
able to get a either a a
discounted rate or just to be
able to get pulled, but um I
have not followed up on any of
that, but just to let you know
that he is, he is out there
lobbying to try to get that done
as well.
So, um, no, I think that's all
I've got. Thank you. And, and
Madam Chair, that doesn't
necessarily have to go through
legislation. You could
potentially do something like
that and rule.
Very good. I'll let him, I'll,
well, maybe I won't tell him,
but thank you.
Uh, Representative Duncan, thank
you, Madam Meister. I'm a big
outdoor fan, um, last year I
drew out for um.
Apex.
During the session
Yeah.
Um, this year, after 6 years, I
do elk and deer.
And then I promptly got on my
mountain bike and wrecked and
recovering from a broken
clavicle, punctured lungs, 6
ribs broke by my spine. So, um,
I'm donating that tag to
hopefully to my nephew.
Anything that we can do to allow
as rep uh Ortez said, anything
we can do to allow our kids to
experience the outdoors is a
wonderful thing. Uh, we went
camping a lot. I didn't know if
that was because my family was
poor or or what, and I didn't
care.
As a boy
You put me in a body of water or
in the mountains and I'm
completely happy. So whatever we
can do to um.
You know, send our kids to the
mountains, send them to the
lakes, whatever we can do, we
need to do that. Uh, it, it, uh,
not only does it provide great
memories, but, uh, in some cases
it provides great careers as
well, be it with the state or
private sector or anywhere else,
so I applied you and and uh if I
don't have to wait 6 more years
for another tag, I would really
appreciate it. I'm gonna work on
a bill with uh her chair. Madam
Chair, thank you.
Thank you if I could just
quickly interject too.
Representative Duncan, I did, I
probably should have included
that in the presentation. I
didn't think about it at the
time, but there are youth
hunting opportunities in every
single hunt code. So the way
that tags are allocated is
through hunt code. There's
literally hundreds of hunk codes
uh in the state of New Mexico
for all different species, and
there there is at least one and
usually multiple youth
opportunities in every single
hunt code and then we we
additionally, the Council of
Outfitters and Guides, every
year we donate a
a guided cow elk hunt to the
Department of Game and Fish for
their hunter education program.
So, um, if a hunter education,
uh, child gets 100%, then they
get put into a drawing for that
guided elk hunt, and so we do
that every year. Thank you.
Thank you so much. Are there any
other questions before I, I
finish off with my list of
questions? OK, um, you know,
thank you all for that. And, and
I get really excited when I saw
this, even though Karina, you
and I've been emailing because
of a project I'm working on, um,
you know, I think there's some
incredible opportunities that we
have in this state and I think,
you know, we've got these
established organizations and
groups that are already doing
some amazing work. Um, you know,
what I, what I find when we're
talking about outdoor
recreation.
And William, especially since
what you were talking about
something that I flagged was an
outdoor academy. Um, and I was
inspired, uh, when, when you had
mentioned that because we have
something that Dunana Community
College, um, the industrial
training academy that is really
designed by Union Pacific to
help cultivate workers to
address the needs that Union
Pacific has. And I'm wondering,
If there's something like that
that we can do that would be a
statewide program that would um
be really kind of cultivating
and nurturing future outfitters,
future raft guides, future
mountain bike guides. Um, if
that is something that we can
work on a car I see you smiling,
so I'm wondering.
Um, yes, thank you for that
question, Madam Vice Chair. Um,
I'm really excited about the
outdoor academy. It was
something that I actually was
happy to hear that you invited
somebody to talk about it, um,
because when I recognize some of
the projects that um outdoor
equity fund is funding, um, that
kind of check off all of the,
you know, all of the things that
we're talking about getting kids
outside, um, and, uh, investing
in the future workforce and um
things like that. Outdoor
Academy really, um,
Comes to the top, um, as well as
there are several other ones.
And so I had this vision this
vision of outdoor equity fund
2.0 where we recognize those
ones that we can duplicate or
expand or see them across the
state, um, and just trying to
figure out which ones are, are
those and how, how can we go and
expand throughout the state.
Yeah, I would, I would love to
be able to help work on that
because I think of many, many
years ago when I was younger, if
there was an outdoor academy
that taught me how to be a
rafting guide, my path would
have been completely
different. I've used far flung
and Big band. I've used in the
Taoist box. We went down the
Riochama, love your company and
I always, always gone to you
first, uh, in that, and your
guides, um, are by far some of
the best I've ever experienced
didn't really, really love those
guys. Um, and so, you know, I
think that's something getting
to kind of think about and if we
can work on that because not
only is it an opportunity, and I
look at it as a way of really
addressing the needs and Carrie,
if you see this as well.
is addressing the needs of
creating economic opportunities
for our residents, because
something that is really
heartbreaking, especially in
communities of color is their
children having to leave because
there are no jobs for them here.
And that is heartbreaking
because that's part of our
cultural fabric as a state. And
so, um, but you know, there,
there are, there has to be
exposure to some of these areas
because as Representative Ortez
said that it's mainly an Anglo
thing and that's why the outdoor
equity fund is so important, uh,
to be.
Able to address those, um,
inequities in terms of
communities of color and
experiences of the outdoors,
although those communities have
been experiencing the outdoors
so much longer, um, and we've
made it into a, uh, an affluent
um uh endeavor rather than
something that is just something
available for everybody. And so.
Um, uh, however you manifest
that in terms of an outdoor
academy, if there is something
that we can do, because that's
also just it's economic
development. And um what we can
do is bring in businesses that
are doing that like far flung,
we've got, you know, Southwest
Expeditions down south. We've
got these different agencies
that are already doing that work
that could be part of that
training program. And it also
could be an opportunity to
recruit new employees,
especially when it's a seasonal
thing like rafting.
Because if they're not rafting,
they're probably a ski guide.
You know, and then so they're
moving around and that's that's
a, um, you know, something
that's very common with, with
guides like that. So, um, I
would I would love to if, if you
figure that out, if it's
something that we can work on
together, I would love to be
able to help with that. Um, and,
and really try and see if we can
find funding or something that
we can, we can do if, if they
requires statute, um, on that,
um, and with that, um, you know,
with the courses that you want
to do down in southern New
Mexico, um, you know, just offer
up, uh, as, as a, you know, the
representative and I, um, I get
to do it more in my job. She's
more looking out for the kids,
um, and I'm looking out for, for
businesses, but if there are
ways that we can, we can
collaborate and I can connect
you with people who are doing
that work, um, because I do
think that that's something that
would benefit. I mean, we've got
the Rio Grande, but it's you
know only a certain period of
time when the water gets
released and it's not really
rapids, it's just more floating.
Um, and so that would certainly
I'd love to be able to do that.
Carrie, a question I have for
you. I'm wondering, are there
challenges for like housing and
accommodations in the rural
communities for outfitters or do
they bring their own tents and
set that up, or do you find that
there are things in communities
where they could.
Benefit from if there were
lodging, um, available, and that
might be something to include
Karina's department is how we
can help foster those areas that
have these deficiencies that
would really help.
Outdoor recreation and
outfitting really thrive.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
yeah, so, you know, honestly,
the hunting industry is a little
bit different than some of the
other outdoor rec industries,
the hunting industry does not
seem to struggle as much with
employment and um and I I'm
actually really excited for you
all to read the results of the
economic impact study because we
did two community studies within
that, um.
Larger study and one was in
reserve, New Mexico, and then
one was in Chama. And so we just
completed those actually last
week and I tagged along and man,
I learned so much and they're
actually there are a lot of
native New Mexicans that are
hired as hunting guides. They
know the area, they know the
wildlife, they've been there,
you know, a lot of them,
they're, they're operating on
their their generational lands
basically that that their
families have had for
generations.
So, um, from an employment stand
standpoint, we don't struggle
near as much as some of the
other outdoor.
Businesses do. From a housing
standpoint,
Outfitters typically provide
housing for guides. And so
guides are still uh seasonal
work, even though a lot of
guides usually can float like
throughout the year, not float,
but you know, they can float
their businesses financially
throughout the year, a lot of
hunting guides have day jobs,
you know, where they work
somewhere else. Um, so, so the
outfitter provides housing,
which a lot of times is a tent
camp in the middle of the
wilderness, you know, for.
However many, you know, for
basically September through
December. So they, they are
providing those, there, there's
also there's all kinds of
different business models, but
there's also outfitters like in
Reserve, for example, there's an
outfitter who owns the little
local lodging place.
And so then they have uh
infrastructure for their guides,
but then they also provide for
their clientele. The one problem
that I think we, we really face
as an industry is actually
access to fuel. So like reserve,
there are 2 gas stations in
reserve, and one gas station is
owned by a woman who's getting
older and wants to retire. So
she's shutting that business
down and there's no one to buy
that business. So that business
is just going to go away and the
Other gas station and reserve
cannot serve hunting season. You
know, hunting season, there's a,
it brings in a ton of people to
the reserve community. Hunting
sustains reserve, but the gas
station can only get fuel twice
a week, and it has to have, you
know, 10 number of gallons in
order to be able to serve the
individuals who are coming
through reserve that time and,
and it's, you know, it's 50
miles to the nearest gas station
from reserve. So it's really
the, the
I would say like indirect
infrastructure that is a
challenge for the hunting
industry right now. Well I
appreciate that because I was
thinking like Karina, when you
and I first started talking was
there's the, there was a bike
race in Cuba.
And not a lot of infrastructure
to handle the amount of people
that would be there. And like,
are there areas that we can
identify in the state? We've
got, you know, I mean, our basic
hubs where those resources are
that are that are needed for the
overall success of a of a trip
or an event are already in
place, but then we have these
smaller communities that may not
have that. And I'm wondering if
that is something that is viable
that we look at. So for example,
if somebody wants.
To buy this fueling this gas
station, um, specifically for
that, you know, for that reason,
are there incentives or
something that we can provide or
that we can help support. I, I,
and I'm just kind of like
brainstorming, but I, I'm, I'm
leaving it up to you to like,
let's figure out how we can do
that because then that's also
supporting the industry, but
it's also giving somebody an
opportunity to start their own
business or run their own
business, um, and how can we
help them thrive?
And so I just wanted to kind of
plant that seed with you and
like let let's kind of figure
that out because there are these
smaller communities when we're
still continuing to talk about
outdoor recreation that can
really benefit, but they just
don't have the infrastructure to
handle it.
And so, you know, how can, how
can we do that, um, and then I
guess lastly, um, you know,
Karina, we, we, I mean, just the
different programs that you've
got and the partnerships that,
you know, you're creating, um,
you know, what are some other
things that we can do to help
get that.
To where it's, it's thriving and
representative Lundstrom talked
about that is like you've been
able to frame that and
demonstrate the value of that.
How can we continue moving that
forward, um, in areas that may
not be getting the attention
just yet, but they deserve that
attention.
Um,
Madam Vice Chairman, Madam
Chair, thank you. Um.
I would go back to the
challenges that we listed,
really, um, staffing is the, is
the biggest thing. We have an
amazing, very small staff that
does so much. Um, so I, I can't
say enough about them, but as we
continue to get really excited
about new programming, I have to
remind myself that uh wait,
um until you can get that more
staffing,
so that is an issue. Yeah,
so they can be uh can be really
effective and efficient and
we're doing, um, growing
sustainably, we have great ideas
and of course we have people who
are always giving us great
ideas, um, but, um, but the, the
staffing is, is just the num the
number one, you know, even the
rural areas for trails plus
right now, um, our outdoor rec
planners spending a whole week
there just speaking to all those
people to to make sure that they
know that we're here. It took us
a minute to look at the map and
say, OK, we got some work to do
in these places, but there's
still
All the work that we're already
doing as well.
Well, in terms of staff, um,
you're welcome for getting
Michelle Simon.
Uh, you took her from our area
down south, um, but I'm really
glad and I'm happy for her
because it's a perfect fit for
for her as well, know her as a
friend. and I'm wondering maybe
it's, it's the idea of like
expanding and like having reps
in four corners of the state,
you know, and, and figuring out,
but I, I, you know, as that
continues to evolve, and I
understand about capacity is
just like kind of keep that in
mind because there are, there
are different things that we can
bring to the table as a
legislature that would help.
Be able to encourage more
growth, more outdoor recreation.
We know that it is a
multi-billion dollar industry
throughout the country. We and
I, I didn't look up the numbers
here, but just for my work, I
also know how it impacts local
communities and so how we can
continue to, to help that
thrive, and you know that you
always have, uh, you know, all
three of you have access and,
and we speak the same kind of
language in terms of economic
development and getting people
outdoors. So, um, I do
appreciate your work, um.
And just wanted to offer those
opportunities to continue
brainstorming on ways that we
can really enhance the
infrastructure that we need, um,
but also try nurture new
industries and new employees and
people to be able to do this
really important job, um, that
brings people to our state and
uh and highlights New Mexico is
the place that we all know and
love, and so I'm really grateful
for for all that you get to do
and uh look forward to keeping
conversations going. Um
Represented Lundstrom. You did
I, did I inspire you to ask a
question? Awesome. So
Representative Leinstrom, I'll
let you finish that off. Thank
you. Thank you very much, Madam
Vice Chair. I, I, I'd like to
ask the staff to think about
things a little bit differently
when it comes to solving these
problems. I think that uh we
have an opportunity by setting
up what I would call enterprises
of the state and RFPing
operations out. We have several
enterprises that the state of
New Mexico owns.
It would make sense to to me,
especially the gas station
example, the infrastructure is
there, we know what the
situation is. I'm not sure why
uh an enterprise like that
couldn't be acquired by the
state of New Mexico for outdoor
or tourism purposes and then it
could be uh.
You know, bid out for operation.
I think that would be a good
thing to do, to think about
state statewide, not only for
outdoor tourism and recreation,
but also things like food
service, you know, we have a
number of food deserts
throughout the state of New
Mexico and it's usually the
small mom and pop grocery stores
that are gonna, you know, go
away. But why couldn't we have
some kind of an assessment done
like that and that might be the
bill to consider first is what
critical infrastructure just due
to
Retirements or deaths or
whatever throughout rural New
Mexico is gonna be lost.
And could those then become a
business enterprise for the
state. That way we don't have to
recreate anything. We just have
to, um, contracted out during
hunting season as an example,
same way with hotels. I know
this committee had a meeting a
few years ago, I think it was in
Cimarron or some somewhere in a
very rural community. I think
there's one hotel there, and if
that group hadn't been opened, I
don't know what, what would have
happened or if they just
exactly.
But I, I just think we need to
think about things a little bit
differently or they become
enterprises of the state for
purposes of an RFP process for
an operators. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative. I
appreciate that. Um, any other
comments before we let our panel
go?
Thank you all for being here.
Appreciate it.
Um,
so, while lunch is getting set
up, we've asked our next
presenter to present early, um,
And so I, we're shifting around
and then that way we'll be able
to take a little bit of a break
for lunch.
So we've got, and I'm, I, I
don't wanna butcher your name
Jeffrey?
Is it Bargel Bargal Bargal, OK,
um, and he is the interim senior
director, uh, with
entrepreneurship, CNM, um,
Ingenuity ingenuity, thank you,
um, so can you tell us a little
bit about what, so when, when we
were looking at um different
topics I had seen in the
newspaper, um, this accelerator
program, and it sounded exciting
and I want, and you know, down
south, we don't always get all
the information of what's going
on in
You know, Southern or northern
New Mexico, so if you could just
give us an update, give us, let
us know what's going on and um
we'd love to hear from you.
Well, first of all, uh, thank
you, Madam Chair, Madam Vice
Chair, and the rest of the
committee here. Um, this is my
first time doing this at one of
these policy committees, so
thank you for having me. My name
is Jeff Barg. I'm the senior
director of entrepreneurship at
Cum Ingenuity. If you're not
familiar with CNM ingenuity. We
are one of the research parks
that was created by the New
Mexico Research Park Act a few
years ago. We are supporting
501c3 of CNM Central New Mexico
Community College. So we provide
workforce training.
Shortened trains and tents boot
camps, trainings,
entrepreneurship development is
managed services for other
local, state and federal
governments, um, and we manage
the holdings and commercial
development for CNM.
So I am the senior director of
entrepreneurship. We cover a
wide breadth of programs,
including ActivateNM uh startup
Fiesta, Space Fiesta, speed
mentoring, the hyperspace
Challenge, adventure pitch and
ski lift pitch our entrepreneur
and development program, which
is funded via uh junior
appropriation and um the
activator program, or outdoor
recreation growth accelerator,
which I'm here to talk about two
of those activator and adventure
pitch. So.
And I myself am a uh.
I'm an outdoor recreation
enthusiast.
Um, as well as an entrepreneur
in remission currently. I sold
my last business two months ago,
so I'm now free to focus
entirely on this.
Our two programs, major programs
are here to talk about Activator
and adventure pitch. So to give
a little overview and
introduction. Activator is our
outdoor recreation growth
accelerator, an adventure pitch
is our pitch competition focused
exclusively on outdoor
recreation and environment and
health and wellness companies.
Why did we signify it as well,
first of all, alter recreation,
how we define outdoor recreation
here because we want to make
sure this is broad enough for
the lots of different companies
that support that are themselves
directly outdoor recreation, but
also indirectly supporting the
outdoor recreation industry. So
they are directly delivering
outdoor recreation, products or
services for outdoor recreation
or channel partners into outdoor
recreation. A good example of
that might be somebody like Tao
Spas that won one of our ski
lift pitch competitions.
9 years ago or so, and they sell
into the outdoor recreation.
They sell through Outfitters,
etc. so.
Um, and then defining growth.
Why did we define this as growth
instead of just simply a startup
accelerator. Well, there are
many companies here throughout
New Mexico in outdoor recreation
that.
Should stay here and they're
already established, but now
they have goals and as Director
Amijo mentioned earlier, that
can mean that they are trying to
grow through customers, through
jobs, through revenue, or
succession is a big one. So
succession is one very
interesting because we know that
New Mexico's median population
age is tending to increase and
there are many businesses that
are out there looking to.
Many business owners looking for
succession plan that have not
put one in place and realizing
all of a sudden, oops, uh, I
don't know what to do with this
business and I'm ready to
retire. So we wanted to bring
those in and I'll highlight some
of those in the presentation
later.
The accelerator itself is 14
week cohort, and it provides
tailor guidance and networking.
I'll provide a little bit more
detail as we move on.
The pitch competition.
Uh, it is an opportunity for
mostly startups, so companies
that have are are fairly young
in their journey, uh, to give a
5 minute live pitch on stage in
front of a panel of judges,
investors, customers, etc. And
this is the 3rd year that we
will produce the adventure pitch
and this year it will be up to
2024 outdoor Economists
conference and this conference
moves around, around the state
every year in Santa Fe last year
and this year it will be in Las
Cruces.
We don't produce that. We're
just, we are a part of the
Outdoor Economics conference,
adventure pitches presented as
part of the program there. We
will also have a panel this year
in addition to Adventure Pitch
itself.
Just reiterating a few of the
things that Director Armijo um
mentioned.
Why this is so important to the
state?
We have all these wonderful
resources here. Our national
parks or state parks, or
wilderness areas. And it's a
large portion of the state's GDP
and it's experiencing a
tremendous amount of growth. 7%
job growth,
and I think Director Armijo
mentioned 11.9% revenue growth
overall in the GDP.
So a little bit more about
Activator.
Activator, the OR and the end
stands for outdoor recreation.
And uh this is our first of 3
annual cohorts. I'd also like to
thank Director Amijo and uh the
um the rest of the staff at the
outdoor recreation division
because we are producing this on
their behalf.
This is their program, um,
funded through one time um bill
through the EDA, uh.
And we are happy to produce it
because it's right in our
wheelhouse and we know how to
run these things.
So, I'd like to provide this
quote here from Toby Garcia at
Jack's Plastic Welding. I talked
about this, this is a
fantastical way when people
applied to the activator
accelerator, we asked them why.
And this is a statement from
Toby that
Illustrates virtually everything
that we thought we were going to
be producing, but he said it
pretty much outright. We have an
existing established very
successful business here in New
Mexico. A lot of folks know
Jack's pla plastic welding. It
is rural. It is an Aztec. I just
up the road, um.
He's taking over this long
established business because we
had somebody ready to exit.
The founders retiring and, uh,
by the way, this is it started
as a sort of making floating
rafts and paddle boards and
things like that. They have
since um expanded tremendously.
So then they started an outdoor
recreation, but now they produce
prototypes for NASA. One of the
things that he was looking for
several things he was looking
for when he came to Activator
was, first of all, the growth.
How do we keep growing now that
we're at the point where we are,
we are, they are a rural
business and they're, it's
difficult to continue growing
that.
Uh, as a new CEO himself, he's
looking to understand how do I
be a better leader, how do I
foster employees, how do I
attract more employees?
And seasonality is one that
comes up over and over and over
again. That is special challenge
of the outdoor recreation
industry.
So
Uh
Outdoor recreation has some
industry specific challenges.
First of all, because we tend to
be in rural areas, they have to
deal with things like distance
to customers, investors,
retailers, manufacturers, and
networks. I underlined and
bolded networks here because it
was another major area uh major
request of the companies that
applied to Activator was we want
to talk to other outdoor
recreation entrepreneurs.
We think that we can learn from
each other. So we made that a
core component of the program,
which I'll talk about in a
moment. See now that I just
mentioned, fast innovation, you
wouldn't think about outdoor
recreation as being an area with
fast innovation, but it is, and
we know that Los Alamos National
Lab and a few others are working
on things that they call
adventure tech. There's lots of
new materials coming out there.
You might think of waterproofing
and things like Gore-Tex and
stuff like that as new types of
adventure tech. Uh, folks are
now carrying, you know, GPS
devices and all that sort of
stuff. There's, there's always
innovation happening, but it is
happening now at a pace that is
surprising to a lot of folks
that may have worked in the
outdoor recreation industry for
many years and they're having to
contend with that.
We know that outdoor recreation
folks tend to have specialized
customer preferences, and we
want to provide a lot of bit of
insight into that. And then, uh,
a lot of our outdoor recreation
entrepreneurs are.
Uh, they're specialists in their
particular area, but they have
to deal with things like regga,
environmental and land use
knowledge, which are can be
dense and very difficult to
understand. Uh, you heard from
Kerrie earlier talking about
some of those things, um.
So there's a lot more to know
than just how do I run my
business, but also how do, how
do I stay within compliance and
a good steward of the land.
So we designed the program to
provide tailored guidance and
networking in these specific
challenge areas.
Particularly providing workshops
and one on one mentorship. Um,
we wanted to bring nationally
successful outdoor recreation
entrepreneurs and experts to.
New Mexico to talk to our up and
coming entrepreneurs here.
And then the peer to peer
guidance in addition to that
became a major component.
So, uh, to give a little bit of
a high level overview of how
Activator was we we structured
it in in three sections. The
first section up front are our
trailhead workshops. These were
open to the public. This is the
first time we've run activator,
and we wanted to make sure that
the people that are going to
apply were familiar with the
program and provide a little
guidance, uh, to attract people
with a low barrier to entry, a
low commitment. And so these are
all open to the public. There we
provided 3 workshops.
Uh, webinars.
And they focused mostly on lean
startup methodology to talk
about, well, if you're going to
start any business, know your
customer, go to your customer,
what are their needs? What are
their unique challenges, and
then start to brainstorm after
you know their needs, what you
could be, uh, what sort of
products and services you could
provide that address those
needs.
From that, uh, folks got more
familiar with it and then we saw
a big uptick in applications. We
had 36 applications and um now
we moved on to the accelerator.
We accepted 18 out of those 36
into the accelerator. Now as
close to the cohort, and this is
where we provided the workshops,
the one on one mentorship, the
peer to peer guidance, and this
is a 10 week bulk of the
program.
And then finally, the showcase.
So at the at the outdoor
Economics conference for the
first time, we're, we are able
to provide booths for free to
all of the cohort and all of the
adventure pitch participants. So
we will have a big showing for
that, um, and we encourage you
to come down to Las Cruces and,
and check it out.
And here's the cohort.
For 2024.
Um, there and we, we designate
any here that are rural. Um,
they are all from all over the
state and representing virtually
the the entire state. So there
are some fantastic companies up
here. Some that you might
recognize as having been around
for a while and some you may not
recognize, they're very new.
Orctech has an employee of one I
mentioned I mentioned, for
example, uh in uh innovation,
fast innovation.
They have licensed the
technology out of NASA to boost
cell signal into areas that have
no signal with a passive.
Low cost device. It it's quite
fascinating. Um, and then you've
got on the other end of the
spectrum, companies like
Bluebird Mountain Sports that
have been around for a long
time, and Jack's plastic
welding, tows fly shop, etc.
There's also a few nonprofits in
here, the adaptive sports
program and NM 2050 are both
nonprofits.
Uh, the Penderre's village in
Gul, uh, I should say golf
resort, not gold rest sport, um,
but the, uh, they were affected
tremendously by the Caf Canyon
fires, and now they're looking
to recover.
Morrison Outdoors, their
particular challenge is very
interesting. They make a baby
and toddler um sleeping bags.
Yeah, adorable, right?
Um, I, I'm a foster parent with
3 foster kids, and, and these
look very, uh very interesting
um little devices to take out
with us as we take, we tend to
take the kids out to the
outdoors, yeah.
Um,
Well, they're, you know, they,
they have crossed the $1 million
in revenue mark. And you know
what that did? It attracted a
Chinese competitor that is
ripping them off.
Very unique challenge.
Right.
And then all sorts of other uh
many, many other different types
of companies, companies that
that focus on um Simply savage
solutions, for example, they,
they have invented a little
device called the bow hitch for
anybody that is trying to carry
their bow out into the
wilderness. Tactical application
vehicles, they focus on
components for off-roading and.
And
Let's see, what else did I write
down? Oh, the Wilderness
sensitive provides therapeutic
and adaptive um adventures.
So there's a lot of variety in
the types of companies that are
here and they're all looking for
something a little bit different
and specialized to them.
All right, Adventure pitch.
We've been running this for 2
years. This will be our 3rd
annual. And again, thank you to
the ORD um this is, this is
actually their program, and we
are merely producing it for
them.
So, but we, we have been now
producing it for the 3rd year
and it continues to gain uh
attraction.
Uh, this is our pitch from 2
years ago. This is Adam White.
He is the founder and CEO of
True Fit, and they provide uh
adaptive wellness solutions for
folks with um uh with autism and
other types of physical and
intellectual disabilities. He
actually, we just coached him
through a session, uh, coached
them two weeks ago.
Uh, because he had the
opportunity to pitch a dinner,
dinner with athletes, and this
is put together with
professional athletes that are
looking for opportunities to
work with youth and other
disadvantaged communities. So he
was invited as one of several
entrepreneurs to provide an
opportunity to them at the same
time, he said, boy, I would love
to have one of you professional
athletes on my board or being a
spokesman for our program. So he
is out now distributing his
program to high schools around
the country.
Here's our winner two years ago,
uh, to give you this is an idea,
if you've never seen a pitch
competition, this is what the
set up generally is. You can see
down front, don't have a laser
on this thing.
No, um, can see down front that
we've, uh, we've got a panel of
judges down there and then the
community around. There's
several, I think 5 or 600, maybe
700 people that attend the
outdoor economics conference.
Um, some of them are investors,
some of them are customers. So
it's a great opportunity to
showcase the businesses we have
in the state.
I mentioned uh Truefit already,
uh, our winner from two years
ago, and last year it was Rezzo
Systems. They provide custom
reservation software uh to ski
and snow rental, bike rental
shops, stuff like that, and he
continues to build new products
out, found it very interesting
niche, uh, where it was
basically replacing paper and
ticket systems.
So it's had a lot of success in
that area.
Application's open right now.
Um, I didn't mention that I
have, uh, I did not bring my
staff with me today, but our,
um, my staff is Lindsay
Humphrey. She's a senior program
manager for ActivateNM and all
of uh all the fiestas and pitch
competitions, everything we
produce. She's done a fantastic
job and this year we've also, we
hired uh Axi Navas, the former
director of the outdoor
recreation division to be our um
program managers specifically
for Activator and done a
tremendous amount for the
program. Uh, so they're not here
today because they're running
those programs.
Um, but Adventure pitch, uh, I
mentioned the applications are
closing if you notice the date
tomorrow at midnight. So, um,
Please, uh, if you know any
companies that you're working
with, ask them to apply. They
have the opportunity to win a
$10,000 top prize as well as a
$3000 2nd prize and $2000 3rd
prize.
So
When we think about success for
Activator and adventure Pitch.
Um, what does that mean over the
long term? Well, first, we are
going to be measuring this
impact by conducting surveys at
the when they finish at the 6th,
12th, and 24 month mark. I
mentioned that we were right in
the middle of our first cohort,
which is a bit of a pilot, so
we're actually collecting um
feedback, data and survey data
at the end of every workshop and
session that we do.
We have kept the program very
light. We alternate between
workshops and then the following
week we'll either do peer to
peer mentorship or expert
mentorship or office hours. Um,
one on one with mentors.
Well, we want to see how folks
do after they come out of this.
Do we see job growth? Do we see
revenue growth, um, I wanted to
mention the building the year
over here, part of this. I've
been in this position now for 3
years and
I manage a lot of programs, some
of them run for many years. For
example, our hyperspace
challenge is a federal program
that we run for the Air Force
Research Lab and Space Force,
that's now been renewed for a
five-year contract. When we know
that we have a multi-year
contract, we can do things like
provide certainty for the
program, for our hiring, we can
hire better staff to end that
feel comfortable over the long
term and feel stable.
We can do advanced planning, so
we know many years in advance
what we're going to do, when
we're going to do it do it. We
can announce to the rest of New
Mexico that hey, this week we're
doing this. So keep your
programs to a different week,
please.
Um, we continue the momentum, so
we build awareness, we get
better speakers, mentors,
judges, and sponsors when we
know year after year it's gonna
be there and we get more and
higher quality applicants. I
would bet that most of the
outdoor recreation companies,
despite our marketing problem.
aren't aware that we ran
Activator or Adventure pitch,
so.
Um, but year after year, we know
that that uh we, year after year
now that this is our 3rd year of
adventure pitch, we're seeing
the quality and the number of
candidates or number of
applicants increase over time.
So, um, so I'd like to think,
you know, director Amijo and the
outdoor recreation division for
sponsoring this for the next 3
years. Now it was a one time uh
ARPA EDA money. So and and we're
in year one, so we've got 2 more
years to figure out how to keep
the sustainability of these
particular programs going.
So that I'd like to say um thank
you, and again, I'm, I'm a big
outdoor enthusiast and we, we
try to get out as much as we
can. We have 3 foster kids right
now. We took them to the uh the
youth fishing derby at Pecos
this year and uh the state is
hungry for it. There was not a
we we had to wait for 2 square
feet of space to toss a line to
the water that it was super
oversubscribed by all the kids
that were waiting, waiting and
excited and um, if you're
looking for recruiting
Event I would recommend going to
a fishing derby and setting up
setting up shop there. So that
I'd like to say thank you and
I'm happy to take any questions.
Um, thank you very much for
doing this and, and you know, I
know that you were sitting here
when we had these conversations
earlier about um you know, one
of the things that I, I don't
think we make those connections
with this, this chambers of
commerce is is like looking into
those communities because it may
not be like a very um uh active
relationship in the beginning,
but it's like at least we can
have eyes out for um people who
might be interested and so I
think, you know, creating those
relationships, even if they're
just very minor, but just
saying, hey, this is what we do.
If you can keep an eye out, I
think I would recommend doing
that if you haven't already.
Done that because I think those
are those are were the were the
ones I run the Green Chamber of
Las Cruces, and so we talk about
the importance of protecting our
airland and water and advocating
for the Oregon Mountains Desert
Peaks National Monument and and
Karina knows all about what we,
we get to do and, and so I think
if we're getting approached by
people who want to start outdoor
businesses that would be at
least we would have that
information, so I would just I
would just recommend that. Yes.
um, thank you, Madam Vice Chair
for the question for the
comment. um I uh
A former board member of the New
Mexico Al Business Alliance, so
I'm familiar with how valuable
chambers are, and we definitely
engage them in this case, we
engaged tremendously with
Endeavor, the outdoor
recreation, um.
Chamber of Commerce and, and we
welcome to work with all the
chambers. I think we've got a an
email list, very extensive that
we have as many chambers as we
can on there.
In the, in the southern part
we're the ones that are doing
the stuff with outdoor
recreation, so fantastic. Love
to continue that conversation.
We'll see you at the outdoor
Economics conference too, I
suppose most likely yes.
Any other questions?
Well, I would
OK, um, I definitely would like
to thank you. I think so many
times, um, you know, we hear
outdoor recreation and we think
of the green chamber, but I
think more and more it's
becoming, uh, you know,
businesses and we want to talk
about that, uh, like I said at
the beginning of your
presentation, um, I had just
seen the accelerator program uh
news release, and um just didn't
even have any idea that you all
existed and so I wanted other
legislators to know that, um,
that
Organizations like yours are are
out there doing the the work,
um.
I think just getting information
like that to different chambers
once again is is key, um, and I
wanted to thank you also for
fostering that is, I think, so
important, that's part of what I
with my job, I, I run a Costa
program and so we work with,
with foster parents all the
time, and I think so many times,
um,
You know, seeing the kids that
we serve don't have that access
to out outdoor recreation and so
um I'm kind of thinking you on
two different levels, so thank
you very much. And if I may,
Madam Chair, I think we should
do an outdoor recreation day at
the Capitol.
Um, to where.
Like we can have the department,
but also some spotlights,
Carrie, William, uh different
outdoor rec groups to get into
the rotunda and then that gives
us an opportunity to talk you up
on the floor.
So that might be something if,
if, I mean, it's, I, I know that
there's a capacity issue and
you're like, there's another one
thing, but I think it would be
helpful because like many of us
involved in our communities are
seeing like these different
areas that like how can we help.
Uplift you and how can we bring
you to our communities and so,
um, if that's something to think
about, I think it's working with
our chief clerk.
I, yeah, yeah, and I would start
that conversation now though if
you can. I mean, I know you've
got the outdoor rec conference
too coming up, but that might be
an opportunity just to table and
have a bunch of outdoor rec
businesses up there and invite
them and then I can work on how
we can connect with other
legislators on the floor.
In both chambers. Alrighty,
well, thank you. Appreciate you
coming up and for your
presentation today.
So, um, we have a little time.
We can breathe a minute and
actually have um some lunch. We
invite you all to join us for
lunch. Uh, we're hoping to get
out of here a little early, um,
that cause I know there's lots
of traveling to to be done today
to get home, um, so I'm gonna
adjourn quickly for lunch, but
I, I, I wanna say maybe 20
minutes for lunch. That way we
can get going again and we can
hopefully be out of here at a,
at a reasonable time, so.
Not yet.
