departments. So, um, Jennifer,
you're going first?
Yes, madam chair. Great. Thank
you.
Well, thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, um, as
the chair said, my name is
Jennifer Savera. I am the deputy
cabinet secretary for the New
Mexico Tourism Department truly
is a pleasure to be here this
afternoon to talk about our
current and future initiatives
that impact our businesses
around our state.
Um, so,
There we go. Uh, so this is just
a quick little presentation
overview. I want to talk a
little bit about like our
department health or overall
organizational health as as a
department. A little bit about
our strategy, the New Mexico
tourism economy and where we're
at in New Mexico, travel and
leisure um contribute 5.2% of
all private GDP, um, and so, and
then finally I'll I'll dive into
our initiatives, um, really kind
of two big buckets.
demands for our state, our
tourism marketing, and then
delivering on our promises that
tourism development piece, um,
and then we'll end and of course
Mark is happy to answer any
questions that you may have.
Yeah.
Oh no, let's see.
Am I smarter than?
All right. Um, so I think it's
always important for us at the
tourism department to be
grounded in what our mission and
vision is because that means
that every project that we do,
every program that we do, it
ladders up to what we are, we
are here to do. And so our
vision is to be the primary
destination for venturesome
travelers, and our mission is to
grow New Mexico's economy
through tourism.
So what is New Mexico true? New
Mexico true is adventure steeped
in culture, and we're looking
for the adventuresome traveler,
um, with thirst for
authenticity.
And so it was great to hear from
the outdoor rec community right
before. Obviously New Mexico,
you know, I was just at the US
Travel Association's ESTO
conference, and I think
destinations are trying to
figure out what makes them
unique, what makes them special,
we don't have that problem here
in New Mexico. We have amazing
outdoor recreation. We have
amazing landscapes. We have
amazing cultures, we have
amazing food. So we're very
blessed here in New Mexico.
As I say that, I, we just want
to go over quickly kind of where
we are as a department. Um, so
we have our 4 divisions. We have
59 FTE authorized. Currently we
have 5 vacancies in our agency,
and that's about 8.5% vacancy
rate for our entire agency. Um,
our FY 25, our current budgets
and recurring funds we have
about 25.6 mil other state
funds, um, so this is clean and
beautiful and some other things,
4.
8 million and non-recurring
23.5. Um, and then I just listed
out some of those non-recurring
dollars and where the
legislature appropriated them to
that were executing on
currently.
Including Special Olympics, um,
are, of course, clean, clean and
beautiful campaign and some
other things, um, and I want you
to know that we take our job
very seriously when the
legislature gives us money that
we are good stewards with that
money, and so our FY 24
reversion for the second year in
a row will be less than 1% of
our total budget because we take
that very seriously.
Um, a little bit going into our
strategy, so.
Um, as many of you may or may
not know, New Mexico Tru started
about in 2014, so we're 10 years
into the brand. So, um, these
were the strategic planks back
in 2014. Um, and you'll see that
they haven't changed much. We've
just evolved them and ramped
them up as the brand has grown
and has we've moved forward.
This is what we call our
ecosystem 2.0, so our former
cabinet secretary Jen Schreyer
kind of had a similar model and
we've kind of ramped it up. Um,
again, our kind of initiatives
really is driving demand. So
that's our four season marketing
campaign our beautiful New
Mexicoche adds our cooperative
marketing where we work with
local governments on a
co-funded, co-branded program.
It's our earned media and travel
trade. And then we have to
deliver on that promise of
adventures steeped in.
So we have things like our
infrastructure development and
clean and beautiful industry
development and all of this,
everything that we do is
grounded in research.
So how is the tourism economy
doing? This is our, um,
2022 visitor profile spending,
so you will see that visitation
continues to grow and we
continue to improve from the
pandemic in 2022, we had a
record 40.8 million trips that
would resulted in $8.3 billion
in direct visitor spending, how
the economic impact of 11.2
billion. It sustained 91,000
jobs, and it took our local
taxes generated about 78.
2 million.
This was one of our campaigns
that we just called the climb.
Um, it's a beautiful picture of
our kind of tourism marketing,
um, so our core tourism
marketing initiatives that we
support businesses, of course,
is our four season national
campaign.
So with investments with the
legislature we have now been
able to be in the market for 4
seasons, um, previously we just
kind of did our winter and our
summer campaigns, but now we're
able, there's very few weeks
that we're not in market
anymore. We have our cooperative
marketing or New Mexico True
certified or earned media and
travel trade.
So as I mentioned, we, um, you
know, our fours national
marketing, we have and I'll talk
about our fly markets that we
are in now. Again, most of the
year. So these are our demand
markets or fly markets,
traditional fly markets is
Austin, Dallas, Houston, Denver,
Phoenix, Santiago, Los Angeles,
and um this past year we were
able to in 2023 we were able to
get into the San Francisco
market, which is huge for us.
And we're really seeing, um,
The
Return on investment in that
market.
Um,
our research director, her name
is Victoria Gregg, and uh she
just presented at the travel and
tourism Research Association
conference, um, and she
presented on this particular
study that we commissioned at
the tourism department, and she
was voted breast best
presentation of the conference.
Um, she was then asked to lead a
peer forum at the US Travel
Association EO conference.
And she also was on a panel. So
she's really quickly becoming
recognized as a thought leader
for New Mexico in this area.
So in 2023, we commissioned a
study really to look at
Are we still doing the right
things? What is right for New
Mexico and kind of really
because we would see a lot of
Texas license plates, quite
frankly, uh, in New Mexico, and
so we always thought them
traditionally as a flight
market. But we were seeing
license plates. So we really
wanted to know are Texans.
Flying or are they driving to
New Mexico?
And what we found is really
predominantly they drive.
They drive from as far as, you
know, Austin, um, Dallas,
they're, they're, while they're
still one of our fly markets,
they do drive.
Um, but what we found is
Californians and why San
Francisco is important, they
fly, they come in, and we know
that uh over Texas, they spent
about $600 more per trip. So it
really is important for us as
we're looking at our marketing
strategies and how we where and
how we go and where where we
spend our money. Texas will
always be one of our markets,
and I'll show you why.
Um, so this is our visitor total
and then visitor spending, so
you'll see Dallas Fort Worth is
still a huge heads and beds.
Like driver of tourism in New
Mexico. They're #2. They're
still going to be one of our
markets. We're still gonna keep
them on. Um, but if you look
down at number 5 at Los Angeles,
you'll see that while the
visitor volume was smaller,
they, they're spending outpaced
their volume. So they're
spending more money here.
So this is what we know about
the San Francisco ROI. So the
winter campaign influenced about
$19,000 trips, 19,000 trips from
New Mexico from San Francisco to
New Mexico. The trips party
spent about $1000 almost $2000
in New Mexico, um, and it
resulted in almost $34.3 million
being spent in New Mexico.
The return on investment was a
52 to 1. And if you look at tax
ROI, that's a 4 to 1.
So we know for sure this
campaign and introducing
ourselves into the San Francisco
market was huge for New Mexico
and it has paid off.
Turning to our cooperative
marketing, so this is our
co-funded, co-branded marketing
program. Again, this is with all
of our, um, local nonprofit
tourism nonprofits, local
communities, and tribal
governments.
So we just uh went through our
grant cycle, just made awards.
And so in FY 25, we're going to
have the most partners that
we've ever had in this
particular program. And
communities are really seeing
the benefits. Um, you'll see one
of the examples that we have
with Farmington of a co-branded,
uh.
Placement in the New Mexico
magazine and other locations.
Um, so we had 48 partners, uh,
our contribution from the New
Mexico tourism department from
you all.
is 3.8 million, uh, the total
advertising investment is 5.7
million. I think what's really
important here to know is that
71% of that funds went to rural
communities.
With a total of investment of
2.4 million.
Our New Mexico True certified
program, um, so businesses are
really seeing the value in
having their products be New
Mexico True certified. It's a
free program. They just have to
do an application. Um, and in FY
25, we're going to hit over 500
businesses that are
participating in the New Mexico
True certified program. We're
almost there, we're we get 483,
um, although I just signed some
agreements, so maybe more.
Uh, so this is, um, you know,
kind of examples of products
that aren't New Mexico Tru
certified.
Last holiday season we did um an
in-state campaign to feature
some of these. I don't know if
you saw it. There was like a hat
maker. It was really cool. Um,
we did a post survey on the
businesses that participated in
the holiday guide, um, and from
that we learned that over 31,000
products were sold within that 4
week period that we ran that
campaign, um, and
The businesses saw about
$500,000 in revenue from that 4
week campaign.
So turning to earned media, so
this is not media that we pay
for. This is our communications
team, our PR team, really
working with travel writers to
do placements, um, in various
magazines, The New York Times,
Kaye West, like all of the major
publications and FOA 24, the New
Mexico Tourism Department
National earned media program
secured 140 placements in travel
media, resulting in 2 billion
impressions in over 2
$6 million in advertising. So
this is a program really kind of
ramped up um over the past 4
years, and it is continuing to
grow um in FY 24, the first year
that we kind of overhauled our
national earned media program.
We had about a return of
investment, about 5 to 1 and uh
FY 24 that return of investment
is $76 for every $1 spent on
this program.
So, um, year over year we
continue to see an increase
about a 10% increase in hidden
gems. So hidden gems are um
locations that are not Santa Fe,
Albuquerque, and Taos. So, um,
so we see them including in
coverage, um, we've seen
multiple stories, uh, this.
Centennial for the healer
Wilderness was huge for us. Um,
we really worked hard and we got
17 international playmen,
international placements for
recognizing the helo wilderness
centennial, including Australia,
New Zealand, Ireland, UK, Italy,
Mexico.
And this is the 4th straight
year that we've had inclusions
in the Smithsonian magazine for
Best small towns to visit.
Next, I want to talk about one
of our new initiatives, what
we're doing to support
businesses.
In New Mexico, and this is
travel trade.
So this is a program that we are
signing up this year, um, and so
we just hired our like.
Ground one hire an FTE. Get
somebody on board to do the
things.
So we hired an FTE um we're
starting to create this. We had
a small team, this team, our
program director is there, Holly
Marquez. They went to the US
Travel Association's IPW um in
Los Angeles, and so, um, many of
you may not know what travel
trade is, but travel trade is
the businesses that arrange and
sell tourism products and
experiences directly to
consumers and other travel
businesses. So effectively,
effectively a
be
Uh, kind of format.
So, I will say that, um, you
know, while our marketing will
continue to, to produce amazing
results by doing the New Mexico
True campaign.
By sending our team to IPW and
having them.
Directly interact with tour
operators. We're getting New
Mexico on the map with the
international travelers. Um, as
a result of us being in Los
Angeles, um, we had a tour
operator email our coms director
Cody Johnson, to let him know as
a result of that meeting at IPW,
he is now doing a Tex-Mex, uh,
tour. And so that includes
Arizona, New Mexico now is not
being passed up and Texas. So
it's a
The travel that he's doing, and
we know that international
travelers come for longer and
they spend more money. So it's
huge for us to kind of get into
this international market, um,
also we're kind of with Route
66, uh, the centennial coming up
in 2026. We're working closely
with Brand USA, um, really on
how do we capitalize on those
international travelers. Of
course, we do everything based
upon research. So we're
commissioning a with other
states, a
project with Samari Research to
understand who those travelers
are going to be, so we can
market directly to those
travelers. So it's really
looking like um the UK, Mexico,
Canada, and Germany. So those
will likely be our primary
markets. Again, we're just kind
of in the middle of that study.
So now I've talked about how we
drive demands and our
initiatives to drive demand,
drive tourism to our state, but
now I'll talk a little bit about
tourism development. So tourism
development is really our
delivering on our promise when
we're getting all getting
everyone excited to come to New
Mexico, but now we need New
Mexico to deliver and so, uh,
that is our tourism development.
So I'm gonna talk, um, about 3
programs that we have our three
core programs that we have in
tourism development. Obviously
we do a lot more, but these are
kind of three core programs that
we do. Um, as we know, events
can be a huge tourism, um, and
economic driver. So we have our
tourism event growth and
sustainability Program TES. Um,
we have our destination forward
with uh supports some tourism
related infrastructure. And then
we have our New Mexico Clean and
Beautiful.
Program.
So, um, I will say that this
particular again given
investments from the state
legislature is our biggest year
for all three of these programs.
Um, so this program provides
technical assistance, marketing,
marketing, cooperative
marketing, sponsorships to
qualified tourism events within
New Mexico to grow and sustain
their events. Um, this year the
Tugs program awarded 533,000 in
grant funding for a 3rd gate
tourism-related events.
And they're scheduled between
August of 2024 and August of
2025, and there's a list of the
202025 events on the right hand
side, on the left hand side, you
will see the events that we
supported in 2024. In 2024, the
program was about 500,000, so
we've grown it just slightly,
um, but you'll see that it's not
again, not just focused on Santa
Fe and Albuquerque. We do
support events throughout the
state of New Mexico.
Our destination forward, um, so
again, this is supporting
infrastructure projects that are
on the ICIP, so sometimes they
need just a little bit of
additional funding to get a
project to completion. Um, so
this particular last year in FY
24, we had 10 awardee and we
awarded 1.9 million this year we
have 12 awardees and we're
awarding 2.3 million. And again,
these are the communities that
we will be.
reporting, um, and the projects
and the amounts.
And finally, it ends with our
clean and beautiful program
because as we know we need to be
good stewards of our land. We
need to clean up our
communities. Um, it is, it is
vital. Um, so this year is our
biggest year ever for Clean and
Beautiful, we awarded 1,000,000,
um, in grants to local
communities to help them with
their cleanup efforts. Um, and
we have 67 communities now
participating in our Clean and
Beautiful program, which is
amazing. Um, so you'll see
there, it's pretty
Much everybody
Um, but yeah, there's good
representation around the state,
for partners participating in
that program.
And that's it. I will turn it
over to Mark.
Hm
Madam Chair, members of the
committee,
I'll
I'll let my slides get up, but,
uh, thank you, thank you for
taking the time to be with us
today. Thank you for inviting us
to be here. It's the top one,
sorry, and um I
I just need to say thank you in
general, uh, the New Mexico
legislature is, uh, has funded
in the Mexicoconomic Development
very generously, uh, and we've
been able to do a lot of really
positive things and, uh, not
included in these slides are a
couple of programs that aren't
finished yet, but I, I do wanna,
I do want to talk about them
because they are because of your
efforts.
Uh, that we're able to do this,
so.
Uh, we just yesterday afternoon
we closed an RFP, uh, for a
company to come in and do a site
readiness analysis of up to 35.
Publicly owned industrial parks.
And what this, what this site
readiness is going to to allow
us to do is identify these
publicly held identified
industrial parks.
What's missing, uh, you know, do
they need a water line? Do they
need a road? Do they need power
lines, you know, natural gas,
etc. what's missing? And then
also analyze what those costs
associated with that missing
infrastructure is so that these,
these industrial parks that are
publicly held, maybe they're
owned by either the city or the
county, potentially the, the
university in the area, uh,
so we know what those deficits
are, so that truly when we're
marketing those, they're shovel
ready.
Uh, they're ready so we can get
that infrastructure in place and
it's not a case of, well, yeah.
2 years from now we can get the
water line to you and those
types of things. So this, this
study, which was funded by an
additional grant or additional
special legislation that you
gave us last year, uh, will be
completed in time for this
year's legislative session, and
we will be able to report out on
that. So thank you again for
that. Also last year you gave us
a a very significant amount of
additional money into, into our
budget, uh, dedicated toward our
science and tech program, and
what
what we're currently going,
going through the process now as
we're doing an RFP to actually
do uh an analysis of all of the
all of the industries that fit
under our science and technology
umbrella to again analyze what
are our strengths, what are our
weaknesses, uh, what, what are,
what are the things we need to
focus on in those areas and
where are our best targets for
those industries, you know,
whether they be uh nationally or
internationally, uh, so we'll be
Uh, we'll be doing, uh, that,
and again, the goal is to have
those analysis done in time for
the legislative session.
Additionally, we're, uh, we've
identified $1.6 million out of
that money that was given out to
us to do a pilot project, uh,
that is, uh, in the science and
technology realm, we're, we're
going to focus on water slash
energy project. Uh, when we put
that RFP out, uh, and what
we're, we've identified again
$1.6 million. What we're looking
for is a technology that
somebody has out there.
That has been proven in the lab,
proven in the, in the modeling,
uh, that needs real life
experience that needs a pilot
out there to actually prove that
it can be done at a scale, uh,
and we'll, we'll provide the
funding to do that pilot project
through that money you gave us.
So again, uh, I just want to say
thank you because you've given
us some really good resources to
do some really good things and
we, uh, and we hope to be able
to report all that out to you
when you do get into full
session.
So thank you for that. And I'm
going to start, um, in the same
way that maybe.
I can get this to work.
No.
Back up. OK.
What we'll just, yeah, we'll
just, you have the handouts. I
can, I can do it the old
fashioned way. So I'll start out
with our mission and vision just
real quick, in our mission is to
improve the lives and families
by increasing economic
opportunities and providing a
place for businesses to thrive.
What that, what that really
means in my mind is creating
career opportunities for New
Mexicans.
Um, we're not just, we're not
creating jobs, we're creating
career opportunities, and
there's a difference. A job is a
place you go, you punch in, you
punch out, you get a paycheck,
but you're always looking for
the next opportunity because
it's not really what it's there
for. What we want to create for
New Mexicans is not only quality
jobs from a pay standpoint, but
jobs that have a career path,
uh, that they can start in and,
and see the, see the progress,
uh, through, through their
livelihood from, from the time
they get out of what
level of education they've
achieved and then moving on to
the the career sector to have
places to go, career paths to
move on. I really think that
that's an important, important
part of what we do.
And then, uh, you know, working
on, uh, engaging with the talent
as we talk about a diverse and
robust economy, engaging talent,
cultivate innovation and
delivers prosperity to the
Mexicans, and I think one of the
other important things that we
need to know there is why we
always look to improve our
economic position. We need to
also understand our cultural
positions too, and that we
don't, we don't step on things
that are important to us in
order to achieve those economic.
Goals because we are unique. Uh,
New Mexico is a little
different, and we need to, we
need to make sure we take care
of that. Uh, we don't want to
change that while we, while we
try to get better from an
economic standpoint.
If you look on slide 3, it's,
it's just a highlight of we do a
lot of different things in the
economic development department.
We have a lot of different uh
tentacles attached to this body
of an octopus, uh, and, and I
know you've already heard from
one of our divisions, outdoor
recreation, earlier today, and
they're doing a phenomenal job
in what they're doing and I'll
talk a little more about uh
that, but the very first one
that's there is a new division
that the legislature created two
years ago, and this
House legislative session gave
us, uh, the funding to actually
put people in those positions,
and we've named our creative
industries director and uh this
morning, the posting for the,
for the assistant or the deputy
director into that, uh, division
was posted today and we hope to
have that person in place within
the, within the next month. This
past year, uh, we were able to
move some grant money out the
door through the creative
industries division and what we
focused on in the in the
creative industries division and
we'll get into the
numbers there was getting the
money out into communities and
letting communities do the
things that they thought they
needed to do in the creative
industry sector. And then we
gathered that data, we, we did a
lot of work back and forth with
those people, uh, to try to get
a better idea of what, what the
strengths are and again where,
where we can truly attack this
when we got people into
position. So again, thank you to
the legislature for creating
that, and we've already had a
really good start on that. The
border authority is
Administratively attached to us
and uh.
Which means that we basically
provide um HR and and ASD or
account services for them and
then they operate independently
from us, but we do provide those
services for them to minimize
the, the strain on their budget
and their people. Uh, the border
authority board, uh, and, and
the governor's office recently
appointed a new director.
Uh, he took, uh, he started his
job a week ago, uh, and has hit
the ground running and we'll be
taking on all things within the
border. I'm gonna just real
quick talk about these other
things. CAP is a, is a program
where businesses can use us to
get their collateral assistance
up to $250,000 so we can
participate up to a $500,000
loan, we can provide $250,000 of
that in a collateral. What we
is we put a CD in the bank.
Uh, uh, for that company as
their collateral. What this
does, this allows the company to
actually do the loan because the
bank is, uh, likes the cash flow
of the company and likes
everything, they just don't have
enough collateral to buy that
new piece of equipment or uh the
things that they need to do and
grow and expand, and this allows
them to do, to do those kind of
things. So it's a very positive
program, uh, and this, uh, this
year we got additional federal
money through the SSBCI program
to to
It, uh, funding in that program
for the next 10 years, so it's
in a very good position. The
community of Business and Rural
Development team. You'll never
hear them called that. There are
regional reps that are located
in the six regions around the
state. Of course, we have the
film and uh the film division,
funded as a unique thing that I
don't know if enough people
really know what fund it does,
but Fundit brings every
Body, government body, federal
and state that has a pot of
money to the table.
So we have SBA, we have NMFA, we
have, uh, we have the uh uh we
have the DOT there. We, anybody
that's got environment, anybody,
there's about 40 different
groups, both federal and state
that sit in this group and what,
what the idea is for communities
to bring their large
infrastructure projects to this
body, and then this body review
and say, oh, well, jeez, did you
know there's money over here?
Did you know there's money over
here and to help those kids.
is actually assemble their,
their stack of financing to
actually accomplish these goals
to where they don't always just
say, well, we'll go get capital
outlay. We know capital outlay
is important part of the
process, but there's a lot of
other resources out there that
we try to help them identify
with.
A new initiative, and this year
we've been able to convert what
was a temporary position uh into
a permanent position as the
director of our food and hunger
and agriculture division, and
that's really looking at helping
local farmers, uh, grow and
expand their business as well as
how to get their goods into our
schools and to our senior
centers and, uh, into the local
markets and help them both from
a from a farmer standpoint, but
also
Improve our nutrition and
actually lower the cost to
those, uh, to those industries
and it's uh, it's been working
very well. We also have the
Office of International Trade in
which we do a coup a couple of
different things we work on
foreign direct investment, uh,
as well as helping New Mexico
companies market themselves.
For international exporting. Uh,
we do have a grant program that
is funded through SBA called the
STEP Grant program that allows
companies to uh come to us and
get a grant to go to a trade
show, maybe optimize their
website where it uh it can be
read in a foreign language and
looks right and feels right in
that language or uh other things
that can help them do export
into a foreign country.
I think everybody's fairly
familiar with the JTIP program,
um, a new program within the
department and I'll give you
some more data on that as we get
into the sites or justice,
equity, diversity and inclusion.
Um, I just say that they've got
the coolest acronym in
government, so, uh, but, and
we'll talk a little bit about
that. Leeds is another good
talking about Jedi Jedi, yes,
yes, absolutely. Um, and may the
force be with you,
uh.
Um, Leeds is a grant program
that we offer to local economic
development organizations for
project specific uh goals. Uh,
it doesn't have to be an ongoing
thing. It can be a very specific
one-time project and those
grants are up to $25,000 that we
give out on an annual basis.
This year we were able to award
um 16 uh Leeds grants around the
state of New Mexico.
The local economic Development
Act, of course, we have a fund
within the department that we
help fund, uh, capital projects.
We've had a really good run. I
think you probably saw the, the
uh announcement just a little
over a week ago that uh we
announced Ibo Solar has chosen
Albuquerque to be their
location. That's another $900
million in capital investment
into New Mexico. It's going to
be another 900 jobs into the
market, and that's uh they're
going to be neighbors.
To Maxi and solar that we
announced, uh, just about a year
ago.
That's uh going to be over 1500
jobs and about $1.2 billion in
capital investment, uh, and so
we're starting to see a nice uh
industry cluster there, and we
really hope that this is going
to lead us to uh some supply
chain industries to those two,
to those two companies help us
bring more in. Uh, Main Street
is, uh, is in over 30
communities in the state of New
Mexico.
Uh, and then you, uh, I've
already mentioned the science
and technology division,
Spaceport Authority like the
border is administratively
attached to us.
So we provide HR and ASD
services, but they are governed
by their, by their board and
operate independently from us,
uh, Spaceport is has got some uh
very good capital projects that
are just getting underway to do
some, uh, do some roadway and
and water, uh, infrastructure
improvements to access more of
the property as we're as, as we
get more people in and use
utilizing the spaceport, uh, we
need to make sure we have that
infrastructure in place.
To help with the expansion.
On film as you move to slide 4.
Um, our spend in New Mexico this
past year was 740 million, uh,
we will admit that it wasn't
exactly what we'd hoped for, but
uh there was this thing called
the strike by uh the, the screen
actors, uh, that did take us out
of production for uh a
significant amount of time,
about 5 months really. Uh, so.
Uh, 740 million in production.
Stan was, uh, was a very solid
year, uh, when you consider that
was accomplished in really 7
months of time of time frame.
Uh, the New Mexico Field crew
median wage, as you can see,
that's a solid wage, $37 an
hour, uh, making it about a
$75,000 a year job and the
average film employed 83% of
their employees were New
Mexicans.
Uh, the Netflix expansion, uh,
we had a ribbon cutting as they
finally completed uh phase one
of their expansion, and they
added another 80 acres to their
campus. It's, it's quite
impressive. They added a new
sound stages and uh some
additional office uh office
space that is uh really
impressive.
Uh, the announcement that the
governor made in last year's
State of the State address that
Mesa Film Studios is going to
locate on the west side of
Albuquerque. They have entered
into a lease with the city of
Albuquerque to locate uh near
the Double Eagle Airport on
city-owned property and they're
uh they're currently under
engineering and design for that,
and that will add 6 more sound
stages, uh, to that area we're
slated for construction on that
project to start in 2026.
I know Karina was in here
earlier and I, I just, I'll take
a moment to brag about the job
that Karina has done. She, she's
really stepped in and done an
excellent job of replacing Axi
Novis, who was our first
director and actually was an
absolute rock star and really
got us off on the right foot,
uh, with the outdoor recreation
division, and Karina's just
stepped in and just taking it to
the next level. So, uh, I'll
brag about her. I know you got
to talk to her earlier today and
I won't, I, I know she talked to
you about
Everything that's there, but I
did want to mention the outdoor
equity fund.
That's uh the impact since 2021
has been 5.7 million and awarded
over 250 different programs
supported.
Uh, the trails grant is also
been every, every time we go out
for a trails gran, we get more,
more requests than we can get
money out the door, so, uh,
there's a definite need for it,
and we're really doing some
really good work out there as
you can see we've done 164
projects and nearly every
county, there's only 3 counties
we've missed, uh, so far, and
that includes 11 tribal
communities that we've invested
in.
Um, they, as you move on uh to
page 7.
Um,
The outdoor recreation
department is is partnered with
uh CNM Ingenuity to launch a
free week of 14 business
accelerator to help outdoor
recreation businesses or
startups, uh, and this program's
first year saw 36 applicants
competing for 18 slots. So
again, a need is there. We're
seeing more, more demand than
than the opportunities we have,
but a very good program. And
then our marketing grant has
supported um
Many recreational events and
activities, and we've awarded
just under $100 to 41 programs
there.
Main Street has been one of our
longest, uh,
Portions of our department as
far as long-term success, as I
mentioned, they have all the 30
communities that are officially
Main Street uh communities. We
also have 13 uh arts and
cultural districts, and we have
15 active projects.
On their project-based
initiatives. So these are, these
are projects for areas that
aren't necessarily ready for
prime time, uh, meaning a full
scale mainstream program, but
they do have specific needs in
their main street or their
corridor areas, and so we, we
work on uh program-based
initiatives to help them get
those projects finished up on a
one by one basis. The
legislatures, as we move on to
page 9, the legislature has been
very generous to us. It may
Street with Capital Outlay.
And we've been able to move a
good number of projects through
the pipeline. You'll notice this
year we won't be asking for
capital outlay, and I know
you're right.
Why? And it's like, because we
we already place where we don't
have enough shovel ready
projects construction ready
projects, and we've always
prided ourselves when we come to
you and ask for capital outlay
money that we have projects
ready. They're shovel ready.
We're ready to get the money to
them and get the money out the
door. We're not in that
position, so we're not going to
ask, ask for any money this
year. But don't forget us. Uh,
we will have construction ready
projects, uh, by the legislative
session of 2017
Nixon won't be back, uh, but we
just felt it was better for us
to, to continue with the, the
direction we've always had,
meaning shovel ready projects
when we ask for the funding. Um,
so we will, we will be back, but
you won't be seeing us this
year.
We also secured, it seems like a
small number sometimes, but the
res resiliency Alliance, uh, we
help fund a nonprofits there and
it, but it really these, these
funds really help these small
nonprofits just sustain life and
continue on. It's really
important impact. You'll notice
on uh our total fiscal impact
for 2024 saw $51.5 million of
reinvestment, uh, that is over
241.
Uh, rehabs that we've done, and
you can see we've seen new
businesses or expansions and and
uh 244 new jobs and, and these
are small rural places, so
those, those jobs have.
Uh, very, very large impact.
And uh
Farmington has created over uh
uh or received over $50,000 in
capital outlay, uh, to develop
the construction documents for
the renovation in Orchard Park
and 40,000 to develop their ACD
plan, and then those are going
to be part of that 10 million
that we got from last year that
we'll be getting those, those
projects to completion. Have you
moved to page 10, we'll talk
about justice, equity, diversity
and inclusion.
Uh, they were also successful in
obtaining SS.
DCI money uh for technical
assistance program and then we
were able to what we did with
that money is we contracted with
three partners to provide.
Accounting, financial and legal
assistance, uh, to rural and
tribal entities. So, uh,
companies, businesses, and
tribal entities in those areas
can come to these contractors
and get those helps uh the the
help that they need and and
getting their financials in
order and, and doing those
things necessary. Uh, and
there's also legal assistance,
so if they need help setting up
their, their corporation or they
have questions that they can get
answered and uh
They are offered in tile stools,
say hey missing gallop as we, as
we look to do this, we also
developed a resource map that is
now live.
That includes over 500 statewide
business resources. Uh, you can
go to this, uh, to this website
and you can click through it and
find exactly the resource that
you as a business, uh, could be
looking for, and it also
includes a community calendar
for events that are going along
the way. The Jedi office as you
move to slide 11 also launched
the first Hispanic Business and
Black Business that saw over 150
people attend each of those
events. They held a certified
incubator
We had a $30 special
appropriation.
There were, we were able to push
out 6 grants to certified
incubators in in the state of
New Mexico. This is the first
time we've been able to assist
certified incubators in over 4
years, uh, through our budget.
So very much again, thank you to
the legislature for providing us
with those. And one of the other
things that the justice equity,
diversity and inclusion program,
the Jedi staff, as we've
implemented a program where
annually we get the entire staff
of the economic development
department to go through
training to understand about
underserved communities to to
understand about uh systemic
racism and things that we
probably don't always understand
on a regular basis doing our
jobs. So, uh, we've implemented
that as a mandatory training
program within our department
and we hope to see that grow
across the entire uh
Entirety of state government
that we all just pause for a
moment and, and learn to
understand those things that are
out there, both culturally and
systemically and so that when we
are doing business that we
understand and reach out to
those people that we may not
traditionally do just in the
normal course of doing our job.
So it's an excellent program.
And even though the first year
there may have been some
grumbling about having to attend
it, uh, it's, it's been very
well received by the staff and
they actually
Look forward to it now, so I, I
think it's been a huge success.
It moved to slide 12, Creative
Industries division, the newly,
newest created division in the,
in the economic development
department.
And um we completed the $200,000
study and guess what it found
out that 1 in 4 residents earned
livelihood in this sector in
McKinley County.
So it, I mean, we may
think overlook creative
industries a lot, uh, but there
are a lot of people out there
attempting to make a living in
this sector and we need to, we
need to figure out how to bring
those resources to them, uh, to
help them thrive. And we're
really excited that uh Johnny
Harvey is, is our director for
this division, and we look
forward for really great things.
As I mentioned, is as I opened
up, you did give us some money
last year. It was uh
And we were able to move $1.8
million out the out the door,
and 3 of those awards went to,
um,
Uh, Dee, uh, College, Gallup and
Moura, uh, and you, you can see
on the page, uh, the results
from, from those CID awards.
When this administration took
office as one of the first acts
was the Energy Transition Act.
SB 489, uh, a designated 5.9
million for
Projects in the San Juan area
through economic development.
There was never nearly $13
million appropriated to the
Department of Workforce
Solutions to help displaced
workers and retrained, and then
there's $1.8 million that was
awarded to the Indian Affairs
Division.
Uh, Department of Workforce
Solutions has moved their money
out the door. Indian Affairs is
still working on theirs, and we
had 4 projects that we funded
and I just realized there's a
typo on there because those
numbers don't add up.
Uh, and I apologize for that,
but uh those are the four
projects that we funded, uh, the
northern New Mexico indigenous
farmers, CNE concrete.
The purple adobe lavender and
the city of Farmington were the
four projects that we, uh, that
we funded for uh the ETA.
Just transition and the state
plan. This is also something
that the legislatures has asked
us to work on, as you recall you
established uh the set and seek
committees, uh, and then, uh, we
have staff that's been working
on uh just transition as well as
working on our twenty-year
strategic plan. We, we look at
it and update it every year and
we, and so it's an ongoing
effort. Every year we look at
the strategic plan. We look at
what we did
For if it's still relevant, if
it's not, let's get rid of it.
Um, and
What are the things that we
still have yet to accomplish
and, and we look at that every
year. But the Just Transition
objective is simply to be more
diversified and sustainable and
to work uh to work on updating
that statewide plan on a, on an
annual basis.
The next generation of this plan
will, um,
Really focus on finding ways to
use, uh, the federal funds that
are available out there. There's
a lot of federal money out
there, but, uh, understanding
how they work and how and what
the best pathways of of getting
them there, uh, will help us.
We're going to focus again on
clean energy infrastructure,
climate resiliency, uh, as we
look at those funds, we'll also
look again at underserved and
underprivileged communities
being our top priority. And
then, uh, finally on page 16,
you'll look
At all of the agencies that
we've engaged with. We had
really good response, uh, when
we reached out to all of our
state agencies and friends to
give us uh comments and impact
on the strategic plan. We had
almost 100% return. I won't
embarrass the one that didn't
return us, but we, we, uh, we
had nearly 100% return on that
and we had a, we had really good
comments and, and we really feel
like it's going to
Help us truly have a successful
Strategic plan moving forward.
And then the final side, I just,
again, I, I want to keep saying
this, thank you.
Because of the investments that
you've made in LA.
We've had very positive impacts.
So one of the things that I
instituted when I came in as
division director with with this
within this uh department 5
years ago.
was on our leader projects we
We really only monitored jobs.
All of our PPAs, or project
participation agreement, which
is really the contracts with the
companies.
The reporting requirements were
pretty much, how many jobs,
Which is good, it's fine. I mean
Jobs is a good measurement, but
I wanted to do more and so since
that time, the new PPAs that
we've implemented have language
in there that says they have to
submit to us on an annual basis.
Uh, and the economic impact,
data sheet, which we, we supply
to them and we ask them to
supply the data back to us.
For those companies that uh we,
we had a good working
relationship and we pretty much
said we'd really like you to
fill this out. We can't
contractually bind you like we
will in the future, but, and
we've had really good success.
So,
Uh, we did get, we did have 60
projects that we have now
full-fledged economic impact
analysis on them uh from some as
new as only a year old and some
as old as probably 7 years old,
uh, in that time frame, but we
do have uh 60 projects. The
average length of those projects
would be 4 years. Most of the
small PPAs that we engage with
companies are usually 5 years in
length, the big projects are
usually 10 years in length. So
you can see that.
You know, most of these projects
are somewhere, somewhere getting
close to their, to their
completion. But there are some
that are very new. These numbers
look pretty astounding, but, uh,
but they're accurate and what
we're looking, when I look at
the ROI here, we're only looking
at the fiscal impact. We're not
using that big economic impact,
which is a really big number and
we, we like to talk about it
usually when we do press
releases because it's really
impressive and it's true, but
what we're really focused on
here when we talk.
About ROI is how much PIT G I G
RT and for the cities and
counties property tax to this
project truly generate. Uh, and
you can see the numbers.
The other thing that we also do
uh when when looking at this, so
you understand when it says all
incentives.
We look at those companies that
we're talking about their leader
projects and then the, the ones
that we know, it's easy, if
they're JTI program, we know how
much JTIP money we've given
them, but we also ask them as
part of that questionnaire, did
you submit for high wage job?
Did you submit for rural jobs?
Did you submit for
manufacturer's investment tax
credit.
And if they check yes to any of
those.
The tax department can't give us
that.
Narrow specific information, but
we know enough about the company
based on what their capital
expenditures have been based on
their job hires, uh, and based
on their payroll that we have a
pretty good idea we can
calculate fairly closely as to
what those potential incentives
would have been high wage, rural
jobs, manufacturers investment
tax credit. So we rolled that
number in to what we do know on
JTIP and Lita, and that's what
we call the total incentives
that this company has.
And then we look at the total
fiscal impact, and you can see
we're still getting a 101%
return on our investment against
all incentives for the state of
New Mexico.
And then that that is a that's
the awarded amount. So usually
the way LEDA works is, you know,
say the award is $5000. They
might get 1 million in year one
when they get their building
completed and the certificate of
occupancy, then they might get
another 1 million when they hire
the 1st 20 people, etc. etc. as
they meet these certain
milestones, then they get out.
So that's why there's a
incentives awarded, that's the
total amount that they could
potentially get.
And then they accessed is the
money that we've actually put in
their hands. So you can see it
jumps up to 231% and then if we
consider in all the entities,
the cities, the counties, the
school districts, uh, and the
economic impact that it has on
them, the fiscal impact that it
has on them. You see the numbers
exponentially get higher. So
again, thank you. If you didn't
give us the money to invest, and
we weren't uh helping these,
these companies grow and expand
into Mexico. We wouldn't be
getting that return on
investment, but I do
I think it's important that we
understand that that is an ROI.
Sometimes when we get mired in
making a budget.
Personally or professionally or
whatever, we always look at
everything as a cost, and we
need to understand that when we
make these types of investments,
we're getting that money back.
And it's actually a return on
investment. It's very similar to
you putting money away in your
401k.
Uh, so that you'll have money in
return. It's the same thing.
It's not a cost to you. It's an
investment into the future and
this is the same thing. So
again, I'm, I'm happy to answer
any questions, even those you
have for tourism, uh, but my
main message to you is thank you
we appreciate the support, um, I
think all of you know my phone
number and I usually answer. So
thank you very much.
Thank you for your presentation
today, um, we've got a.
My vice chair, Carrie Hamlin on
the list.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you both for for doing
this. Obviously this is an area
of interest for me given what I
get to do for a living, um, and
the honor I get to do that. Um,
I do have a couple of comments
and a couple of questions, and
Mark, I'll go for you first.
Um, the, the conversation that
we had, you were, you, uh, um,
you know, Jennifer was here
already and I think you might
have caught some of the
conversation that we had with
Karina and um and Carrie and
William about um the opportunity
for like an outdoor training
academy and I just asked like
for us to start marinating on
that because one of the, the
conversations was is that we
don't have enough people to do
that and I don't like paying
people out of state to do those
things like us to nurture our
own and grow that that.
economy. And so if there's
something there that maybe when
we start really kind of getting
our teeth into it that where EDD
can help with that, um, because
we have the example I used down
in southern New Mexico is that
uh Dua Community College, we
have the industrial training
academy and that is a
partnership with Union Pacific
to train people to work on the,
on the rail yard right there, as
you know.
And so if there's a way that we
can kind of model that
throughout the state to help
nurture the outdoor recreation
industry by teaching and
nurturing and providing
resources to people to go into
that field in our state and meet
the needs that are that where we
have those vacancies, right? Um,
so that's something that I, that
I hope that we can do, um, uh,
for that, just something that
kind of just marinate on as, as,
you know, I, I don't want to
insert things that Karina's
like, I can't do that right now,
but just for us to think about
and how we can work on making.
a success, um.
You know, one of the things
you'd mentioned about the, the
food, uh, the food program, um,
being able to support the
healthy food financing
initiative. Thank you because
your department initiates that
and that is a program that is
designed to provide low interest
loans or grants to uh mainly
black, brown and indigenous
farmers, mainly females, because
the USDA admits that they
discriminate against those
groups more than any other else
when it comes down to funding.
So I appreciate that and I will
always continue to support that,
um, because I think it's a very
valuable.
program and also providing
people with access to healthy
food, um, because we don't, we
have these, um, there's a term
of food deserts, but also
there's a, a term that a a black
farmer by the name of Karen, I
think her last name is
Washington, used as a term
called food apartheid, um,
because the deserts are
beautiful, and, um, and what
we're associating this with is,
you know, food insecurity. So,
um, something I'd like to put
out there. Uh, one of the things
that I want to thank your
department for doing that we
were able to do down in Las
Cruces is the catastrophic
business relief program.
Because for many of us who work
uh in economic development, we
know that every small business
is one catastrophe away from
being closed down, and we saw
this during the pandemic and um
uh and so we have been able to,
I'll get those statistics and
well I think hopefully we'll
have that presentation when
we're in in in Las Cruces, um,
of being able to save a lot of
businesses when they've had
unexpected expenses. And so the
one statistic I can pull is that
I know that they had saved 6
businesses during the heat wave.
Because their HVAC systems went
out.
And they were able to provide
that resource to them to help
them repair those, and I would
like to try and do that at the
state level, but I think it
would be going through um
Martika's department and not
because it would be, it would be
loans.
Um, low interest loans that
Martin helped craft, um, and
then lastly, 11 thing I would
ask is, um, you know, the Jedi
summit that you did, and I'm
really grateful that there's
certainly a focus on, especially
black businesses, black owned
businesses, and brown owned
businesses. Um, I would also,
uh, just remind you that there
is an intersectionality between
queer businesses as well.
Um, last year we did have
underserved businesses that were
uh featured in a panel when we
were in Albuquerque last year
during this interim committee.
And so, um, if that can also be
included. I would appreciate
that, um, because there are
those businesses that are giving
back to the community and also
experience uh certain challenges
as well. Um, so that's all I
have for you, Mark. OK, well,
well, thank you, thank you for
that. uh, Madam Chair, um, by
Hamlin. Uh, there's, there's no
doubt that the Jedi group would
Completely do that. So I'll
just, it's just a matter of
mentioning it to them and
they'll, and they'll, and
they'll take care of, they'll
take care of that alliance in
Albuquerque, that I think would
be really good, um, but, uh, you
know, and this leads into kind
of my, my, my questions and
comments for Jennifer is that um
there are businesses outside of
Albuquerque and below Socorro.
um, so I would, I would like a
north of Santa Fe too,
believe it right yeah,
so I mean
And I'm always welcome to, I
mean, we've got, you know, the
representative and chair
Gallegos and I both personally
know some dear friends who are
queer, who own a business, it's
very successful, um, and I think
that, you know, there are ways
that we can help highlight them
as well, um, and help them. Um,
and so I appreciate that. So,
and, and Mark, you've always had
an open door and I and and even,
you know, your, your predecessor
always an open door, so I really
am grateful for that.
Um, Jennifer, if we can look, if
we can look at Jennifer's slide
cause I just want to see the
visual of this. If you can go to
page 30, it's the tourism event
growth and sustainability
program?
There we go.
So Jennifer, I do have to
disagree with you.
Um,
a little bit, um, just because,
uh, there's not much in southern
New Mexico. Um, you know, our
international film festival,
great. We've got monuments to
Main Street Month. We've got the
wine festivals. We've got a lot
going on. Um, and so I would
hope that uh we can uh increase
the spots on there because if
you don't mind going to page,
um, and then the next page, page
31.
We can go to that one.
We see the visual representation
and then if you can go to to the
next one.
Those maps should look like
that.
So I, I, I, I know that you're
not disagreeing with me that, I
mean, there's certainly um,
But I do I do think that there
are the things and so my
question is, are they just not
applying for this? Is, is that
the issue?
And do we need to up our game on
making sure that these different
events get registered with you.
Um, Madam Chair, Madam Vice
Chair, yes, I mean, that's it.
We try to do our best to get,
you know, the word out about
these programs. Our team this
weekend will be going to Demming
for the Demming duck races. It's
an event that we have supported,
um, as you mentioned, the Las
Cruces International Film
Festival, um, so you know, these
are, and we would hope that more
events, um, and we would hope
that more communities would
apply for our funding, um, but
yeah, absolutely, in, you know.
Anything that we can do to work
with you to get the word out so
that we do see better
representation. Obviously our
clean and beautiful, um, so our
tourism event growth and
sustainability program. This is
our year two. OK, so it's year
two. So it's a newer grant
program that I think, you know,
obviously newer grant program
trying to get the word out and
destination forward as well. It
is your two, and so then we see
Clean and Beautiful, which has
been around
forever. And so then.
More communities know about it,
take advantage of it, um, and so
as we're growing this program
and, you know, again, thank you
for the investments in that and
we were able to grow both of the
tourism event growth and
sustainability program, the
first year that we had it, we
utilized ARPA funds, um, and
then we replaced that obviously
with general funds we've we've
used up all of our ARPA funds um
at the tourism department, so we
replaced that with general
funds, um, and then destination
Forward we grew it, you know,
another from 1.9% to 2.
3 and hopefully we'll continue
to grow so that we can support
and help more communities. OK, I
I appreciate that, Jennifer, and
I think one of the things that
uh I think my colleague and our
friend, uh, Debbie Moore, who is
the CEO and president of the
Greater Las Cruces Chamber of
Commerce. And who's listening
and who's listening, um, cause
she'll send us texts. Um, I get
to work with her a lot and so I
would recommend that the
department connect with chambers
of commerce throughout the
state, because uh those are
opportunities, you know, often
we're asked to sponsor events,
and
So, um, those relationships
there can help fill out these
maps and so I recognize and I
and I did want to feel like, is
it just that people aren't
applying for them, um, you know,
Debbie and I also have the same
conversations with Workforce
Solutions is like work with us
because we have these list
serves of these businesses and
we have creative ways of getting
this information out to our
community, not just our business
members. And so if there are
ways that we can do that, I, I
think it's safe for me to.
Offer on behalf of Debbie and I,
um, that, you know, all we need
is just a flyer JPEG, and we can
send that out.
Super easy. Um, and so I would
love to be able to do that
because we get a little crabby
when Southern New Mexico gets
ignored.
You'll hear us about it, you'll,
I do especially on the floor and
in committee and so we would
really like to help.
Fill that out for you. And I
understand if people aren't,
aren't getting that information
into you, that's on us. I'd like
it also to be on us to help get
that information to you.
Madam Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
absolutely, and we will continue
to get out into the community.
We just recently um finished a
true tour down to Demming and
Silver City. Um, I will continue
to go to the south. We were, um,
obviously in Clovis recently
we've been, this is my, I was
just telling, we have our new
tribal tourism development
coordinator. I brought her on
and she started this week, um,
so this is like day 3. I don't
know, day 4, so I brought her
with us, but I was telling her
this is the 3rd time I've been
to.
Farmington
Uh, this summer, and so it's
great. We're always trying to
get out into communities to
spread the word, have town
halls, let people know about us,
but anything that we can do, and
we're happy to work with you to
get the information out. I, I do
appreciate that, um, because I,
I do think that there are ways
that we can, we can really make
sure because I also understand
capacity, but if our community
is not fully aware of these
opportunities, then we, I think
it's, it's our job because of
our connection with you in our
capacity as legislators.
Uh, to make sure that that
information gets there. So I'd
really like to do that cause
then then I don't get so crappy
when I don't see Southern New
Mexico represented on maps.
So thank you. I appreciate that.
That's all, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Thank you, and uh, you know, we,
we were kind of talking about it
and snickering about it when,
when you're presenting cause we
were looking at the maps, um,
and I think part of.
You know, we're, we're.
We're small little communities,
um, that sometimes aren't
talking and so I think that's
important, but I think we also
have um that international peace
that is so close to us, and I
don't know that we're tapping
into some of the, um, whether
it's festivals or some type of
projects that they've got, and
it seems like there would be a
way to bring some of that down
into New Mexico as well,
because, you know, we, we really
butt up against El Paso, Juarez,
and then our communities.
Cuz we're we're very uh a lot of
our communities are very rural,
and so I think they would get
caught up in some of those and
probably um participate in in
more of those um type of events
and maybe even Las Cruces or um
Alan McGordo, wouldn't you think
so, um,
I guess also getting the word
out in in that way, so, um, just
a thought, um, when you were
presenting also, uh, it looks
like
We're really hitting the um
western state market.
Um, is there a reason that we're
Focusing there. Yeah, Madam
Chair, so, um, our fly our fly
markets are based on data. Um,
we really try to see, you know,
again, where we're going to get
that return on investment, and
we continue to look at that
again, visitation volume, we're
nowhere near capacity. We can
still get visitors, um, and so
we will continue to expand where
we, you know, as we did into San
Francisco where it makes the
most sense and where we're going
to get that return on
investment. Um, so every, you
know, all of our
Fly markets are based upon our
research, um, and where we're
really going to see kind of that
return. And so, um, we'll
continue, like I said, to uh hit
Dallas. It's a huge driver,
right? People from Texas come,
they come to New Mexico and they
enjoy their time here. And we're
not going to abandon that, but I
also think we'll start to look
at where are our high volume
visitors coming from, and
that's, you know, one of the
reasons we're getting into the
international market. We've been
traditionally our department has
been focused on, you know,
Domestic marketing, but we're
really looking at those
international visitors because
we know, especially Mexico,
Canada, um, you know, that are
right borders, as you mentioned,
are spending more money are
coming, they're staying longer
and they're spending more money.
So, um, we'll continue to look
at that to see, uh, not only
just volume, but who, what
visitors are spending more in
our state. And when I, when I, I
see my, my partner here to to do
the button, but um one of the
best advertisements I saw, I
And you know, flying in and out
of Dallas or um Las Vegas was
the green chili cheeseburger,
uh, you know, you see that just
on the at the airport and you
know, I think people relate to
the green chili and so just um
just a visual, so just saying,
um I oh no, OK,
because I've also seen the one
of Carlsbad Caverns, and my
friend Angel Pena and his kid
are in there and I'm in the
Dallas airport going, oh look,
there's homie.
There's angel.
That's nice, yeah,
um, I don't think we have any
more questions.
One who brought the
the British influencers here.
Um, so they were at, uh, so at
IPW, the International Travel
Trade, it's the largest travel
trade in the United States. They
have them all over the world,
but in New Mexico IPW, I mean in
the United States IPW is our
largest. So our Cody Johnson,
you know, we meet with these
travel buyers, that's all we do
there. We set up appointments.
And as a result of him um
setting up an appointment, you
know, we had an international
tour operators say great, we're
including New Mexico in our next
in our itinerary, and that's
huge, and that's what we're
going to continue to do, um, and
as we really stand up this
program, I think we're going to
see and I we've already seen, we
have our 2 2023 data, but it's
just early indications are
great, like increase in spend,
increase in visitation, but
we're seeing a huge increase in
international, and I think we're
gonna.
Continue to see that through
these efforts. Well, for those
who may not, there, there are
these two fellows. I think it's
Justin and Jace or something.
They're from the UK. They can,
they're real popular on TikTok,
Representative Onion Nou, did
you see them too? And they
started in southern New Mexico
and work their way up and the
thing that was beautiful about
that, besides that it's super
clever.
Um, is that they left.
Right before the fires in
Royoso.
And then they started talking
about the fires in Royoso and
helping raise money for the
fires in Ruidos. So not every
influencer is going to be that
that conscious, but what I feel
that these guys were able to do
was genuinely say how much they
really enjoyed New Mexico and so
I, I commend you on that because
that was brilliant when I
started seeing these guys. I was
like, of course I'm going to
follow them. I want to see where
they go in my home state. Um, so
I think that's great and being
these really creative because
we're also hitting a different
demographic there, um, but.
With the popularity of TikTok,
these guys are in the UK.
They're getting there, so I, I,
I really appreciate this
opportunity to go outside of
that little box that we're used
to working in, so thank you very
much. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Well, I think that's all the
questions that we have. I know
that being the last presenters
on the last day is not always,
you don't have the the fullest
of uh audiences, um, but I think
the presentations were
excellent, um, I appreciate you
making the trip up here. I think
it's important for us to be in
some of these rural communities,
um, so people have access and
can can visit with you directly.
Uh, you both have been so
gracious, and I appreciate you
being our last victims of the
day. So thank you so.
So much. Thank you, Madam Chair
and members of the committee. We
appreciate it. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Members of the committee
have a, have a good, safe
travels back. Thank you. You
too.
So before we close up, um.
We are going to see if there's
anybody here for public comment?
We've got one person on Zoom, so
we'll do that one first.
just going to say.
Me uh Anne Green, uh you are
unmuted.
Hi, can you hear me? We can.
Oh, thank you. I'm sorry.
Uh, my name is Anne Green Romick
and I work for Southwestern
Power Group.
The developer of the Rio Soul
transmission line. We just
wanted to take this opportunity
to provide a really brief update
on the Rio Soul project.
We are the 2nd line of the
original Sunzia transmission
project that you heard about
yesterday. Southwestern Power
Group was the original developer
of Sunzia before we sold it to
Pattern Energy in 2022.
Rio soul is an AC line, and
alternating current line, which
means that we will have.
Energy to serve Arizona and New
Mexico customers along its path.
We also parallels the Sunzia
Road and has completed most of
its permitting and right of way
acquisition in tandem with Szia.
It's a 557 mile high voltage
transmission line that will
create over 2600 job years in
construction, operations and
maintenance of the line.
We plan to start construction in
2026 following Sanzia's
completion.
Uh, recently, I completed
economic impact study conducted
by E3 consultants shows that Rio
Soul will bring $2.4 billion of
private capital investment.
$193 million in fiscal revenues
to Arizona and New Mexico.
Uh, 1.17 billion in newly
generated economic activity in
New Mexico and Arizona at 677
million in direct economic
benefit in New Mexico and $506
million to Arizona.
And an additional 674 million in
indirect and induced economic
benefits.
And we're also helping the state
to meet its renewable energy
transition goals with all the
benefits that come from that.
We look forward to meeting with
many of you in your local
communities.
Hopefully this interim and thank
you very much, that's all. Thank
you for calling in. Uh, next we
have Mr. Joseph Hernandez here
in person.
Thank you for being with us
today.
I was hoping to meet you soon.
I'm gonna be learning this soon.
Uh, Madam Chair,
Members of the committee, um,
Uh, community leaders have
participated in and folks uh uh
listening online. My name is
Joseph Hernandez. I'm, uh,
speaking as a community member
from uh here in San Juan County.
I, uh, uh, grew up here, uh, you
know, graduated at Shiprock High
School.
Um, and, and just like everybody
else, I, I, I left my community,
you know, I went to school, went
to work outside. Then then I
came back and, and, and I told
my, my chapter officials I go,
why is it nothing uh
being why is everything the
same? And, and my chapter
official told me, run for, for
the community land use planning
Committee. And that's when I
first learned the difficulties
it, it, it, you know, we face on
the Navajo Nation.
When it comes to economic
development, uh, the numerous
obstacles and barriers, you
know, to get uh projects uh
through community-led projects.
And so I, I, you know, I, I
really understood that working
at the community level and um,
and having to, to continue to,
to work, uh, you know, with the
many different, there's 56
Navajo chapters in New Mexico.
Um, you know, in, in San Juan
County, 60% of the of the land
is uh Native American land, you
know, tribal land. And so we
have a a a unique, uh, you know,
uh, uh, Four Corners community
is really unique up here. Um,
and just like everybody else,
you know, I've.
I myself, my first job was at
San Juan Jaring Station. My
first job coming back home was
at Four Quarters Power plant.
You know, I, I, I worked in the
oil and gas fields, you know,
and, and I have relatives who
work in in that industry, uh,
and, and all of the industries
that we have and um but you
know, I really liked this last
uh comment about tourism
because, uh, you know, we, we
have a lot of, uh, you know,
unique opportunity to
To be able to uh uh to capture
that money that's, that's just
not uh uh staying in our
communities. But um I, I learned
a lot from, from hearing the
presentations online, and I'm
really glad that uh I, I just
want to again, thank, thank you
for coming up here, um, and I'm
looking forward to the work
ahead. Yeah, thank you.
Thank you all, um.
Is there any anyone else here
for public comment?
Um, before we close out, I once
again, want, want to thank our
staff, um, they do all the heavy
lifting, uh, they get us
organized and um they, they're
here early and, and they leave
late, so we really appreciate
the work that you do for us. So
thank you. Uh, once again, I
wanna thank uh San Juan College,
uh, for giving us such a lovely
place to be for being so
considerate, was surrounding us
with these beautiful flowers,
um, making sure that we had
The meals, um, I know that, um,
San Juan, um.
Foundation, correct, was one of
the meal providers of Four
Corners. Thank you so much. Um,
and it was, I mean, once again,
last night was such a treat and
just the hospitality that we've
received here.
Top notch. So thank you so much.
Um, I also wanted to do a plug
for our next meeting. It's going
to be September 11th through
13th. We once again will be on
the road in our home turf will
be in Las Cruces, um, and so we
were hoping to get that agenda
out sometime next week and so,
um, if you do come down, please
bring a cooler, bring something
so you can take back some green
chili because September is, is a
greatest time for hatch green
chili, so I have to do a a a
plug
That and um and I'll be
providing recipes for my famous
white girl rellenos and the
cheese ball that I make.
So you can get our act on the
road, so please come and see us.
So thank you all once again so
much and um please be safe going
home.
Thank you and we.
