This, um, thank you for uh for,
I wanted to say thank you uh for
hosting us today. What a hidden
gem. I did. I, I kept thinking I
was lost all the way up until
the door, so, um, but what a
beautiful campus and just um
very, very happy that we're here
today. So what I think I'd like
to do is I'm gonna start with
the committee. uh, we'll start
with the introductions and I'm
hoping by the time we're done
with introductions, um, Senator
Charlie will be here, but if
not, we'll then start with the
present
ation so we don't, um, get too
far off schedule. And so with
that, I'm gonna go ahead and
start with Representative, uh,
Royal Caviero. If you would go
ahead and give a little
introduction and, and we'll move
down the line. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Good
morning, uh, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, those
in the audience and those
viewing. My name is Patricia
Royal Caballero. I represent
House District 13, which is the
far southwest quadrant of
Albuquerque, and I've been on
this committee. I'm happy to be
on this committee since my first
term. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee,
audience. Uh, I'm Gail
Armstrong. Uh, I'm a state
representative for District 49,
which is part of Valencia, not
this area, but, uh, my friends
and family here and Rio
communities I have, uh, so
Catherine Secorro Sierra, and
Valencia Counties. Uh, my home
is in Magdalena, New Mexico, and
uh pleased to be here.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Good
morning. I'm Senator Nicole
Tobiasin. I represent District
21, which is the northeast
pocket of Albuquerque.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Good
morning, everybody. My name's
Nicole Chavez. I serve District
31. That's the far northeast
heights of Albuquerque, and I'm
so happy to be here.
Good morning, Madam Chair. My
name's Alan Martinez. I
represent District 23, which is
the northern part
of Rio Rancho in the very west
edge of the town of Bernallio,
and I'm happy to be back on this
committee.
Glad to have you back. Uh, if
we'll go on to this end over
here. Go ahead, Representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, good morning
to everybody. My name is Martin
Zamora
I represent House District 63.
It covers the south half of
Curry County, north half of
Roosevelt, all of Debaca, all of
Guadalupe, and a touch of San
Miguel County. Thank you for
having us.
Hello everybody. My name is
Anita Gonzalez, and I am from
Las Vegas and I'm um House
District 70, so my district is
majority of Semio County as well
as parts of Torrance County.
Half of Torrance County. Thank
you.
Good morning, Madam Chair. uh,
Joshua Sanchez, Senator, uh,
this is my area, District 29,
and I'm happy to have all of you
here in my hometown and I can't
wait to see what we have on the
presentations. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Good morning, Madam Chair. I'm
Natalie Figueroa. I served
Senate District 18 in the
Northeast heights of Albuquerque
and really enjoyed the beautiful
drive in here this morning.
Morning, Madam Chair. I'm Bill
Sheriff.
Let me try that again
Good morning
I'm Bill Sherrer. I'm the state
senator from Senate District
One, which is Farmington, west
to the edge of the Navajo
Nation.
Thank you, and I think
Representative Cullen, uh, we're
just doing introductions.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
Representative Catherine Cullen,
the northern part of Riar Rancho
in Sandoval County. Thank you.
And if we want to go to our
staff real quickly
with.
service
Aaron Bond council Service
and Roberto Sanchez, Webcaster.
Thank you. And once again, I'm
Doreen Gallegos. I'm the vice
chair of this committee, um,
and, um, once again we're very,
very pleased that we're being
hosted by, uh, UNM Valencia and,
um, if we can get our first
presenters up to up to start the
presentation. It looks like
we've got
is it Robert uh, Noblin?
Roseanne Peralton
Victoria Archuleta, Jonathan
Aragon
Good morning
Just you today. OK, then I won't
read all the names. OK, thank
you.
Is is Rio communities here as
well?
OK. Did you all want to come on
up? or or is it, are we doing
two separate presentations? Uh,
they're, they're separate, but
we can all share.
Come on up
And I guess why we're um getting
settled, I wanna, I don't know
who provided breakfast today.
You and I'm gonna also said,
thank you so much. It's always
nice to be able to come in and
have a cup of coffee and some
breakfast, especially when we're
traveling in from, from faraway
places. So I really appreciate
that. Thank you for providing
that. Great.
um, Vice Chair Gallegos, uh,
members of the committee, thank
you for being here in Valencia
County. We are so excited as a
community to host all of you and
to share all the really exciting
things that are happening, um,
in Los Lunas, Rio communities
and all across Valencia County.
Um, in your packets, I did
provide um copies of uh the
presentation for the village of
Los Lunas. Um, and if, uh, I
believe those are about to get,
that's about to get pulled up.
So it's also on the screen, um.
available
So just a moment. And, uh, of
course, on behalf of Mayor
Charles Griego and the council
of the village of Los Lunas.
Again, we welcome you to our
community. Um, for the village
of Los Lunas, uh, I have the
privilege of serving as a senior
economic developer and film
liaison for the village, um, in,
in the village of Los Lunas, um,
we had a bit of a reorg about a
year ago. So, um, I now have,
uh, my own department, so it is
the, uh, in economic
development, I oversee business
and economic development. What
you would pretty much imagine
that to be tra traditionally um
working on recruitment,
expansion, um, and of course
attraction of companies into the
village of Los Lunas. Um, also,
I oversee the tourism and visit
Los Lunas marketing initiatives,
um, and all the largers tax
spend for that and then also uh
service film liaison to the
state's film office. So, um,
since Albuquerque is home to
North uh Netflix's North
American headquarters. We do get
a lot of overflow from
production, um, here. So they
do come through my office
Um, if you could scroll up a
little bit on the, thank you.
So, uh, for those of you that
are not familiar here in the
village of Los Lunas, we are one
of the fastest growing
communities in the state of New
Mexico. Technically we're the
2nd fastest to the city of Rio
Rancho, but, um, you know, I, I
joke with the mayor of your
rancho that we're catching up
pretty quick. Uh, we're building
very fast and we have all of the
main and major um home builders
that you see in the city of
Albuquerque and Rio Rancho in
Sandoval Counties. So they're
all building very fast here, um,
and at a significantly
affordable rate, um, in compari
son to other parts of the metro
area. So as Albuquerque is
seeing uh somewhat of a of a
shortage, an increase in prices
of available and affordable
homes. We do get, again, the
overflow of, um, a lot of the
workforce that are deciding to
come and live in Los Unas and
Valencia County. So definitely a
win for us and a major reason
for um our growth in in
population.
So a few of our biggest
employers, um, as you can see
on, on the screen, uh, the Los
Lunas Metadata Center, I do
understand that you, uh, will
have a tour and learn a little
bit more about Meta tomorrow
during your, uh, during your
tour. So I won't spend too much
time uh on Meta, but they have
been one of the most exceptional
companies in Los Lunas and
Valencia County and have really
been, uh, a driving force to
what's put us on the national
and international maps. So, um,
just their, their presence alone
and their millions of dollars
of investment into Valencia
County and to the state of New
Mexico has been one of the most
transformative things that we've
seen in the last 10 years.
The Walmart distribution center,
they have recently celebrated
their 25th year in operation.
They were kind of the first big
name company to uh establish in
the Los Motos Business Park in
Los Lunas, and they employ,
um, almost 900 people and an
additional 100 in contractors.
Uh, while Kainoi, Niagara
bottling, Frisinus Medical Care,
and then accurate machine and
tools are also significant
corporate employers, um, and
then the Amazon fulfillment
Center, actually this week, they
celebrate a year of being in
operation. Um,
at their peak around holiday
season, they have about 120 to
1500 employees, a good majority
of those actually being here
from Valencia County and some
that transferred from the ABQ
one site in Westside Albuquerque
that were already residents of
Valencia County, but they were
able to move and work closer to
home. So that is very exciting
for us and, and I just want to
keep Amazon in mind because of
how much traffic they also
produce, um, which is a big need
for us to have a new
interchange. Um, at peak, Amazon
off
of the Mexico Highway 6 will
have anywhere from 300 to 500
semi trucks on Highway 6,
causing significant wear and
tear um to that state highway.
Um, let's see
If we can go to the next slide,
please
Thank you. So community assets,
what makes La Luna special. Um,
again, our proximity to
Albuquerque is definitely
attractive to a lot of major
companies. Um, our workforce is
very, uh, fluid. It definitely,
uh, encompasses Valencia,
Bernalilo, and Sandoval
counties. Um, I do want to note
that the village of Los Luna is
in partnership with Bernalilo
and Sandoval Counties for the
I-40 trade port corridor. We do
serve as a significant rail
component for Federal funding,
um, for that uh specific
coalition. But as you see, we're
uh
very proud of being a
pro-business commun community.
We are, uh, we have an excess of
industrial parking available
space. Over 2200 acres of
industrial land between our
three business parks, um, again,
which is very attractive for
manufacturers looking for
increments of 50 to 100, 200
acres at a time. Uh, available
workforce, available housing,
um, again, we are starting to
see some increases in prices
there.
Uh, next slide please
So I, I did want to show a map
of Los Lunas because we have
grown significantly by way of um
organic population increase, but
also some annexation um from
unincorporated parts of the
county. So the three distinct
business parks and is Los Motos
Business Park, Heing Business
and Tech Park West, and then
also the central New Mexico rail
Park. That is where I spend
about 80% of my time and energy
is really trying to recruit
companies to, to lock into those
industrial parks.
And I do want to point out and
see if my
laser works. So just to be in
perspective, uh, this is I-25.
Sorry if I'm a little shaky, but
New Mexico Highway 6 is the only
road to get through the village
of Los Lunas and across Valencia
County. So this Thursday, we're
actually going to break ground
on our Los Lunas Boulevard, the
new I-25 interchange, and
that'll connect I-25 New Mexico
Highway 314. It'll be a 2000 ft
river bridge and connect all the
way out to New Mexico Highway
47, allowing
for increased access in Los
Lunas for commuter traffic, um,
emergency response times, and
then also um just increased
traffic flow throughout the
community. Next slide, please.
Um, again, new infrastructure,
um, thank you to, uh, you know,
this, this committee and to the
legislature for supporting all
the different infrastructure
projects that we have here in
Los Lunas, um, it's definitely
has a ripple effect throughout
the entire county. Um, next
slide please.
So again, the last one is
Boulevard. This is definitely
something that we are very
excited about, very excited to
share, and on Thursday, um, of
course, all are invited to join
us for the official
groundbreaking of the Los Lines
Boulevard project. So it is um
currently, uh, construction is
expected at $159 million in the
funding sources for that are 25
million from the Federal Highway
Administration, 114 from the
Mexico Department of
Transportation and
the village of Los Lunas putting
up almost 20 million as well. So
definitely, uh, you know, as a
community, we do have skin in
the game, and this is going to
be one of the biggest
infrastructure projects in the
state of New Mexico since the
big eye in the early 2000s. So,
um this is uh just an incredible
opportunity. It's gonna overall
increase economic development.
And again, um, what's the most
critical part is the emergency
response times because uh if, if
anyone is ever in Los Lunas and
driving on New Mexico high
way 6 anytime between 2:30 and
5:30
just hope you pack your lunch
cause you're gonna be sitting
there for a while. So I'm
definitely needing, uh, this,
this bridge and one of the
biggest asks that we're going to
have for the next legislative
session is an additional $80
million for phase two. So this
is uh the groundbreaking for
phase one, phase 2, would start
again after that 80 million is
secure and there will be a total
of 6 phases in construction for
this project through 2029.
Next slide please
Um,
so this is going to be also a
multi-use trail. We do plan on
having biking trails, walk
walkability, um, throughout this
bridge and throughout the
corridor and uh again, it'll
also open up a considerable
amount of traffic flow for the
new phase of development that is
called Losenderos, where we
anticipate nearly 5000 homes to
be built over the next 15 years
or so.
Um, the benefits of this project
is we anticipate it to
anticipate for it to generate um
over 50 construction jobs daily
over the span of four years. We
also, um, expected to have
a potential increase in land
value and associated property
taxes uh once the construction
is complete, and then, of
course, the connection from I-25
and 47 will also help to improve
um the rail runner access, um,
next slide please.
So where, where you see here
we'll have a new rail runner,
um, interchange, and it'll help
with the flow of traffic. So the
rail runner, of course, has been
um really important to us here
in the village of Los Lunas
because it does help for
increased access from lend all
the way to, um, Santa Fe. So we
do see a growing number of
commuters actually, uh, you
know, taking
the rail runner from Los Lunas
Transportation Center all the
way up to Albuquerque and Santa
Fe.
Next slide please
So again, this river bridge is
going to be one of the largest
in the state of New Mexico, uh,
once phase two is complete,
it'll be a total of 4 lanes in
width, uh, 2000 ft bridge, and
again it'll expand over the
river, um, allowing for uh
an increase in access. So right
now on New Mexico Highway 6, we
have anywhere from 200 to 30,000
daily commuters on
just that little road. And it
cannot sustain that any longer.
So, um, this, this has been a
project that's been over 25
years in the making. We're
excited that it's finally
happening. We, we get to break
ground on it, um, but we're also
probably about 10 years too late
for a third interchange. So, um,
in some future, we would
definitely need that on the
northern side of Valencia County
and north of the village of Los
Lunas, um, and, and that is
something that's gonna be
critical as we continue to grow
our industrial parks and
hopefully
if I do my job right, you know,
there's more manufacturing
coming in and we're able to
attract additional businesses
into our industrial area, um,
but, but right now what
currently exists is putting a
lot of wear and tear on that, on
that road.
Next slide please
So,
um, I do want to highlight again
what's exciting for us is an
increase in uh residential
development.
So right here, this is the area
that we call Losenderos, and we
have actually broken ground.
This is where the UNM Workforce
Training Center is in the
village of Los Luna. Um, and so
again, to highlight everything
north of New Mexico, Highway 6
is industrial. Everything south
of New Mexico, Highway 6 is all
residential, and this area
called Losenderos, we
anticipate, um, nearly 5000
homes as part of this master
plan development. So again
it is critical to have, uh, this
interchange that'll open up this
access for the new residential
um throughout the rest of the
county. And as this becomes a
major employment center as well,
we'll see increased, um, traffic
there.
um, next slide please.
So workforce data, um, I don't
wanna take up too much time, but
I just do want to highlight that
the village of Los Lunas is
considerably growing. Um, our
workforce and it's not just
limited to those that live
within our municipal boundary.
Um, we're also pulling people
from as far as grants. Um, I
know anecdotally there's people
that work at the data center
that come from, you know, grants
or Gallup for, um, you know,
even just high paying security
jobs. So the data center is
really driving a lot of that
momentum. Um, we're seeing a lot
of people from Bernal Leo and
Sandoval
Counties, even as far north as,
uh, you know, Placitas and
Algodones coming for gainful
employment at the data center at
places like Arcosa in Belen, um,
in between Belen and Rio
communities and we're having a
lot of manufacturing come into
Valencia County. So per capita,
uh, Valencia County does have
the highest number of
manufacturers in the state of
New Mexico. So that's something
we're really proud of
Um, again, 13% increase in job
growth in our community and a
considerably high, uh, and
growing average household
income.
Next slide please
And again just to kind of
highlight that workforce, um,
we're seeing a lot of people
specifically from kind of like
South Valley, Albuquerque come
in to the village of Los Lunas,
but we're seeing a lot of young
families starting to move to the
village of Los Unas. So, um, you
know, a lot of, a lot of
millennials, a lot of first-time
home buyers, um, you know, the
same floor plan from the same
builder could have 2000 to
$30,000 difference in the city
of Albuquerque than it does in
Los Lunas, and I know that
firsthand because I, I just live
d it. So, um, definitely people
get more bang for their buck
here in Los Unass in terms of,
uh, you know, housing, and it is
a great and safe place for
people to raise their families.
So even in my new developing
neighborhood, it's all young
families, which is really
exciting to see.
Um, next slide please.
So, this is my contact
information. Of course, I'm
happy to share any um additional
information and meet with um,
you know, meet and talk more
about the Los Linas Boulevard
interchange, but, um, with that,
I stand for questions.
Thank you, Ms. Archuleta, for
the presentation. I think, um,
what we're gonna do is we'll go
on to the next presenters, uh,
but before we do that, we've had
some additional people come in
if they want to do a quick
introduction and then I will
hand the gavel back over to the
chair and then she can uh
proceed with running the rest of
the meeting. Thank you.
Good morning, everyone. Um, I'm
Jennifer Jones from District 32,
which is Hidalgo, Luna, and
Donana Counties. It's good to be
here.
OK.
Morning. I'm Representative
Jella Yornu, House District 19,
Albuquerque, New Mexico. That's
the fairgrounds of the
International District. Thanks
for having us.
Rod
Uh, good morning everybody. Uh,
Representative Rod Montoya,
House District One, San Juan
County.
So we'll go on to our, our
chairwoman.
Thank you, Vice Chair. Good
morning, everyone. I'm Senator
Angel Charlie. I represent
Senate District 30, which much
of the new development that we
just talked about. I apologize
for being late. I took Highway 6
this morning and um so I'm
excited to to get into all of
the new development that's here,
but let's go right ahead and
move on.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm Dr. Martin Moore,
City manager here in Rio
Community with me here today is
our Mayor Proten, Councilor
Lawrence Gordon, and we
appreciate all of you coming
down to this neck of the woods.
First, I wanted to do just a
slight correction to the record,
um, we appreciate, we appreciate
Arcosa being
some few miles near to Berlin,
but it's right, it's literally
our neighbor to the south, so
right there in real communities
and I did want to
let those of you who know and
have been involved in the in the
bypass road that it is moving
along toward construction. Right
now they're projected completion
of that $6.5 million dollar
projects,
uh
I think they're saying the last
week in September right now they
are pouring the
they are pouring the
interconnects off of Highway 304
and 47. They're starting on
Highway 47 1st. It looks like
it's moving along. There have
been some challenges with
utilities. The area has been
sitting undeveloped for so long
that now that there's
activities, the utility
companies with all the pipelines
blow or scrambling now to uh
update their maps and all that
good stuff, but that is good
news because as a city of Rio
communities we've, we're the new
kids on the block, so to speak.
you know, so we're, where Los
Unnas was to, you know, a couple
of decades ago or so is about
where we're at now
We are very happy that companies
such as Maverick are finally
getting their engineering
hopefully stamped by the
Department of Transportation,
very shortly, I mention that to
those our representatives that
are here locally to let you know
they are moving along.
but they're working together
with agency staff.
Um, the other things that we
have had really as small
businesses.
We've seen empty buildings
starting to fill up back up
again. We, we are seeing uh
homebuilders that are interested
again. We are currently dealing
with some challenges in
relationship to
uh working together with a
private water company whose
whose water rate whose water
rates and sewer rates seem to be
a little bit of a challenge, but
we are working together with
them
Um, we have mentioned it to some
of our, our other
representatives, and we'll
continue to work to try to make
sure that we have good and
adequate. The water rights are
there, but they're working hard
to try to actually get the
development there and move and
move beyond the move beyond the,
well, we're in a planned
community that was started 50
years ago and that now that
we're in as real communities now
that we're in our 12th year
uh, we're
we're, we're starting to see
some of those improvements we're
seeing fire hydrants being
replaced. We've, our capital,
our capital investments have
gone basically from about half a
million dollars
um, when I started here in 2021,
today it's 25 million.
and right now we are looking at
approximately 14 projects that
are currently actively going in
Rio communities right now we
have one of our major streets
it's just we, we let the bid is
gonna start construction. We
have another one that's going to
start in a couple of months and
another one will start the month
after that.
So it's been a busy time, but at
the same time it's, it's we we
see their opportunities, we
adopted and we appreciate our,
our, our uh city council
supporting it. We've adopted
spectacular views and endless
opportunities.
and we see the endless
opportunities and we believe
that developers are starting to
see the endless opportunities
that we have there in real
communities.
One of the things that's really
quiet on the on the screen right
now is that
our city hall is where, as we
understand, UNM Valencia used to
sit before they came and built
their new facilities here, and
right next door, um, the
building has been acquired and
purchased. Uh, the dumpsters are
in place, and I guess, and
they're just starting, in fact,
within a week, they're gonna be
starting major um interior
demolition and reconstruction to
try to bring in some businesses
that they're still confidential
at this time. We can't mention
or disclose them, but
we are very appreciative of that
as well. So we're, we're taking
our existing buildings and then
we're trying to take our, take
our new infrastructure, our
city's financial position is
good.
Um, our, our position as far as,
as we feel as being in the right
place at the right time with
with a rail spur, we have a rail
spur up in a business park just
south of us. That's where Arcosa
is. The rail spur is looking
right now at expanding and
pulling and coming north right
up toward our city line, which
gives opportunity for that
vacant land. Now, in fact,
they're working on a crossing on
that new bypass road.
So a lot of those things are
there. So what is our need?
uh, as young kids like we said,
our need is infrastructure,
infrastructure, infrastructure,
uh, getting the water and sewer
to move beyond sleepy beyond,
uh, you know, sleepy town to,
um, we like the Sleepy town
part, but we like the, but we
also like the livable wage part
having places for our people to
go to work because we have both
retirees and young families, and
we are so grateful that for both
for coming in and making real
communities a part of their
lives, and we're hopeful that we
can have a good quality of life
for them. It will stand for any
questions.
anything.
Thank you all for that
presentation. We'll start off
with questions. Representative
Armstrong.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you presenters, uh, for
being here today. I was a little
sad not to see the mayor from
Los Lunas just because he gave
such a great presentation Friday
night at the, uh, Hispanic
Chamber of Commerce event.
So everyone gets a little taste
of tiny, tiny taste of what it's
like to live in kind of rural
New Mexico, uh, just to get to
this location where people were
feeling lost and, and like,
where is this map taking me? Uh,
but we, we're, uh, loud and
proud
uh of this campus and the people
who are here, uh, sitting at the
table, um.
we're excited. We've worked
really hard for the, uh, for the
off-ramp. Um, I do represent Rio
communities, uh, and, uh, we're
having a little get together one
night this week. I can't
remember the night, but it's on
my calendar. Uh, and, um, and
so, and the ribbon cutting for
the exit is a big deal. That we
have all worked very, very hard,
uh, to do that, and that's, that
is state money, local money, and
federal money. And so, uh, just
how important DOT is
and the funding to DOT, uh, I
just want to give a shout out,
uh, to make sure that people
know how important it is that we
fund them more than we did last
year in this next session,
because we can hear we need
infrastructure, infrastructure,
infrastructure, and all roads
lead to infrastructure. Um, one
of the questions I have is, um,
do you all think that with the
growing capacity of Valencia
County that our schools are
prepared for the grow
th um, and, and have you all,
has that been something that you
all have been talking about?
Yeah, yeah, uh, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative Armstrong
the short answer is I think
we're getting there.
Uh, we have, uh we have been
having conversations. In fact, I
will give the kudos to our Mayor
Pro Tem in talking together with
the Chancellor here and talking
together with counterparts and
other communities with the lenn
schools, uh, there's the Berlin
School District did
our kids go to that school
district and talking about
particularly about things
related to the trades.
and the workforce development
and finding the holes and the
needs in filling them because,
because Berlin High School's got
capability for, you know, one or
two things, and this you and
Malencia, a beautiful campus
here has some capability for
some things, but there are still
still areas that need to be
filled and, and we're looking
forward and we would love to
partner together with Los Lnas,
um, and continue to push forward
that because one of the big
problems with getting the, the
development in
is the the qualified and trained
labor force to to do the work,
to cut down on the cost of
getting labor in here. And so
that's, that's one of the major
keys, I think in working
together with schools, there is,
they're talking about it,
they're working on the programs,
they're, I know that the count,
they'll be, you know Valencia
will be given their own
presentation in a future panel,
but
but we think it's starting to
get there. Uh, we do still see
some needs and opportunities for
continued growth. I know that
there probably will be some
proposals coming forward in
relationship to how we can
better engage the students and
get them and get them both
interested and interested enough
to want to be here to see the
future for the the economy of
Valencia County happened.
company.
Right
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
Armstrong, um, you know, so we,
we do have a different school
district. We have Los Lines
school districts, um, in the
village of Los Lunas, and, uh,
well, I can't speak on behalf of
the school district. I, I, I can
share a quick story when I did
almost a similar presentation,
um, a little bit more focused on
workforce growth and workforce
development, um, for the Loya
school board a couple of weeks
ago, you know, I get very
excited. I get very jazzed. I'm
like, you know, we look at all
these companies that are coming
in and all this growth. And at
the end of the
presentation, when I asked the
school board, you know, what,
any questions, comments,
concerns, the first response was
this is kind of scary, and that
was not a reaction I was
expecting, um, but I think just
the, the speed of this growth
and the amount of, you know,
5000 homes in one school
district, that's a lot to put
in one elementary, and one
middle school. So again, I
cannot speak on behalf of Los
Luna school boards, but I just,
well, I was personally surprised
at the reaction after I gave a
similar presentation. So, um
so
and, and again, I, I think
that's a a different
conversation that needs to
happen because, um, you know,
even in my presentations, I
really try to focus on
presenting, um, at Los Lina
schools at the different high
schools to, uh, juniors and
seniors. You know, that's a
prime time to really get them,
you know, focused on what are
the opportunities here in Los
Lunas and Valencia County and in
New Mexico and I, I think there
is a bit of a disconnect between
K through 12, higher ed, and
what's actually happening out in
the real world and what's
needed. So,
um, I, again, here in Valencia
County, we're seeing a
significant increase in uh
trades and like we need
electricians. I mean, if you're
going to build a multi-million
square foot data center. I mean,
it's gonna need all those very
technical jobs, um, supporting
it. So, um, also a growth in
engineering jobs and
where I think students and
especially at the high school
level, they're not fully aware
of what all the possibilities
are in their own backyard. So I
presented to a junior class last
school year, and, you know, how
many of you have heard of Meta?
And I don't know if it was early
in the morning that, you know,
only like two of them raise
their hand. And I said, well,
this is one of the most
important companies in our
backyard. You can see it from,
you know, the window. It's right
across the street from the high
school. So even, even our
students being more
familiar with what's available
to them. Um, I think really
needs to happen, and that's not
just on one person. I think
that's a whole systemic um
issue. Um, I also just want to
touch on the fact I do serve on
the Business Advisory board for
the for UNM Valencia. So I have
a great opportunity of working,
you know, with the Chancellor
and, uh, uh, you know, I think
we're really trying to talk
about that more as business
leaders, um, we're engaging
business owners and companies
that are here and, and really
having those thoughtful
conversations of how do we focus
in Valencia County to bridge
those gaps and make sure that
we're providing the best for our
students.
Thank you for that. I, it's just
a concern. I know how fast it's
growing, and I, I just wanna
make sure, Madam Chair, that our
schools are prepared for that
growth, uh, because we want them
going to school in Valencia
County, not somewhere else. So I
wanna hog all those kids here,
um, the other thing that that
you didn't mention was the Los
Lunas Hospital, uh, that's
getting ready to open. We did a
beam signing a couple of weeks
ago, I believe, and so we're
excited about that, but that is,
uh, it's on Highway 6
where, uh, you know, they're
working hard to get a, a
stoplight there, but they're
running into some issues. So if
DOT is listening, the, the uh
pamphlets or the, the packets on
your desk and so we just need
approval for that right away
before, instead of, you know,
putting the cart before the
horse, which is the hospital.
Let's put the stoplight in and,
and help the the community with
that. Um, my husband and I own
two businesses here in Valencia
County, and I have to tell you
all, thank you.
for being business friendly, um,
even though the state is not as
business friendly, you all find
ways to help businesses open
here in in Los Lunas and, and
Valencia County in general. And
the, and it, it shows you
uh with the amount of housing
that's being built, that there
are businesses here and uh
people want to live here and
work here and play here, but we
want to keep those kids here as
well. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Representative Roel Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, panel, for your
presentation. I'm very familiar
with your outstanding economic
development growth as you were
breaking ground just on the
Walmart many years ago, many,
many years ago. I was the, uh,
economic development director
for Sebala County, and as you
know, there was a lot of
competition between the counties
in order to be able to um get
the Walmart uh distribution
center and um fortunately,
fortunately for you, um, you got
it, and I think that was one of
the major anchors in the
continued development that has
occurred really fast paced
because once an anger like that
lays ground, obviously it
attracts a lot more jobs and
other businesses, so Madam
Chair, I, I'm, I have a question
just in terms of the ongoing uh
community input.
processes that are used by um
you all in terms of um your
economic development strategy
plan, um, how much community
input has there been and has
there been any concern raised,
uh, about the use of our scarce
water source and other resources
for as the development as you
mentioned, was on high speed in
this
area. Have they, have there been
any concerns voiced on how we're
gonna to best utilize uh these
scarce natural resources
available that we know
absolutely have to be in place
in order to attract certain
economic development uh
projects. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Roel Caballero, um, thank you
for that question. Um, if I may,
I just wanted to, uh, point out,
uh, Representative Armstrong,
the, the reason I didn't bring
up the hospital is because that
is a project led by Valencia
County. So I just wanted to, um,
allow Valencia County to be the
ones to speak on that. So, um,
but, uh, to the question about
community input process, so I, I
do feel like our elected
officials here in in Los Lunas,
in the other municipalities and
at the county level
and of course, um, our
legislators here in Valencia
County have all been very
accessible. Um, our community is
very tight knit and even though
we're growing very fast, Los
Luas is still only 18,000 in
population. So, um, there, you
know, there is a lot of
community input. We do have a
pretty active, um, you know,
different community groups and
community members, um, that will
come to, you know, council at
the village of Los Lunas. I'm
sure there's similar in uh in
our neighboring communities, but
one of the exciting things um I
am
happy to share is that we in the
village of Los Lunas just went
out to RFP for two distinct, um,
projects. One, which is a
workforce housing development
project and then another was for
an economic development
strategic plan. So we are
looking uh for professional
services to really ramp up our
uh economic development plan. We
have not had an official
economic development strategic
plan in the village of Los
Lunas, um, in our big 2040
conceptual plan for the
community when I got here,
economic
development had one page. So
we're, we're growing very fast
now. This, this is our
opportunity once we award it um
in early September, uh, we will
have an external contractor. I
was very surprised, um, the due
date was Thursday, this past
Thursday at 4 o'clock, we had
almost 25 responses.
external from all over the
country, wanting to, um, you
know, at least provide a
proposal for an economic
development strategic plan. That
is an unprecedented,
unprecedented amount of RFP
responses and proposals that we
have not seen in, in any other
project. So, um, I have my
reading cut out for me this
week, um, and so does my
selection committee, but once
that is in progress in the fall,
um, we will have community input
forums from members of the
community, uh, I, I definitely
want to see a student, uh,
roundtable as well because, you
know, my, my sister, I'm her
legal guardian and she lives
with me. She's 15 and goes to
Los Luna's high school and
there's, you know, she is
already, you know, saying, well,
we need a Dutch bros and we need
this and we need that, you know,
and, and it's true, but um I
think where the community can
provide that input in a very
structured format. We're
definitely going to take that to
heart as we plan out the next 5
and 10 years of what our
economic development growth is
going to look like
in, in Los Lunas. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and, and thank you
for and just um to follow up two
things on the housing and
commercial development that's
occurring.
I'm hoping that they are being
encouraged as all around the
state to utilize solar and
you're the home of geothermal,
uh, research and development
projects here through that uh
not home but your accessible to
geothermal, which we'll hear
about later. And that is because
even though we're attracting a
lot of development, there is the
concern that renewable energies
um
should be or should be the
viable source of energy for the
future because of the eventual
low cost of the utilities to the
families, and that's what
families are going to be
encouraged to do. Obviously, not
just buy a new home, Madam
Chair, but also be able to
afford uh the cost of utility so
they don't lose their home in
the long run. So I'm asking if
you, if you're not an asking a
question, but I'm hoping that
you
are encouraging, um, the use of
those renewable energies as much
as possible in those
developments so that the homes
are constructed from the very
beginning, utilizing uh
renewable energy so that we
protect our families in the
future, because I think your
area, Madam Chair, is going to
continue to grow. And the final
point I just wanted to um bring
up is that the reason I brought
up about the um the community
input. There has been, I know,
in previous
years concern about um not just
in Los Lunas in this county, but
around the state as well,
concern about the communities or
residents of certain
neighborhoods, not being aware
of certain projects because in
the ordinances that are created,
they're open ended, they're not
defining quite clearly what
industrial development means or
what particular commercial
development
means in those definitions need
to be very clear to the
residents to uh from the very
beginning to avoid um large
outcries that have occurred in
your in your past concerning
certain developments. So, Madam
Chair, thank you very much and
thank you, panel, once again.
Madam Chair, if I, if I could
just add, I think that the
public input issue is very, very
important, um, in the city of
Rio communities we've
we've used Facebook Live stream,
started it during, they started
during COVID, decided to council
decided to keep it, uh, not too
long ago we had up to 1200 folks
at a time watching city council
meetings, so, um, we're keeping
those social media outlets alive
because we've noticed one of the
major parts of
of public input, it's a two-way
street and having public
interest.
um, in the conversations that
are being had we see as equally
important, so we, we agree with
you and we look forward to
continued input in Rio
communities as well.
Any more questions?
Senator?
Thank you, Madam Chair. We're 5
minutes ahead of schedule, so
why not, right? Um, this
question is for Miss Archuleta,
and it's about the interchange
project. The document you gave
us says they're breaking ground,
yeah, it sounds like it's
tremendously overdue. 30 to 500
trucks a day, uh, just for the
Amazon business is a huge
amount, so kudos to getting it
moving. It says it will be
finished. Phase one
in 2029, and you said there are
6 phases, so can you briefly say
what, what's completed in phase
one? What's phase 23456, and
when do you hope to finish the
whole thing.
Um
Madam Chair, Senator Figueroa,
thank you so much for those
questions. Um, I'm just
referring to some notes here. So
phase one will include the new
interchange, the river bridge,
so then you interchange off of
I-25. Uh, the river bridge, as
well as the roadway extension to
New Mexico Highway 47, um, and
that will be under construction
continuously for the next 4
years. Um.
and when I
so when I say construction will
be in six phases. Um, there's, I
guess, phases within phases, um,
but the next major movement
would be Phase 2, which would
actually widen the corridor from
two lanes to 4 lanes and phase 2
will include the multi-use, uh,
trail system as well. And uh
but we can't start phase two. We
need an excuse me, an additional
80 million to even begin
considering phase two, but some
of that will all happen
concurrently, so it is a huge
project. It's gonna, you know,
have multiple points of
construction. Um, so it's not
just, you know, it starts at
I-25 and moves all the way out.
Um, the different contractors
are going to be staged at
different places in the in
Valencia County and a lot of
this will all be happening
concurrently.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Victoria. That's phase 1
and phase two,
you can email me 3456. Thanks.
Yeah, Madam Chair, Senator,
thank you. I will, um, I will
outline some clarification on
that
Well, thank you so much, panel,
when I think about economic
development for rural
communities or semi-rural
communities, I definitely am
thinking about Lislowness and
the strategic and smart growth
that's happened here, um, and I
wanted to really quickly just
ask about two things, Miss
Archuleta that you spoke about.
The first was, um, you have
about an 18 million population
or 18,000 population in
Wilsliness right now. OK, can
you speak to, I know, I,
um, how many
commu what the commuter
population is? How many people
are actually coming in.
So, Madam Chair, um, thank you
for that question. So yes, we
have about 18,000 in our
municipal boundary, um, the
county itself has about
between about 75,000, um, both
population numbers are expected
to grow. Los Luna succeeding
20,000 in the next couple of
years, and Valencia County as a
whole, um, expected to reach
about 90,000 by 2040. So a lot
of that in the surrounding
unincorporated areas near our
municipal border in, in village
of Los Lunas. Um, commuter
traffic any given day from
Valencia County into Bernalilo
County, there is anywhere from
35,000 to 45,000 vehicles on I
25. Now that's various points,
um, you know, and that that's a
measurement between like Los
Luna and downtown Albuquerque.
So that is a considerable amount
of traffic, I would say, uh,
about, it's about a 60/40 split,
as we're still somewhat of a
bedroom community where, uh, you
know, we have a lot of people
that live in the village of Los
Unnos in Valencia County, but
are commuting north into the
city of Albuquerque for their
jobs. Now we're seeing a major
shift in that, right, with all
the different industrial growth
that's happen
ing we're seeing a more even
split again about 40
from 60-40% of that traffic
coming from Albuquerque and
Bernalio County into Valencia.
So, um, you know, I, I myself
was included in that number. I
was living in the city of
Albuquerque working in Los Lunas
finally was able to, you know,
lock in on a home in the
village, um, put my money where
my mouth is and uh it it's been
very rewarding, but I think
we're seeing more similar
stories, especially like among
millennials trying to buy their
first homes. We're getting
priced out of the city of
Albuquerque. So they're,
they're, we're moving into
places like Valencia County and
Los Lunas.
Thank you, Ms. Archuleta. It's a
great segue to my next question,
which is all of the new housing
development that's happening,
what considerations have been
given to affordable housing.
Yes, so affordable housing, um,
like Madam Chair, like I
mentioned, uh, we do have an
RFP, uh, that we just received
proposals on, so we have um our
MRA district, our metro
redevelopment area, um, which is
near the transportation center,
um, and the drop off for the, uh
for the rail runner. We have
about 10 acres of land that we
planted, it's village owned
land, um, so we plan on
utilizing the land in our
control to really promote
workforce housing. So that would
be a um
a ownership model, not just a,
you know, rental. We really want
to help, uh, our families create
generational wealth and
something that they can pass
down. So that is a very specific
project we're hoping to have
that awarded, um, one of the
proposals awarded in early
September, same time frame as
we're doing the economic
development strategic plan. Um,
there have been private
developers that have been
looking into the village of Los
Sonas. Um, I am working with one
that has not been able to put
shovels in the ground just yet.
They're waiting
on um uh New Mexico Housing
Authority funding Litech funding
specifically, um, I did receive
notice a few weeks ago that they
received that. So that would be
a um 55 uh age 55 plus community
of, uh, about
60 to 65 apartment style, um
again, also in our MRA district.
So there's funding by putting
them in certain areas, but
that's on a private property.
So, uh, but we are supporting
incentives for that development.
And then further, I think, a
challenge that we're really
having in terms of having, you
know, condos, apartments, uh,
duplexes, tripplexes is that we
don't have market rate
apartments currently in the
village of Los Lunas, so a lot
of our developers are actually
struggling to get funding
because we're still
predominantly rural and there's
no comparative market rates
for them to base their loan and
financing off of. So, um, where
places like Mesa del Sol have
very cool kind of multi uh
multi-purpose apartment
complexes. I believe one of
those would thrive and do well
in the village of Lounas, but
unfortunately just the funding
structure for some of these
companies external to New
Mexico, they look at us being a
real community as an investment
risk. So we're trying to
overcome that, um, and I'm
trying to work with developers
and landowners to really provide
like more justification for
those types of funds.
Thank you. Uh, and thank you
panel for your incredible, uh,
presentations this morning as we
transition into our next panel,
Workforce training
collaborations. Let's go ahead
and introduce our new
legislators who joined us. We'll
start on this side with Senator
Lopez.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Um,
I'm Linda Lopez, state senator,
District 11, the Southwest
quadrant of Bernalillo County,
so I'm just, oh, as I guess what
the crow flies quite a few
miles, but uh good to be here.
Thank you. Good morning.
Good morning, everyone. I'm
Representative Patti Lundstrom.
I represent House District 9,
which is Gallopin McKinley
County.
Good morning, Madam Chair, and
good morning, everyone in the
audience. Uh, I'm Charlotte
Little. I represent House
District 68, which is in
northwest corner of Albuquerque.
Glad to be here today.
Uh, Representative Garcia.
OK
Uh, good morning, everyone. Uh,
it's good to finally get here
going through all the back roads
and
my GPS wasn't taking me in the
right directions. But thank you
uh for hosting this meeting here
and learning a lot about, I've
just passed through here from
time to time, family living in
Valencia County and uh to see uh
that development that has been
going on, uh, since day one and
I see a lot of uh
uh opportunities that have come
about because of those economic
development. My name is Martha
Garcia. I represent District 6,
which is a portion of Sela
County and McKinley County.
and that's who I am. Thank you.
Uh, Representative Matthews.
Thank you. Is that working
OK. Red means yes. OK. Uh, I'm
Marion Matthews, state rep from,
uh, District 27 in Albuquerque.
and uh
a an alumni of the University of
New Mexico.
and glad to see us on this
campus.
Thank you.
All right, so Chancellor, uh,
Doumu and President
or I'm sorry, vice president,
um, socia
and our folks from telemetry, if
you wanna come on up, we'll get
started with the next panel.
Please, yeah.
And it looks like there's so
many of us legislators here.
There's a shortage of mics for
you, so maybe if we could get a
couple more mics for our
presenters if none? Can we share
up here a bit? OK.
Well, thank you all for joining
us this morning and welcoming
us. Let's go ahead and start
with Chancellor since we're here
on your campus.
Well, uh, uh, good morning,
Madam Chair. Uh, members of the
committee. Uh, my name is uh
Doctor Sam Deumu, and I'm the
Chancellor of UNM Valencia. I
wanna take this opportunity to
welcome you all to our campus.
I'm glad you're here.
Hi, my name's Tracy Hartz. I'm
the president of Central New
Mexico Community College, and
it's lovely to see so many of
you and certainly to be on this
beautiful campus.
on next.
Well, good morning, uh, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
My name is Steve Saucida, and I
have the privilege of serving as
the vice president for Workforce
Development at New Mexico Junior
College in Hobbs, New Mexico. So
a little bit of a drive in, but,
uh, wonderful to be here first
time at this campus and uh thank
you for having us.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee. My name is Randy
Krall. I'm a New Mexico native
and local technology
entrepreneur and looking forward
to talking about uh CNN and my
experiences.
Good morning. My name is Arjan
Bata. Um, I'm a, I'm the IOT
director at Telemetry Insight,
also participated in bootcamps
from CNM.
All right, panel, we've got
until 11:30, so let's go ahead
and jump in. That time does
include questions from the
committee, so we'll hand it
over.
OK, uh, good uh, Madam Chair,
thank you very much and good
morning. Everybody once again.
Um, uh, here, uh, uh, Juan and
Valencia, um, we are in the 3rd
year of, uh, opening our
workforce training center.
Unfortunately, I don't have any
slides, uh, to, to share about
this, but we, we built uh a
workforce training center on the
west side of I-25, uh, uh, in
2022, and that's about the time
I started and uh we opened it
and uh the purpose of that
center is to serve uh
the business community, most
especially, and of course, uh,
also the uh the external part of
the campus. If we look at our,
our, our, what we offer, we, we
use the term in higher
education, the credit and
non-credit. Well, that's
supposed to be the non-credit
more so the professional
certification site, uh, learners
come there to learn, uh, about
project management, uh, they do,
um, we, we've been working with
uh with some of the businesses
in the community, um, on
partnerships. For instance, we
have an agreement
with um uh with Amazon, uh, a
couple of years ago, they did
this nationwide, um, uh, program
where their employees can come
to any of the uh higher
education institutions, sign up
for classes, no questions asked,
and Amazon pays for that, and
so, uh, at that time, it was
only just the um uh the
Albuquerque plants that was uh
running and then since then, the
uh Los Linos plant has opened,
and we've had just a trickle of
students and we're really
working on a
campaign and making sure that
we, we reach them. In addition,
we also have, uh, we have meta
as was mentioned earlier on, uh,
that's also in our service area
and um, you know, we have uh the
Walmart distribution center and
uh not to forget our school
districts because uh recently,
we've been uh working, I, I meet
with the um the school uh
superintendents every month to
talk about big picture high
level, um, needs from the
schools, but we also, we, we,
it's not not
not just meeting the need by
just being reactive. We are more
being proactive and saying, you
know, higher education, why
don't we just band together as
one giant intentional solution
to all workforce training needs.
So therefore, uh, we built, uh,
a construction trades program,
um, last year, targeting the
high school students, and this
is the 2nd year of that, uh, in
our, uh, in our vision, we have,
uh, we have uh ele electrician.
uh plumbing, uh, HVAC, other
programs coming up in the
pipeline, uh as we move along.
So, um, that, that's kind of
where we are right now and then
uh we're looking at expanding
our offerings, uh, you know, Los
Luna's economic developer
mentioned it a while ago that
this area needs a lot of trades
and we know that, you know, uh,
we, we know that, uh, loud and
clear, and so we're focusing a
lot of uh uh efforts on building
trades programs, um, so that,
uh, we reduce the number of
people who kind of
drive out in the morning to go
to, uh, to go north to go to
work. But even when they go, go
there to go to work, you know,
they still come back home to,
to, to spend that money locally
so we, we, we're part of that
economic uh machinery, so to
speak. And, uh, um, and, and so
that's part of some of the
things we're doing right now and
I'll add more to it, uh, as, as
we move along. Thank you.
Great, uh, good morning. So, uh,
what I'd like to do is, uh,
thank you for the introduction
again. It's lovely to be on this
campus. Um, I was hoping I was
good to see the Workforce
Training Center, so I hope I'll
do that soon. I don't know if my
presentation is posted. I know
it's online and so
we
there we are. Uh, I apologize. I
don't think I brought as many
copies as I anticipated there
would be this many people
attending, but we really
appreciate the opportunity to be
here, uh, again, I wanna really,
I'm so proud that CNM founded
his uh Albuquerque Technical
Vocational Institute, uh, is
celebrating our 60th anniversary
this year. Uh, we have a trades
facility that's opening, uh,
August 27th, and that's our
large 60th anniversary, and I
want to highlight traits because
we all know that's what's so
important in terms of high wage,
high demand job
s and that's really what this
presentation's about. Um, I also
want to note that everything
that you'll hear in this
presentation is really grounded
in our mission vision and
values. Our mission is to
educate, is to uh create futures
for our learners and partners
through leadership and education
and training. Uh, that grounds
everything that we do. My
governing board is incredibly
proud, uh, that we take all of
our resources to try to meet our
student, our learner needs, our
community needs, which this
present
ation ' s really about, and to
do so in a way that really
supports organizational
excellence and effectiveness.
So we're really here today and I
really appreciate the topic and
uh to talk about workforce needs
and how our workforce programs
tied to the statewide economic
development plan, how they tie
to our regional plan, um, and
CNM's role in this. Uh, I want
to note this isn't a much
abbreviated presentation that I
gave to the Legislative Finance
Committee in June. That's a
probably a relief to many of you
who heard that the first time.
um, and particularly because we
have so many, um, we have Randy
and, and our colleague here who
can really attest to the value
of some of the work that we've
been doing. So I certainly don't
need to go over that. But what's
most important, I think, is that
every time CNM is invited to the
table with the Albuquerque
Economic Regional Alliance,
which the village of Las Luis is
a member of. Every time we're
invited when the state, uh,
Secretary Black or others call
us to the table to say, how are
we going to attract,
uh, new employers to our
community, but also how do we
grow our small businesses and
our entrepreneurs who are here,
uh
we're always talking about, uh,
not only JTip and the other
economic development incentives
that are here for the state, but
particularly the $60 million
that the legislature and the
governor have authorized for
high demand, high workforce
training programs and work-based
learning. So what I really want
to do is talk a little bit about
how not only do we frankly sell
that and that's incredibly
attractive to our, to not only
current and future employers,
but it's really part of the
statewide and regional, um,
economic package
economic development package,
uh, that we
I mean, I mean in those
conversations regularly.
Now, what's most important is,
yes, you actually appropriated
$60 million. You appropriated um
20 million and 1 tranche a
couple of years ago. We finished
that as a state. You've now
appropriated a $60 million in
New Mexico grow money of that
$60 million CNM will receive
about $21 million of it. So we
know that our success um is
critical to meeting our
workforce needs, not only here
in our region, uh, in Central
New Mexico, but really helped to
serve the state and we partner
with other institutions, um
to leverage, uh, whether it's
data collection or or survey
outreach, um, the agreements we
have with the state on
internships and in the
agreements we have with
employers, so we're able to
share our templates and some of
the work we do with our other
colleges, but I really want to
highlight the results. The
inputs are significant. The
results are even more
impressive, and we're really
excited about how they're going
to continue to grow, so again
we received a lot of money in
the first round of HED funding.
We've received $7 million from
New Mexico Grow in year one. We
have just now started New Mexico
grow, um, year 2, and so we look
forward to talking about those
results.
We have spent the money and we
are allocating our money in two
ways. One is in programming,
short term workforce training
programming, uh, what doctor
recommended is non-credit
training. We actually don't call
it non-credit, we call it
workforce training because every
training program we have,
frankly has embedded skills and
competencies that lead to
credit. So we know that someone
who's coming through our
program, uh, basically as a
shadow transcript of credit. We
know that any time that they
want to come to CNM and enter a
degree program, they're able to
do that to save time, resources,
um, and put them on a quick, uh,
on a quick path. So about the
next 6 slides we'll really focus
on the programs that we offer.
These are short-term upskilling
program workforce training
programs, um, so far we have
served, as you can see, 3100
learners. It's an impressive
number, uh, in just a couple of
years with this state funding,
um,
and I want to tell you a little
bit about those programs that
they're in. You can see, again,
the focus is on high demand,
high wage programming. Certainly
technology, but you can also see
that we rest on or, or we, um,
rely on our trades background is
uh Albuquerque TBI and CNM. So
you see construction trades, you
see transportation. Uh, you
certainly see manufacturing, you
certainly see healthcare. Uh,
we, we build on our 60, 55 year
old uh healthcare program and
nursing, but more. Um, we're
really excited about quantum
technology
as you know, the state, New
Mexico, as part of the Elevate
Quantum grant, um, or the Yellow
Bay Grant with Colorado and
Wyoming, um, CNM is starting our
quantum technician bootcamp in
the fall. We already have people
enrolled, um, and CNM is
providing the workforce training
programming for all three
states.
Colorado, Wyoming, and New
Mexico. We're really proud of
that design and, and our, um,
faculty members who are leading
that with our industry partners.
So the first round of funding,
what did we do with it? Well, we
certainly provided about 1000
individuals with workforce
training. Uh, we can tell you
that 79% of them when they
finish that training were
employed in a program related to
their or employed in industry
related to their program.
That's really what you want to
do. You want to be able to know
that individuals who are
entering a program know they're
going to get a job and that's
related to their course of study
or course of uh learning. Um,
we're really proud of our 50%
response rate, and I got to tell
you, we do it just by calling
people.
It's a lot of work, um, but
there's no, we have not found a
better way to really reach out
and learn, um, and get the
feedback that we need from um
our graduates to be able to tell
us what worked, where they are,
um,
I can tell you the next round,
it's pretty difficult for people
to tell us what they're earning.
So that's a stretch, um, but we
can say and just with the 435
people who responded just that
first year. Um, we can tell you
that they're, they're out, their
wages went up, and that's really
again what you want to see. You
want to see that they're
employed, that their wages went
up, and you want to see perhaps
that they've actually continued
their learning.
What did we do last year with
the first year of grow money.
Uh, so far, we served 2, almost
2100 learners. I, I, I'll note
here that the in progress are
pending 850 learners are still
in process. We awarded money in
scholarships and training in
June. It's not surprising that
in August they some of them have
yet to finish their program. So
you can see here that it, uh, by
the end of September, we'll know
more, who has completed their
training. So we certainly expect
that number to grow to go up.
And this is just the snapshot in
time that we can provide that,
uh, progress
point. Again, we have a 54%
response rate of learners. So
again, each term we're getting
better about how we're
collecting data because we know
that you will fund us based on
how well the results um are, are
coming forward. So we're really
proud of the fact that we're
still again continuing to uh
solicit information from those
who are completing our
programming. You can see here
that, again, we have 72% who are
working in the area that they
studied.
of those individuals who are
reporting a status as employed,
we're really pleased that you
can see that more 8087
individuals of those 530 are in
that 60 to 6 to $70,000 range.
You know the average wage from
the
um
one of the reliable living wage
uh statuses would say in New Mex
in in Albuquerque that wage
should be close to $57,000. So
we really want to focus on that
87, right? We want to focus on
those individuals who are in
those programs who are getting
that high wage, high demand job.
It does not mean that
individuals in the 120 or 118
who are not quite there yet.
that that's a failure. It means
that they have started their
training, and they're likely
going to come back to us for
upskilling or get into a degree
program where there's more
financial aid, more resources to
help them succeed, but that's a
really important first step
I won't highlight the um our
student success because I think,
I think we have some of that
here at this table. I mentioned
the other way that CNM is um
allocating the resources, the $7
million that we've received is
by paid internships.
I think all of you know and
you've talked about CTE already,
we know that individuals who are
able to work with their hands,
who are able to put their
learning in a relevant work
experience by meaning they learn
their industry, they complete
their program. Uh, in addition,
they provide employers with an
opportunity and a direct pathway
for uh employees. So it's, uh,
and so we are very proud of the
fact that we want 100% of our
learners. Doesn't matter if
you're in a workforce training
program or a credit program, get
a work-based learning
experience. Doesn't matter if
it's healthcare, trades, a
technology, doesn't matter if
you're in liberal arts. We want
you to learn how to use data. We
want you to learn how to use AI
and technology to help tell your
story, to analyze information,
and certainly anybody in our CTE
programs absolutely has to be
able to write reports, has to be
able to communicate clearly, has
to be able to have their
critical thinking.
The only way, one of the primary
ways to get that is through
these work-based learning
experiences.
When I say work-based learning,
I mean internships,
apprenticeships, whether they're
registered apprenticeships or
other apprenticeships that the
industry partners have
identified as a path with
competencies and skills that
they want their employees to
have, uh, so we talk about
work-based experience broadly.
So far we've had over 250, uh,
interns. Again, we're really
pleased that the survey results
are high, that they're reporting
that they are continuing their
education or they're going on
to, um, they're going on to uh
higher wages.
So far we've expanded because of
the state program, we have
expanded the number of employers
we're serving, and it isn't only
Intel, it's also telemetry. It's
also small businesses in film
and in industry. So it's a broad
range of employers we work for.
Again, you can see that we were
able to increase the number of
employers we're aiming for 40%
of our employers currently, uh,
to have
CNM or ingenuity uh learners in
their workforce. Here's some
just, uh, employer quotes to
talk about how we've been able
to
change how we work to meet, to
reduce barriers so that
employers can more easily hire
our interns because that's
really important. You don't want
to have barriers for our
learners, and you definitely
don't want to have them for the
employers. You want to make it
as easy as possible for
employers to be able to sign up
for this wage subsidy.
Most of the employers where our
students are placed are in
private companies, but we're
really proud of the work we've
been doing with local government
and state government, as you
know, government is facing uh
significant vacancies, and we
want to make sure that we have
our learners are really informed
about the great opportunities,
whether they're was CYFD where
the Department of
Transportation, whether we're
there with Department of IT, but
of course we have IT in all
agencies, um, but we're really
proud of our partnerships,
particularly with Bernna Leo
County. They've doubled down as
about 80 interns so far.
Uh, again, here are our goals
for next year. So with the $7
million we have this year, uh,
we, our goal is to serve about
2900 learners in about 65
programs, we hope to have more
interns, and we're figuring out
different ways to be able to
give our students who are the
average age of 27, who work 1 to
2 jobs. We're trying to figure
out a way to get them key
experiences, project-based
experiences that are paid, um,
so they can translate their
learning into some relevant
experience
that helps to make them more
marketable when they complete
their programs.
Um, we, I just really want to
highlight why state funding is
important. You all should know
that the state of New Mexico is
getting national attention
for the investment you've made
in workforce.
It's because of the data that
we've shown at CNM, but it's
also because of the data that
our colleagues have shown,
whether it's New Mexico Junior
College, whether it was UNM Taos
at the LFC meeting, uh, whether
it's ENMU and Portales. um
this country is following this
investment.
and that's why this data is so
important. The reason they're
following this status is because
as you may know, in the big
beautiful bill that recently
passed, Workforce Pell was
passed.
That means there's federal
funding that could be available
for some of these programs, not
all of them.
So we really wanna make sure
that we're showing the data that
shows how these programs are
making a difference in the lives
of our learners, and our
employers and our communities.
and that, and we're trying to
identify and use this data to
identify where the need still
remains once federal money may
be coming in probably in 2
years. I don't think it's coming
in the near future, um, because
there's a lot of regulation
around that. But we really want
to say, say thank you again for
the funding you've committed.
We're really proud of the
results. We want better data to
be able to uh give you more of
a, uh, a picture in January, in
December when you're considering
your budget recommendations, but
also in January, um, when we
start the
new FY 27 in the last round of
funding, but again, we really
want to thank you for your
leadership and support, um, and
be glad to answer any questions
you may have.
Well, good morning, Madam Chair.
Members of the committee, as I
stated, my name is Steve Sose
and I represent uh New Mexico
Junior College in Hobbs and our
workforce development. So, um, I
too want to thank you. I mean,
we could all just say we echo
what Dr. Hartzler said and then
show you our slides, but truly
thank you for making the
investment in workforce
development. So, um, I could
borrow this.
How did GRO fund has led to good
jobs or better jobs in Lee
County as Dr. Hartzler Minon up
until the most recent beautiful,
big beautiful bill workforce
training was not covered by Pell
Grant. So in the Permian Basin,
where Lee County is in
southeastern New Mexico, uh, Lee
County is the number one all
producing county in America, not
just the state, but in America.
And so many in our service area
are not are not really
interested in what you would
consider a traditional degree, a
liberal arts degree
in arts and sciences. They're
saying, how can I go to work?
What can I do when they see the
word college when we're out
there they start running the
other direction, and we simply
say give us just a moment. Let
us talk to you about what we
offer, but oftentimes because it
wasn't covered by conventional
financial aid, cost was a
barrier to them, so they said,
obviously we're very happy for
the Department of Workforce
Solutions or America's Jobs
Cents now that we've had a great
partnership for many years, but
sometimes
that also creates another
barrier to entry because they
have to go through their
process and if they are not
approved, then they are not
funded. So what the Growth Fund
has allowed us to do is work
with students directly because
of the funding that we have
available. It's removed cost
barriers to for many to take the
training of their choice and of
those that took it with New
Mexico Junior College,
approximately 30% use that to
upskill in a job that they
already had to compete for a
promotion as well. So this is
not just new to the industry
this is within the industry to
be able to compete for a
promotion. With the growth
funding that we received, New
Mexico Junior College received
473,000 of the 20 million in
year one and also in year two,
and we use that exclusively for
scholarships or discounts to be
able to help as many people as
we possibly could. As I
mentioned, we're the number one
oil producing county in America,
Eddy County is #3, and so, um,
$13.27 billion
came from oil and gas to the
state revenue this past year.
We're very proud of that. And so
of the students who received
funding from the Growth Fund,
71% of them were in the energy
sector. 21% were in the
healthcare sector and 8% were in
public safety and law
enforcement. So the breakdown of
that for New Mexico Junior
College is such. Our top was our
automation and industrial
systems, building, and I am very
proud to say for those of you
who have been elected officials
for some
time, if I say the name Dr.
Steve McCleary, you know exactly
who that was. The longtime
president of New Mexico Junior
College, who unfortunately
passed away on April 2nd earlier
this year, and we had a grand
opening on July 17th of our new
industrial training center, uh,
25,000 square feet for
automation, linemen training,
oil and gas, and welding and
named it after Doctor Steve
McCleary, uh, quite fitting as
he was a pioneer for workforce
development in southeastern New
Mexico. Our lease operator
training is quite unique. It is
about the only one of its kind
in the country. We actually have
a mock job site west of our
training facility. It's a 10-day
program in the morning, they are
doing math for the oil field.
They are doing safety. They are
learning calculations and in the
afternoon, whether rain or sleet
or snow or shine, they are out
on location because that mimics
what it is like to work in the
oil and gas industry. And so
that is one of our top programs,
our CDL program continues to
thrive. Our two week
program where you can be a
novice and those that take and
complete our two-week training,
98% pass rate on the first time
for their skills test. So we're
very, very, very happy about
that. PLC is tied to our
automation program. Obviously
you see medical assistant and
instructor development insert by
waiver are for our law
enforcement programs, along with
dental assistant Farmtech, and
EMT Basics. So last year we were
able to help 286 students with
the $473,000
that we received. Every penny
was accounted for and 100% went
to supporting student
scholarships to be able to help
as many people as we could to
obtain jobs or to level up. Our
projections for next year, we
anticipate a 40% increase to go
from 286 to 400 students with
what we have and the areas that
we see this greatest growth is
automation and PLC. Why? Because
we had a waitlist in our
morning, afternoon and evening
cohorts because we were locked
for space, but
part of this 25,000 square foot
facility is a 7000 square foot
automation lab that is second to
none in our area, so we can
limit the waitlist and actually
get students in. Oil and gas,
transportation training, we've
added quite a plethora of DOT
compliance. Why? Safety is
important when you have drivers
out there, they need to be able
to be compliant with DOT
regulations. Our healthcare
trainings in EMT and CMA as well
as our public safety through our
advanced law enforcement
trainings.
The high demand programs offered
in New Mexico Junior College in
Southeast New Mexico within the
Permian Basin is our lease
operator, CDL, Automation, EMT
clinical medical assistant, and
our OSHA safety training, we are
actually partners with an OSHA
Training Instituteation Center,
offer over 35 OSHA classes where
you can receive a certification
as a certified Safety and Health
official in general industry or
construction.
I won't read this all to you,
but I do want to highlight this
student. His name is David
Hines. He took our CDL program
in August of 2024. Prior to
coming to us, he was
incarcerated. He was in prison,
and when he got out, the only
place he could find a job was
They let him go. And as he told
us, he was only making $900
every two weeks, as it was. His
mother worked at the port of
entry where trucks have to get
weighed and pass inspection, and
she's on our advisory board for
our transportation training, she
said, I've heard of some funding
that New Mexico Junior College
has, you should go and talk to
them. He came and talked to our
director. We said absolutely. We
don't care about your past. We
want to invest in your future.
So he went through the two-week
CDL program.
passed with flying colors and is
currently employed uh for BNLu,
where he is making $2000 a week.
Now versus 900 every 2 weeks,
and came and told us in a
presentation as you see here,
this would not have been
possible without growth funding.
This would not have been
possible without all of you
voting yes to fund workforce
training. And the next student
that we wanted to highlight was
Ariana Green, who completed the
farm tech program just in April
of this year, uh, was in debt
- end jobs by her own words. She
was able to access the funding
that the GRE funding provides,
uh, was able to take her
pharmacy tech class, nationally
certified, and is now working
for CVS Pharma pharmacy locally
able to provide for herself and
for her children, but without
this funding never would have
had that opportunity. So with
that, I want to quite simply say
thank you. The opportunity for
NMJC to sit here and be
representative of Southeastern
New Mexico and kind of a
different type of workforce that
is not represented oftentimes in
situations like this. We will
continue the good work. We so
appreciate the support of the
state and hope that it continues
even after FY 27 and at the end
of this, I'd be happy to stand
for any questions. Thank you for
the opportunity.
Good morning again
My, uh, company is serves the
industry. He was just talking
about, um, really interesting to
hear about the lease operator
training and the automation
training, but, um, to use your
time well, what I was planning
on doing was splitting remarks
into about 3 sections. I'll,
I'll tell you a little bit about
what my company does. I'll tell
you about how CNM has impacted
it and then Arjun here will tell
you some more details about
personal impact on his life and
a little more detail on the
technology.
So we serve the upstream oil and
gas space, very big part of New
Mexico's economy. There are
about a million wells in the US,
the vast majority of them fall
into this category called
marginal wells. So they produce
about 10 or 15 barrels of oil
per day or less. These are not
the ones that the big name
companies uh typically operate.
Um, let's say that you are
responsible for 100 or 1000 of
those wells. It's
very likely that you have
individuals like he's been
training that are servicing the
wells. It's also very likely
those wells are controlled by a
simple timer. Picture the device
that turns on and off your
swimming pool or your Christmas
lights, does a pretty good job
on those, but on a well it's
usually either under pumping or
overpumping the well. And both
of those are suboptimal for
various reasons or either
costing you money or uh there's
an opportunity to make more
money, so that's
our market and our service, we
install a simple solar powered
device on top of the well, and
then we start providing
information to you about how
well that's running, how, how
well that well is running and uh
you allow you to tune the timer.
So that's it in a nutshell, uh,
economic impact on the well
might be $100,000 a year on a
well that's not run correctly.
Thousands of dollars a day on a
well that um that um
it wasn't running at all. And by
the way, we, we prepared some
materials that we can uh email
to all of you as well. So that's
it in a nutshell, very simple.
It's a patent pending
technology. It was developed and
homegrown here in New Mexico,
um, are strategy is to use the
information that this simple
device generates and provide
data for the operators and sell
that to them and uh I'll share
some numbers with you a little
bit uh in a bit here. Um, we,
uh, produce just under 500,000
of revenue last year. We're on
course for about 1.5 million
this year and we're showing a
similar uh growth record, I mean
growth projection over the next
5 years. I would argue though
that our impact on the state is
much greater than those, those
individual numbers for a couple
of reasons. Uh, one is that we
import money into New Mexico.
So, um, the bulk of the
employees of the ownership is
here in the state, but the
customers and the investors are
generally out of state. So
we're, we're, we're bringing
dollars into New Mexico. Also,
many of the individuals in the
company joined because they
wanted to experience a startup
with the potential of starting
their own. And so I have a
feeling that our company is
going to produce several
spin-offs a little bit later on
and um I hope that happens. So,
let me talk about CN
M
Um, I met Kyle Lee in 2019,
while at another startup, I'm
one of those serial
entrepreneurs I've, uh, done a
few companies, some of them
worked out, some of them didn't,
and I was actually a tenant at
the Fuse makerspace at the time,
um, and, uh, uh, again, that,
that, that was one of those
early experiences shortly after
that met Brian Rashop, who
started the IoT bootcamp at the
fuse maker space. Uh, if you've
never seen it, it's, it's a,
it's an amazing operation
that, that whole facility is
amazing. Um, so I was doing that
with a biomedical startup which
did not survive COVID
unfortunately, but that led
directly to this current company
TelemetryInsight, and that's
what I've been doing ever since
then. So, um, Brian, uh
recommended one of his graduates
from one of those recent cohorts
at his boot camp and that became
employee number one at Telemetry
Insight. Um, that individual
has, has moved on. He wanted
to live out, out on the east
coast, but he was the first of
several employees that we had.
In fact, uh, there's been about
a dozen graduates of the boot
camps that have uh come into
telemetry insight through from
10 different cohorts from two
different bootcamps. So, um,
sorry, sorry for using an
acronym IOT stands for Internet
of Things. That's these little
devices that do interesting work
generally solar solar powered,
inexpensive and generate data.
We've also got graduates from
the data science program. So the
basic idea is that that little
device generates the data, the
data science program, then uh
analyzes it and produces this
information that's going to be
useful for the employees. We've
also sent two of our own
employees through, through the
bootcamp programs, and 6 of
these are still employed with
us, Argen is one of them, uh,
as, as I mentioned, and we're
likely to add 2 more this year.
So, um, not only though are
these the individuals that are
solving the day to day
problems, CNM has helped with
the executive leadership of my
company. So 3 individuals, uh,
Cliff Lewis, Arjan, right here,
and Brian Rashop have all been
involved from day one, providing
key uh guidance on product
market fit, where can the
technology go? Who can it uh
serve and Brian has
single-handedly generated a
stream of employees from his
boot camp just at
the right time, we needed to
hire somebody. He had somebody
that was going to be graduating
from the cohort, brought them on
board, and this is one of the
things that I think that is so
critical to the CNN bootcamp
model. Uh, you don't wait for
years for somebody to graduate
with a traditional degree.
They're out in a few months and
they hit the ground running,
they've got the skills and the
background to uh to do the
things that we need. So, um, it,
it's just difficult to overstate
the impact that CNN has had on
my company and looking forward
to um uh a lot of uh future um
opportunity with them. I'll let
Arjun talk a little bit uh more
detail on his specific
experience.
Right.
I'm Argin. Thank you guys for
having me.
Uh, so a little bit about me,
um, I studied architecture at
UNM and then I did my masters at
University College London.
um, in design for manufacture,
um, I was studying robotics in
architecture there. Uh, I came
back to New Mexico during COVID.
The when there was really not
many job opportunities in the
field of architecture.
Uh, so I had really decided to
look at CNM's bootcamp, um, and
I looked at the IoT bootcamp,
uh, to kind of upskill myself in
software and electronics. I had,
I had experience with designing
and making things, but really
wanted to upgrade myself in
terms of um those skill sets,
uh, so within those 10 weeks,
um,
it eventually kickstarted my
career in IoT and then 2.5, 3
years later, I'm currently
serving as the IOT director here
at Telemetry Insight, um
so
the main
kind of uh experience through
the bootcamp. I'll talk about
those 10 weeks really shortly.
Um, it was under Dr. Doctor
Brian Reop. Um, it's a very
project intensive, uh, hands,
hands on uh curriculum. We build
projects very quickly and some
of those projects are, they
vary, um, they're all
self-guided, um, things like
smart plant watering systems,
um, I made a pool table that
detects the color of the ball
that goes in and uh highlights
the pocket. um
made a, uh, laser tracking
system for um communicating
across with lasers. This is all
within 10 weeks. Um, that kind
of speed really prepped me for
um telemetry insight and the
work that we needed to do there.
So
um, I initially started at
telemetry, just building and
assembling hardware, eventually
moved on to software development
there, um, and then process
management and then contributed
to some of the kind of
technological breakthroughs, uh,
that actually, uh, allows our
kind of optimized algorithms to
operate on these like low
compute hardware uh out in the
field.
The
right now working on some new
hardware designs and revisions,
but right now leading the team
to scale our main products and
co-products to not just hundreds
of units but thousands and
10,000s is the goal.
Um, some kind of key takeaways
for me, um, graduates often kind
of arrive with unconventional
paths, um, but it creates kind
of creative and adaptive problem
solvers. I personally note that
with the team members I have at
Telemetry Insight, we're all
very different from each other,
um, but very adaptable, very
creative, um, and all went
through this kind of 10 week
boot camp.
um, just to end, um, please,
please continue to support these
programs for people like me and
uh the employees uh that are at
telemetry.
Thank you
Thank you very much, panel. Um,
we'll start with questions.
Representative Lindstrom.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and good
morning everyone. I apologize
for you having to turn around
and wrench your neck to see me,
but I appreciate, I appreciate
the presentation today. I had a
few questions, Madam Chair. I'd
like to start with, um, making
the comment that I agree that
students' success is measured by
being employed. I think that's a
big deal, but I'd like to ask
how long are they monitored
after the first time? How long
do you stay, stay with them.
This would be for Tracy, please.
So, um, Madam Chair and
Representative Blundstrom, uh,
currently, so our goal is 5
years.
Uh, with this program, we are
certainly focused on the
immediate employment upon
program completion and then 66
months and then a year and we'll
keep doing that on a yearly
basis because we anticipate
that, um, like our panelist,
they may have one training, but
they may come back for another
training in data analytics or
something else that will again,
um, increase their uh earning
potential. So we're really
looking our
goal is for a five-year track.
Uh, that's what we're seeking
funding for from New America and
actually our partnership with
Area, the Albuquerque Regional
Economic Alliance. We share
business analysts, um, so our
goal is to track this
information for 5 years. That's
really unusual. Most
schools program states don't do
that, but that's our goal to get
enough data to be able to do
that for a period of time.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, and
so let me ask you to, are these
workforce programs or these
students, are they eligible for
the Opportunity scholarship
Fund?
Um, at this moment, I'm sorry,
Madam Chair, and, um,
Representative Lonestrom, at
this moment for the workforce
training, they are not eligible
for the Opportunity scholarship,
but if they choose to go on to a
degree program, they can be
they're eligible for the
Opportunity scholarship program
or other state aid, so I'm out
of chair. How does the funding
work if a student goes in for
stackable certificates and um
you're enrolling them under this
grow program.
Is there a separate track for
each certificate or how, how do
you do that?
Um, so, uh, Madam Chair and
Representative Lumstrom, uh, the
path we currently have, and it's
consistently being improved, uh,
is that an individual who goes
through, for example, this
Internet of Things bootcamp
develops a list of skills and
competencies. We have a
crosswalk to 3 courses, 9
credits in our particular um
computer science, uh,
certificate credit program and
degree program, associate's
degree program.
When the individual chooses, if
you were to, if, if our learners
chooses to go into a degree
program, they come in with,
again, 3 courses, 9 credits. We
then helped them apply for
federal financial aid if they're
eligible, so that would be the
Pell Grant, maybe loans, but
really mostly grant aid or
student aid, uh, state aid,
which may include the
Opportunity scholarship program
So when they change
program pathways is when we open
up and try to figure out which
aid programs are available to
them to leverage.
So and that answered your
question, and I, we do that in
healthcare and trades in IT and
almost all of our pathways. I'm
I'm trying to understand it,
Madam Chair, uh, Tracy and
Panel, we have um
we have a subcommittee that's
working on these federal funds
losses to the state of New
Mexico, uh, the committee calls
it B to the 3 power. We don't
call it Big Beautiful, we just
call it be the 3rd power, and
there's a whole bunch of funding
that we anticipate will be, uh,
lost, so we're looking at where
these other sources are coming
from, and it's true that these
training programs and workforce
programs are in there.
to the positive, which is great.
but that, uh, can't be said for
some other source, some other
funds are going to be cut
pretty, pretty severely in the
next couple of years, so we need
to take a peek at that. We need
to see how all these things are
being, uh, funded, um,
particularly when we're looking
at stackable certificates.
and how it could apply to the
opportunity scholarship the the
last question that I have, Madam
Chair, and, and panel is about
AI. I understand that it's
helpful and and uh I'm just
curious, how do the institutions
ensure that the student actually
knows what they're doing versus
AI use. You know, I've, I've.
I'm one of those people that's
right in the middle when it
comes to AI, you know, it's,
it's, it's a great thing and
it's here to stay, so whether I
like it or not, it's here to
stay. But I want to know that
the people that were graduating
actually know
what uh they're doing. Uh, I've
often worried about that when I
think about medical students and
whether or not they're actually
writing their
their reports or are they having
somebody else from a computer
write it. So how, how do you
ensure that? Since everything's
on the internet, everything's on
the web. They're probably tested
that way. They're probably in
some kind of a in some kind of a
uh college uh uh set up where
they're tested with a proctor, I
assume, but how, how do you all
know that they know what they're
doing?
Um,
Madam Chair and Representative
uh Lungstrom, uh, here at UN in
Valencia, what we, where we
begin is uh in in the classroom,
we um uh our professors, they're
aware of this. They know that
students can access these
resources online. And so, uh,
there are, there are tools out
there that actually help us
detect whether the student did
this work or copied it or
whatever the case may be. And
that's where that check and
balance begins, you know, not
just turning
something and say this is mine,
uh, uh, you know, and you stop
them along the way and you say,
OK, listen, you know, you didn't
tell us exactly where you got
this from, but, you know, it
needs to be done a different
way. So, you know, that check
and balance begins in the
classroom, and that's that's
where we start and then, uh, at
the next level up, uh, you know,
we're working with our
professors, kind of really
helping them also get up to
speed because this is moving
very fast. This is a fast moving
train that all of us are getting
shocked every day. So that,
that's what we begin to do that,
to make sure that their work
is a quality and it's legitimate
and it's their work versus, you
know, we spend a couple of hours
and come back in with this, you
know, uh, high-level, uh,
report, and you say this is
mine. So we, we, we look at that
every day. It's it's, it's sort
of like, uh, you know, we keep
on fighting this to make sure
that the work is legitimate. I
hope that answers your question.
So if I may, um, so, um, Madam
Chair and Representative
Lindstrom, at least at CNM we're
looking, we, we have been
working on this for a number of
years. Certainly faculty
development, faculty development
on curriculum, our instructional
support, the individuals who
help faculty design courses,
particularly using our open
education resources, the free
text materials that are pulled
together for each course. We
actually use those courses to
generate um
a course tutor, if you will, to
help with, so we use AI in a
number of ways. Yes, there are
student assessment of writing,
work, problem solving prompts.
We're also using it to revise
courses and provide additional
tools to faculty and students to
help with their learning that's
iterative.
Um, but I would say the biggest
gain we've seen are particularly
for students who aren't strong
in English, for example,
generate a first draft,
certainly using AI, but then
iterate that draft, and we've
seen greater gains in their, um,
and those students product
being able to write reports,
being able to add um
themselves in these what might
have been more sterile uh
assignments. So we, we use an
iterative process to help the
students, but they're the growth
in those learner in those
learner skills has been
dramatic. It's really leveled
the playing field and increased
their abilities much faster than
in a traditional course, and
that's consistent with
data in other, with other fields
and certainly in other areas,
but, um, and with other schools,
we're not alone in doing that,
um.
but I mean, I think ultimately,
it's the employer who's telling
us
the use of critical thinking and
writing and learning our
technical skills.
and the use of AI is what's
helping those individuals
frankly excel in the workplace.
We have strong examples with
Amazon where that's the case,
you know, Amazon's uh
rope, uh, their mechanical, um,
manuals are online. You still
need someone who can interface
with, here's the, understand,
here's the problem. Here's some
ways I need to test to see if
this is actually the problem I
need to solve. Here are all the
technology I can use and access
based on um
prompts when I can put in
prompts and that manual based
on, I'll say Amazon systems
allow them to identify the
problem, identify and test
solutions. So there are ways to
use AI, but I would say actually
it's the employer who's helping
us refine and make sure that our
students aren't just repeating
what they see. So, but I would
ask Randy to perhaps tackle
that. I mean, say here's a way
where an employer tests that
skill set.
Thanks. Um, Madam Chair and
Representative Lindstrom, some
of my earliest employment
experiences were at Los Alamos
National Labs working in AI. So
I have a long, long career in
this field, and I've watched
the, I've watched it evolve and
especially in the last 5 or 10
years, obviously evolved very,
very quickly. Uh, I view it
though as one of many tools that
are available to a technology
entrepreneur, to a company, and,
uh, as with any tools, they can
be
used correctly, they can be
abused. I, I can't speak to, to
what happens in the boot camps,
but I, I do have a a significant
familiarity with some of the
instructors, and I think that
they make an effort to ensure
that the students are aware of
the impact of the tools and the
things that they are creating
with them, and that is something
that we talk about in my
company. We actually do use AI
in a variety of different
contexts to take that data from
the top of the pump jack and
turn it into something useful
for the operator.
Yeah, Madam Chair, I, I just, I
bring the issue up because it's
um come to my attention that uh.
there's been some policy changes
at the federal level when it
comes to English proficiency to
be a CDL driver.
Um,
understanding now is that there
has to be some level of
proficiency, which makes sense.
I mean, at at some level you
gotta be able to speak English
to to uh operate and see, see
what your responsibilities are,
but I was curious because I
assume, I assume that AI is
gonna be a big deal, if not this
session, the following session
for all of us. So I'm trying to
understand how it works with all
of you in education.
as you're the, I think you're
the heart of what this where it
all started anyway, so I, I and
research your R&D and things
like that, so I'm trying to get
my thinking around that, how
it's good and how it may need
some some check. We saw some
draft legislation this last
session that
boy, I mean, it's all over the
board and, and there hasn't been
tons of focus for us, at least
not for me. I'd imagine that
this committee would be one that
takes some of that up this next
session, but with that, thank
you Madam Chair.
If I may, to just in response to
that, Madam Chair and
Representative Lunstrom, you
mentioned, um, you could, uh,
I'm sorry, if you could keep
your comments brief, we're
one of the things that we do in
Lee County, we have 70% of
Hispanic demographic. We created
a series called English for the
Workplace, and we started with
our CDL program, where we
created a manual in-house from
scratch, English on one side,
Spanish on the other side, line
by line, that gives them an
opportunity to be successful for
the skills exam because the
skills exam must be
administered.
in English and of all the
students who've taken English
for the workplace prior to
taking CDL training have passed
with a 100% pass rate. And the
next we will be moving on to
healthcare with nursing and then
office personnel.
That's really good to hear.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Representative
Cullen.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um.
just a couple of things that
I've been a big proponent of CTE
for many, many years, and I
really believe that the state of
New Mexico has
lagged behind the times to get
it throughout the state, um.
and Madam Chair, uh, just
recently, well, Riotech just
opened and it's a very unique
partnership with CNM
And so one of my questions is um
we're not funding CTE well in
this state. Um, I believe,
according to other states.
Again, we have uh lagged um both
with dual credit and CTE for
many, many years. So my
question, um, there's gonna be a
couple of questions of
recommendations for funding and
providing these career technical
education opportunities
throughout the school districts
of the state.
If somebody wants to.
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative, uh, Colin, thank
you for raising Riotech as an
example of where, uh, a college
and a school district have
agreed to share resources and
co-manage facilities, um,
building them is one thing,
managing them and operating them
is another. And it's been a
really important partnership
with um
Superintendent, um, Cleveland on
this work for years and thank
you for your leadership on the
school board and uh rearrange
the school board and then, um,
now as a member. So when we look
at funding, I would say in the
um
I'm sorry, it's not B cubed be
exponentially 3 to the power,
what are we calling the B cubed,
B to the 3rd power bill, um
with
B as a third power, uh, there
is, there are, there are
movements to remove Perkins'
funding. So they're 2 points I
make. One, there's a movement to
remove Perkins funding from
higher education.
making it only K-12. I would say
that is a challenge for us
because because we frankly CNM
receives probably 1 to $2
million a year in Perkins
funding to start programs and to
buy equipment like our
quantuman, the, the, um, the
technical equipment for the
quantum mechanics program. Um,
for our simulators that may um
were been approached for an air
traffic controller program. We
would be using those sorts of
funds to start programs that are
high demand, high wage
and not just demand in our
state, but certainly across the
country. So the changing in
Perkins funding, if that
happens, would be dramatic for
us. We would look for uh
replacement or other
opportunities for funding. The,
uh, New Mexico Grow Money, the
workforce, the high demand, high
wage money for $60 million does
allow, uh, some funding for
program equipment.
So, for example, if I'm looking
to fund a balance in my
mechatronics program or a
quantum mechanics program, and I
use some Perkins funding. I'm
going to use some of this New
Mexico girl money. Again, you
want to know what program funds
we're using for what programs,
um, and again, what are those
outcomes of the investments. So
there's some ways we're gonna
have to look at funding for
programs, uh, again, that are in
demand at the region or the
state level that are consistent
with moving the economic
development, uh, plan for plans
forward, um.
but I will say right now what
the legislature has done is fund
that work and that's been very
important for us.
um, expanding that would be
needed particularly if federal
funding is, is reduced. And then
at the K-12 level, I'm not as
familiar with their, with the
funding for CTE. I know some of
that has changed to the
positive, that there is more
funding available, but I think
that's also a formula and some
other line item adjustments for
CTE funding, but there's no
question the the Rio tech
program that the two facilities
that we're operating, uh, that
we're looking at equipment
replacement in the next 5 years,
once that is up and running,
you're going to start seeing us
articulate what the needs are,
where we're finding
efficiencies, um, help me to
leverage funds better. Again,
it's a new partnership, it's an
entrepreneur, so it's a startup
basically. So we're gonna test
what the model looks like
be able to articulate, I think,
with greater clarity what those
needs are.
Um, Madam Chair,
to answer that question, I think
there are, there are two aspects
to it. For me, uh, for here, uh,
you are in Valencia. Um, as I
mentioned earlier on in my, uh,
my opening speech, uh, we're
starting to partner with the
school districts where I meet
with the uh superintendents of,
uh, Los Lunas Schools, Berlin
schools, and School of Dreams
Academy. Just specifically for
that purpose because when I look
at solutions in this area, it's
a, everybody goes, uh, you know,
with that.
proverbial hat in hand asking
for the same money for the same
solution. So what we're trying
to do is band together as a, as
a large collaborative and say,
how do we come together and
build uh um unintentional
solution so that, you know, so
that we get, we, we, we get
those answers, uh, those answers
have one location. For instance,
uh CTE instructions are very
tough to come by because of
their pay, you know, I've, I'm
not gonna give up a 100K job and
to come get a 50K job. So
I, I think one of the things we
would like to look at is that
for the legislature to help for,
for us to look at how we uh how
we uh pay CTE instructors,
whether at the post-secondary
level or at the high school
level. And what we're doing in
our collaborative is, let's just
get one CTE instructor for
whatever the field is and let's
share that rather than the three
school districts plus myself
going out looking for that.
You've just quadrupled that, you
know, uh, that right there. So
that's what another way to do
that too.
Uh
in other states, CT instructors
are paid that premium, and you
have to just recognize that. And
so we need to do that to say
this is not an easily uh found
uh skill because people can make
more money outside. How do we
how do we compensate, uh, the
educational sector to say, if
you have one, this is what you
know this is the the right level
to uh fund them. Uh, the other
aspect of it is also the
workforce side, um.
as I see, you know, Valencia
County is just sort of like
grown into what Bonolio County
is in terms of the businesses,
the, the corporate sector, uh,
around here, I think over 60% of
our businesses are small
businesses, small to medium
sized. You know, if we talk
about large businesses here, you
can count them. I mean, your,
uh, your me, your Amazon, your
uh Walmart distribution. and a
few others. So therefore, we're
just starting to grow. That's
why the Workforce Training
Center that we have on the west
side of
town, we're really looking at
how do we reach those
businesses? How do we partner
with them? How do we offer the
right skill and training that
they need, rather than just us
throwing something out there and
say, come and take it. It has to
be what the, the client wants,
want the, what the stakeholder
wants and offer that. So we're,
we're really in a, uh, we're,
we're in a growing mode right
now for us. So that's those are
some of the uh concerns we face,
but as far as the funding is
concerned, we received about
$268,000 last year.
for uh New Mexico grow. Uh, we,
we didn't spend a lot of it, not
because we didn't want to, but
because they need just, you
know, who we were going to train
just wasn't quite there. So
we're looking at ways to boost
that, to, to do more campaign in
the community to, to meet with
the businesses and really
partner with them, you know,
offering exactly what they want.
So I hope that answers the
question.
Madam Chair Representative
Collin, I'll be brief. There's
nothing much more that I could
say there, but to your point
about funding, prior to the
state of New Mexico authorizing
the growth funding. I've been
doing workforce training for
over 18 years now. And
ironically there's 18 community
colleges in the state of New
Mexico that offer this sort of
training. And when we had the
high skills fund when we had to
submit metrics of new entities
served, training hours and head
count. Funding was based on
training hours and that fund was
approximately 440,000 over 15
years spread 18 wastes.
So I, and I think my colleagues
would agree, I am not fudging on
those numbers and so to have 60
million spread out is fantastic.
But what we had to do at New
Mexico Junior College was pursue
private partnerships, you know,
with private industry to be able
to fund it. Now granted, when we
had some of that money, we were
able to maybe do the 20 to 25%
scholarship, but nothing like we
were able to do with the Growth
Fund. And so we would love to
see that continue because while
there is such a value
in traditional degrees, we know
that CTE and workforce training
is not going away and is not the
B option at higher ed
institutions any longer.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair. And
so to that point, if we invest
within it, we hope to keep our
students here in New Mexico
instead of having them leave and
then give them additional
opportunities and like
representative Lundstrom had
mentioned is the opportunity
scholarships also for
certificates because not a
reason to go to 2 to 4 years,
and even with the 2 years this
is a pathway from in high school
going into the CTE, um,
and Madam Chair, I'm looking,
you know, we're looking at New
Mexico oil and gas, um, up and
even Rio Rancho because in that
industry, they really need a lot
of electricians and welders and
pathways and internships and
apprenticeships, and so I know
that down in Hobbs, they have a
great CTE program, and I'm sure
that kind of goes right into,
um, with them going into the
college as well as kind of a
pathway. Um, and so
Madam Chair, um
let me just see, uh
when we talk about the Perkins
funding, I know we never
received a whole lot of Perkins
funding in vision when you start
splitting that up, it's very
limited amount that we get. So,
um, I know we've talked about
different solutions of funding
mechanisms with the SCG for
career technical education. I
think that's what we're really
needing to look at is that other
um
another pathway for that for our
funding, which we'll be looking
at within LESC, but within when
we're looking at economic
development, Madam Chair, it is
very important that we really
start investing in our CCTE, um,
and we as as this committee
really needs to take a look at
that, um, a, we want to keep our
students here. We need to have,
um, the, the workforce here
that's able to get higher paying
jobs, and these are higher
paying jobs
that do not require a four-year
degree. And so, um, again, like
I said, in New Mexico, we are
way behind. Um, we're starting
to play catch up, I believe, um,
but again, compared to other
states, we need to be kind of
looking at some alternatives,
especially with funding and
providing support for them. Um,
so I do think that is all I
have. Thank you.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Matthews.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, presenters. um
uh, I'm gonna
sort of focus on something
that's uh a little bit
different. I'm wondering how
well we are doing serving the
educational needs of people who
are not seeking certificates and
not seeking degrees and how open
are community colleges and other
facilities are to people who
want to maintain their computer
skills, for example, um, so let
me give you a chance to answer
that and then I'll do some
follow-up questions. Thank you.
OK
Um, so if I may, uh, Madam Chair
and Representative Matthews,
I'll, I'll take one example. I
really appreciate the
conversation and the panel's
comments around Fusemaker space.
in Albuquerque and I would say
the CNM stimulus Center
downtown.
um,
the conversation that college is
intimidating.
It's very difficult to walk in
to a college campus, uh, CNM and
I
don't take credit for this. My
predecessor started and really
wanted to open the doors for
people who would not go, who
were not going to come to our
campuses, but who would walk
into a non-traditional
storefront opportunity, um, to
learn or upgrade skills, and
that's really where our digital
media and a lot of our work um
at Fuseaker Stays with the boot
camps around Internet of Things
and coding and and many
iterations of coding as you've
noted, um, and data literacy
really are not on our main
campus because it really
maintains an openness
to the community that is not
traditional. Um, our digital
media programming, for example,
is going to move to the rail
yards in our film and digital
media site, not surprising, but
again, it's a very different
place to learn or upskill, um
to help people learn skills, and
I would say open their open up
the options for them to explore
more.
Um, I think you're, and then if
your question is about ongoing
computer skills and um or
upscaling around AI or if it's
not a, a bootcamp or a
certificate that may take a
couple of weeks or 10 weeks,
what would that upskilling look
like? And that's something we're
exploring for other members of
our community.
whether it's an Excel's class or
it's an AI familiarity class or
some of our, I would say what's
normally called continuing
education or um community
orient uh community education um
I hate to say we're focusing on
the 230,000 people who are not
serving in certain areas on
skills to get them in the
workplace and the continuing
headline is not as high on the
priority right now.
honestly
Madam President, um
and I wanna first of all thank
you for our, our, uh, offices,
are legislative offices are at
Mount Montoya's uh CNM Montoyi's
campus, and we've been made to
feel very, very welcome.
Um
and we really appreciate CNN for
that and I appreciate seeing him
because I taught there for a
number of years and really,
really enjoyed that.
Um.
are there actual restrictions?
are not allowing non-degree,
non-certificate people into some
of these classes or is it just
based on whether or not there's
space in the class.
Uh, Madam Chair Representative
Matthews, I'd say it's based on
space. There's no other barrier.
We're an open access
um, institution and for
individuals over a certain age,
they have a significant
reduction, like $10 a credit
hours so they could still take
some of those courses for
non-credit or audit and
at a modest, modest cost.
I think it's $10 a credit hour.
Um.
um
Madam Chair, and presenters, I
just want to make the point that
it's particularly for older
people watching the pace now
that we see the change in
technology.
um
that is very, very isolating for
them not to be able to have a
place to go to
learn what
AAI is not a one, a steak sauce,
and
uh
um
and to have some sense of how
these things relate to their
lives. There's a nonprofit in
Albuquerque called Tenures, and
it's, uh, uh, it teaches, it's a
nonprofit, then you can pay, I
don't know, 20 bucks or
something, and high schoolers
teach you how to do various
kinds of technology things. The
waiting list is like 100s
Uh, so there's a real demand for
this.
um, and the other thing I'd say
is that while there are
age
particularly because of age
issues, people who are not
necessarily interested in a
certificate or a degree, but a
lot of times they are volunteers
and organizations, and they
perform an important function in
keeping a lot of our 501c3s and
so forth, uh, functioning. So,
um, I would really encourage all
of you, make some real effort to
include these people because
they want to be of use, and they
frequently feel like they're
pushed away.
Thank you
Thank you, Representative. Um, I
also appreciate the um promotion
president. I'll take it. Uh,
Senator Stefanics, and we have
about 15 minutes left.
I will be very short. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Um, and thank you
to the panel. I am concerned as
we talk about AI about uh
preventing harm
and the safety and I know it's
being used already, um
I just heard a story about uh
scamming incidents. Uh, I also
heard a story about people
looking up people's personal
histories and putting it out
publicly and stopping, you know,
progress and their future. So
can you, any of you address, uh
the issue of fake news, the harm
to people, etc.
Thank you Madam Chair
Um, Madam Chair, if I may, um,
and, uh, Senator, if I may, I, I
to, a couple of very concrete
examples of how AI is affecting
privacy and
credit and um our learners is
the number of employees I've had
to hire.
to make sure that we are not
um, awarding financial aid to
fraudulent applicants.
So there have been last term
7000 applicants
and that's just the example that
we briefed our board on. We had
7000 fake applicants.
divided those up in half. Some
seemed more, uh, anyway, after
analysis, we ended up
saving, you know, we ended up
only awarding maybe a couple
$000 out of what could have been
hundreds of thousands of dollars
every term because AI is helping
to generate
artificial students, artificial
applicants, so I'll just say
very clearly, I mean, it is
challenging our systems in terms
of awarding money to make sure
we are still sound financial
stewards of federal and state
aid that's expected of us. This
has been going on for years, so
it's not new, but it's
incredibly cost costly, costly
if you make a mistake, costly if
you're um
for the organization to um catch
fraud basically. The others are
cybersecurity. There's no
question we've all had more
attacks on our systems, um,
because AI is allowed bad actors
to be very efficient
and very harmful, so we've
certainly, um, expanded our work
in those areas around
cybersecurity. And again, when I
say protecting the institution,
it's protecting all of our data,
whether it's employee data or
student data. So I don't just
mean CNM as this, you know, our
bank accounts, that's one, but
really it's our learner and our
student data, which is and our
employee data, which is probably
the most, that's really the most
valuable asset we have.
and so we're very mindful of the
costs and the processes that
we've had to, um, go through to
make sure that we're as secure
as we can. So if I think about
AI and how it's affecting our
general businesses
pretty incredible and that's
different than fake news. That's
different than assessing
um.
other information out there, but
those are very too clear
examples that I know CNM is not
the only one dealing with this.
This is every institution
dealing with this at some level.
I just want to make the comment,
Madam Chair, that, um, about
12 to 15 years ago, I was in a
conference where several
cybersecurity experts said no
matter how you think you're
ahead of the game in protecting
information and privacy and
data, uh, somebody's gonna
figure it out.
So I think we have some
challenges, um.
in our society as we go forward.
And I just want to put that on
the table while we
know AI is going to advance
education, advance the workforce
that we have some issues to deal
with. Thank you very much.
Thank you, Senator, uh, Senator
Tobiasson.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
wanted to make a little bit more
of a statement. I've been
texting one of my sons, um,
while we're having this
conversation, and he did um the
deep dive coding program at CNM
loved it and he did use AI, um,
partly not to do with coding,
but to help break down some more
complicated topics within that
coursework, um, they had open
dialogue with their um
instructors and other people
that were involved in
helping guide them through that
program, and it was like, I
think a 10-week program, if I
remember right. Um, but he, he's
now using what he learned in
that deep dy program and that
certification in his
professional career. So he's not
necessarily employed as a coder,
but he's using that, um, on a
regular basis, and he still uses
AI for a multitude of things,
but I think like any, let's call
it an emerging technology,
right? Because we know that it's
changing all the time. I think
there's
going to be positive and
negative. I respect, um, the
senator's comments about this
because we're having those
conversations in multiple
committee committees right now.
It's, it's an important thing
for our state to look at, to
make sure that everyone is
protected to the degree that we
can help, um, but it's also a
huge benefit in learning, um,
and I think, gosh, how would we
have all learned if we put
ourselves back in high school or
in college, um, it is a
different world
today, but I really applaud the
efforts that you're taking, um,
in higher education here in our
state because it's a different
world. Kids are learning with
different tech technology, um,
at a different pace than we
learned, and we have to keep up
and are we behind, um, perhaps,
but you all are making great
strides to make sure that we
bring um tools together and
certifications forward so that
it's not a one size fits all
because it's not a one size fits
all world anymore
So thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Senator, a
Representative Roy Royal
Caballero.
OK.
Oh, it wasn't in. OK, thank you.
A huge fan of um
CNN and all of our uh junior
colleges and um applied you for
also for all the work that
you've done and I think
oftentimes in workforce
development strategies, planning
and strategies aligned with our
economic development plans and
strategies.
we focus a great deal on
recruitment of industries
attracting recruiting site
development, all of those
things, and oftentimes we lose
sight of uh what our current
employers are in need of and so
one of my questions is how do we
ensure that training programs
align with the needs of our
current employers and then the
second part of that is how do we
um collaborate in
in the attracting of and
retention, the attraction of the
new businesses and the retention
of current businesses or
employers, how do we ensure that
we're um
that they are in a place to
provide uh high wages, living
wages, uh, wages that will
secure um the success in the
future that we're preparing
everybody for or enhancing
everybody for that's
first question and I just have
one more after that. Thank you.
Madam Chair Representative
Caballero, uh, to answer your
first question, what we do at
New Mexico Junior College is
every department within the
workforce development division,
has an advisory board that meets
twice a year in the spring and
in the fall. Automation has our
advisory board, oil and gas,
continuing education,
transportation, and we've made
it a practice to ask our
industry partners that what we
call the KISS method. What do we
need to keep doing, stop doing,
start doing, because if what
we're offering is not what our
employers are looking for
in our graduates, we'd missed
the boat. So we're asking them
not just in the formal setting,
but consistently in
subcommittees and focus groups
to come and review the
curriculum, tour the facilities,
look at the equipment, and if
they're saying, man, you really
need to be offering this and you
need to be training on this. Our
next question is, how can we
count on you for a donation or,
you know, a contribution to make
that happen because quite
simply, everyone comes with
ideas, but we're looking for
partner
s not just ideas as well. So
advisory boards are one big way
for us and to answer your second
question, this is an ongoing
partnership with our local and
regional economic development
for quality of life initiatives
because we can offer phenomenal
training programs, but if
there's not affordable housing,
if there's not a place for their
kids to go to school, if there's
not entertainment, they're going
to look elsewhere, so for us it
is a constant partnership of how
do we improve quality of life?
We'll provide the training
program
but we are not responsible for
things like housing and the
advisory boards has been a
paramount success for us to be
able to ask them, not only
should we not be doing what do
we need to start doing? How will
you help us in making that
possible.
Thank you.
OK, um, thank you. The only item
I'd like to add is that, um.
advisory uh committees, uh, the
city of Albuquerque has
something called um
a a jobs Albuquerque program. So
your point about always
attracting, uh, the telera and
others is important but it's
equally as important to grow
those businesses who are already
here. So we're really proud to
work with the the city run to
administer their job Albuquerque
program, but, uh, that's really
a program to help small
businesses or entrepreneurs, uh,
get a scholarship or funding for
1 or 2 employees.
uh, to help get training for
everything from supervisor
training to program management
to, um, digital marketing or
digital media. So whatever that
one employer needs and wants to
invest in that, that employee.
We're really helping them try to
grow their business. So that's
really important. So as you
noted, it's not only the
attracting large employers
that's really growing or small
and large businesses, so I'm
proud of the city that we do
that again, the New Mexico grow
money that you have allows us to
do that. We market to our
employers
that way of the, I don't know
how many uh employers I, I
raised in our presentation
earlier. Most of those are small
businesses. They're not Amazon.
They're not Intel.
That's or Sandia Labs, that's
part of it, but that's not,
that's not the bulk of the
employers are much smaller. So I
would say the state money that
you've put forward has been very
helpful. Um, I will tell you a
challenge because you asked the
question about wages
uh, you can see that a number of
the programs that we offer, uh,
frankly don't lead
to immediately don't, they don't
need immediately to a
sustainable wages.
Uh, I would say medical
assistant, I would say early
childhood education
certificates, education
assistants, um, don't lead to
the wages that are high wage.
The state's support of
subsidizing early childhood
education and educators is
really important. We still need
early education childcare
providers and it's important to
get individuals into the job
market and on a path that allows
them to, um, and that's where
we're providing some of these
funds, but allows them to grow
their own business or to grow,
or to gain their, um, education
skills in other areas. So I
would say that not everything we
offer
meets the high wage requirement,
and that's a real challenge for
us because I would say that's um
that challenges our integrity.
It challenges whether we should
even provide, be providing those
programs. I will tell you a lot
of my peer institutions don't
offer programs where those wages
are not, uh, livable wages.
If I did that, I would be
eliminating key programs that
grow our community. So it's a
very, uh, challenging place to
be. I will say the subsidies for
wages for early childhood has
been really instrumental.
That's one area where clearly
the community sees a need,
society needs seeds a need. We
are able to provide that
training to help boost their,
um, to put individuals on a path
and to move forward. So I, I
would just say we can't always
guarantee market, high market
wages, because that's not what
we can always do, um, but we are
doing our best to help
um, still meet a social and
community need, um, in a way
that is at least doesn't cost an
individual money to go to that
program.
So the scholarship money or the
other wages for paid
internships. It's gonna cost the
individual time, their time,
maybe their gas, uh, how do they
get to their work-based
experience, but at least we try
to minimize the other costs to
them to get them on a path. So
I, I just wanna know I just
would like to share that's a
really complicated question, and
we struggle with that in
particular industries.
because we don't drive the wages
in those industries.
so.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and what
I would say is that I think
we need to change just our
mindset, the way we approach
things as well.
because I think there is a way
to provide um higher wages,
living wages, and it because
we're all committed to breaking
the cycles of poverty.
and if we're gonna break the
cycles of poverty, we've got to
create new cycles of opportunity
in order to create those cycles
of opportunity, it includes what
you all have identified are the
partnerships, the collaboration,
but most importantly, changing
the way we've been doing
business in New Mexico, which is
minimum minimum wage, minimum,
um, you know, whatever we reach,
we feel we have to reach the
minimum and then for some reason
the cycle stops there and so
we're not really in effect
creating the long term
sustainability economic wise for
our communities and that's what
we're, what I think all of our
goals should be. If not, we
continue to spin, uh, in, in a,
in a, in a vicious cycle that
doesn't get our communities out
of that constant state of
poverty. And so I would say keep
addressing the challenge, keep
working, finding out what the
business is actually need in
order to be able to um afford
living wages and that's really
a, a big, a big focus of uh
community economic development
around our state. I did have a
couple of other questions, but
for the sake of time, I'll, um,
defer them directly to you, uh,
we have your contact information
because I am interested in
knowing how you plan to address
affordable housing
ing uh, barriers and
transportation barriers as well
as how you're including rural
and underserved communities in
your constant, um, assessments
and building of your programs.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative, um,
and I have a couple of questions
myself and I think we'll have an
opportunity to answer that, um,
represented Real Caballero
because one of my questions was
about barriers to retention.
um, and of the 3100 students
that have come through the CNM
program and the nearly 300 at
New Mexico Junior College. How
many of those have
um, made it to completion that
are out there actually in the
workforce.
And of those who didn't make it,
why?
Sure, well, um, and I thank you
for the question, uh, Senator, I
note, uh, in the presentation,
we have the data to, to
to date of where our students
are who have completed. The
majority significant majority of
them of them complete. So let's
just start with that. Very few
of them don't complete. The ones
that I have in progress and
pending are because of when
often when they started the
program and they're just.
they started in June or July and
they just haven't finished it
yet because the program is
longer than
the time we're reporting.
Oftentimes when individuals are
com uh, do, are they withdraw
from the course. It could be
because of a life circumstance
that has happened where, uh, in
a 10-week intensive course, if
you're missing two weeks of that
course, it's
I would generally say it's
impossible to catch up and still
finish on time. What we try to
do is move individuals into the
next round of the programming,
if they're able to do that. Um,
oftentimes there are other, um,
it could be health, it could be
family, they could leave the
area, their job search, their
job situation often changes, and
their schedule may change that
impacts their ability to
complete. Um, I would say with
those individuals, we try to
make sure we're providing
uh,
not only the food assistance and
academic or training or career
support, uh, in other ways we're
trying to find transportation
support, um, we try to serve
other, other needs where we can.
We try to re-enroll them if we
can.
so I mean they're common error
reasons why people don't
complete.
Madam Chair, to, to answer that,
um, roughly 90+% have completed
all the programs that went
through the growth funding, and
I do just want to say for
context and clarity of the 286,
that's who received growth
funding, but we did train 4,166
students last year, so it's much
bigger. This was just simply of
who received that type of
funding, and those who didn't
complete as President Harschler
had mentioned, most of it is
life circumstances, uh, whether
it's familial or they had to
move out of town and
um, our numbers are the same. We
submitted to the state in our
proposal that we would begin
tracking them 90 days after the
completion of the training. So
whenever we had to submit, we
still had students who started
in April, May, June, so they're
still not within the threshold
and we do the same, we call, we,
we, we make a call and we ask
those questions and I would say
roughly 70% who did complete are
within the industry in which
they obtain their training.
Thank you. I'm curious, are
there any limitations on the
grow funding to help with some
of the supplemental costs of
those barriers, housing,
utilities, what does that growth
funding actually fund and can we
work to make it actually meet
the needs of students who may
not be able to complete.
Um, Madam Chair, uh, CNM builds
in in the cost of the
programming that we offer. We do
build in certain supports for
individuals that may be
training, um
I'll say career, uh
career supports, etc. So that is
built in, um
our food pantries and our food
access is available to all
learners and no matter what
program they're in, whether
they're in a workforce training
or they're in our degrees
seeking programs, Transportation
vouchers are for anybody who has
that need. It doesn't matter if
they're in workforce training or
in a degree seeking program, um,
our housing assistance is pretty
modest and so is our childcare
programming. Childcare
assistance is probably it's
majority, um, be used by our
degree-seeking students,
um
but my direction and our goal is
to broaden our services to all
learners, no matter what,
frankly, what door they come
into. I don't know, um, I will
say the state's support of food
assistance has been very
beneficial over the last number
of years. Uh, you've funded, uh,
the higher education department
for, uh, supplemental nutrition
and, and assistance, and that's
been very helpful as we, it's
because it's allowed us to, um,
provide more food assistance
across more campuses and to more
individuals. um
and then the other housing, the
other issues I'd have to
provide, I'd have to think more
clearly about that.
Madam Chair, I would echo that.
um, in New Mexico Junior
College, we call them wraparound
services, you know, as many
institutions do as well. Um,
transportation would be one, but
housing would be the biggest.
housing would be the biggest
simply because at this moment we
do not have dedicated workforce
training, housing on our campus
and uh many years ago we
integrated them with the general
population and those taking a
10-day oil and gas class did not
mix well with an
eighteen-year-old undergrad. So
that we, we did
away with that. And so this is
why if there was some amendments
to the growth funding to help
with housing primarily to be
able to have dedicated housing
for workforce training that is
more short term. I believe that
that would help our metrics and
being able to help students even
more.
Uh
Madam Chair, let me, I'd like to
add to what my colleagues have
just said, uh, for us two,
transportation is big. We, uh, I
just spent this last uh year
talking with uh Rio Transit to
uh for us to uh work on an
agreement where they'll pick up
our students uh from the Los
Lunas uh train station, bring
him here express, and we're also
looking at extending that to the
uh outlining areas, for
instance, uh, Meadow Lake is
about 1015 miles from here. The
typical student, uh, that we're
talking about that we need to
get back to work. They can
' t get here. So that, those are
the kind of things that we need.
We also have a, uh, a food
pantry here on campus and all
our students are open, uh, have
access to that. So yeah,
transportation is going to be
big for a lot of our students
because Buren County is, is, you
know, once you get out of the,
uh, the, uh, Berlin, Los Lunas,
a corridor. It's all rural. I
mean, the next house will be 5
miles away from you. So, as we
try to reach them, you know,
we're not even doing it via
distance. We're not saying go
online. No, we want that, they
want to be here in
person. And so that's one of the
things that we might we need
help with to say, how can we
provide more transportation,
whether it's known city or
whatever, but that, that's,
that's part of the basic needs
that we've identified of our
students. Thank you.
Uh, thank you and thank you all
for your presentation. this,
this morning. Um, I just wanted
to especially thank you Vice
President Salcido for the story
that making that connection
really helps me understand and
see the full trajectory of how
these programs are making
impact, um, and then I wanted to
let you know, um, President,
that I placed an intern from CNM
several years ago at a nonprofit
that I ran, and it was extremely
beneficial, um, to the day to
day operations of the nonprofit,
but
also to that student, um, in
their trajectory to obtain a
social, uh, social worker
licensure, um.
thank you all for helping us
understand how collaboration
affects positively to Mexico's
workforce.
Uh, up next, we are going to
have
Jeff Lopez, the director of
Office of Broadband Access and
Expansion on a connectivity
issues across the state.
Welcome, Jeff. It's great to see
you.
We are running about 7 minutes
behind, so just keep that in
mind, um, but Jeff will hand it
over to you.
Members of the committee, thank
you for inviting me here to
present today.
I am Jeff Lopez, the director of
the New Mexico Office of
Broadband Access and Expansion.
I am newly appointed by Governor
Michelle Lujan Grisham. This is
about my 8th week, but I'm happy
to share updates and progress
from the Office of Broadband
today. Uh, everybody should
uh, have or be receiving
shortly, uh, my presentation. So
I'll just be covering some of
the slides.
Better?
Thank you.
So I'm gonna be covering a
couple of items today. First and
foremost, I wanted to provide an
update on the state funding that
the legislature has provided to
the Office of Broadband, an
update on our federal programs
as well and cover some of the
challenges that we are facing
today and expect to face in the
future.
Moving ahead to slide 3, this is
an overview of broadband access
in New Mexico. Uh, the blue dots
are areas served by broadband.
Those are households, small
businesses, uh, community
institutions that have access to
broadband. The central map
doesn't quite portray the full
picture because a lot of the
high density areas are covered.
So if you look to the left, to
the circle says 90% of broadband
service or locations, those are
small businesses, households
have access to high-speed
broadband. That's a speed of 100
megabits per second download and
20
megabits per second upload,
minimum.
Uh, that's enough to cover
streaming, teleworking,
telemedicine for a family of 4,
not necessarily all at once, but
it meets the minimum
requirements that the FCC, the
federal agency, NTIA, and the
Office of Broadband have
identified
Uh, the yellow, uh, dots are
underserved locations. Uh, so
that's in between 25 download
and 3 upload, and, uh, the
minimum qualification to be
served. Uh, about 5% of
households and small businesses
in New Mexico are underserved by
broadband today.
Uh, 5% are unserved, so
completely, uh, unavailable, do
not have access to broadband or
have speeds of less than 253.
That is not enough to make a
video call, not enough to
download files, typically of any
size that is necessary today.
Um, overall, around 765,000
locations are served today, and
46,000 are unserved.
Uh, with funding that we have
available and have deployed, uh,
we expect to serve, uh, an
additional, uh, number of
households bringing that number
down to 33,000 by the end of
2026. So that is funding from
the Connect to Mexico Fund that
is funding from our capital
projects fund from the US
Treasury. It does not include
what will be our largest
program, the bead program from
NTIA, which we're in the process
of finalizing right now as we
speak.
Turning to the next slide
Our goal by the end of 2026 is
to have all households, all
small businesses, all community
institutions, uh, served by
enforceable commitments for
broadband, so it might not
necessarily be complete and
wired, but we want those grant
agreements in place so that
every location in New Mexico can
be served by broadband by the
end of the next calendar year.
Why is this important and
particularly for this committee,
uh, focusing on rural
development.
Rural counties with access to
broadband have business growth
rates that are 213% higher.
than rural counties without
excess broadband.
That means self-employment also
benefits where opportunity
entrepreneurs in rural areas who
want to provide service and
access to, thank you.
uh.
to service and access to their
community and areas around the
state and around the nation, uh,
would need that broadband
connectivity to sell, to provide
services. Uh, it also means a
per capita income growth rate
that is 18% higher again for
rural areas with access to
broadband compared to rural
areas without access, and that
is holding all else constant. So
broadband can be a key component
of economic development in rural
areas.
Uh, the next slide
is the benefit of our friends at
the Legislative Education Study
Committee. Uh, I won't cover
every bill in detail, but just a
brief overview of how we got to
where we are today with the
Office of Broadband. Uh, the
Office of Broadband is about 4
years old at this point,
established in 2021.
um
both House Bill 10 and Senate
Bill 93 in combination provide a
lot of the authority that we use
today, uh, as well as, uh,
Senate Bill 144 and Senate Bill
377, providing some of the state
funding that we are allocating
as we speak, uh, putting
broadband into the ground,
laying fiber, and laying
attaching fiber to poles. Uh,
most recently, Senate Bill 401
in the 2025 legislative session
transferred the statewide
education network from PSFA to
the Office of Broadband. So we
are in the middle of that
transfer period for 6 months
starting July 1st
through the end of the year, and
we look to complete that, uh, by
the end of December.
Um, it does not deal with the
Office of Broadband, but I also
wanted to highlight Senate Bill
126, which increases the PRC's
universal service fund to $40
million per year. So that is not
public funds, but from the state
universal Service fund with, uh,
per connection charges on, uh,
telephone services.
Turning to the next slide, this
is an overview of the timelines
that we are under.
The Office of Broadband
administers 3 funds and 5
programs pri primarily. Uh, the
oldest is the US Treasury
Capital Projects Fund. This was
passed by the US Congress in the
American Rescue Plan Act in
2021. Uh, we need to complete
all projects funded by the
Capital Projects Fund by the end
of 2026.
Sorry, catching up on the
slides. Um, the next, uh, is the
Connecting Mexico fund that's
split into three different
programs, the Connecting Mexico
Fund, uh, capital programs must
be complete by next year, in
June of 2026. That is when the
fund currently expires. Uh, the
GWE projects or the grant
writing, engineering, um
grant writing, engineering and
planning, uh, grant program has
$100,000 for, uh, rural
communities for small, uh,
towns, tribes, uh, we still have
funding available for any
technical assistance that local
communities might need. Uh, the
last one is the Student Connect
program, providing connectivity
for students wherever they are,
whether they're in the household
doing homework or within the
school. This provides devices
and connectivity for students
throughout New Mexico and as I
mentioned in a previous slide,
the largest program that we're
expected to administer is the
BEA program from the US
Department
of Commerce NTIA, National
Telecommunications Information
Administration.
New Mexico is currently
allocated $675 million from this
program. Uh, we are in the
process of, uh
evaluating bids and, um,
applications for this program,
and we expect to have public
comment by the end of this
month, making much of the work
that we've done over the past 3
years, public and available for
review. Uh, so I'll have more to
share in the coming weeks on
this program, but I wanted to
highlight it today that it will
be the largest programs that the
Office of Broadband Administers.
The remaining 5 programs are
currently delivering broadband
throughout New Mexico, but they
are not administered by the
Office of Broadband, the
primarily uh federal funds with
the blue bars and the New Mexico
PRC, which I had mentioned
previously.
Uh, moving ahead to the map of
New Mexico. These are
programs and projects throughout
the state that we have funded or
completed. Uh, the green, uh,
color is from state funds that
connect to Mexico Fund primarily
the capital projects as well as
the Student Connect program, uh,
the pink magenta is federal
funds from the AARPA Capital
Projects Fund. We are focusing
on rural areas with these funds
as well as student connectivity
throughout the state, uh,
delivering in many of your
districts and to many of your
constituents already. Uh, we are
very fortunate to be, uh, not
just breaking ground, but, uh,
cutting ribbons when it comes to
some of the capital projects
funds
and, uh, connecting Mexico
funding. So we're excited to
share that progress with you.
Uh, turning to the next slide,
this is just an overview, sort
of a 101 on broadband. So you
can see a picture of a, uh, work
that we are funding and working
with our internet service
providers in partnership, making
sure that we connect households,
small businesses throughout the
state. Uh, the first photo, if
you can see it in your slides,
is, uh, burying the fiber. So we
either trench or plow, uh,
working in this case with Oso
Internet, uh, primarily in the
Rama chapter, um, the second
picture is the handhole
connection that's typically on
the curb or along the right of
way
connecting, uh, the main fiber
line to a household, uh, NID is
the network interface device on
the house so that connects, uh,
from the street into your
household and into the, the, the
modem on the 4th picture. Uh,
the 5th picture is a little bit
out of place, but that's the
network operations. What you
might see in a hut, uh, nearby
or in the, uh, headquarters of
the, the Internet service
provider, providing a lot of
those fiber connections to the
home. Uh, we are still fiber
first in New Mexico,
prioritizing the landline
connectivity, uh, to households,
uh, because it is future
p ro o f uh, it is laid into the
ground. It is largely permanent
without damage. Uh, we still
believe that that is the best
connectivity that, uh, money can
buy, but it's often much more
expensive than alternatives. So
we are also funding alternative
projects whether there's fixed
wireless, um, or unlicensed
fixed wireless in rare
circumstances and particularly
for student connectivity
hotspots for the home, making
sure that students have the
ability to do their homework at
home.
Uh, turning to the next, uh,
slide, these, this is another
picture of Oso Internet, uh,
providing connectivity in the
Rama Navajo chapter, uh
this is a plowing fiber directly
behind, um
just wanted to illustrate sort
of the work that we're doing,
uh, broadband project number 3
is trenching, uh, with Penasco
Valley Telecom and N Artesia,
uh, you can see it's just a
regular bobcat, but they dig a
trench, we lay fiber, bury it,
uh, again, working with our
partners to provide this
connectivity. Uh, moving quickly
to broadband project number 4.
Another example of trenching
some of the work is also by hand
making sure that the, the
connectivity is there. We also
have professional engineers on
site for a lot, many projects,
uh, making sure that the, uh,
projects are up to code and
meeting
all requirements
Uh, the next slide is an
overview of our funding. Again,
I said I wanted to provide an
update, um, the ARPA Capital
Projects Fund, which is that
first, uh, program that the
Office of Broadband received
funding for, uh, all the funds
have been expended or
encumbered. We have a small
amount remaining primarily for
administrative expenses. Uh, the
fourth bar here is the
connection New Mexico fund that
combines Student Connect, uh,
GEP, and it combines our capital
project as well as some of the
broadband strategic fund that
the legislature provided to us
to, to plan and uh
provide some strategic decision
making
Uh, that last bar is only $5
million currently. So that's a
bead program available for, for
planning for our deployment.
Um, as you can see in the next
slide, we expect this amount to
be much larger, a bigger
component of our overall
projects, and we are very
fortunate in New Mexico where we
predated a lot of other states
when it comes to establishing an
office of Broadband that has
allowed us to provide a pilot
program almost with both the New
Mexico fund and the Capital
projects fund, uh, putting some
of the systems we need in place,
the systems and staff at the
Office of Broadband to prepare
to administer what will be our
largest source of funding from
the 675 million from NTIA. Uh,
again, we are
in the process of finalizing,
uh, evaluating some of the
proposals we've had for that
funding, um, completing bids and
preliminary agreements, and we
hope to make that public by the
end of the month.
Uh, I'm going to turn to some of
the challenges that we're facing
in permitting and rights of way,
particularly in rural areas, as
you know, uh, much better than
me, New Mexico is a very diverse
state. Uh, we have mountains and
valleys, uh, very dramatic
topography, which brings a lot
of visitors to New Mexico but
also provides a lot of
challenges for infrastructure,
whether it's highways or
broadband. From one quarter mile
to the next, it might be a
little different jurisdictions
for approving a right of way,
um, whether it is local, tribal,
state, or federal, this image,
uh, gives some of the background
on some of the
challenges we face as the Office
of Broadband, not granting those
permits, but coordinating the
projects and making sure the
funding gets off the ground. So
we do not have any authority
over rights of way or
permitting. We work with our,
uh, partner agencies in the
states and federal agencies as
well as, uh, tribes, pueblos,
and our, uh, Native American
nations on permitting for many
of those projects.
The next slide, um, I wanted to
cover the statewide education
network, the SEN. Uh, today we
have network infrastructure in
20223 schools, uh, providing
connectivity in 96,000 students
around the state.
Um
the benefits of this program,
again, we transferred it from
PSFA, uh, starting July 1st of
this year. It'll be fully
administered by the Office of
Broadband, and we see a critical
component, uh, in the statewide
education network, providing
cybersecurity, reducing risk for
local students who might be, uh,
vulnerable to cyberattacks, as
well as supporting education for
the local school districts where
they might be able to benefit
from educational technology and
some of the curriculum
available, not just in New
Mexico but around the country,
um, administrative is a big one
here, where
whether it's uh planning or
procurement procurement or
working with our federal
partners at the Federal
Communications Commission for
E-rate, um, the Office of
Broadband today is assisting
many schools, and I want to say
that we connected two schools in
New Mexico, just recently, the
final two schools that will be
now connected to fiber or we
provided assistance through
E-rate, uh, and reducing the,
the administrative burden that
many school districts face when
they are meeting the challenge
of providing broadband
connectivity for their students.
Finally, cost reduction. We hope
to work with local internet
service providers, uh, reducing
or eliminating school share
after E rate for economies of
scale. We want to see these
networks deployed throughout New
Mexico at every school, uh,
available to every student. Uh,
finally, the Office of Broadband
provides technical support for
many school districts, uh, even
though they're not directly
state agencies, uh, they benefit
our, our constituents. We want
to make sure that they have the
service provided, uh, available
through internet.
Uh, this is an overview of the
statewide Education Network
where we have nodes active
today, uh, throughout the state.
It is, uh
not just Hu and spoke with
central locations in Albuquerque
and Las Cruces, but we have
nodes in Travis County,
Roosevelt and Curry County,
grants, um, throughout the
state, we want to make sure that
schools have the highest speed
necessary.
to complete their work and have
access to next generation
educational technology.
Uh, finally, I wanna, um, end on
this slide on challenges.
Uh, in May of 2025, the US
Department of Commerce canceled
the, uh, Digital Equity Act
funding for New Mexico. This was
$8.7 million available for aging
individuals, veterans,
individuals with disabilities
and low literacy populations and
particularly it was available
for rural families, making sure
that they had the digital skills
and digital literacy necessary
to participate in the networks
that we are funding.
Uh, so we are, um,
trying to identify some
alternatives to this federal
grant that was canceled. Uh, we
are in the close-up process with
NTIA today, uh, but the need is
still there, not just for
capital investments that we've
seen with the, uh, the programs
I discussed today, uh, but also
for digital literacy and digital
opportunity. Uh, the second
bullet is on broadband
affordability. In April of 2024,
the US Congress allowed the
Affordable Connectivity program
to lapse. That was $30 per month
for low-income households, $70
per month for households on
tribal lands. Uh, the program,
uh, expired with a lack of
funding in 2024. Um, so now
there is another critical
component missing for the
state's plan for broadband, not
just that capital investment or
digital opportunity, but also,
uh, affordability for broadband.
And as always, and with many
state agencies, I wanna raise
the last challenge which is
procurement, rights of way and
project management. Again, we
are very fortunate in New Mexico
to have some of that early
funding from the Capital Project
Fund and from the legislature
with the Connecting Mexico Fund,
uh, making sure that the Office
of Broadband has a staffing and
processes necessary to deploy,
uh, what will be our largest
program. So we are hard at work,
um, getting the existing funds
out the door and into the
ground, one of those fiber or,
um, or fixed wireless, uh,
working with our local internet
service
providers throughout the state
uh, to provide that
connectivity. And we look
forward to the next steps. And
with that
I stand ready to answer any of
your questions. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you
Committee, any questions?
Representative
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, um,
thank you for briefing us. I, I
was gonna have a specific
question concerning the federal
funds, excuse me, and you
addressed that in terms of it
being pulled back the, the, the
equity funds, um.
so
my concern is we were
we set up this office probably
later than what we should have
and in, in the sense that we've
had these broadband needs for a
very long time. Lack of access
has been a major issue in our
state. I'm glad we finally did.
and I'm glad we got the
injection of the federal monies.
However, in the current state
that we're in of federal
funding. It concerns me, um,
that, and, and this is why my
question. I want to know what
the plan is for um long, you
know, there, there's gonna be
not just the initial
implementation or connection
connectivity, I should say. But
then we have
the challenge of long term
maintenance and funding once
everything
all the funds are spent. Is
there a plan in place, um, to
address those two areas, the
plan for long-term maintenance
and what is the plan for
funding, and then attached to
that question is, is, has there
been any attempt to leverage the
state and federal funds with
other funding, um, probably I'm
talking about the partnerships,
actual public-private
partnerships that
could help also in answering
that question. Thank you, Madam
Chan.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative.
there is currently no dedicated
funding at the state level for
operational expenditures for the
broadband networks that we are
funding on the Capitol side
today. Um, some of the federal
programs that the FCC has turned
the focus not just on those
capital, uh, construction
projects, but also operational
expenditures for rural internet
service providers. It is
certainly a big part of what we
are trying to do, and it was the
original intent of the
bipartisan infrastructure law
which established Bede where
you'd have the investment from
Bead for capital expenditure and
the digital Equity Act for
digital Opportunity.
and the Affordable Connectivity
program that helps provide some
of that sustainable, uh,
financing for these networks
that are being, uh, invested in
so deeply, so heavily. Um, so we
do not currently have a state
program, but the FCC does
provide some of the services as
well as USDA reconnect.
Um, however, I think there is
more of a need, especially with
the 675 million that we're
deploying from Bead for more
concentrational operational
expenditures as well as
affordability.
Um, I think, uh, the point you
raised on partnerships is
particularly important, and
again we had um almost 39
applications for $14 million for
the digital Equity Act funds.
That was in partnership with
Tribes partnership with local
governments, partnership with
many of our nonprofits
throughout the state to provide
access to the digital literacy
and digital skills training. I
think we do need some of that
still today to make sure that
the other parts of this picture
are complete.
Thank you, and I forgot to tell
you, thank you very much for
your presentation. I think
together with the plan, we have
to have an operational plan in
place, and we have to be already
setting up the funding for it.
Um, but I'm also concerned about
equity and access and so we
cannot minimize the importance
of the rural communities, um
lack of equity all these years
and access, and now that we have
this funding, I want to see us
advancing that, not minimizing
that approach, because sometimes
it's easier to do that. We
ignore what we've ignored for
centuries, and place it on the
back burner. It has to remain on
the front burner, uh, in order
for us to be able to even place
a dent in the inequities that
have occurred in the state in
terms of access.
and especially in this, in any
area of uh technical
development, so I just encourage
you to um to really keep that
first and foremost in all of the
planning that goes forward. And
then vigorously go after um the
accountability in my estimation,
Madam Chair, in the private
sector because they're
ultimately benefiting from the
funding. They're, they're the
beneficiaries by far the greater
beneficiaries. We will have
access, but the greater
beneficiaries always are those
that tend to um stand to profit.
And so holding them accountable
to their degree of profitability
in becoming a partner in helping
to leverage the funds, however
way that may be for the steak
because it all has to be state
by state, obviously, and our
state has different challenges
as far as that's concerned, but
the um the companies need to be
active partners and give back to
the community that
that is providing them the
opportunity to set us up in the
long run. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Lujan.
and welcome.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
sorry. I was trying to get here
a bit earlier for this
presentation, um, and this is
campus is a little farther out
than I thought. Um, but happy to
be here. Uh, Representative Tara
Luhan from House District 48 in
Santa Fe. Um, my question is,
and I, I just want to say thank
you, uh, to Jeff for, for
joining Aba and becoming the new
director. I think that this is a
great opportunity for us to have
your um
your experience from your
background and, and you bringing
that to, to us here in New
Mexico. So thank you number one
for that and welcome.
And I'd like to just ask, I know
that there were, um, before you
came, before you even had your
first day that there were
contracts that were canceled and
things going on in the office,
um, that were not under your
control at that time. Can you
update us why why that happened
or what is going on in review of
that, Madam Chair.
I thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative Lu Han, thank you
for the question. Um, I can get
into some details if you provide
additional information on the
contracts of concern, but I will
say again, a big part of our
process is making sure we have
the procurement and licensing,
um, as well as contracting
process available at the Office
of Broadband. So when there is a
problem, I am here to hear it
and do my best to address it.
Thank you. I appreciate that.
That, so maybe we'll just follow
up on that, um, as you are
pretty brand new, um, and I'm
sure that was kind of my, my
point. I just had found out
about that was brought to my
attention, um
before, um
Jeff came on, came on board, but
I just was wondering why that
that was happening and maybe
it's for other purposes and
you'll, uh, review and let us
know about that. Um, my other
question is
in reference to us losing the
funding, the federal funding.
Um, what is it gonna look like
for New Mexico and, and please
forgive me if you covered this
already, but what is it going to
look for New Mexico in regards
to not having that federal
funding, Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Luhan, thank you for that
question. I think it is very
important again that we have
that focus on digital literacy
and digital skills training. Uh,
we are fortunate to also receive
$1.9 million in the Department
of Labor, uh, from some of the
congressionally directed
spending from our
congressionally, uh,
congressional delegation for,
uh, workforce development. That
is a big part of this, but
separate from workforce
development, we need those
skills training, uh, available
in senior centers in rural
community centers wherever
the populations are that would
largely benefit from the
networks that we're creating. I
think we need those
partnerships. We can still work
on the partnership side, but
where we're actually funding
curriculum or putting uh events
together. I think we do need
some dedicated funding for
digital literacy and digital
opportunity.
Thank you, manager. I appreciate
that. Um, it's just one of
obvious, the obvious concern
with uh in the moment now with
making sure that we get that
broadband. The other, the other
question that and I briefly saw
it in here is how we're lay
we're laying fiber down and what
the, that being the most
expensive or one of the most
expensive costs for broadband.
And looking at the alternatives
under what the, I guess what the
um
direction from the federal
government is where, where are
we with all that, Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Liuhan, thank you for that
question. I think it is very,
uh, important to understand the
challenges that we have in New
Mexico. And again, this is
something that you all
understand better than me,
whether it's the topography,
whether it's the mountains or
valleys, the hard rock, uh, that
can add significant costs to
broadband deployment. Um, some,
some fibers laid into the ground
where you dig a trench or plow,
um, some is attached to poles,
uh, so that's a little bit more
cost-effective where you can use
existing poles and existing
rights right of way, but again,
that's not available throughout
the state.
and we're not just focusing on
fiber. We also fund projects for
fixed wireless where you have an
antenna on top of a household,
connecting to a um a larger
antenna that could be miles away
in some circumstances, but it
requires line of sight.
Sometimes again, if there is a
mesa in the way or some tree
cover in a bosquey, it can make,
make, uh, connectivity more of a
challenge for that household
trying to access the internet.
Um, so we do deal with a lot
higher costs for deployment in
New Mexico compared to some of
the East Coast states or areas
with higher density, and that's
also
where the markets have also
served a higher percentage of
the population because the rate
of return is higher in those
areas of higher density and also
they don't have to spend so much
for reaching rural communities
if the distances are less or if
they're not facing some of that
hard rock to to dig a trench and
lay fiber.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
And so that this will be a
basically my last question in
regards to that and looking at
our um our demographic
topography, as you mentioned,
with our fire risk and fire
hazard in those areas where are
we there? Last year before you
came aboard, but I think you
were briefed on this was that um
communities had to come together
because of the destruction of,
of their lines and such. Where,
where are we with that
ma'am.
Madam Chair, it is a big
priority not just for the Office
of Broadband, but for the state
and especially for the governor
and not just recovering from
disasters, but providing
resiliency and that is
particularly important for
broadband and internet
connectivity and wireless
connectivity for cellphone
access. If a, if a home doesn't
have access to NPR or broadcast
alerts or if they don't have
access to a wireless tower
because of damage from a fire or
a flood that can be lack of
access to critical
life saving technology and
alerts. Um, I'm working with our
partner agencies at the
Department of Information
Technology and Homeland Security
and Emergency Management on
where we can deploy more
resources for making sure that
not just the public responders,
um, but also members of the
public have access to those
critical ors and emergency
emergency situations. Uh, so I
think cellphone access is a big
part of that. Um, coming from
the congressional delegation,
there are a lot of federal
components here, whether it's
FEMA or other federal resources
through SBA for economic
development, um, I now as the
director of Office of Broadband,
I want to make sure that we
provide that resiliency for
infrastructure, and we are very
fortunate to announce $1.25
million for recovery and
resiliency and Lincoln Otero
Counties. We just announced that
earlier, uh, last week, uh, for
response to the Brudoso fire. So
we are hard at work responding,
not just to exact past
disasters, but providing some of
that resiliency for future
disasters as well.
Thank you. That's a great
update. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you,
Senator Stefaniks.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and my
comment is related to some of
your last remarks about public
safety. I think education and
economic development are very
important, but in some of our
small rural communities when
major events happen. They can't
make calls and they can't even
email, and I've had this
situation occur in uh Pecos, for
example, where they couldn't get
a hold of the state police to
come for an emergency.
This school board, uh, the Board
of Education there at that
school district had been meeting
with your prior, uh, director on
working on services and then it
stopped, it changed, and then it
was a whole restart all over
again. So I'm hoping that we can
continue the work that's been
started in all of these small
communities.
without having to start all over
again. So that's basically my
comment. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator. I just have
two quick questions. Um, the
first is, are we on track to
complete the plan by 2026?
Uh, Madam Chair, thank you for
the question. We are on track to
have the enforceable commitments
in place by the end of calendar
year 2026 for all broadband
serviceable locations. Those are
households, small businesses
throughout New Mexico. Again,
uh, that is making sure that we
have the commitment in place,
the signed grant agreements to
get the work done, um, that
won't mean every house is
connected by the end of 2026,
but you are on track to make
sure that the grant agreements,
the funding is in place and then
we turn to the project man
management and holding internet
service providers accountable
for the commitments that they've
made. So I would say that
we are on track. Uh, this is
part of the expected timeline
for the largest section of
funds, the BEA program, uh,
particularly with the change in
the federal administration that
added some of the additional
wrinkles and considerations from
one administration to the next,
so we are facing some
turbulence, but I would say
there is a national bipartisan
commitment to broadband, and I
am proud to say that I'm a
receiver of the bipartisan
commitment for the state also
through the Connect to Mexico
Fund and other sources. So I
think because of those, uh,
commitments at the state and
federal level, we are on track
Thank you. Uh, the second
question is, uh, it's a little
bit bigger and I would be very
curious to know why we don't
invest in satellite access to
internet. I live in a very rural
part of Senate District 30, and
I have satellite, internet, and
wind broadband goes down in my
community.
my internet is still up and I
hesitate to say that because now
my neighbors will know my
internet is still up. My
neighbors or my family, so I
still up. um, but there is no
shortage of open sky in New
Mexico, um, and it might
alleviate some of these uh
topography issues, easement
issues. Why didn't we invest
there?
Uh, Madam Chair, thank you for
the question and lower Earth
orbit satellite is a significant
part of the picture. Um, there
is a company deployed throughout
New Mexico today, where
households such as yours can
gain service through, um, low
Earth orbit satellite, uh,
connectivity, um, some of the
changes that I discussed from
one federal administration to
the next also loosen some of the
restrictions on low Earth orbit
satellites. So we have two
satellite companies that have
participated in the round of
bidding for Bead. I can't
publicly disclose what those
companies are, but you might be
able to guess. So we are
entertain
ing some of those applications
for funding today to help
complete the picture. Uh, some
of the concerns I have with low
Earth orbit satellite is
resiliency, whether it is, uh,
weather or solar wind or other
natural disasters, I think there
is a risk to some of those new
technologies that haven't been
fully fleshed out yet.
Additionally, it, it makes sense
in areas with open skies, but we
also have a lot of communi
communities along waterways and
valleys along Bosques, whether
it's tree coverage or just a
mesa or a mountain in the way
that can also impede some of the
access for, uh, low Earth orbit
satellite. So we are still fiber
first. We are focusing on areas
that are financially prudent for
the fiber connectivity, but to
low Earth orbit satellites are
going to be part of the picture
again meeting that commitment by
the end of 2026.
Thank you for that, Jeff. Um,
and I, if there's no other
questions, I think our lunches
here, folks, so thank you for
your presentation, Jeff. We
appreciate you. Thank you, um,
folks, we have lunch for
legislators, um, over in the
corner there. It's provided by
