OK. All right, um.
All right
Thank you, everyone, co-chairs.
Committee members for inviting
me here today. My name is Angela
Samon and I serve as deputy
counsel for the New Mexico
Department of Justice's IME
litigation Division.
Since January of 2025, much of
the impact litigation division's
work has focused on protecting
the interests of the state of
New Mexico and our residents
against federal funding cuts and
agency reorganizations that have
or would have impaired our state
government's ability to serve
our population.
To date, the impact litigation
division has brought in
cooperation with other states,
25 lawsuits against federal
agencies and officials submitted
numerous comment letters
concerning policy changes that
would harm New Mexico residents
and or impair the state
government's abilities to meet
their needs and multiple amicus
briefs supporting nonprofits
that provide critical support to
our communities. Our success in
obtaining court orders directing
resumption of funding has
restored billions.
of dollars to New Mexico state
and local agencies, as well as
community organizations. To give
you a better sense of not just
the dollars, but the real world
impact of these victories. I
want to highlight a few of our
cases.
Um, New York versus Trump, our
very first litigation filed on
January 28th with 22 states and
DC challenged their directive
from the Federal Office of
Management and Budget to all
federal agencies requiring them
to freeze all activities related
to the obligation or
disbursement of federal
financial assistance and other
relevant agency activities.
While the agency, OMB reviewed
whether those funding, um,
priorities aligned with the new
administration.
' s preferences. This freeze
applied to all grants, loans to
states, including monies that
had already been approved and
awarded to New Mexico, amounts
that we had taken into account
as being available when we
created and approved the state's
budget for 2025 and 2026. If
this freeze, which had no end
date attached to it, had gone
into effect, we would have lost
about 42% of our budget.
For the fiscal year that ended
on June 30th, 2025. The state's
total budget was 28 billion976
million dollars.
Just under half, 12 billion $53
million came in the form of
direct aid from the federal
government.
Without the anticipated federal
funding, the state would have
run through all of its cash
reserves by the end of May. But
we averted such a catastrophic
event because we want an
injunction in federal court that
directed the federal government
to release the money, all $12
billion plus the billions to New
Mexico, plus the billions owed
to other states that had been
frozen pursuant to the
directive.
Another example, through
multiple lawsuits challenging
the termination of federal
funding for our public schools.
We have restored just over $50
million to the public education
department.
One example is New York versus
Department of Education, which
pertain to education stab
stabilization grants. On March
28th, the US Department of
Education notified PED that we
would no longer be able to
access millions of dollars in
education stabilization funds
that had been approved and
awarded to the state through the
bipartisan American Rescue Plan
Act to address the long term
effect, long-term effects of
COVID pandemic on K through 12
students.
The funds in question were for
the homeless children and youth
programs, elementary and
secondary school emergency
relief. An emergency assistance
to non-public schools. These
funds covered the cost of food,
personal care items, classroom
supplies, specialized training
for teachers and more.
On April 10th, 16 states along
with New Mexico and DC filed a
lawsuit challenging the
rescission of these funds. We
obtained a preliminary
injunction making the funds
available to us again, only for
the Federal administration to
try 2 weeks later to again
suspend the same funds.
We again sought an emergency
order from the court, working
with our state agencies to
establish the harm and
irreparable harm that we would
suffer, and we won. As of July
1st of the roughly $5.8 million
owed to us, we have received 4.2
million and the remainder is in
the process of being released.
More recently, we challenged the
administration's freeze on over
$6 billion to multiple states of
Department of Education funding
for 6 programs related to
English learning and adult
education.
Even though the funding for
these programs had been set by
Congress in statute and the
agency, therefore did not have
authority to rewrite or ignore
duly passed legislation and
suspended funds for 6 programs
because it simply did not
believe such programs should
exist. And the programs in
question included the migrant
education program, which
supports the educational needs
of migratory children, so
students whose families move
frequently due to seasonal
agricultural work. Title 3 A.
programs which support language
instruction for English learners
and immigrant students, which
aim to help students, including
immigrant children and youth,
achieve English language
proficiency so that they can
pass our standardized testing,
21st century community learning
centers, which were created to,
um, support community learning
centers that would help students
in high poverty, low performing
schools meet basic aca academic
achievement standards and
provided services.
To complement regular academic
programs. Finally, the last
program, one of the last
programs at issue was the adult
education and family literal
Literacy Act funds. Shortly
after filing the lawsuit and
submitting our briefs requesting
a preliminary injunction that
would have directed the Federal
Department of Education to make
the funds available. The feds
announced that it would be
releasing the funds voluntarily,
including the estimated
4,477,600
dollars that had been awarded to
New Mexico PED for the 2025, 26
fiscal year, which just began on
July 1st.
Our work has also restored
funding for other state
agencies. For instance,
including the New Mexico
Department of Transportation. In
May, we joined a lawsuit
challenging the administration's
suspension of formula grants
that would support the building
of an electric vehicle charging
infrastructure, uh, as part of
the federal administration's
implementation of an executive
order quote terminating the
Green New Deal. In June, the
federal court enjoined this
funding freeze against states
for specifically only for those
states that
submitted evidence detailing the
impact that this freeze would
have. New Mexico was one such
state, and we regained access to
the $18 million that had been
allocated to us.
In April, we joined litigation
to challenge the sudden
termination of $11 billion for
emergency public health programs
from the Federal Department of
Health and Human Services. We
obtained a court order directing
the federal government to resume
provision of funding,
reinstating $59 million for HCA
and DOH.
Litigation against other federal
attempts at cutting funds have
also resulted in benefits to our
public universities. For
instance, we brought a lawsuit
in conjunction with other states
against NIH after they attempted
to reduce reimbursements for
costs that are associated with
research and academic programs.
This resulted in the restoration
of $14.5 million to the
University of New Mexico.
Finally, our lawsuit challenging
dismantling of AmeriCorps
reinstated $2 million in
programming and staff funding to
nonprofit organizations within
New Mexico.
Aside from ensuring that funds
awarded to us remain available
and accessible or litigation
efforts have also focused on
stemming the reorganization and
even wholesale elimination of
federal agencies with whom we
work in close partnership. Why?
To protect the health of our
residents and of our democratic
process. In February, New
Mexico, along with Arizona and
Michigan led a thirteen-state
lawsuit to stop Elon Musk and
the Department of Government
Efficiencies dismantling of the
federal government.
While Musk may have left the
federal government, Doge
continues to access government
databases with information about
states personally and
confidential information about
our individual residents
continues to order termination
of federal employees, make
payment decisions and other
conduct that laid out, as laid
out in our Constitution, only
congressionally created entity
can do. That litigation remains
ongoing, and our purpose remains
to ensure that our elected
officials are held accountable
when
They step well beyond their
legal authority and to make sure
this does not happen again.
In April, in an effort to
protect the powers of our state
governments, we joined a
multi-state lawsuit challenging
6 provision, 6 provisions of the
preserving and protecting the
integrity of American elections
executive order on the grounds
that the president lacked the
authority to impose the proposed
changes and in particular
intruded on authority of the
federal Congress, as well as the
traditional power of states to
administer elections. We want a
preliminary injunction that
remains in effect today.
Other notable litigation in this
category includes challenges to
prevent the dismantling of the
Department of Health and Human
Services and to prevent
reductions in force across
federal agencies.
Before I end, I want to
emphasize one more thing. The
impact litigation division is
not exclusively focused on
federal litigation. Since our
inception, we have been leading
our litigation against social
media companies like Meta and
Snapchat for claiming that they
had adopted measures to protect
children against trafficking and
exploitation and that they were
working to ensure healthy use of
social media, but then entirely
failed to live up to these
public promises.
Our attorneys have also made it
a priority to meet with
advocates and service providers
throughout the state. To hear
from people who are on the front
lines about what our community's
most pressing needs are and how
we can use impact litigation to
meet the needs and protect our
residents against abuse and
deceptive business practices.
We are doing all of this with 44
attorneys plus myself in this
division.
To say that we are at capacity
is an understatement. We want to
continue to do the amazing work
that we are doing, but we also
want to expand our impact. And
we know that there are people
out there who want to work for
us, including former federal
employees with ties to New
Mexico, who are looking to make
a difference in people's lives
by working at the New Mexico
Department of Justice and doing
the consumer protection and
civil rights enforcement work
that is no longer happening at
the federal level. So I am going
to
use this moment to make an
informal ask, to help us expand
our roster and our impact. I can
tell you right now with an
additional $3.2 million. We can
attract the talent and the
commitment that our division
needs to take off even further.
Thank you for your time and
consideration.
All righty, um, thank you for
the presentation. Let's uh go to
the committee. Are there any
questions? Let's start with
Representative Day Hoffman B
Hill.
Thank you very much, Madam Chair
and thank you, Ms. Samant for
that, um, update. My first
question is for all of the
budgetary cuts, um, specifically
for the Department of
Transportation cuts. What was
the legal basis for the lawsuit?
Sure.
Thank you.
So in the Department of
Transportation case, um, there
were conditions that were being
imposed on the potential receipt
of funds. And under federal law,
while the government can impose
conditions, certain conditions
on funding. They can't do it to
the point where they're
basically
Put us in a position where we
have no choice but to do work
that is rightfully the federal
government's.
Um
jurisdiction and not ours.
That's one. Another requirement
under law is that the conditions
have to be related to some
extent to the purpose of the
funds. In this case, the
condition involved requiring
that we engage in immigration
enforcement activities, which
were also not
Properly defined in the
conditions in order to receive
money that would actually allow
us to build charging stations
for cars. I'm also gonna add in
that case, there was another
layer where these funds were
already um allocated
appropriated, in other words,
all the legal procedures that
needed to take place so that
they were guaranteed to us and
it wasn't a discretionary
matter, had been followed
through, and we were, we had
built our own budgets, like I
said, in anticipation of
receiving
Receiving those funds.
Thank you and thank you, Madam
Chair, and thank you for
fighting for New Mexico in that
way, um, and so were these
budgetary cuts solely done
through, um, OMB measures or
were some of them also directed
via presidential executive
order.
So the, the, the executive
orders themselves did not impose
cuts. They directed agencies to
do X, Y, Z things. Some of these
cuts have definitely been, um,
at the hands of the Office of
Management and Budget. Um, in
fact, recently we just amended a
complaint to flag that it wasn't
the agency itself that was
directing how spending should be
made, and I'll back up and just
say, so once, if a statute has,
for example,
We have our formula grants. So a
statute may say 65% of these
funds will go to XYZ states, or
this is how you're going to
determine how each state gets an
allocation, right? And then
Congress separately also has to
set aside money to meet that. So
in that scenario, that's kind of
like the clearest indication and
Absolutely like zero discretion.
The agency just has to make sure
we comply with, you know, the
terms of the grants of money
that we're actually using them
for the purposes that we claimed
that we were going to, and
that's how they should be cut.
Uh, uh, dispersed in some of
these funding cases, we had
those types of allocations that
nevertheless, the agency said,
you know what, these are no
longer available to you. So
that's one kind of area. Another
is an issue has been
that Office of Management and
Budget, which also again does
not have the authority to decide
whether or not monies should be
released to us that have already
been approved and allocated. OMB
has been involved in issuing
those directives, or at least
those are the allegations in our
complaint.
OK, thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair. My last question is, um,
I believe New Mexico, but please
confirm for me also joined the
lawsuit related to the
elimination of um.
Uh, birth citizenship. Can you
confirm if that's correct and
then give us a status update on
that lawsuit.
So yes, um, we joined, uh, the
multi-state litigation
challenging the effort to end
birthright citizenship. It was
filed in Massachusetts, um, and
so what has happened is at the
same time that or around the
time that we filed our lawsuit,
there were other organizations
that filed their own. 11 lawsuit
involved individuals who would
have been impacted by the
decision and some nonprofits
that they wanted preliminary
injunction preventing
implementation of the birthright
citizenship ban. We did as well,
but then the
Federal government appealed
those PIs. Fast forward, they
went up to the Supreme Court.
The Supreme Court issued a
ruling only with respect to the
lawsuit brought by individuals,
and in that case, basically
said, listen, we, uh, the
majority held that courts can
only, only need to issue
injunctions that will make the
plaintiffs whole. And in that
case, they said that the
district court in that
individual lawsuit erred because
they did like a nationwide ban.
ban against implementation when
all that needed to be done to
make the plaintiffs, the
individuals in that case hall
was to issue an order saying the
birthright citizenship ban won't
apply to them.
There was a footnote in that
Supreme Court decision, noting
that the states as plaintiffs
are in a slightly different
position, right? Because we
aren't necessarily saying that
the ban is going to impact the
state. Our concern is that it's
going to impact our residents
and how we provide benefits, how
we issue birth certificates and
create a series of
administrative hurdles. So to
make the state whole, you don't
like, you would actually
implement a ban on
implementation.
of the birthright citizenship,
um.
Prohibition to everyone in our
state.
So where we are now is since the
Supreme Court ruling, matters
are now proceeding back into the
District of Massachusetts.
We are filing briefs about the
implications of that Supreme
Court ruling for our position.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair. So once you get clarity
on that issue, is that the
expectation is you file in in
New Mexico Federal District
court for, I mean, how is that
gonna be implemented? What court
of jurisdiction would implement
that. So actually, I, so the,
the court in Massachusetts could
issue an order because we are a
plaintiff in that state in their
court, and they have authority
over us. That court does have
the power to issue an order that
would require the federal
government to not implement the
birthright citizenship ban in
New Mexico.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
So, the, the state of New Mexico
as a named plaintiff in that
case would be subject to that
specific order in that court.
Great, thank you, Madam Chair.
All right, let's go to
Representative Herrera.
Thank you Madam Chair and thank
you for your presentation, so
can you just give me the total
number of uh millions of dollars
that you've brought into this
state. So I, I, I can add the
ones that I just told you. OK,
well, you don't have, I mean, I
can do it later on. I'm just
curious because that's what I'm
gonna take to my constituents,
you know, I won't
repeat every state, but I, I
want them to know how important
this is. Yeah, I mean, I've
done. I really would say like
from the get-go, the biggest
threat.
from day one was the issuance by
OMB of this memo saying everyone
stop, right? And that literally
put $12 billion in limbo. Within
hours of that memo going out, we
contacted our state agencies and
we said, hey, are you guys able
to draw down money?
And even though the band was
only supposed to apply to
payments that went to states or
organizations, not to
individuals. One of the first
impacts that we saw, we weren't
able to access um the Medicaid
portals, and that was one of the
first impacts. So, I mean, I, I
think that was a huge, huge
initial just
Um, breaks that we were able to
put on the way in which, um,
kind of reorganization and
decision making was gonna happen
as we saw it, um, so I'd say I I
what I would add is that I do
know as I was pulling these
numbers, um, last night. There
are additional funds that were
just released within the last 2
weeks related to Ed, um, I know
that PED has some more money. I
know that we have not accounted
for all the money that New Mex
State University has regained,
um, through our litigation, um,
but I know it's at least in the
2 upwards, at least upwards of
$2 million and that's a very
conservative figure because I
don't want to make a
misrepresentation, so how many
lawsuits do you, uh, Madam
Chair, uh, how, how many
lawsuits do you still have
pending?
So as of now, all 25 are still
pending. Um, I would say in
terms of, because of there are
some that are on appeal. And I
would say in, in
Giving you this information
where I've said a preliminary
injunction was issued. The money
has been released. That is, that
is, even if something's been
appealed, I only counted the
money that is still flowing to
us. So this is, even with the
appeals that are pending that
are still going to be, um,
resolved in the future. These,
these are the figures before us.
Um, so those, those are the 25
that are, that are still out
there.
And I, I guess, Madam Chair, my.
Last question, what do you see
as the next big lawsuit on the
horizon.
Um,
I'm now I'm gonna have to give
the lawyer's answer to that. And
I'm like, I, I wish I could
share our strategy, but I can't,
but, um, you know, we are
mindful of the fact that
Everyday decisions are made at
in any government, um, we are in
constant communication with our
state agencies about what they
are seeing if they can't, they
suddenly tell us, listen, I
don't know what happened. We
usually are able to draw money
as of the 15th of the month,
that didn't happen. We then go
try to find out is this a
technical error? Is this an
inadvertent delay, or is this
part of a bigger effort at
cutting, cutting
cutting funds or programs.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair,
thank you and thank you, Madam
Chair, and I just want to say
that at a recent hearing in
Tucumerry,
Um, we learned, I, I asked, you
know, how I had these, uh, what,
what these, uh, you know.
Uh, procedures coming down, how
had that affected a small, you
know, a small, um.
really univers uh university in
our state, and they said they
had cut the uh indirect cost
rate from 55% to 15% and, uh, in
doing so.
They kind of had to, they kept
all the students that were doing
the research on board, you know,
all the graduate students, they
were able to keep them, but most
adjunct faculty had to be let
go, so they, uh, you know, the,
the like uh I think somebody was
talking about the nuggets, you
know, this, this is another
nugget that doesn't seem huge,
but the impact of that.
On, on faculty in New Mexico has
huge ramifications for this
state because as most of us
know, most of our faculty
members are adjunct faculty.
So, uh, we, we're gonna be
facing some huge things down the
road and, and Medicaid is just
one of them, so that that's all
I have to say, Madam Chair.
Alrighty, let's go to Senator
Soul's co-chair. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you for what
you're doing every day. I, I
know it's got to be frustrating
many times, uh, people ask all
the time.
You know, constituents, how can
they do this? Isn't it the law
they passed the money, the law
is distribute it.
How are they violating the law
and then who's actually held
accountable other than, oh,
we'll give you the money now. Is
there ever accountability for
violating the law?
I, I want to say that there is
still hope for for long term
accountability and, and I think
to, um, uh, Representative
Herrera's question also in terms
of like, are these lawsuits
over. Um, even though we got
these
preliminary injunctions, which
is basically, we've met, met
certain standards to show that
the state is going to be
irreparably harmed. The balance
of the equities are in favor of
turning on these federal funds,
and there's a less risk of harm
to the federal government than
to us. However, that
Order is only in place until the
lawsuit is actually resolved. To
your question of how do we get
accountability is the ultimate,
the end goal of a lot of these
lawsuits is to get a permanent
injunction, so a court order
that says, you guys can never,
for instance, um, cut off funds
because they don't align with
agency priorities because for
this particular funding stream,
the law says that is not a basis
on which you can decide to turn
off money or
So we are looking for in the end
role, like actual very clear
statements of this is what the
law is, um, and
You know, and, uh, for better or
worse, the way that a lot of,
um, our, our efforts have gone
to date is once we get an order
saying turn the money back on.
We do monitor, right? Like, and
we check in, we check in with
our state agencies, other states
do the same. And if the money
isn't on, we go back to court
and we say, look, Your Honor, we
would like you to issue an order
to enforce the injunction and
kind of repeat it. Um, what the
courts have been doing to
get greater accountability is
they require regular status
reports, right? From the
Department of Justice. So
they'll periodically file
something in court that says
this is the message we sent to
all of our units and all of our
funding recipients, so we
should, the states will get them
too, saying on X date and an
order was issued. It means this
proceed, right? This is what we
did. This is the amount of money
we've released, so.
Madam Chair, you know, that's
nice, but we've already seen
some instances with, uh, the
prison down in El Salvador and
others where they essentially
said,
We can't, we're not going to do
it.
What happens if they just
refuse. I mean, my area is
education. There was $5 billion.
We didn't know if it was gonna
be released, school is starting
and what did they just say no,
we're not gonna. What happens? I
mean, yeah, no, it's and, and
that the the education funding
that have freeze that happened
over the last, I mean this all
transpired in a matter of 3
weeks. It was absolutely
terrifying to people all over
the country regardless of, you
know, what color your state is.
Um, what happens, I mean, partly
the
courts are, do have the power to
issue um sanctions, which is
something that I think Joe Judge
Bosberg had entertained, um, in
these alien Enemies Act
deportation cases for the
misrepresentations. I think
courts are, are, are.
Also
Striking a balance between
obviously wanting to make sure
that not only are they acting
objectively, but that there is
this public perception of like
these guys are acting, acting
objectively. So I think courts
are very cautious in using that
stick of a sanction, but that is
certainly an option that the
courts have. Beyond that, you
know, outside of the work that
litigators do in the Department
of Justice does here in New
Mexico, um, it really is almost,
I mean, I would say to, to
residents in New Mexico, you
know, you, you vote.
Right? It's, it's the ballot
that's the accountability, um,
and yes, I do think that both
courts and elected officials are
mindful when people are upset
and either take to the streets
or write letters or call their
representatives like this
absolutely makes a difference,
including, for instance, in the
CAT deportations.
Thank you. Uh
Yeah, it's kind of like it only
works if people believe that the
law, we run into that as
legislators that, you know, we
pass a law without any real
enforcement mechanism, and it's
often like, well it's a lot.
People have to do it. It's like,
what if they don't?
You know, and that's always kind
of the frustrating thing that
that we see, um, and my last
comment, Madam Chair, is I very
much support uh bringing in the
displaced uh prosecutors from
other places to New Mexico. It
seems like a pretty good deal
that for a few million dollars,
you all with an office of 4 or 5
have saved us several billion
dollars. That seems like a
pretty good deal and I, I hope
that, uh, in the next budget
that we're able to to make sure
that there is that funding. I
think one of the opportunities.
Out of all the this committee
and all the things happening,
New Mexico is well placed to
For lack of a better word, poach
good people from other states
that don't have the, the
finances that New Mexico still
has, so thank you, thanks for
what you do.
OK, thank you. Uh, we have
Senator Nava, then Senator
Pinto.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Ms. Mont, for being here.
Um, I, as a former member of the
US Department of Housing and
Urban Development, um, was
really, uh,
Extremely concerned clearly
about all the cuts, but there
was a specific program that I
was part of the implementation
of with Job Corp, um, here in
New Mexico and that was
completely dismantled, um, youth
that we had met with who were
going to have an opportunity in
life, right? Um, we're
completely displaced and I know
that you mentioned AmeriCorps
and some of the reverted
funding, um, that went out to
organizations, right? How does
that blend in with the Job Corp
situation?
So I, I, I, I, I feel like I'm
gonna have to get back to you on
that, but maybe to the extent
that there's an analogy, um, you
know, when the AmeriCorps
funding, um, at least was
restored. And, and this is one
of the many challenges with
coming in after the fact and,
you know, people have lost their
jobs, they may be in a situation
where they're like, I went and
got something else, they may
have relocated because this is
not, you know, they came here
specifically.
or to a part of the state,
especially young people, for
that particular opportunity, um,
and so what we've seen is that
there have been questions asked
of, you know, do, do some of
these folks want to come back
and a lot of people have said,
no, because they're afraid. What
if the funding gets cut, gets
cut off again. So,
You know, a lot of that decision
making of what to do is left up
to the, the nonprofit
organizations and the actual
like kind of providers
themselves, but I, I absolutely
hear um what you're saying. It,
it's been a challenge, you know,
throughout this time our office
has set up an intake line and so
we get emails from people who
have either their small business
or their small organization has
now lost money some very large
nonprofits, arts organizations.
youth serving organizations and,
um, I, I'll put this out there
just so folks know, um, you
know, one of the, the
limitations that the state has
just because of the way the law
works is we bring lawsuits, and
this makes sense since for the
New Mexico Department of
Justice, where the nexus has to
be, there has to be some harm to
the state. And for better or
worse, the way case law courts
have ruled, we can't go into
state court to just say,
Um, that our residents have been
harmed and we are responsible
residents. We actually have to
show like a financial impact if
we can show a harm to New
Mexico's environment because of
these cuts. So in situations
like the Job Corps and
AmeriCorps, um, scenario, we've
really tried to think about, OK,
what role do we actually play in
if there is a pass-through,
right? Like, can we make an
argument to advocate for the
individuals
organizations that are
ultimately being harmed. So our
work gets a little more
complicated when it comes to
individuals who are going to be
um impacted the way. And I do
want to apologize, uh, Madam
Chair for not abiding by
protocol and so please accept my
apologies, that was not meant to
be disrespectful.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Ms. Lamont, um, and thank
you for your response and just,
uh, wholeheartedly thank you for
your work and the dedication.
Um, I will tell you as a former
English language learner, a
former DACA recipient, and a
former naturalized citizen, um,
You're fighting for everything
that I represent and stand for,
and I don't know that many
people like myself have a seat
at this table, um, and not in
the, not across the state, not
across the US. So I think it's
critically important that we
understand the connection
between the impact to our
communities and the importance
of coming together as one body
because we're here to serve the
communities at large and I
wholeheartedly appreciate your
work. I hear that you need much
more assistance and support, um,
but just thank you for being
here with us today.
Let me thank you. Let's go to
Senator Pinto. Thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
thank you for your presentation.
Um, I invite you to, um, present
before the Union Affairs
Committee, and if, um, we, uh,
can't generate any action of
support. I will personally write
a letter of support for that 3.2
million requests, maybe even
more in that sense, but.
Um, thank you for the work you
do, and I think it does need to
be supported. Thank you, Madam,
thank you, and we'll take you up
on that.
Are there any other, uh, let's
go to Representative Brown.
I'm sure I'm gonna stick my neck
out just a little bit.
Um
I, I think the lesson here, you
know, when there's a change of
administrations in Washington
DC, we often see these types of
perturbations.
Um, as an attorney, I have a
concern if there is a, a
contract or a grant and the
language is locked tight, then
that needs to be, I think,
honored, but I know for a fact
that there are times when grant
language, Madam Chair, is
specific about availability of
funds and so forth, and there
are terms and conditions in
those uh grants that that matter
and so I think Madam Chair, um,
yeah, we, we get something
promised and we don't wanna give
it up.
I, I understand that, but I
guess the question I'm really
wanting to ask you is.
Uh, USAID was supposed to be an
organization that helped not
domestically, but we found out,
uh, through news reports that
some of that money was being
used domestically. Did New
Mexico, Madam Chair, um, um, uh,
Madam Blus any money when USAID
was dried up, do you know? So,
Madam Chair, I, I think I want
to correct one thing. Actually,
USAID was created, um, to have a
domestic impact. The food that
is sent.
To, and this was actually
created under a Republican
administration, but USAID was
collected. It buys food like the
food for Peace program buys food
from farmers within the United
States, grains and then ships it
abroad. Now, that program has
been suspended. So to the extent
that there are expenditures
related to the purchases of
those food goods. That's, that
was what was happening. With
respect to, um, some of the
other programs out of USAID, a
lot of them were
to um collaborative
international research programs,
so a lot of states to the extent
that states, state entities were
impacted. It was through their
universities, um, research
capabilities. Um, we were not
impacted in that way.
And I'll just add a kind of a
personal info note, uh, Madam
Chair, one of my sons worked for
USAID.
As an independent contractor,
and he started that job, he
said, Mom, there is a lot of
waste going on here.
And it bothered him, so, you
know, such as it is, but he saw
it.
Pretty obviously and I thought
that was very unfortunate. Thank
you.
Do
Any other, uh, questions from
the committee members.
Uh, excuse me, uh,
Representative Laura.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for the presentation. I just
wanna thank you and uh the EG
for, for fighting for for New
Mexicans and I really wanna uh
thank you for that earlier you
had mentioned New Mexico State
University.
So as an alum, I'm very
concerned and I less from us as
well and I'm sure others are in
MSU alums what have been the,
you know, you had mentioned
something earlier but you really
didn't go into detail so if you
would mind maybe talking more
about NMSU and the the the the
funding that's being impacted.
Sure, Madam Chair, thank you.
um, for that question also.
So
some of the buckets of funding
that NMSU was facing, um, a loss
of was through the National
Institutes of Health, um, some
of their cuts, Department of
Education, absolutely through
some of their cuts, um, as well
as, and I can tell you the, um,
The indirect, the rate cap. I
think you were just talking
about. So the rate cap was
another one. and then also they
did also receive some funding, I
believe through HHS for that
supported some research
programs, um, and I believe
those are kind of the in broad
brush strokes, a lot of them,
but they were getting a lot of
funding that, um, related to the
support and promotion of
Hispanic students first
generation.
Students underrepresented groups
in STEM programs, um, and that
was a huge part of what they,
what the programs were that were
at risk, um, through the funding
cuts that they were facing.
Thank you for that. Thank you,
Madam Chair, and I know there's
one program in particular that
that's very near and dear to me,
that's the the NMSU camp
program.
And the camp program uh offers
that first year of support for
uh for students who are either
farm workers themselves or our
children or farm workers. And so
I know that program has been
very successful.
And they have um.
Been able to have a very high
grade retention rate, have a
very high graduation rate.
Uh
Doctors, accountants, engineers,
nurses.
All kinds of opportunity to
students who otherwise wouldn't
have had that opportunity. And
so any I, I think that uh any
support that we can give
inimacie and particularly those
programs that target those
students who need the extra
support would be really
important and that's what once,
once again I wanna thank you and
everyone over at the Department
of Justice for doing that work
because it is so, so important
that we have the opportunity for
students who otherwise would't
be able.
to attend university who
otherwise wouldn't be able to
even graduate from the
university, be able to continue
to do so, so thank, thank you
for that. I appreciate that.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Laura, is there anyone else who
would like to ask questions?
It doesn't, it doesn't look like
it, but we want to thank you for
being here this afternoon. Thank
you for the thorough report and
I'd like to ask if there are
updates, could you share that
information with our staff so it
can be distributed to the
committee. Absolutely, Madam
Chair, we'd be, we'd be happy
to. All righty. Well, thank you
again for being here. I, uh,
wanted to make a couple of
announcements about this evening
and then tomorrow, uh, first we
need to, and I was remiss in
mentioning Larry Horan was one
of our.
Breakfast sponsors, uh, this,
this morning, so I wanted to
make sure that he, uh, we all
know that, and then, uh, tonight
we will be having dinner
upstairs. I believe that starts
at 66 o'clock, um, and then
tomorrow morning.
We've got Eric Shanay here from
the LFC. He'll be providing a
Medicaid overview at 7:30 and,
uh, what I had envisioned is
that we would just be upstairs,
uh, over breakfast listening to
you, to you, if that's OK,
instead of trying to haul food
down here I we might as well
just stay up there or I think we
have to have a, a,
Open media
Oh, we do?
Oh, OK.
All righty, so I've just been
informed, I guess we eat quick
and then come down here, uh,
because of webcasting issues. I
did not, I did not realize that.
OK, in the old days we used to
call those executive sessions
and we just.
Everybody who wanted to come
into the room could come in, but
I, I understand, so tomorrow,
uh, 7:30.
We're, we need to have time to
have breakfast though. That'll
be at 7.
7.
OK breakfast down here.
Uh, OK, so let's the breakfast
will be ready at 7. OK, well,
the breakfast is ready at 7.
Eric starts talking at 7:30 down
here.
Correct? All right. uh, if we
can manage to have it brought
down here, we will. If not,
we'll just eat upstairs and then
we'll come on down so thank you
everybody. We've got a couple
we've got a couple of um hours
yet before we come back together
for dinner, did you have
something else that, that, that
gets us in good shape. Thank
you, OK, so we're in good shape,
he says, so we're in good shape.
