We've got 3 presentations, each
is scheduled for approximately
an hour or so, um, and we'll try
and keep on schedule without
trying to limit people's ability
to ask pertinent questions. Uh,
first up this afternoon, the
impact of congressional budget
reconciliation on Medicaid, the
federal supplemental nutrition
assistance program and state
fiscal policy. We have Brian
Wenko, senior legislative
director with the National
Conference of State Legislators,
uh, nice.
For you to join us. Have you had
time in the last hour to figure
out what actually got passed
and give us an update with on
all 1000 pages in the bill and
how it's changed.
I think it ended up being about
930 some pages and it was passed
at 4 a.m. this morning, so, um,
my slides might have a, a few
typos as I was furiously, you
know, trying to adjust it and to
provide updates, so, you know, I
will certainly do my best, but,
uh, you know, thank you for
having me today. We, we really
appreciate it.
Thank you for being here and
please uh go on and when you get
done, I'm sure there will be
questions from committee
members.
Yeah, no, of course. So again,
thank you. So good morning. My
name is Brian Wonco. I'm a
senior legislative director for
our budgets and revenue. Um, I'm
a member of the DC Bay State
Federal Affairs team for NCSL,
uh, one of a dozen staffers
working on, you know, the state
Fed advocacy issues, uh, again,
I want to start by saying thank
you for having me today and
inviting NCSL to participate,
um, as you know, we are
bipartisan organization
dedicated to you, uh, state
legislators, your hardworking
staff, um, and just the overall.
of your state institutions, and
it is always an honor to work on
your behalf and we are very
grateful to for this invitation
and to be here today. Um, I am
going to share my screen. I do
have a slide deck presentation,
so give me just one moment here.
All right.
So again, uh, I want to quickly
kind of give an elevator pitch
and kind of go over what NCSL's
committee and policy process and
I think that I'll, you know,
help, uh, lend itself to, you
know, kind of some of the issues
that I'm gonna raise, uh, you
know, that we are following here
again out of the NCSL DC's
office, um, so committees are
nominated by legislative
leaders, uh, uh, they work, uh,
I work on the budgets and
revenue Committee with two
co-chairs, 1 R 1 D, um
You know, it represents a bird
from Washington is my Democrat
and I have Senator Tim Reid as
my Republican from South Dakota,
and community membership is
surprised about 330 legislators
and legislative staff,
legislators votes and requires 3
quarters majority for policy and
director of uh uh uh resolutions
to pass. Uh we have an annual
business meeting, uh, at our
legislative summit every summer,
uh, then followed by a general.
business meeting, you know, that
all states participate in, uh,
so again that's going to be next
month in Boston, August 4th to
6th. Um, I just want to, you
know, again share that this
really serves as the basis for
NCSL education,
uh, and advocacy.
Again, uh, it is going to be,
you know, uh, kind of go over a
little bit of an agenda what I'm
going to share with you today,
um, federal freezes and court
updates, uh, we haven't really
or the media hasn't really
reported lately on, you know,
federal freezes, but back in
January and February, um, they
had impacted across many
different states and there was a
court update this week that will
probably mean more discussion
around it, and of course
reconciliation and what next.
including aspects of Medicaid
and SNAP. Um, I will touch on
tax provisions. I know you guys
are going to be having and um
meeting uh specifically on tax
in a few weeks, um, but I just
want to, you know, touch on a
couple of the issues that NCSLs,
you know, following, uh, I'll
touch upon uh FY 26
appropriations. Um, there's
another R word recision. So you
got reconciliation and then
rescissions and resili
rescissions are gonna be uh you
know, an issue that we might be.
hearing more of, uh, and just at
the end, uh, uh, a little, you
know, issue that we're working
on. I, I put it in the penny and
there's this elimination with
Penny and, you know, kind of for
fiscal stability, it might have
an impact on states as well. So
I'll save that for kind of uh,
you know, maybe a little bit
lighthearted, but still
important uh piece at the end.
So again, uh, I was kind of
start off, you have collision,
mean collisions in 2025, you
know, oh boy, oh my, uh, I
already mentioned the federal
cuts and the freezes, um, so it
really disrupted state federal
programs and the uncertainty
still persists as the court
cases proceed, uh, and, but you
know there's a caveat there
because this week we see the
Supreme Court rule against lower
court freezes and injunctions
that they imposed, so you'll
have kind of like the freeing up
of the.
administration being able to
impose, you know, certain, you
know, cuts that we saw both
funding and staff cuts across
different agencies, but you also
have, you know, policy
priorities that will re-emerge
now that they're unencumbered
by, you know, court cases, uh
reconciliation appropriations,
again, it's the vote a rama
happened overnight. The bill
was, uh, I, uh, you know, passed
this morning. I put 4 a.m.
because I, I think there was a
big
AI moratorium vote at that time,
so that was a big, you know, win
for state federalism, um, and I
do want to, you know, mention
appropriations, um, you know,
reconciliation, uh, ties in, you
know, closely with, with
appropriations, but they are two
different entities, uh, um, and
I'll note this FY 25
appropriations past in the CR 6
months late, it passed like
March. I forget the exact date.
I want to say March 12th or
15th, uh, but it was a party
line.
votes, uh, and, and the Senate,
you actually had 10 Senate
Democrats voting to end the
debate. um, so yeah, they didn't
vote, you know, for the end up
measure, but this shows that
there was a willingness to, to
move ahead, um, to avoid any
kind of default or or the
government shutdown or
disruption. So again, FY 26
still needs to pass, um, uh, I
mentioned rescissions, uh, and
another name for it is
empowerment, one
aren't approved by Congress and
administration moves ahead
anyways, they become empower.
Um, these are formal clawbacks,
so this is gonna be money that
was already appropriated by
Congress in prior fiscal years
that may have gone uh unused
unobligated, um, so the White
House, you know, you know,
through their own be proposal,
and then Congress has 45 days to
vote on that, and that's going
to be kind of another emerging
tool that we'll see.
Uh, and, uh, this
administration.
Uh, lastly, but certainly not
least, uh, I, I do mention the
deficit as being a major
component of the collision, uh,
you know, reconciliation has
what was passed a provision in
it that raises the debt ceiling,
um, you know, but you know, the
reconciliation still needs to go
back to the house and you'll
have some physical hawks that
might, you know, raise objection
to this,
so again, uh, you know, there's
a lot to be still done, uh, yes,
the Senate passed it.
Uh, but as I mentioned, uh, you
know, tell, uh, you know, all
things are said and done, and
it's enacted in law, you know
things can still change as we
know, but hopefully, fingers
crossed, um, you know, you know,
for both federal staff and CSL
staff in all states and
everyone, you know, in between,
um, you know, a lot of the big
surprises, uh, you know,
happened overnight and nothing,
you know, major.
moves forward, but my fingers
are crossed.
Um, excuse me one second. So
again, uh where I mentioned
federal funding freezes, if you
recall way back in January and
February, which seems, you know,
like a long, long time ago. Um,
you know, when, uh, President
Trump first took office. He had
a series of executive orders
that were put forth, uh, you
know, some of these orders were
included in the memo, um, which
again, you recall there was uh
it came out.
There was another I'm on the
memo clarifying, uh, and
actually providing an Excel
sheet with, you know, thousands
of federal programs that were
going to be questioned, then all
the OMB stuff was rescinded. Uh,
however, you know, what they put
forth, and this includes, you
know, several bullets really
shows where the presidential
initiatives are and moving
forward and what we can kind of
expect, um, you know, future
targets, whether it's, you know,
additional rescissions or
additional executive.
orders, uh, that would be
present, so, you know, so this
is going to be the social
agenda, this is going to be
fiscal cuts under Doi, you know,
you're going to have federal
staff reductions, and I
mentioned all that because of
the impact that it does have on
stage. So, you know, some states
such as inflation reduction Act
or IIJA that might have
provisions. Some of it might go
largely untouched like the
Highway Trust Fund, uh, but you
might have energy aspects, uh,
under IJA.
IRA that uh you know, fall in
when the other bullet points,
um, yeah, that would be, you
know, at least the American
energy, um, that we're gonna be
you what we call the prior
administration presidential
initiatives. So, you know, and
it's something that we see every
administration change every
transition you see kind of a uh
a move from prior presidential
transitions, a scrubbing into
the new presidential initiative,
so that
parts nothing new. Um, what was
kind of new was the mounts that
happened all at once. There was,
you know, dozens and dozens of
executive orders that took place
and really the speed at how they
shut down the programs, uh, you
know, where states had, you
know, had agreements, had
funding, uh, yeah, procurement,
uh, mechanisms in place, um, the
immediate shutdown curtailed any
kind of, you know,
renegotiation, additional
conversation.
you know, that, you know,
changed, you know, certain words
that were more amenable to the
prior, you know, president
and the administration and
rewarding things into something
that would be a little bit more
palatable for the new
administration. Uh, those things
are again, typical in the past
that, you know, we saw a
immediately change, and so there
was no kind of renegotiation,
reterming, pivoting, uh, it was
just a cessation of funding
flows that really disrupted, you
know.
closes to states, um, you know,
within a few days, uh, you know,
uh, at the same time, I should
say, you know, we had, you know,
portals, uh, you know, whether
it was, you know, funding for a
head start or, you know,
Medicaid portals, um, all of a
sudden, you know, quit, yeah,
you know, we were told that it
was coincidence, uh, a lot of
that was freed up, but, you
know, in the, the weeks and
months since then we heard, you
know, reports that there were
still problems with it, so, uh
A lot of uh there was dozens and
dozens of lawsuits, you know,
since, you know, you know,
responding to the executive
orders, um, you know, so since
then, uh, a lot of it has been
held up in courts, but again,
earlier this week, the Supreme
Court had a, you know, a court
case that came out, you know,
63, uh, that was really freeing
up a lot of lower court
injunctions against, you know,
the Trump administration, so
you'll see now that things
moving forward.
again, um, and, uh, you know,
whether it's, you know, the
presidential initiatives and
his, you know, the White House's
social agenda, you'll have
additional doji cuts, uh, you
know, you know, not only funding
for the programs but where I
mentioned federal staff
reductions and those staff
reductions in you have impact on
states too, as, you know,
there's just a lack of federal,
you know, case loads, um, no
longer being able to be had, you
know, now really.
shift, you know, on the states
it's kind of an intangible
burden that you don't really see
on, uh, you know, an accounting
lie, but, you know, we see it in
reward applications.
Uh, moving ahead, um, so, you
know, the big thing, a budget
reconciliation, you know, the
one big beautiful bill, you
know, you know, kind of an
update of, you know, where we
are on this. You can see it's,
you know, largely party line
votes as we look throughout the
history of the, you know, uh, of
what's, you know, transpired
since February, um, it started
off relatively slow, then, you
know, super speeded up, uh, you
know, when the house, uh, you
know, started after the
you know, excuse me, after the
budget resolution was passed,
uh, you saw introduction of the
tax and the markup of the actual
bill text, uh, you saw in the
house, you know, pass it really
fairly quickly, um, all the
hearings took place within about
2 weeks and you saw the final
bill, you know, you know, pass,
you know, relatively quickly and
just a 2.5 week period after
that original budget resolution
was passed, so I see here in my
slide considerations underway.
Uh, they did vote on it, and now
it goes back to the house, um,
where that, uh, we still have to
see what how it rules is going,
you know, to do as far as, you
know, scheduling debate if
there's going to be amendments
or how it's going to be moved,
uh, but the hope is there to
still little bit by July 4th,
um, you know, we'll see if that
happens, you know, depending on,
you know, the other things to
consider, and I put that here as
um we, you know, the deep cuts
to Medicaid and SNAP.
But yeah,
we saw a hesitancy from, you
know, certain groups, uh, you
know, especially the moderates
in the Senate, but you also had
a group of, you know, physical
hawks in the Senate as well push
for further Medicaid cuts. Uh,
and, you know, Medicaid and
SNAP, uh, again, you're gonna
have moderates, uh, that kind of
weigh in here as well. Um,
that's why I put the, you know,
coalitions to to watch. So you
got the hawks, which I call the
physical hawks, as well as
Hawks, um, you have the salt and
uh I'll talk to you about, you
know, this is the salt cap
deduction debate, uh, yeah, you
know, hopefully, you know, that
part is uh uh a compromise was
found and so we lost, you know,
of an issue, uh, you know,
moving forward, you know, in the
House passage, um, you know,
again, things can always be
tweaked and so we're still
watching it. And again, I, you
know, I'll put the moderates
there.
Uh, I just want to touch real
quick, uh, you know, on the
starting point. So like, where
do these numbers actually come
from. So, you know, when I
mentioned the the actual, the
budget resolution and then you
have reconciliation, resolution
came first was HO Rez14, and the
two big outstanding numbers
you'll see, um, are the 3 I
should say is that educational
workforce at 330 billion and
then you have ag, you know, 230
billion.
Um, and then all the way in the
bottom it says ways and means
plus 4.5 trillion. So these are
kind of the big things. You have
energy and commerce at 880 is
going to be Medicaid, uh, and
some of the other assistance
programs and A 230, that's gonna
be snap, um, and then we, these
are, you know, largely
offsetting the ways and means
4.5 million, but if you add all
those up, you still don't get to
4.5. I'd say a million, 4.5
trillion, excuse me, big
difference between a million and
and uh and you still see, you
know, a difference, um, and also
you kind of mentioned here, you,
you might have heard the news
about, you know, accounting
practices, uh, that were kind of
scrutinized and you know this is
going to be whether it's
concurrent law or current policy
as the baseline, uh,
Yeah, regardless of what you use
the reconciliation process has
cuts and it has costs, um, and
whether it's recognized as a net
deficit or not is a political
debate, um, as far as my
analysis, I say the original
starting point, um, the spending
cuts do not equal the tax cuts,
and there's not a balanced
budget, you know, there is tough
math, the big numbers being 80
billion 230 billion as
mentioned, um, these make up the
bulk of the offsets for the for.
$5 trillion in tax cuts, and
that's the original proposal,
um, we'll see CBO numbers, you
know, shortly as it comes out
of, you know, what the, the
physical impact of the bill
actually will be, um, so we'll
be watching that, uh, you know,
move forward, moving forward.
Uh, again, uh, you know, so the
big issues are going to be, as I
said, Snap and Medicaid being
those two biggest numbers to
offset the tax cuts, you know,
the big, you know, some of the
big issues, you know, for SNAP
is, of course, is just shifting
costs to states by tying cost
shares to payment error rates.
And so this was all included in
the final bill, um, and you see,
you know, what how the Senate
bill eliminates the cost share
for states with air rates below.
6 and then caps it at the
highest of 15%, um, all states
would have paid at least 5%
underneath the House bill, but
you know, the, the Senate bill
was adopted and it's a
relatively better, you know, you
know, 4 states, and again,
relative is the key.
Uh, where does that, you know,
payment error rate put in New
Mexico and just highlighted, you
know, here, so you have the, the
different uh tiers, um, you
know, New Mexico is in the top
tier, you know, the old 15%
effective in fiscal year 2028.
Uh, other aspects, uh, uh, um,
you know, of snap, uh, is
administrative, you know, cost
share, uh, again, this is uh
what we like to say uh NCSL kind
of some of the, the, the
unfunded mandates um you know,
federalism aspects where any
disproportionate cuts shouldn't
be shifted on the state. So when
it goes to 50 to 75%, you know,
that's a very fairly large
increase, um.
And, you know, shifting a policy
that in turn turns into more of
a a burden on the states. Uh,
work requirements, um, uh, you
know, is, is an issue, uh, and,
and it increases the, the age
rate from 54 to 64, um, you
know, so again, that's, you
know, mainly just, you know,
raising the age for a, a cost,
you know, uh saving aspect.
Uh, uh, you got waivers again
for, you know, for, uh, areas
that have high employment rates,
but the last part here is the
non-citizen eligibility, um, and
you'll see this type of language
is, you know, seen here and many
other areas. Um, here you have
ineligibility for certain
non-citizens as though here in,
in your future uh tax-oriented,
uh, there were similar
pre-certification for the income
tax credit.
that's requiring Social Security
numbers, and there's a lot of
other, um, you know, citizenship
requirements or Social security
number of requirements, um, just
want to note that for your
future meeting that uh that was
an area that, uh, you know,
popped up, uh, you know,
throughout, um, and some of
these eligibility aspects, uh,
we'd say again has a indirect
implication as far as the
administration on state side.
So, you know, where you have,
you know, that sort of
ific ation and verification, a
lot of that, you know, cost is,
you know, put onto the states
is, you know, whether it's, you
know, you know, done through,
you know, a driver's license or,
you know, other, you know,
factors that could be something
that, you know, to look at as
well as, you know, being an
increased burden for that where
states have to, you know, do the
certification.
Uh, moving on to Medicaid. So
again, uh, uh, Medicaid was the
biggest issue. I mean, it's, you
know, we, we kind of talked to
saying it is the elephant in the
room is probably the biggest
issue that's also the most
contentious, you know, it
started off for the house
version sought to really change
the way federal and state
governments share responsibility
for Medicaid program costs, um,
the changes to federal match or
federal medical aid assistance.
percentage FMA uh for expansion
states for specified states, and
these would have been, you know,
again, the expansion states that
were most hearted underneath the
House bill, uh, largely the
Senate bill doesn't, you know,
address, you know, FMAP, um, you
know, overnight there was an FAP
provision, uh, and the amendment
failed, um, you know, my
colleagues over on my, on the
health team are combing.
through a lot of uh those
provisions of Medicaid and it
will probably be having a, you
know, webinar in the near
future, um, but, you know, the
FAP aspect is something that we,
you know, hope largely stays
out, you know, until it passes
through the the the house and
then, you know, uh, certainly,
uh, if it gets signed into law.
Um, you know, the tension again
at the House bill was to
eliminate the mechanism states
used to finance states share
this is going to be the
moratorium on provider, you
know, taxes, uh, the house, uh,
put a moratorium on all states'
ability to raise their taxes
beyond 6%, you know, 6%, um,
yeah, the Senate, uh, you know,
had, you know, initially came
out and their rate ceiling was
3.5%.
Uh, yeah, yeah, this was back
up, um, so negoti back up to to
to the larger amount. Um, so
again, you know, from the
federalism aspect, you know,
have a moratorium on any state
fiscal policy, you know, we look
at as as an encroachment, um, so
we've been advocating, you know,
you know, to, to remove the
provider taxes, but again, uh,
we went from seeing a bad rate
in the house, even worse.
In the Senate to bouncing back
to, you know, you know, to the,
the house rate. So again,
something that we're watching,
you know, very closely. Uh,
another aspect is, um, you know,
that role, he stabilization
fund, uh, you know, a lot of,
you know, red states, uh, and
blue states, uh, you know,
recognize that the rural
hospitals were going to be, you
know, hit most uh by some of
the, the changes to to
the, the cuts, um, so in the
negotiations, uh, there was an
amendment or provision, you
know, put in to to help fund uh
some of the, you know, that
specifically.
Uh, a couple other areas, uh,
you know, state directed
payments, um, another issue, uh,
and again, where I say increased
eligibility checks and this kind
of goes into, again, uh, the
undue burden on the states of,
you know, verifying the
eligibility, you know, would
have gone to every 6 months, and
so, you know, that is, you know,
quite an administrative burden,
you know, put on states and
something else that we
advocated, yeah, yeah, against
and continue to look at, so, um,
I think the theme here is uh not
only is there cuts to programs,
um, but as we shift away from
capabilities of federal
institutions to provide
services, uh, you have, you
know, case load shifting as well
as increased administration, you
know, placed onto states and,
you know, different state
agencies will have to adapt to
those.
You know, in indirect increases
of, you know, workload and, and
burdens.
Uh, touching, you know, a quick
uh uh taxes, um, uh, you know,
it's budgets and revenue, so I,
I, I'll just, you know, it's my
portfolio, so I'll just quickly
mention, uh, a couple of areas,
um, we were looking at uh our
NCSL policy, you know, back in
2024, uh, as we kind of, you
know, anticipated, uh, you know,
you know, the tax cuts and job
Act of 2017 coming to an end,
uh, so some of the major
areas that we advocated for, you
know, I mean it's bonds, the
taxes up status, uh, yeah,
through different coalitions at
NCSL participate in, um, that
was something that was not in
and it ended up not being
considered in the house and then
stayed out of the Senate
version. Uh, I'll touch upon a
little bit deeper in the salt
deduction, um, and then I'll
touch a little bit more on my
state sovereignty, but you know,
I already mentioned, you know,
earner income tax credit, uh,
uh, and issues
Uh, you know, for
pre-certification, social
security numbers was there, um,
we, you know, uh, awful, also
advocated, you know, for a
robust, you know, standard
reduction, you know, that really
helps lower income and middle
class families. Uh, we also, you
know, strive to to have a solid,
you know, child tax credit that
was included, um, affordable
housing, light tech was, you
know, a pretty good number. Um,
so a lot of positives on the tax
legislation.
front, uh, two big advocacy
issues again, just wanted to
raise it for awareness for this
group. Uh, so salt, uh, a lot of
the headlines is actually on the
salt cap, um, and so that went
to 10 to 40 and I just quickly,
you know, put here on the 2nd
bullet that on average, you
know, you know, nearly 10% of
filer is utilize, you know,
salts and Mexico's, you know,
lower, uh, for the, from the
average at 5, 9% um with uh
Relative to the caps here, so,
uh, with the average 13,300
pre-cap and then 200 afterca,
um, so you're right around, so
you certainly, yeah, uh, yeah,
that 10,000 to 40,000 threshold,
you know, will benefit uh uh New
Mexico, you know, taxpayers.
Um, the kappa for the Senate,
the big difference is it has a
sunset provision, so that was
the compromise. So, um, you
know, after 2029, uh, we'll be
having this debate and argument
again.
Another one pass through entity
tax, a lot of states it was a
little bit more palatable to uh
have a a salt cap because you
had pass through entities as a
viable option and this would
have been IRS notice 22075, uh,
36 states utilized it, including
New Mexico, um, yeah, the house
version, you know, look to
strike any use of a viable
option, uh, which was, you know,
Uh, obviously detrimental to, to
the states and the ability for
us corporations to utilize it,
uh, the Senate, uh, original
version uh was a little bit
better, um, actually just put a
cap on the the viable option,
uh, so you had a cap and then a
cap, um.
However, the final Senate
language, it was struck and is
out of the bill, so, um, you
know, and advocacy when, you
know, for states.
Uh, Another big one is
restriction on state income tax,
and yeah, this, yeah, kind of,
you know, it's title alone, uh,
state income tax, it should, you
know, it should be more widely
known as state business income
tax because it's not personal
income tax, um, in the House
bill, there was a revision to
public law 86272 in 1959 law for
those that are familiar with
that term, uh,
Uh, it's, uh, yeah, it's an
exemption for out of state, uh,
uh, business activities to pay
in business income in state, uh,
it's a very narrow definition,
you know, that was narrowed by
court decisions as well as the
multi-state tax commission, uh
had definitions of, you know,
published for uniformity's sake,
um, the language that was
inserted would have, you know,
expanded that.
solicitation of orders, um, CBO
escorted actually over a billion
dollars, so at the, the, at the
least across different states,
um, but it, you know, might not
seem like a lot, but, you know,
we don't know the true value.
They didn't put a, you know, an
estimated, you know, uh uh other
side to it, um, so again, it
just wanted to flag these tax
provisions, you know, for the
group is, you know, something
that's important, um.
you know, again, this is, you
know, we look at state fiscal,
you know, sovereignty, and, you
know, providing more exemptions
that would have limited, you
know, the state's ability to
collect, you know, income tax
and the limit, you know, the
restrict the tax base, um, you
know, is, uh, it was a
nonstarter for NCSL, so we, you
know, rallied a lot of
deterrent, uh, set of presidents
and House Speakers at the state
level to call their Senate
counterparts, and that was
struck.
Um, and I share those two things
just because we hope they don't
come back. Um, so just because
uh they're out of text now,
doesn't mean uh they'll come
back, uh, uh, with fingers
crossed that they don't.
Um, so that's reconciliation
again, if you look at the
collision aspects, you know,
appropriations is still there.
um, yeah, although they are
separate, they are still
entwined because you have
appropriations that, you know,
you have, you know, funding
ceilings are largely going to be
set, you know, through 2034,
including FY 26, uh, because of
the reconciliation, uh, numbers,
um, so yeah, you have, you know,
the top lines are set, so you
don't have
much we'll go room when it goes
into the natural appropriations
process, which is, yeah, um, you
know, the corporations committee
giving subcommittee allotments,
um, to the various jurisdictions
and then jurisdictions, you
know, splitting that, you know,
the little, the smaller pots up,
um, you know, largely we'll
probably see similar numbers to
FY 25, uh, again, a lot related.
pounds and how reconciliation
finishes up and which will kind
of lend itself a trend into how
we look at appropriations, um,
if things in a few days get
really messy in the house where
you have again those fiscal
hawks, um, you know, kind of up
in the process as they look for
deeper cuts, uh, versus, you
know, maybe you have more
moderate, uh, you know, come
together, you know, within the
GOP caucus.
Uh, to maybe circumvent that,
uh, and but nonetheless, those
arguments uh might be then
punted if, you know, for the
sake of just getting
reconciliation done into
appropriation, and then
appropriations might turn into a
process where, again, you, you
could, you know, have shutdowns,
but this is all prognostication,
um, yeah, again, with very
narrow House majority, these are
different scenarios that, you
know, states.
You know, I should think of and
I know many states, you know, we
did a poll, a survey to to
states to the, the committee
members, um, a lot of states,
you know, do, uh, you know, have
scenarios in place, you know, to
recognize and prioritize
different funding to keep
funding whole for a certain
areas in case of a shutdown, but
in, in the political climate
that's ongoing, um, you know,
all scenarios are.
Are there an open and should be
planned for.
Again, rescissions and all
things similar. I mentioned
that, you know, empowerment and
um.
And for, you know, a rescission,
it's 1974, uh, law, um, so the
White House, you know, looking
at money that's uh unobligated,
and so this is money that hasn't
been, you know, put through any
kind of procurement, uh, whether
you're a state or any kind of
implementing, you know, uh uh uh
a partner.
You know, whether it's a state
or a nonprofit or or or a
corporate entity, um, so it's
unobligated funds are targets
for rescission, um.
And so the OB budget director,
um, this is Russell Vaugh, you
know, has the ability to put a
package together and transmit to
Congress. Congress has 45 days
where they have to approve it.
Um, if they don't prove it in 45
days, it's tabled in mute, and
yeah, and the director has to
resubmit, um, so it doesn't
automatically go into force. It
actually takes an action of
Congress to approve it. Um, we
are seeing one on.
For assistance, uh, again, not a
lot of impact direct impact to
states when you think about
foreign assistance, um, you
know, the House voted June 12 to
14 to 212, um, Senate has until
July 18th. Um, I say when you
think foreign assistance, no
direct impacts, um, a lot of,
you know, foreign assistance
programs are actually run
through like state universities
that uh you know, might have,
you know, development programs
uh overseas, so it does have,
you know, state impacts to that.
degree, uh, you know, again,
there was several billion
dollars, um, and, you know, set
it uh has until the 18th to to
prove that. Um, so I put, what
is, you know, kind of next in
the recision aspect. Well, you
know, there's a lot of legal
interpretations of what
impoundment is and what can be,
you know, a rescission, um, you
know, one aspect is, you know,
the education department, even
just today is making the news
of, you know, the
administration with holding
upwards of, you know, 6 billion
and you know this is developing.
I just talked with the our um my
education counterpart who's the
SME on it much more than I am,
uh, but in the initial
reporting, you have these
different titles that I'm
sharing here, and again, this
would be, you know, kind of
freezing and re-evaluating, you
know, based on that Supreme
Court 63 decision, there's
nothing stopping now
administration for moving
forward, it's
planning on some of these
aspects. So this is an example
of like that next step of what's
moving forward. Um, and even the
subbo, like, uh, you know, where
I put uh 2.2 billion, um, that
was specific for the uh
supporting effective
instruction. So this would be,
you know, money bound for, for
teachers, and so it resonates,
you know, 2.2 billion, you know,
across 50 states might not seem
like a lot, um, but we kind of
think of, you know, holes in the
like, um, you know, you know,
things like this start momentum
builds, and we look at any small
amounts, uh, you know, relative
to a large number as being, you
know, something that, you know,
catches our eye from the
Federalism aspect.
Uh, and lastly, uh, I know over
time, uh, for the presentation,
but just wanted to throw in the
petty, something that uh you
know, I'm working with several
states on uh you know, the
elimination of the penny, you
know, throws into a sales tax
aspect where a lot of states,
you know, either, uh, you know,
uh, have rounding uh laws to to
to round up uh or round down,
um, and so this will impact uh
state sales tax.
aspects as we switch from, you
know, uh, rounding from the,
the, the Hummer to beyond to the
penny to now running those
things onto the nickel, um.
So just wanted to, to, you know,
throw that, you know, another
little area that NCSL is working
on. Again, uh, you know, the
penny is not going away as a
denomination, uh, it'll be
around for several months
according to the treasury, but
Treasury won't be offering any
regulation or guidance to the
state, so largely, um this, how,
how to utilize the nickel
instead of the penny, uh, will
be on stage, so one last fiscal,
you know.
You know, thing for us to worry
about, uh, I would have never
thought 2025 would have me, you
know, writing policy briefs on
eliminating the penny, but here
we are.
Uh, with that, um, I already
mentioned the, the Boston
summit, so, um, I'm unapologetic
in asking you to come to the
summit Boston. We're celebrating
in 50 years, um, we always
appreciate, you know,
legislative participation, um,
come by for a good time, uh, and
with that, uh, uh, I'll take
questions.
Thank you so much and uh we're
taking a list of people I get on
the list asking questions. I
would ask, make sure questions
we don't get into the politics
side of it, but more just how
the policies will affect New
Mexico, not whether was good
policy or intention or other,
other kinds of things as people
are asking some questions,
anyone?
Nobody has questions,
everybody's sleepy after lunch.
Representative Brown.
Thank you very much, Mr.
Chairman, and um,
Is it Mr. let's see, Winko.
Am I pronouncing that correctly?
It's one go, but I've, yeah,
long life of hearing both, so no
worries. OK.
OK, um, well, Mr. Chair, I do
have a couple of questions. One
regarding SNAP, the other
regarding Social Security.
Uh, so, um,
I guess I under a
misunderstanding, I, I thought I
heard that snap is funded,
there's a proposal apparently uh
on the table to split that into
75% federal funding in a 25% by
the state.
Is this refer in toto, Mr.
Chairman, to
The actual benefits, or is this
uh ratio change.
Only affecting, um,
Yeah, so it, it'd be two parts
to that. So yes, it would be
shared between the states, and
this would be the benefit cost
share based on those error
rates, um, and so underneath the
law, you know, 21 states would
owe that 15% of the total, you
know, shifting that federal cost
onto the states, uh, second part
of that, you know, it is correct
is the administrative cost
share, which is, you know,
separate that would go from
where states, you know, pay the
administrative, you know.
Aspect of it, they pay 50% now
and that would shift to 75%, so
states would incur the
additional cost on
administrative side of things,
um, but snap overall, the bigger
picture, you know, would have
states, you know, owe a larger
percentage underneath that cost
share of 15% based on the the
payment error rates.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and
that's, that's very helpful. Um,
then the next question is
regarding Social Security.
New Mexico moved after many
years of uh debate to um
Not taxing, you know, we have a
federal tax on Social Security
under the status quo.
The um state of New Mexico
piggybacks on the federal
treatment of Social Security, so
we did have a and still do to
some extent have a state tax on
social, so under uh the bill,
um, it seems to me there's a
roundabout way of changing this.
Apparently there was some issue
about whether or not the federal
government could just
I guess stop taxing.
Social Security, uh, and it's my
understanding we've gone to some
kind of a deduction instead.
And so the question is, Mr.
Chair, uh, Mr. Expert, what is
The tax treatment is, should the
bill go through and then with
New Mexico say it does go
through, how would that affect
New Mexico's treatment.
Yeah, unfortunately, I don't
have a clear answer for the
Social Security aspect of it.
Uh, I know there's a lot of
discussions around, you know,
that aspect, um, uh,
unfortunately, I don't know if
it was included in or reinserted
in the in the final, you know,
part or overnight, so, um, you
know, I, I, I'll have to get
back to you with a precise
answer.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Thank you. Anyone else?
Uh
Yep, Senator Woods, uh.
I may have misunderstood Mister
Chair, but uh the way I
understand it.
We did the experts say that the
salt.
was completely out of the my
misunderstanding that.
Oh yeah, no, I'm happy to, to,
to go over it and sorry if I
cause any um misunderstanding.
Um, I can share my slide again.
Give me a second if I'm
available and I can go back to
the slides.
Uh, and it's, you know, what I
was mentioning that there was,
you know, two parts to salt, so
you, you have the salt cap
deduction, um, and that is in
the bill, so the original TCGA
of 2017 put the cap at 10,000,
um, underneath the, the Senate
compromise that lifts it up to
40,000. Um, that will be sunset
through 2029, uh, and then the
income ceiling is.
500,000, so that's what's in the
Senate version that passed
overnight and uh again you can
kind of see, you know, how New
Mexico utilizes the sault cap
deduction, uh, so an increase of
threshold, um, you know, should
have an, a positive impact uh
on, on New Mexico taxpayers, uh,
the second part of the salt
deduction, and this is what you
know, it came about, you know,
from the original salt cap that
was in place.
Um, so states looked at ways to
alleviate the burden of having
that 10,000 salt cap, and so
I'll advance the slide one to
the next is uh uh sheet and um,
so what was utilized was the
pass through entity tax, uh, and
this would have been taxed
under, you know, as corporations
and, you know, payments by
partnerships, um, you know, for
to, to, to take um, you know,
what was, you know,
what would have been utilized
underneath.
personal income tax and be able
to to take that portions and
apply it and to be able to
utilize it, you know, through
your partnership or as a
corporation underneath business
aspects. So you were still able
to, you know, for certain trades
and businesses, um, to, to, to
claim more, uh, underneath, you
know, state and local taxes, uh,
and this was the part, um, you
know, a lot of the focus was on
that, you know, 10,000 versus
40,000.
Um, uh, because, but meanwhile
states, you know, since 2017 and
TCGA, um, 36 states, you know,
adopted this PET alternative,
um, including in Mexico, a state
that adopted it. um, and if this
wasn't to be uh if the house
completely got rid of this
viable option, um, you know, the
Treasury came out with a notice
back in 2020, uh, they said
they're gonna have forthcoming
regulations. They never did.
Um, so this IRS notice really
served, you know, as in kind of
the role of the land for a
while, um, until, you know, you
had the house version that
looked completely stripped, you
know, any kind of authority of
this IRS notice to repeal it,
and you know, to get rid of this
PTA completely, uh, the Senate,
uh, yeah, look just to put a cap
on the mount of uh deduction
that could be applied, you know,
through the password entity tax.
Um, however, um, that was
initially ended up being renewed
from the final bill, um, so this
part two from the salt cap that,
you know, a lot of it is
overlooked, but, you know,
certainly has an impact on
states, uh, was not included, so
I hope that uh helps explain it
a little bit.
Yes, it, yes, it does. Thank
you, Representative Lindstrom.
Oh, you.
Oh, I'm sorry, Senator Lopez. I
got the, got the wrong one on.
I'm sorry, Senator Lopez. I
appreciate it. Thank you, Madam
co-chair. I just wanted to ask
you to check on my email, but
was there a copy of this? I did
not. I can certainly will, um, I
was late in getting it just
because it was overnight, uh, I,
I was making changes on the fly
as we, you know, received news
from my counterparts as we
looked at the bill. So, but I, I
certainly can share, uh, you
know, the presentation.
with with this group.
what's flashing on the screen,
so the.
Thank you. I do have a question
right towards the end of your
presentation, you talked about
$6 billion in the education
funding, uh, looked like most of
that was out of the title, New
Mexico's largest education from
federal funding is more in the
special education area, is that
being touched or is it just out
of some of the, uh, they're not
to the people who get them, but
the more obscure title programs.
That
That the funding cuts are
coming.
Yeah, so I, I mean, as it
develops, uh, again, this is all
within, you know, you know, 24
or 48 hours here, but what we're
understanding is, you know,
those titles, um, again, uh,
You know, I'll share my screen
real quick, uh.
Uh
Just to, to, to show, um,
Yeah, yeah, from, uh,
the, the media sources being
reported, it's, you know, to the
the specific programs, um, and
this is, you know, how
rescission packages usually are,
I mean, so again this would be
um
Your money that you, you know,
the administration has either
not spent in the past or just
looking to freeze and not spend
in the future, um, and where I
put kind of legal
interpretations of, you know,
where they can step in to to
apply this, you know, it varies
and you know it's yet to be
determined for this education
aspect, um, but like we're in
the process and they're able to
freeze that money, um, so we'll
see
of these rescission or, and I
say all things similar, um, you
know, it might not, you know,
have the, the strict definition
of a rescission, um, but you
might see challenges, you know,
to these things or similar
things under the Empowerment
Control Act of 1974 is, you
know, we're an administration is
trying to um not enforce the
will of Congress, you know, by
withholding fundings that
Congress had app.
So,
um, so again these are the
areas uh uh that are included in
the initial reporting on this,
so, um, happy, if you have
additional questions, you know,
for education, uh, I can, you
know, for them on also to to my
counterpart, um, uh, as I said,
uh, we have a loving standing
committees and education is one
of them and um yeah, my
colleague Austin there, you
know, is very diligent and I
happy to answer.
Questions there.
Thank you. I appreciate it for
the committee members tomorrow
at 9:45, we are gonna be getting
an update on federal education.
Daniel Estilian, who, uh, with
the LESC I know has been
watching this today, I'm sure,
uh, as far as how the those
things are going to affect the,
the education uh funding that we
get through the federal level
tomorrow, but I know this is
kind of hot news as to whether
this, this had been talked about
potentially, but as to which
ones were, were more likely to
show up in which of the federal
funding.
does not seem to be on the
block.
Other questions committee.
If not, thank you so much for
taking time and I know uh you're
probably anxious to get back and
read through more and figure out
more of what is in there, what
isn't there, and probably have
other states asking similar
kinds of questions as they're
looking at how this is going to
affect their states directly, so
I very much appreciate you
spending some time this
afternoon with us.
Yeah, you know, I appreciate it.
Thank you for the invite and
sorry I couldn't be there in
person. Um, I, you know, uh,
NCSL always likes to be in
person, but I appreciate, you
know, being able to be on Zoom.
Thank you.
Take care. Thank you, everyone.
And committee are again.
We're, we're slightly ahead of
schedule, um, is our next
presenter are, are they ready?
People want to take a short
break before that or just move
on and people come and go.
We'll just move on. OK, so get,
get done earlier, that's fine.
Uh, so federal action proposed
impacts on the New Mexico
hospitals. Uh, we have Troy
Clark, president, chief
executive Officer, New Mexico
Hospital Association and Julia.
uh, senior director of
government affairs in Mexico
Hospital Association. You would
please go ahead.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, uh, Troy
Clark again, uh, from the Mexico
Hospital Association and I
brought with me Julia Ritten, as
you mentioned. We apologize if
we look disheveled much like
what's happening in DC, the rain
today rained on our parade as we
went out to get a bite to eat
and just like in DC, the longer
we waited, the worse it got.
So with that, let me tell you a
brief bit and I'm gonna do my
best to follow my staff's lead
on uh keeping me on slides so as
we move along, you'll see me
flip slides.
And, uh, Joey and I will
alternate here, but just for
your information as a
background, uh, the hospital
association represents 48
hospitals in our state. It's
easier for me to tell you the
few that we don't, the Indian
Health Services and the VA, so
the federally funded, uh,
hospitals. Other than that, we
represent, uh, nearly every
hospital. There's a couple post
acute facilities, uh, but other
than that we bring the voice of
urban facilities, rural
facilities. If you look on page
3, I always like to make sure
we, uh,
set the ground first, uh, with a
map of the uh state and with a
dot representing every one of
our hospitals to see just how
rural we are.
When I talk to my peers in
Maryland, their rural hospital,
most rural hospital, for
example, is a 76 bed hospital
that's 19 miles away from the
next closest hospital.
Over half of our hospitals are
smaller and further apart than
that we, uh, have hospitals who
have an average census of
patients in their house
overnight of less than 3 and 50
to 100 miles apart. And so
implications on access to care,
as we know, as we've talked to
you over the years, we have been
fighting this fight to try and
improve access to care in our
state.
Because the magnitude of the
implications if we lose access
to care in any quadrant of our
state. We only have 4
communities that have 2
hospitals throughout the entire
state.
Um, we represent urban rural
academic.
For profit, not for private,
privately owned.
Ranges of service lines, most
people, what they think about
the hospital of the 48 where
that we represent, uh, 37 of
those are acute care hospitals
that most people think of, uh, a
blue H on the highway with an
emergency room, some have
operating rooms, labor and
delivery. There's 11 of our
hospitals in our state that are
what we call post acute, that
some of you may not be aware of
and think of. They make up our
behavioral health hospitals, our
inpatient physical
rehabilitation hospitals for our
long term term acute care
hospitals. So they are
also our members and play into
uh the healthcare spectrum that
we uh try to represent.
Thank you, everybody. My name is
Julia and I'm our senior
director of government affairs
with the Hospital Association,
and I want to thank Clinton for
the invitation to join today.
Um, I will be, uh, starting on
page 5. We want to start by
thinking all of you for the, um,
really large investments over
the last few fiscal years in
healthcare and hospitals
specifically rural hospitals,
um, we put together some numbers
here, uh, since, uh, state
fiscal year, which I am.
Clarifying the difference cause
there's a lot of federal fiscal
year implications, but um we're
looking at uh several $100
million ranging from the launch
of the rural healthcare Delivery
Fund, which uh the new round of
grants begins today, uh, or
opening for those applications
begins today, uh, with the new
um fiscal year starting, um, and
ranging from, uh, the really
large uh Medicaid provider and
facility rate increases, uh,
from a few years ago that you
have continued to uh.
Sustain, um, and then for, for
us, uh, specifically in that
state fiscal year 2025 and the
2024 legislative session, the
healthcare delivery and Access
Act, which we are gonna talk
about today in depth and um
thank all of you, um, for
supporting that, we had all but
one vote and that individual is
no longer in the legislature and
for you freshmen, I'm sure we
would have had your vote as
well, so uh thank you to
everybody who um voted yes and
helped us get that passed, so
I want to go into depth a little
bit on the HDAA because that's
what's going to be impacted by
um the uh HR one, the one big
beautiful bill, um, whether it's
the house version or the Senate
version or some other version of
that. Um, so looking on page 7,
the impetus behind uh pulling
the trigger on putting a program
together is because in 2022, 2/3
of our hospitals expenses
exceeded revenue, um, there were
Some new rules adopted by the
Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services, which we
refer to as CMS that we're all
probably more familiar with
today than we were when the HDAA
passed and that was a
combination of um really uh
recognizing that provider taxes
uh or an allowable use of funds
as well as raising the
reimbursement ceiling for
Medicaid from um 100% of
Medicare up to the average
commercial insurance rate. So
those two pieces.
Together is what the HDAA um is
addressing. This was enacted, as
I said last year, uh, in, in
2024's legislative session and
then the healthcare authority
and we can't thank them enough
for their work and their um
expeditious work on this, they
submitted the application to CMS
and got approval in November for
the um 2024 year and then just
last Monday, I received approval
from CMS for the 2025 calendar
year program. So, uh, the timing
of that was.
really important because a lot
of the language and uh HR one.
Um, could impact that depending
on if it was or wasn't approved,
um, this is a program that does
require annual approval by CMS
and so some of the language
that's in HR one is a little
difficult to interpret, uh, just
because we're not sure if
approved means approved or if it
means approved for this year and
not for next year. So, um, due
to the complexity of the program
and the language in the budget
we are trying to stay very high
level, so give me a look of like
super confusion if we go a
little bit too deep, um.
So to talk about how the uh HDAA
is funded. It is through uh what
is called a provider tax, we use
the language interchangeably
assessment as well, uh, which is
the um state's portion of
funding for the Medicaid program
specifically for the HDAA. So
this is a tax that's paid by
each hospital. There's a, a
complex, um, method that's used
to determine that, right? But
what, what we want to highlight
is that the way
we set up the program, rural
hospitals receive a 50% discount
in what they pay, and so, uh,
they contribute approximately
19% of the total across the
state, uh, tax base for this and
receive approximately 40% of the
distribution and so that was
really the key lever for us in
the way that we set up our
program, um, that made this the
the way that we wanted to to
move forward with the program,
um, provider taxes are used in.
49 of 50 states. I don't want to
bring the narrative up, but
there's been a lot of
conversation in the news that
provider taxes are some sort
sort of money laundering or
fraud, waste and abuse program,
and they are not, they have been
around for many years. They are
programs that are vetted by the
legislature, the governors of
each state that has them as well
as uh CMS so that we try our
best to do a little graphic, but
as you'll see for the HDAA, each
hospital pays their portion of
the tax.
For us currently that when
pulled together, that uh is $310
million that gets sent to the
feds and matched at this at the
rate that our Medicaid, uh,
program is matched, which is
somewhere between 3 and 4, a 3
to 4 match, and then when it
comes back altogether with that
federal match, it's a total, uh,
program of $1.5 billion a net of
about 1.2 billion, so very
instrumental and and impactful
for uh New Mexico.
Um, so I'm on uh slide 9 or page
9, so um, that is the pool of
funds kind of how it's funded,
not using general fund dollars,
uh, using that provider tax, but
just as important as how
hospitals receive uh those
funds. So we use the language
that um the HDAA is a
supplemental payment program,
uh, quarterly hospitals receive
an additional payment per
Medicaid patient, uh, served
that accounts for 60% of the
program funds and then once.
per year, 40% of the funds are
made, uh, based on.
A hospital's performance on
clinical quality improvement
measures. And again, those are
uh based on uh additional amount
of money per Medicaid patient
served.
Um, the, what really makes this
program work is that the total
Medicaid reimbursement, which is
the base payment plus the
supplemental payment is capped
at the average commercial
insurance rate and uh which for
us in New Mexico based on our
payer uh mix which Troy will
talk a little bit more about is,
is higher, our average
commercial rate is higher than
in other states, so we get a lot
more kind of proportionally have
a benefit than some other states
see for us, this is a really
great program, um, as you'll
see.
Uh, for hospital services, the,
um, under the HDAA, the rate of
reimbursement is averaged at
175% of Medicare, and we'll talk
a little bit more about um some
of the changes that Congress
proposed, so I'll pass it back
to Troy.
Thank you. And so all this one
is background to understand
where we're starting from, but
also it plays into the
implications of some of the
different specific language
within the one video that I'm
gonna go call it HR one.
HR one, there's a lot of federal
uncertainty right now for us.
That's the most difficult thing
for our hospitals. Uh, I get
calls from the governor, I get
calls from our federal, uh,
delegation. What's the impact
going to be, and you can't look
at one provision, and you can't
look at just
HR one
As it came out of the house.
Because once it got to the
Senate, it looked very
different.
Uh, it wasn't also a lot of new
things came in, and then on top
of that, on June 6th.
Our executive branch issued a
presidential memorandum to
initiate some of the
implications that they're trying
to also negotiate and get into
the statute of HR one as it
moves forward. And so there's
implication or two from the
executive branch to CMS to
limit.
Uh, reimbursement rates at no
more than Medicare, and I know I
heard uh secretary uh Armijo
mentioned this earlier. I'm
gonna reiterate it. Most of us
would think that Medicare is
not, it varies by state, mostly
you can estimate the difference
based on the change or
differentials in average
household income, cost of
living, we have a very low cost
of living, uh, I'm sorry, very
low average household income. We
have a very low Medicare rate.
And so capping us at a Medicare
rate stifles a lot of our
ability to be able to invest and
improve access, which are
healthcare authority, you as the
legislature, the governor have
worked so hard on the last few
years, so we're gonna talk about
some of those implications, uh,
moving forward.
Uh, along with that, why it
matters. I also want to talk
about uh a comment that was made
earlier that was correct and I
support, but I want to augment
it to make sure we don't
misunderstand.
Secretary Armijo talked about
all the work that we have done
to improve access and I think if
I remember right, Senator
Trujillo, you raised that.
Make no mistake, this
legislature and this uh governor
has done a whole lot. We've
worked very well together, I
think, to try and make
improvements to improve access,
we've gotten behavioral health,
primary care, and obstetric
reimbursement rates per% of
Medicare to help attract them
while
Secretary Armijo is correct that
her network has increased by
4000 providers. I want you to
understand that we still have a
major access problem.
The network for Medicaid
providers has increased. Our
number of providers has not
decreased. In fact, institute
physician advocacy Institute,
PAI.
Did a study and did it based off
of claims submitted, so not just
licensed physicians, but people
who are actually submitting
claims to make sure they're
seeing patients. We are the only
state that decreased in the
number of providers that we have
from 20.
And we're the only state that
decreased.
So, part of that I also want to
address our access problem
actually is not improved, it's
gotten worse, and it's mainly
gotten worse because the demand
has increased.
We have a baby boomer
generation who is almost double
the size of any other age cohort
who is now in the highest
healthcare delivery needs years
of their lives.
So yes, we've done a lot, but
really what we've done is
stifled or put off the negative
impacts of that increased demand
on our healthcare systems.
What we see, uh, Senator
Trujillo in our emergency rooms
is.
We are seeing less of the low
acuity.
Or the misuse of ERs.
Or primary care, but the actual
utilization of
So I want to make that clear
just so everyone understands it
and fully supportive of
everything extra Mijo said, but
I want to make sure we think
about because a lot of what
we're gonna talk about is the
implications of this federal
bill on all of our efforts.
For access to care.
So why does it matter? I'm on
page 12 now, um.
And some of you have heard me
talk about this on the left-hand
side, you're going to see a pie
chart.
On that page chart, uh, we show
what our hospitals experience
from the makeup of their
patients.
43% of the, and this is all of
our hospitals at about 43% of
our patients across the state.
Uh, which matches up with about
43% of our population are
Medicaid.
Another 37% are Medicare.
There only 14% commercial.
And 6% that fall into other
mostly which uh there are some
self-pay, there's some workers.
What I didn't show you on this
graph for space, but to give you
a comparative, if you look at
the United States as a whole, or
I would say most other states.
The slice of the pie for
Medicaid is usually about 15 to
17%.
The slice of the pie for
Medicare is about 25 to 30%.
The slice of the pie for
commercial is about 50 to 60%.
So you have a revenue source
coming in from the commercial
pay.
That keeps the sustainability of
your healthcare system, whether
that's doctors or hospitals.
is a very different scenario
than it is here in New Mexico,
as Julia said, some of that
played into the healthcare
delivery and Access Act because
that drives our commercial rates
up higher, which allowed us to
increase our Medicaid
reimbursements higher.
You look at the right hand side,
here's the other big key to
this, why the big risk to our
healthcare system.
Medicaid from a base rate
perspective pays about 80 to 90%
of cost. In fact, the last
number I saw, uh, from the
healthcare authority for
facilities is about 85%.
That varies from one hospital to
the other.
I want to be very clear, that's
percentage of costs, not what
the hospital charges.
Not what they would like to be
reimbursed, but the actual cost
of the doctors, the nurses, the
medications, the supplies, the
room, etc.
So with every patient,
You are receiving less than what
it costs to provide that care.
That's where HDA was so critical
for years, our hospitals were
having to increase the
reimbursement rates on the
commercial and I think Secretary
Armilo told you that when
somebody asked the question,
what's going to be the offset
here? It's going to put upward
pressure on commercial
reimbursement rates. That's
what's happened in New Mexico or
already, I believe, uh, the 2nd
highest, if not the top 2 or 3
commercial rates in the country.
There's not a whole lot of
ability to push those even
higher. So you look at that.
If 43% of your population.
You're only getting 80 to 90
cents on the dollar, you have to
make it up somewhere, which is
on the commercial business.
Now what we risk is not having
this additional supplemental
payment.
Julia said some people couch
these provider taxes and
supplemental payments as fraud
and abuse, they're not.
There are mechanisms to make up
for that shortfall, so that
you're paying full cost so you
can keep your uh hospitals open.
When 43% of your patients coming
in the door, uh, are paying
below cost, and that changes in
any way. It affects every person
that comes into that hospital.
It's too big of an area.
When the hospital has to stay
sustainable and make it so that
they'repenses are at or below
their revenue so they can stay
open, that affects every patient
in that community.
Because the hospital has to
react when their expenses are
greater than revenues by either
shutting down services or so it
will affect every person,
whether they're on Medicare or
whether they're on commercial,
these cuts are not just cuts.
The Medicaid program.
There are also broader changes,
so we're gonna spend a lot of
time talking about the HDAA and
Joey is gonna get into some
numbers because for the first
time in decades.
When we pass the HDAA with the
additional $1.5 billion in
funds, we finally were going to
have total Medicaid payments it
exceeded costs.
Which were, which is allowing
our hospital CEOs and leaders to
finally stop looking at their
services and say, what do I have
to cut to keep open and start to
look at their community and say
what services do my communities
need that I can add, because I
have.
That all gets put at risk.
The Broader Medicaid changes
that are out there, um.
We know we've got a huge risk
and uncompensated care, and I
think uh Secretary Millo talked
a little bit about that, or our
pre uh pandemic levels were, uh,
up at 14 to 18%.
That movement
Let me back up and say I met
with Senator Heinrich, uh, a
little over a week ago.
I said it's critical that you
understand that every provision
because there are so many
provisions throughout these
bills and figuring out how they
cross up.
The one that's bipartisan is go
after the true fraud and waste
and abuse. There is no loser on
that except the bad guy.
That's not a challenge, but
there's not a whole lot out of
that. I think you heard from
Secretary Armi oh the small
amounts that are out there to go
after.
For every other provision in the
bill, you have to look and say
it's going to either push the
cost of the state.
It's gonna push the cost of the
industry or it's gonna push the
cost to the patient and family.
One of those 3, and you need to
identify each one as you vote on
it.
Because we need to recognize
those costs, and any cost that
goes to the state.
It's really gonna come back and
say, is that a service that
we're no longer going to
provide, which would affect the
patient and family, if we're
going to reduce the programmatic
side, or is it going to be
pushed to the industry by
reducing reimbursement rates,
which I will tell you we have
done all of this work to get
reimbursement rates up to try
and address one of the legs of
the stool that I believe that
causes our lack of providers in
this state, and that's our
Medicare reimbursement.
If we reverse that, all the work
we've done to try and attract
more physicians into our state
is going to be reversed.
So look, we have increased
uncompensated care that will put
our facilities at risk as well
as our independent providers.
There are proposed changes when
it comes to the work
requirements and the uh periods
of time to determine whether you
have Medicaid or not. And I'll
give you an example. Currently,
an individual, and I can't
remember who talked about it,
one of you raised the question
about somebody coming in and
needing these uh senators now I
think about it as he walks out,
they come in and they need
services right then and does the
hospital help them get
registered on BWell or on
Medicaid, and the answer is yes,
they do, and they help them even
though they have
current needs today that need to
be taken care of and then you
have up to 90 days before that
approval takes place that that
care can be or that coverage can
be effective for.
They're gonna reduce that down
to 30 days.
Well, I can tell you our
healthcare providers don't take
that person and say come back
when you're approved. They
provide that care that day and
they rely on the fact that they
will be approved in the next 90
days and they'll get paid for
the services that they provide.
You move that to 60 or down 60
days to the 30 day mark.
Historically, and I hope uh
Secretary Aril finds some magic
gems from other states. Our
state can't process applications
that quickly, which means our
hospitals and doctors then go.
I will tell you history, I
believe, uh, is indicative of
the future. We won't turn the
patients away.
We'll have to find ways to make
things sustainable, but that
really results in a high risk of
cutting of services because our
expenses will go up or the
services without getting
reimbursed for it.
So there's a lot of other
implications that play into the
other Medicaid changes who's
eligible, who's not when they're
on and off, changes of when they
go on to the expansion
population or when they come
off.
It's a challenge, a patient
comes in and we review whether
or not they're eligible for
Medicare or Medicaid that day.
And we provide services based
upon that, and then we find out
30 days later that, oh, we found
out as an MCO or the state later
that they were no longer
eligible, so we retroactively uh
disenrolled them.
Which then again pushes that
cost back onto the doctors and
hospitals of our state. So on
this next page, uh, the
potential impacts, I think
that's slide 14. I just wanna
really quickly emphasize, uh,
without going too deep, but what
the changes were that just
passed out of the Senate, um,
that will impact HDAA. The first
is that the cap on how much of
the provider tax can fund um the
HDAA was cut by about 40%, um,
and that will be a
stuff down by 0.5%, uh, starting
in uh 20 federal fiscal year
2018, which is a little
confusing because that's.
Sorry, 2028. I always say what's
the zero between friends when I
say billions and mean millions
and it's a lot, um, starting in
2028, which is a little
confusing for us or we're unsure
exactly when that starts because
that would be October 1st of
2027, uh, and so we just are
kind of putting a pin in that
for now, um, so the capacity of
the of the provider tax, the
size of that program would be
contracted at the same time, uh,
in the, uh, bill that passed the
Senate uh earlier today, there's
also
Provision that would reduce the
cap on the reimbursement rate
from that average commercial
rate down to 100% of Medicare
rates because we are an
expansion state, uh, and that
would start in calendar year
2028 and be a reduction of 10%
each year until that Medicare uh
cap is reached, and so I just
wanted to be really clear about
those two lovers that are being
pulled cause I'm gonna talk a
little bit about on slide 15,
the potential
impacts of that.
And I'm Troy's covered a lot of
this, so I just want to go down
to the kind of turquoise, the
possible hospital impact. This
was modeled by the Robert Wood
Johnson Foundation based on the
proposal that the language that
passed the House of
Representatives and so these
numbers I believe are actually
underestimating, um, because the
Senate's, uh, the Senate made
broader cuts to um both Medicaid
and for sure uh to the provider
tax in the state uh directed
payment distribution program,
but we're looking at um a loss
of.
$3.6 billion for hospital
funding and uh which results in
a $9.2 billion loss uh in
possible state um impact on page
16, specifically when we look at
the healthcare delivery and
Access Act, we modeled out the
reduction to the um cap that is
in um the Senate bill, uh, for
the provider tax and that will
um contract the amount of funds
available in the program by 500.
$66 million of a $1.5 billion
dollar program, so we're looking
at uh more than 1/3 of that
funding of that program will go
away, um.
And then, uh, our partners at
the American Hospital
Association, who have been very
busy on Capitol Hill, they did
the following, um, modeling down
at the um at the bottom about
the impacts of the, uh, by $1
billion reductions in Medicaid
spending. I think some of these
are important looking at the tax
um numbers for the state, but
we're looking at over 1300
hospital jobs lost. These are
specific, uh, for, um, New
Mexico, uh, and.
The ripple effect is almost
15,000 jobs potentially lost in
the state due to these cuts, um,
and so just wanted to highlight
those.
That does bring us to the end of
our slides. I will highlight
that we did put an appendix
together that talks about the
specific provisions in the House
and the Senate version and and
the Senate sides are already out
of date even though I updated
them at like 2 o'clock
yesterday. So I just wanna
highlight that one of that the
change in here, there's actually
just one change, but the change
in here is on slide 21. There is
a rural health transformation
program that the previous
speaker just uh talked about,
um, on this slide, it says a $25
billion
program, it was increased to $50
billion. That's the um sentence
approach to offsetting the cuts
that they're making in this
bill, um, so they recognize that
the uh impacts of the changes to
the provider tax and the
distribution, uh, will, will
negatively impact hospitals and
so they've put together this um
uh $50 billion program. I should
clarify it's not just for
hospitals, it would also be
available for federally
qualified health centers and
Uh, rural health clinics, the
latest that we just heard on um
the lunch break, uh, is that the
language that included in here
we'll start this, make this
funding available beginning in
um 2026. I think it might be
calendar year, but it could be
fiscal year, um, I wasn't sure
on that, but that the
applications from rural
providers will be due by
December 31st of this year, and
then this will run um through uh
uh this.
Federal fiscal year 2032, um, I
just want to state my, my
concern in reading through this
is that I think there's gonna
be, I don't want to confuse this
for any of the folks uh who
serve on the health committee,
but I think there might be a
cliff effect uh worry for
providers that this funding will
go away at the same time that
the um provider tax reduction,
so the smallest amount of money
available will go into effect as
well as the time that we'll be
closer to the 100% of Medicare
reimbursement rate and so
I worry that that 2032 year will
have a bunch of things kind of
coming together all at the same
time that will be, um,
Really difficult for our for in
particular for rural hospitals
to work through that. So I will
open it up for questions. Uh, I
hope we stayed at a level that
was comprehendible, um, but
please, uh, please ask me any
questions.
Thank you both very much.
Appreciate it. uh,
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, just a
quick question for you. Um, do
all states receive the same
Medicaid funding regardless of
how many folks they
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative Duncan. No, there
are very, there are some, uh,
states, one that uh have
expanded and so I have a greater
number of people that they uh
enroll and the reimbursement
matches is, uh, another.
Element that varies by state,
uh, and the driving component on
that one is your average
household income. We have the
2nd highest match rate out
there. So there are some states
that have as low as paid by the
government, federal government
50% by the state. We have a 3.72
match currently it adjusts every
year when they redo the federal
income, but every dollar we put
in make sure it was just, I was
just curious about that and Mr.
Chair, one last question.
Um, and you're probably gonna
have to explain to me, I think
you indicated that at some point
in time that that we're not
paying our providers quick
enough, it was it a 60 day
window and then my question then
would be, um, what can we do to
get them paid quicker? Do we
need to hire? Is it the money
coming in? Is that the issue?
Thank you, Mr. Cha, thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative Duncan, let me be
clear, my comment was not about
the timing of payments being
made, but the timing of how
quickly people are approved, so
it would only be their
initiative, it does affect the
timing of when they would get
paid for their initial
application to be approved.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Townsend
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
Representative Duncan, let me be
clear, my comment was not about
the timing of payments being
made, but the timing of how
quickly people are approved, so
it would only be their
initiative, it does affect the
timing of when they would get
paid for their initial
application to be approved.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Townsends today, if you
are watching.
One news channel, everything's
gonna turn out good, and you
turn and switch the other
channel and
Everything's going to hell in a
handbag.
What you have described.
is what we have today. It's not
a result of the of a bill that's
going through Congress right
now. It's, it's what these
providers are trying to live
with.
And so
If we're the only.
Without getting political, we're
all grown-ups. Tell me why.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
Senator, uh,
I will, I have described our
access problem as a three-legged
stool, or high level of Medicaid
enrollees, 43% of our population
with this low Medicaid
reimbursement rate. That's one
leg of the stool.
Those are like the stools or
medical malpractice environment,
Hot button, but I just will say
that affects our recruitment and
retention capabilities. Our
third is our taxing policy.
And I use that catch-all phrase
for two reasons. One, we're one
of two states that subject
health care to sales tax or in
our case, GRT in our state.
That is not an expense in
healthcare that gets passed on
to the consumer directly.
Because Medicare and Medicaid
and commercial reimbursement
doesn't, uh, increase the amount
they're going to pay you in
order to pay that tax fee. So
that that burden gets put onto
the providers, which means an
independent physician or a
hospital, that's an additional
expense for them, coupled with
that.
And I know there's another
difficult topic when we are a
low income state, but our tax
credits that we provide for
providers, especially in rural
areas.
We have increased over time, but
we pale in comparison to other
states, and when we're
recruiting physicians, we are
recruiting on a nationwide
basis. So I couple those two
together in taxing policy, and I
know it's difficult to sell to
our population to say we should
increase.
Tax credits on income tax basis
to a group that is usually
deemed in the wealthy group, but
when we are competing and they
are comparing their
opportunities to other states
that, I appreciate that Senator.
Just real quick, I just want to
add to that that we, we feel at
the hospital association that
the healthcare delivery and
Access Act addressed for
hospitals, the Medicare,
Medicaid reimbursement leg of
that stool and that, that freed
up general funds, uh, in this
space, of course, it's not
exactly how it works, but to
address the physician
reimbursement rates and with all
of these levers being pulled and
changed and potentially removing
or changing the benefits of the
healthcare delivery.
Access Act, that three-legged
stool really comes back into
play and that reimbursement
rates will be more prominent for
the sustainability and
stabilization of, of the
hospitals which employ
physicians in the state going
forward. So while we, we thought
we had a solution for a short
period of time, it's looking
like we're probably not going to
be able to sustain that more
than, you know, 5 years, 4 or 5
years.
Well, Mr. Chairman.
I was sitting here trying to
Put this in the
Some of us have lived, if you've
never had the opportunity.
To run a business that was
failing, you have missed out on
a great opportunity to learn.
And, and what I learned in in my
career of merging and taking
over when
On a company
Hospital.
Starts getting this.
And the, and it's not the, the
future is not bright.
What leaves you first or your
best and brightest.
Your best doctors, your best
managers, your best supervisors,
your best.
uh
emergency care technicians, they
leave first because they are
smart people and they have
They, they see it.
But then what happens?
I
You have
The beat and I don't mean that
disrespectful, but you have less
than the, than the, so that
you're
Problems with medical
malpractice are exacerbated.
In a work environment, it's
typically safety issues.
When you lose all of that talent
in that.
Historical knowledges of
processes, and they leave, then
what happens is you have more
accidents.
And you're efficiencies.
So, what?
The point I'm trying to make is,
is I don't.
I don't think I should.
Look at what just happened in
Washington.
As the problem.
It's another problem.
I get that part of it, but we
have created a problem that bad
enough on its own that before
that bill was ever contemplated,
we were
We were, we were in really bad
shape. 2/3 of our hospitals.
are in dire need. We got 6 or 8.
Probably gonna go broke.
We have 6 or 8 communities.
That are going to have no health
care or they're gonna.
And we have turned our back on
that issue for
Multiple years. So my, my point
is.
Oh, I hear you. I, I don't want
us to believe that.
The big beautiful bill or
whatever you wanna call it, is,
is the problem. The problem is
in our legislature because we
haven't addressed the problem.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, uh, Senator Trujillo.
I appreciate getting this
information here today. Um, I, I
do just want to point out that
New Mexico has got a smaller
population.
But, but it's different than New
Hampshire, Rhode Island. We have
a large
We've got a small population,
large land mass, we have people
all over the place. And so.
When I look at this map.
On page 3, I just have to
recognize that we're already in
a position where some women
can't get OBGY have to travel
miles, um, and see, um, we've
got, as you said, a, a growing
popular in the baby boomers at
the very end of it.
And we're having issues, um, you
know, in, in greater numbers,
and so, so, you know, closing
out 6 to 8.
Hospitals around the state in a
state where you already have
large travel when I heard today
the possibility that Taos could
be closing, um, we have a old
home, it's very old. My husband
grew up in it in Taos, um, uh,
it's a typical
But if that hospital closes and
we're up there visiting and
something happens to one of us
to look at that, it's like now,
you know, you could have to
figure out where is you're gonna
be, where it's gonna be your
healthcare provided. And I know
that's gonna be around the
state. So I, I don't want to
dwell on it. I do want to say
that
We're gonna be retiring in mass,
and we didn't have enough
population coming up. That is
actually part of our problem
with employees, whether you're
talking about health care, or
they're talking about schools,
but you talk about it, you name
it, every committee I'm on,
there is somebody who's coming
and and complaining that they
can't find enough employees. We
don't have enough people.
We just don't have enough
people. I'm not going to get
political and say that
immigrants could definitely
provide some of that, but I'm
just gonna say that is, we have
to figure out some solutions.
That is a federal issue that has
to be addressed, but it has to
be addressed. We don't have
enough people, um, to provide
services. So I just want to turn
to page 12.
And I've got a couple of
questions about um why it
matters.
Um, when you have
I, I see the, the Medicaid
number that seems realistic. On
the Medicare number.
How many of those people are
dual enrolled and I will just
say that we've got a large
population of retired government
employees.
That like myself and my husband
are dual and well, my husband
not yet, but I am d and roll. So
do we know what the number of
that 14% that are also Medicare.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and uh
Senator, um, so on this graph,
this would be the primary. So if
you are a dual eligible,
Medicare is your primary. We
don't break that out, but I do
know that the healthcare
authority and numerous
conversations with them know
exactly how many dual eligibles
that we have in the program in
the state we can't you Mr.
Chairman and thank you, Troy,
because I was getting a little
nervous that maybe because a
good portion of that if it was
gonna be that you have the
double on there, that, that good
person that 14 retired. Um, OK,
and then
And I just had kind of like a
thought as we were talking about
this, I keep hearing that the,
the cap is going to be 100 we
know that's not 100%, but the
cap is going to be 100%. In New
Mexico still pay 150%. We just
don't get the reimbursement at
the 50%. And I don't know what
that would cost. I, I, I, I, I,
you know, I'd love to know what
that cost is, but.
Are we restricted?
Or are we just not gonna get
reimbursed for.
Thank you, Mr. Cha and Senator,
great, uh, question, one that we
are asking that we'll have to
see the text of what comes out,
but I will tell you there are
the two provisions that we've
talked about today.
On the provider tax limitation
going from 6% down to 3.5%. I
know this wasn't part of your
question, but I want to make
sure everybody understands it.
That has an impact on federal
match.
Uh, capability of what you could
do. So, in essence, we could
lower the uh cap from or the
federal government can lower the
cap from 6.5 to 3 or 6% to 3.5%
and the state could choose to
make up the difference and put
more general fund dollars in.
However, on the other side of
the equation, our total payments
cannot exceed eventually 100% of
Medicare.
And our understanding of that is
That is not something that you
could go in and just make up
differences from uh state
general funds. Now, could it be
done through grants outside of
reimbursement directly for, I'm
not a lawyer, I can't get into
that, but the way the text is
written, no, you could not just
miss out on the match funds and
actually pay it as a Medicaid
reimbursement that we would
take, and it's more complex but
for the ease of simplicity and
joy, I think made it easier for
us to say, just rough idea we're
at 174% of Medicare. It's
different between outpatient.
So it will take a couple of
years, the stair stepping is 10%
reduction each year. So if we're
at 174 to get to 100%, 7.5
years. Um, but once you get
there, total Medicaid, whether
it's base supplemental payments,
anything else paid through the
Medicaid program, at least from
the language and the text that
we saw through yesterday, that's
the most the state could make.
And Mr. Chair, Senator, I think
to compound that and make it
more confusing is the
president's executive memo, um,
where he is saying kind of
outside of the directed payment
language, which is in the bill,
which is like the supplemental
payments. He's saying, and I put
it in here, someone's gonna read
it that um
To ensure that the HHS secretary
needs to ensure that Medicaid
payment rates are not higher
than Medicare, so it feels a
little bit like if they don't
get what they want, you know,
out of the build text that they
have this executive order that
they've put out there, or it's
not an executive order, but
it's, I don't know, that's how
I'm considering it. I recently
last week was looking at the
Federal Register to see all we
have seen is the text of the
this kind of executive order or
memo that's come out, but we
haven't actually seen how the
agency is addressing it. They
moved
very quickly on this. The
announcement came out on June on
Friday, June 6th, that the
president issued this, and I
believe by the next Monday, so
like, you know, 3 days later,
they had already, uh, the agency
had already put their request in
for review by Office of
Management or budget or
something like that. I think our
processor processes are
confusing, but the feds are a
whole another thing, so just
last week I was looking at that.
Ledger number or whatever they
call it to see like have they
released this text and we can
start to see and they haven't
released it, so I think that.
I think it'll be very difficult
to work around that, um, and I
think another area of concern is
what that means for the um
physician reimbursement rates. I
think Secretary Armio had a
slide kind of mentioning that,
which is you guys have made some
really uh impactful investments
to bring targeted rates up to
150% of Medicare, uh, and what
would that mean and to your
question, could you work around
it by not getting the match? I
don't know, but if you don't get
the match, you're really only
doing about a quarter of the
amount of funding into the
program. Thank you for
that answer. So, um,
I hope that we can come up with
some solutions, I mean, it
would, we talked about this last
week, and that is that if the
whole country was gonna go to
the same rate.
And everybody was going to be
all states have the same
percentage of Medicare, Medicaid
reimbursement, you know,
individuals, then it might
Workout, but we're gonna be at a
real disadvantage and so
recruiting um physicians.
If this is all the way it goes
and gets signed by the
executive. And I think we're
gonna have to be really cre
recruitments. We've talked a lot
in the past, uh, or recently
passed, I should say, about uh
do we need to increase tuition
reimbursement.
Do we need to um provide
specific housing, um, uh,
support for physicians, for
nurses, for healthcare
providers. What are the things
that we can do outside of what's
happening here, to try to
recruit and retire.
Um, and then the last question,
or the last maybe comment
actually is on page 6. I think
we've really talked, we've kind
of danced on um.
The economic impacts.
But the reality is, is if you've
got.
1300.
Hospital potentially lose their
jobs, then there's a whole
support network for those 1380
people in the communities,
whether it's the dry cleaner,
whether it's the uh grocery
store, whether it's the shoe
store, um, recreation. I'm, I'm
just trying to say that there
really is a domino effect
whenever you pull one string,
and a whole bunch of other
strings fall and so the impact
to Medicaid spending is, is
really
What were they Russian dolls
finding more, more stuff there,
so anyway, thank you. Thank you
Senators represent that. Thank
you. Thank
you both of you for that great
presentation, um, always
overwhelming. I'm sure it is to
you. I could stand it till 10:30
last night, and then it's, it's
tough to watch and it's tough to
follow. I, I actually.
This, if he's going to affect,
now, am I right, they won't go
into effect until October. Is
that correct?
Mr. Chair Representative, the
I can hear Troy laughing over
here and so I'm trying to think
about how to, yeah, I'm trying
to think about how not to make
it confusing. So the part that's
going to cap the reimbursement
at 100% of Medicare, that's
stepped down, which reduces the
reimbursement of these programs
by 10% each year starts calendar
year of 2028. So 11 2028. The
tax portion that has a 0.5%
reduction, and we are almost at
the cap of that 6%, um, so it'll
go to
5.5% begins in federal fiscal
year 2028, so.
Is that October 1st, is it?
Uh, you know, like January 1st
of the next year, that's where
we're not really sure, but let's
just assume that it's January 1,
so very close to that 2028 time
frame and then um the tax has to
be to 3.5% by federal fiscal
year 2032, and it's a it's
unclear, uh, that if you can
just take as much time as you
need to get your reimbursement
rate to 100% of Medicare or if
at some point they just are
gonna say in 2032, you need to
be at a 100%.
% of Medicare. It doesn't say
that, so we are interpreting
that just not as advice to
anybody but just saying you take
as much time, but you have to
reduce by 10% each year, but
yes, we, we
We don't think, and I'm just
gonna put a little asterisk on
that cause things could still
change our interpretation could
be wrong, that it impacts our
calendar year 25 program or our
calendar year 26th or 27, which
we don't have approval for
either 26 or 27, but there are
other outside of this, there are
other lovers in other parts of
the program that could be
impacted.
Mr. Chair, let me augment that
to say part of the other
difficulty here is the language
in the bill talks about certain
things based upon the date of
enactment.
And it makes references back to
if you have approval or you had
substantial progress in the
application to gain approval
prior to May 1st.
But there's not really clear
clarity around what that means.
And here's what I'll say is, our
state plan amendment gets
approved every 3 years, every 4
years.
But we have to renew the
approval of supplemental payment
programs every year. So is the
reference to an approval.
For the renewal.
Or for the initial approval,
because we could, we've already
been under our state plan
amendment now for 2 years.
We would have, it's we're in the
2nd year.
We just got the approval for the
renewal for 2025 within the last
week.
We could have 2 more years under
that renewal, if that's what
it's talking about, but if it
talks about the approval for the
renewal, we might only have one
year left. So there's some
ambiguity in how we are
interpreting or trying to get
the clarification on the
interpretation of really when
those effective dates are.
Uh, thank you. Uh, thank you,
Troy and Mr. Chair, I guess, I
guess my other question is um we
make laws and then they go to
agencies to promulgate the
rules, right? So,
If this bill passes, don't,
don't all these, all these
sections have to go to different
agencies for promulgation of the
rules in isn't there a timeline
for that. Can you just go
through that for me, Mr. Chair,
I believe uh that you are
correct. The, and I have had to
read more federal bill language
than I ever thought I would, but
I think some of these sections
are directing, um, Secretary
Kennedy to make changes, go into
this part of the Federal
register where you have made
this rule, um, capping provider.
taxes at 6% and make these
changes. So, um, I'm not well
versed in the federal rulemaking
process, but I believe that it's
similar to the state process
where they do a notice and
comment period and then, uh, you
know, however long that would
take them after that, I think
because, and this is just me
opining, uh, I think because the
directive is in there, it's
telling them where they have to
go. There's less room for them
to, like, why would they care
what the public has to say if
the law is saying you have to go
uh into this direction, so.
Um, I think that they would have
to do some uh rulemaking to
comply with it, but I don't
think it changes the effective
date, and I would also agree
with everything choice that I
probably got out a little ahead
of my skis, I would say.
Absent that approval part of it
where I don't think it
necessarily impacts the money
part of the program, but again,
and for all the hospitals that
are listening, we could be
wrong, um, as we are reading
this and, and, uh, getting more
interpretation and working with
other state hospital
associations to ask what their
interpretation of it is in the
American Hospital Association,
so there's still a long road to
go to get full clarification on
all of these impacts.
Mr. Chair and Representative,
I'm gonna.
redirect you also back to page
11, um, where we talked about
this presidential memoranda that
we kind of think is not quite in
executive order, but very
similar to it. I actually think
what we're seeing, I mean, this
is a movement in that direction
of promulgating rules.
Under existing law with the
intention to get them to what
they're, the administration is
hopeful to end up in the one big
beautiful Bill Act. So, I
believe they are already
indicated when we saw this, we
realized they're trying to force
this to happen through rules.
Before the bill even passes.
So I think some of that we're
gonna see, I believe more of
this come out in some of the
rules being proactively.
Uh, established through.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Troy for that. Did you want to
add 6? OK,
um, there's also another date,
which is November of 2026. So,
you know, we'll see what happens
then too. Um, I think things
could change, but we'll see. Uh,
I also wanted to know, I've
been, you know, we've all been
texting and trying to check
email and stuff. I saw that
they, there was the, I saw a
number for the rural health
transformation Program at 50
billion. Have, have you heard
that or?
Did that just come up on, on the
internet somehow, Mr. Chair, um,
you are correct, so the, uh,
that was the one change in the
amendment, the bill language
itself said 25 million. Senator
Susan Collins from Maine had put
forward an amendment to raise it
to 50 million that did not pass,
but in the wraparound amendment,
which my understanding is that's
like where they put all the
actual amendments that they're
actually gonna adopt, they did
raise that amount to $50 million
and they moved the um
Initial date of that to 2026 and
I'm
I would, I would assume that
that means uh.
Well, that would be this year,
so the money will go out
sometime in um calendar year
2026 and providers, this was
just the update that we got over
the lunch hour providers will
need to submit their
applications by December 31st of
this year, uh, and so, yes, the
program doubled in there, there
will be um.
I believe it's 10, correct me,
Troy, if you remember
differently. I think it's $10
billion a year will go out each
year with half of that going
directly to each state equally
and then there will be some um
prioritization for rural health
providers, but it's very, the
language is very vague. It
doesn't say anything else, so
we're not, we don't have an
estimate for how much of that
would come to New Mexico or how
it would be uh allocated out or
any of that at this point.
Did you have an estimate, Mr.
Chair, um, and vice chair, uh,
for how much rural hospitals
would need in New Mexico to to
survive currently, did you, I'm
sure you did an estimate of
that. Do you know what that
number is?
Mr. Chair and representative,
that number varies. Uh, there
are so many factors, uh, that go
into play here. Uh, we have
tried to keep, uh, our analysis
and estimates that those things
that are known, which is almost
impossible because it has
changed by the half day, um.
But each hospital will be taking
our lead from what the
implications of the bill are
after we see the text from
today.
And then applying that within
their own facility.
So the, the amount that it's
going to take for each facility
varies, and they, they all have
very infrastructures, agent
facility, number of staff, etc.
so it varies greatly amongst our
uh hospitals.
Well Mr. Chair and Troy, I just
want you to know I have met
recently with both uh CEOs of my
two hospitals, Tain Espinola in
my district uh recently, and
they were very grateful to the
work of the hospital association
and this legislature for really
for really doing the best we
could to to ensure provider
rates and to make that a
reliable um balance for people,
so, um, so we'll keep working
together and seeing how we can
do this and and how we.
gonna make it happen and do the
best we can, which is all we can
do anytime, and that's about all
I have to say, Mr. Chair. Thank
you. Thank you, co-chair
Lindstrom.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want
to restate representatives uh
Herrera's question. I'm looking
at page 7 and you're talking
about.
2/3 of the hospital expenses
exceeded revenue, I imagine
that's an average for New Mexico
and it was all hospitals.
But when she asked you how much
it is needed for these rural
hospitals to survive.
What are you currently using in
the formula.
HDAA.
We're taking a chunk of Medicaid
money's matched against federal
money. What is that number?
And how's it distributed to the
rural hospitals.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and uh
Representative Lundstrom. I'm
gonna try and do this without
getting too complex.
Well if you need to. I, I will
probably end up there
regardless, OK, so the Medicaid
reimbursement formula and rules
are very complex. OK. On the
provider tax side, they require
that the tax is broad-based and
everybody is taxed. In other
words, you can't say you're a
small rural hospital, so you
don't get a tax, but you do get
disbursement. What it did allow
for
was veryations or discounts to
be allowed to be applied to the
tax and Ms. Rutten, uh, talked
about this, that what we were
able to pass.
Uh, I'm sure I should say what
we're able to assemble that you
as a legislature passed, looked
at the variables of the CMS
rules.
The conditions of our hospital
and whether they were our rural
facilities or not to where we
were able to maximize against
the average commercial rate to
find a reimbursement mechanism
that got all hospitals.
An increase over and above what
tax they would have to pay. Let
me ask you something. Are they
getting a Medicaid provider rate
in this formula or is it higher?
Or easier, let me ask you, what
is the distribution of the first
payments in March that are going
out without getting into all the
other, how much is that going to
be? So part in that, so I talked
about the tax side, right, uh,
Mr. Ja, uh representative on the
disbursement side, Medicaid, CMS
requires that Medicaid
reimbursements be reimbursed
based on volume.
So it is without having to
explain our small rural
hospitals have very little
volume to begin with, let alone
comparative Medicaid volume.
That's why the differential
between what was paid in on the
tax side was shifted between the
urban and the rural hospitals.
In fact, it's not just that the
50% discount is given to the
rural hospitals, the urban
hospitals have to pay that 50%,
so the full amount is still
paid.
On the disbursement side, the
disbursement is paid within CMS
rules based upon Medicaid
volumes, but it's also broken
down by class. You have a group
called the Frontier Hospitals.
Yeah, another group that is
called the Urban and Rurals and
another group called the Post
Acute within those three
categories, it is an increased
supplemental payment above the
base rate. So everybody gets
paid their base rate, which also
differs whether you're a post
acute facility or whether you're
a rural facility or an urban
facility, and then there is the
supplemental payment.
It gets paid out as an
additional increase.
In the total payments for the
Medicaid. So let me ask you, in
those classifications, and we're
looking at a rural stabilization
fund with all of our hospitals
basically the eligible for this
rule stabilization and
Representative.
I haven't seen the language to
see what they will use, but I'm
going to make the assumption
that they will follow history
and most likely use a uh
Designation from
Human health resources or HRSA.
They have their own list.
There's about 20 different lists
out there of what is rural and
what is not. The reason I say
that is we come from a small
state, we might think these are
these hospitals in Albuquerque
are big, but let's go to a big
city and then you see a big
hospital.
So if the rural state
they utilize the Hsa list are
facilities in Santa Fe,
Albuquerque, Las Cruces, and
Farmington. So let me ask you
then what the, it makes sense
that the state would go in as a
one grant for the rule
stabilization fund for the
distribution to whoever
qualifies.
Yeah, and
Uh, Mr. Chair and
Representative, part of the lack
of language at this point is in
that rural stabilization fund.
It talks about how it will be
allocated amongst the states. It
does not discuss at all what the
rama or what the requirements
will be for the distribution in
within the state of their
dollars to the hospitals,
whether it will require the
previous CMS requirements that
it's done by volume.
In this case, by not allowing
the urban facilities to be
included, it will be a little
more parody amongst the rural
hospitals, but amongst our rural
hospitals, you still have great
differences in volumes for a
Clayton to a Farmington to a uh
roido so there's big differences
there, not as great if you
include the, uh, urban locations
in Albuquerque, Santa Fe, and
Las Cruces. One of our
responsibilities for this
committee is that we're supposed
to be making recommendations.
When we finish all of our
from work at the end of the day,
we make recommendations to the
finance committees. He made a
comment, you gave us some
examples of some of the, the
problems we have in terms of
policy that we might be able to
work on one of them that you
mentioned was Medal. Is there,
is there data available that
demonstrates that that's a
problem.
You have data that you can share
with this committee.
Uh,
Mr. Chair and represent, I
believe there is, uh, there are
different forms of data that we
can get we can pull from our
hospitals. I don't have it now,
but I can easily pull from our
hospitals and show the policy
increases in those things,
and if that's something that we
need to take back as a
recommendation, I don't know if
it is. I'm not close to those
bills. I've never carried one of
those bills, but I've carried a
lot of finance bills.
And I understand how the budget
works. So I want to understand
if you have something else in
there besides, oh my gosh, we
need more general fund. We need
to know what that is.
Um, and I'd like to see that
because tomorrow we're gonna be
looking at past and current
direct federal spending to
individuals and entities in New
Mexico, and that's everybody
that we've asked for a chart
that provides information on
every agency that gets federal
money and how much?
What I'm hoping we do is we look
at everything very
comprehensively. We're not just
going to, I know you guys are
the big dog on the street with
Medicaid, and I get that that's
got the biggest uh impact as
well as SNAP, and probably
public education, but there's
other things out there, and
we'll be looking at multipliers
to these things, we want to see
what the economic impact is. We
want to understand if there are
other issues that we need to be
looking at that are um just as
important.
Because I don't believe that in
a million years we're gonna be
able to say everything that goes
away it's gonna be replaced with
general fund. I do not believe
that would happen, especially
over a long period of time.
So we're going to have to come
up with some very uh specific
recommendations.
So if you've got data on that or
anything else that you raised,
we need to see it.
Uh, that you think that might be
something we ought to take a
peek at.
Mr. Chair and Representative
Latro let me add to that and
say, I believe the answer is
yes, uh, I'm gonna come back to
the healthcare delivery and
Access Act, as I described it,
we developed that around the
rules that were in place at the
time. I think there is some work
that we can do when we see the
final rules that come out that
we can say what could we do to
tweak that because part of the
challenge that most states have
when they come to these
supplemental payments is they
end up with some communities
that are winners and some
communities that are losers.
And you look at it in those
states and they usually have to
make the decision, do we do
what's best for the whole state
if there's a lot more
communities that are winners and
losers.
With our scenario, we were able
to create a product that had no
losers. Every community came out
better, but I think when we look
at the new rules, we can look
and adapt and say, how can we
minimize some of the negative
effects of what the new policy
says because we now we have a
new set of guidelines to look
at, and that will be one that
we'll bring back. I agree with
you because we have this
administration for 4 more years
or 3.5 years, whatever it is,
and these are the things that we
can see are going to be
implemented. We need to be
prepared.
prepared for that. We need to be
making those recommendations,
but I also don't want us to be
barred down in it's work.
We wouldn't have the capacity to
understand what you're talking
about.
I, I, I don't want you to go
there with the committee. You'd
be surprised what we know and
what we understand, um.
But anyway, I wanted to make
that comment, Mr. Chairman,
because we're trying to take a
comprehensive approach. We're
not trying to compound the
problem later if there is
problems, but we do, we do need
to understand.
Where you're coming from. I want
to, for me, I'm gonna start
calling this bill B to the 3rd
power. It's not basically, it's
not um be square, it's to the
3rd tower. Uh, don't like big
beautiful, that's that's has a
different connotation for me.
I'm old school and it's not a
good connotation, so I like B to
the 3rd power and we'll see if
we can't get that fixed. Thank
you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, co-chair. Um, I just
have a, a quick question, sort
of along those same lines on
page 12 talks about Medicaid
only reimburses 80 to 90% of
costs, Medicare 90 to 100% of
costs.
The cost that are calculated, we
hear lots, uh, tends to be in
the larger communities, not a
rural hospitals, but about
private equity firms buying up
the hospitals, huge profits
headed off to Tennessee
Corporations. What percentage of
the costs are the parasitic
costs of profit going out of
state?
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
Senator, Mr. Chair, um, in this
are the actual costs that come
from the cost report. No, no
profit component is included in,
uh, that cost mechanism. So
there's not a built-in profit
that's part of the cost. It
looks at the uh cost both direct
and indirect, indirect, meaning
like your uh housekeeping, your
dietary, uh,
That are not delivering patient
care but required to have those
patients in-house. So this is a
direct cost. This does not
include any profit component.
So the companies that own these
are making no profit off of any
Medicaid reimbursement, those
are all just done gratis in
their hospital and all the
profit is only coming out of the
private pay, uh, Mr. Chair, I
will say, uh, for the most part,
yes, uh, on that that it's.
There is a component to that, so
having run a business, when you
have a fixed cost of a building,
you're better off to get some of
those costs reimbursed.
So is there a profit component
that they're gaining on that?
No, but are they getting some of
their costs covered, which is
better than none. Yes.
And it gets kind of on the same
thing, you know, we hear lots
about
Again, the parasitic costs of
insurance that doesn't provide
direct health care, how much of
the percent is insurance or is
this just what's paid to docs
and staff and
And equipment, uh, you know, I
think back a couple of years
ago, I had, yeah, it's old
people like me that are
expensive to the healthcare
processes of things, uh, I had a
procedure done that was an
outpatient procedure. I was at
the hospital for about 3 hours,
and they charged the insurance
company $40,000. I asked for a
breakdown of what that was. It's
like, well, that's what the cost
is for this procedure.
Yeah, somebody's making a lot of
profit on that. I, you know, you
can't square that in a direct
cost. Where are those profits
going as far as the cost for
Medicaid and Medicare.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, again, on
the cost, those would be
inclusive of any of the drugs or
supplies, the payment for the
doctors, the nurses, um, in a
small rural hospital I'll give
you an example, you may be
paying for a doctor to be there
24 hours a day, that they may
not be seeing a patient during
part of that time because
there's not volume in a small
hospital. So those are all
included in the direct costs.
There is not a profit component.
Now, having said that, we have
to buy supplies for medical, uh,
equipment manufacturers. Uh, we
have to buy services from uh
physicians and others who
provide service
ultrasonographers, if they have
profit components in their
piece, which I would relate back
to if an insurance company has a
profit component that they're
taking out of the premium side
that that doesn't parlay into
what we're talking about here.
We're talking about the cost
that the hospitals uh are paying
to provide that care within
their hospital.
Or if I have to buy medical
supply, uh,
Product from McKesson. McKesson
probably has a profit component
that's part of what they're
charging me as the hospital, but
I have to pay that cost for
whatever those catheters or
syringes are in there. It's most
costly. So this is referring and
reflecting back to not the end.
I think your question is
expanding to the entire health
care process, including from the
insurance company to the medical
suppliers to the hospitals and
the doctors.
These numbers are being given to
you from the hospital's
perspective.
OK. And, and I think your last
comment is from the hospital's
perspective, and there are
multi-billion dollar companies
that are buying these up because
they're very profitable. Uh, and
you're saying that is not
reflective in this that you know
they are not making a profit
buying up the hospitals and
passing on those costs and to,
to Medicare and Medicaid.
So no, I'm not saying that none
of our hospitals have a profit
component. In fact, I would say
all of our hospitals have to
have a profit component, whether
they are academic, not for
profit, state-owned or a
for-profit entity, simply for
the ability to grow and uh
replenish their existing
equipment or existing
facilities. We have several
facilities in the state, for
example, that are over 60 years
old.
They don't earn enough of a
profit to be able to build a new
facility. You have to still earn
a, I call it a margin, but I'll
use the word profit if you want.
Every facility is gonna have to
make a profit to be able to
continue and be sustainable in
business.
So I'm not saying that they
don't make a profit, but what I
am saying for the comparison, if
we go back to
Slide 7.
If we go back to 2022.
The condition financially of our
hospitals, 2/3 of them had
costs, including those that were
for-profit owned.
That were greater than their
than their revenues. So yes, in
that year,
They were losing money, and I
would actually say that the
pande over the pandemic years,
there are several of those
entities, whether they're out of
state owned for-profit, not for
profit academic that we're
losing money because their
expenses were greater than their
revenues.
OK. And, and, and I think I
understand and certainly I know
our rural hospitals more so, but
we see in more urban areas where
Some of that
Expenses are the profit that the
company is taking as, as part of
their expense and writing it off
as an expense to shareholders
to, to others, I would guess,
cause I'm, they are not doing it
out of the goodness of their
heart. Lots of the, the larger
ones, but I'll let you comment
then yeah, I'll move on just
very quickly, Mr. Chair, there
are
Facilities again that do have a
margining uh profit.
Margin or profit or a management
fee is not included in any of
the numbers I've given you as an
expense. I'll, I'll drop it, but
you know, they're getting the
money somewhere, uh, you know,
and so if they're shifting it
from somewhere else to to other
places and, and saying that
that's not part of the expense,
but we'll take it out of
somewhere else there.
You know, they're, they're not
doing it for free, Mr. Jarrett,
in the years maybe this will
clarify, in the ears were
revenues exceed expenses that
residual we don't count that
residual as an expense.
That would be what is their
profit mode, uh.
their profit margin on that. But
when we're looking at cost here,
we're only looking at the
expense of providing the care.
Not any profit margin.
Sir Woodson, man, I think we're
about done with this. Yep, we're
actually a little past. We're
about done with this topic just
real quickly.
The statement was made that the
reimbursement rate
I tied to the.
Mr. Chair and uh Senator uh
Woods, I believe you were
talking about one that I was
asked about the reimbursement
for Medicaid, uh, it is the
match rate, so when we put up a
dollar of state funds, whether
that comes out of general fund
or in or in the.
Case of the healthcare delivery
and Access Act, the provider
tax, the amount that the federal
government matches on that. So
in this case, currently it's
$3.72 when we put up a dollar
that $3.72 is determined by a
formula by CMS that the main
driver in that is the average
household income. That's what
leads us to have a much higher
match rate than other states who
may be as low as a 1.
So in that scenario.
A low per capita income.
is to New Mexico's advantage.
Uh, Mr. Chair and Senator, uh,
Woods, yes, for Medicaid. It
hurts us on the Medicare
reimbursement rate, but for
Medicaid reimbursement on the
match, it has been very helpful.
We have the 2nd highest match
rate in the country.
So in, in Medicare, it affects
it the opposite way.
Mr. Cha, wrap your head around
that, Senator Woods. No, no, I,
I think, uh, I kind of
understand it because
So
Apples and oranges, apples and
oranges.
01 side.
Uh, people are, are
are covered because of one
reason, the other side people
are covered for the other
reason.
So I think I understand that
part.
But uh
Just a quick explanation in my
cowboy logic.
On uh
On, on
big hospitals and small
hospitals and the volume.
Control.
If, if you have a machine in
that hospital that does certain
function.
The fixed cost on that machine
is the same day after day after
day.
But if you have a high usage.
Of that machine, then it can
return more money into the
coffers.
Because you can charge for the
same procedure several times
that day, whereas in another
hospital.
You may, I wanna get to charge
it one time during the day.
So I can see the, the
The economies of scale is, is
very huge in hospital language.
And that's one of the real
hospitals are having their
problems. It's just volume
control, and then the, the other
question I had that I didn't
quite understand. When we talk
about private pay.
Being so much better.
In the mix.
I can't believe in, in under the
scenario we're talking about,
Mr. Chair.
That they're willing to pay over
cost theirselves.
So
Those private pay insurance
company don't negotiate.
The cost of service also.
chair.
Mr. Chair and Senator Woods, uh,
they do negotiate the price, but
you have to realize that every
payer source paid below cost.
You would not have a facility to
provide care cause there would
it cost would exceed. So part of
that willingness to pay at a
negotiated rate, and they like
it as low as possible, but comes
into how do you keep the
sustainability of that, uh,
facility or that doctor's
practice open and in place,
hence why I made the comment at
the beginning that while a lot
of this focuses on Medicaid
reimbursement, the impact is on
all of our patients.
The impact is there that reduced
reimbursement will not reduce
the need for care.
But it will absolutely have a
potential impact on this care,
the services even being
available for the entire
community, whether it's Medicare
or Medicaid. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you. It's been very
enlightening, uh, represent a, a
quick question, please.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair.
I just want to do a follow-up on
Medel a little bit, um.
You know, I, I, I talked to CEOs
I talked to doctors, uh.
It's, it's not, we, we have
actuarial tables, you know, that
tell us what people should earn
for their lifetime or what
they're, you know, what their
compensation should be. It's,
it's, that's not the problem,
it's the punitive damages that
come up in these, in these
cases, where you get a $30
million award.
Um
If we, if we change medal. If
we, if we changed it to follow
so that we followed kind of what
it, you know, if if a hospital
or doctor makes a mistake, we
all think that person should be
certainly reimbursed for for
what the damage that we have
caused to their life.
And, and we know what those
tables show.
What I'm wondering, uh, you
know, we don't control insurance
companies.
So, so even if we did that,
It could an insurance company
come in and still charge the
same rate to these doctors, and
conversely, have you done a
study on what it would cost to
self-insure.
If if we came up with a
solution, and we were gonna
self-insure all of our
physicians in the state.
Have, have you done a study on
how much that would not uh
done the, uh, and the analysis,
and I'm assuming when you're
saying self-insure, not any
individual hospital, but
collectively, I think at the end
you were saying all of the
hospitals, uh, that's something
that we could do, uh, I will
tell you part of what plays into
that though is.
Your insurance rates are a
direct impact of the outflows,
and you mentioned punitive
damages in one case. I don't
think there's any dispute over
Economic damages, the wages
loss, the actual past or future
medical costs. The
Difference of opinion on where
our medical malpractice uh laws
I believe need to be changed,
would be in the non-economic
damages and in the punitives in
those two areas, because they
all affect the outflows and so
the amount that you have to pay
out is going to drive what the
insurance company says they have
to collect.
Uh, that's on.
Or Mr. Sherman, we say we would
have to collect. I mean, this
is, it's not my lane. This is
really not my lane, but but it's
all of our lanes because this is
this is who we work with in this
state, so that's what I'm, I'm
trying to help figure out, and I
think we're gonna need you guys
to help us figure this out.
Mr. Chair and uh Representative,
I will say we have for one
portion of the medical
malpractice area for one segment
of our hospitals, there is a
patient compensation fund that
has been created that is similar
to what you're talking about.
They, they calculate exactly the
we that is paying it out and how
much the surcharges have to be
paid in by those who are
participating in that, and that
is run by the state.
Thank you very much. Very
enlightening. You can tell from
the questions, lots of concern
and issues and, and recognize
that all of these changes have
real effects on real people in
our communities and certainly
very much lots of concern about
our rural hospitals in
particular that already have a
lack of access of care, um, in
some areas with no care at all.
And so thank you again, it's
been, been very enlightening and
again for, for a teacher that's
not in this lane, I'm learning
lots. So thank you.
Um, our last presentation were
slightly behind, but we've got
plenty of time uh built in on
the back end of things.
Presbyterian Healthcare
Services, uh Outlook on federal
changes, how Mueller, and Todd
Ubercu.
And if I can, yeah, I, if, if
you hold off just a moment, uh,
we do need to have a motion to
accept the minutes. I think
they've been handed out.
The motion and seconded, is
there any opposition to the
minutes as handed out. And the
opposition see that.
That is approved and then also
for our agenda, of which we're
more than halfway through,
motion to accept the agenda,
or Senator Townsend and uh
seconded by Senator Trujillo is
there the opposition to the the
agenda.
So no
That also is approved. OK. Thank
you for us to take care of some
short business. So please
proceed.
Good afternoon.
My name's Hunley Muller with
Presbyterian Healthcare
Services. I'm the senior vice
president and system chief
nurse, um, for those services.
Um, I want to thank
Co-chair and um representative
Lindstrom and co-chair and
represented our Senator Souls,
and thank you for the
opportunity to be here today
with all of you in this
representative body.
We come, we come before you
today as a provider of
healthcare services as a
partner, as a thought leader.
And a meaningful contributor to
solutions for how we, we all
care for the citizens of New
Mexico. So we're really grateful
for this opportunity. I want to
begin first by just giving you a
little bit of background about
Presbyterian healthcare services
as a health system. You may be
aware already that Presbyterian
Healthcare Services began its
commitment to New Mexico in
1908.
Today we provide healthcare to
9.
954,000 citizens of the state,
and with the largest provider
today of hospital-based Medicaid
services in New Mexico at 41%.
We provide that care through 3
urban hospitals, 6 rural
hospitals, 32 clinics spread
throughout our state, in
addition to 4 urgent care, and
EDs and 3 ambulatory surgery
centers.
We truly value our partnership
with other systems in in the
state and our independent
providers to prepare, prepare to
provide care across the
continual. We really believe
together. That's the only way
you're going to get things done
together in that partnership.
This care is supported by over
7000 clinic or hospital-based
employees, including physicians,
advanced practice clinicians,
nurses, and techs.
And together,
We are committed to serving New
Mexico and New Mexico's Medicaid
program.
We want to express appreciation
for the legislator's support
their increased Medicaid rates
and healthcare delivery and
access Act.
To sustain and expand the access
to care in New Mexico, knowing
that those HDA funds.
Brings um extra funding to
hospitals while being budget
neutral for the state.
Next, I want to touch on
How actions that we are taking
and solutions that we are
working through to use the funds
that have been provided towards
these shared goals.
We know New Mexico Healthcare is
predominantly about rural
healthcare.
And my colleague Todd Oberhiel
will address that momentarily.
Within Presbyterian, HDA and
Medicaid rate increases have
been invested.
In ways such as investing in
technology to reduce the amount
of time our primary care
physicians spend on
administrative tasks. You walk
into our clinics today through
that technology, they're able to
look the patient in the eye,
make more of a connection,
listen to their needs, and then
some other documentation burden
is handled much more efficiently
than it was before. I would say
this is a good use of funds to
connect the patient and their
physician, which is one of the
most important relationships in
this equation.
Also investing in our staff, in
their education. We have many
staff that want to continue to
build and expand upon their
meaningful careers and continue
to work for Presbyterian and
continue to stay in New Mexico.
So building pipeline programs
are critical.
They take partnership with the
other schools, as well as other
folks in industry. One example
is our nursing career pathways
program.
This allows, this is completely
dedicated towards our current
Presbyterian employees.
We have many staff that are
already nurse techs or medical
assistants in the clinics, and
they have an aspiration to do
more, they want to build their
career and continue to
contribute in meaningful ways
and feed their families. So this
program helps them become an LPN
or an RN, and we look at this as
just the first step on expanding
ways we can have pipeline
programs and help people who are
already in New Mexico.
We provide flexible schedules to
help them continue to work in
their current job, and we put
Advanced tuition support and
partner investment to help them
have very little to know
financial burden to be able to
go to school while they continue
to work for Presbyterian.
We look to produce 100 nurses
per year through this program.
We graduated our first cohort of
LPNs just a few months ago.
We're about to graduate another
cohort and within 3 years we'll
start graduating the RNs.
Hearing their stories.
Just tells us over and over this
investment and how we're using
funds to be able to build our
workforce to take care of our
patients is significant.
We've had a relationship with
CNN for 40+ years, and we're
continuing to reinvent how we
also produce LPNs and texts
throughout um the state to care
for all of our patients as well
as um apprenticeships. And we're
also exploring a primary care
residency, so we can have more
primary care doctors to be able
to provide that family practice
care.
Without access and I and I want
to say one other thing too.
We also are looking at how we
support our direct caregivers.
We just recently
Through the investments that we,
that we've been working on have
given the largest paying raises.
In more than a decade to a
direct care clinical staff.
And we have also given them
additional time off through
additional PTO because they need
to rest and recuperate as well.
And you have to be able to take
care of your people in order to
make, take care of your mission.
So while raises and time off
help retain our valuable team,
um, the focus is also on
Decreasing this administrative
burden that we talked about in
the pipeline growth without
access to this critical funding,
these investments become much
more difficult to make.
As you, as you heard from our
New Mexico Hospital Association
representatives and our
healthcare authority, um, the
HDA funds are under jeopardy and
could limit the momentum we've
been able to build over the last
6 months. Another concern that I
know I have is I talked to you
about pipelines is what could be
the significant um impact to
just employment in the state.
So concerned about that as far
as our workforce, once again,
our, our people help us
accomplish the mission to be
able to care for the citizens of
our state.
As a not for profit health
system are commitment is to
reinfest every dollar back into
expanding access to care
throughout New Mexico.
And we truly appreciate.
The Legislature's leadership in
mitigating the Medicare Medicaid
cuts we anticipate. My colleague
Tom Oberhee, our hospital chief
executive of one of our rural
hospitals, Lincoln County
Medical Center. We'll now share
more on the impact that these
cuts may have in the raw
hospital. Thank you, Holly
souls, shares, thank you for
today and give me the
opportunity to come before you,
um, my name is Todd Ohue, the
hospital chief executive at
Lincoln County Medical Center in
Ruidoso, um, I wanna, uh, well,
first off, I'm here.
representing the rural hospitals
of Presbyterian serves in the
communities they serve. Those,
those are the communities of
Espinola, Socorro, Tucumcari,
Clovis, and my hospital in
Ruidoso, New Mexico and one
note, you might not know the
hospital in Rioso actually has
been part of the Presbyterian
system since 1972. It was the
first hospital the Presbyterian
took on outside of the
Albuquerque area system ever
since '72.
I want to thank you though and
the legislature because your
actions over the last two years,
I think, are very important, uh,
to acknowledge.
Uh, specifically to the world
hospitals and what you've done.
From the passage of HDAA to
Senate Bill 161, um, those,
those actions on your part, um,
have really changed the
environment and what I hear from
my colleagues, not just within
Presbyterian but throughout the
state of what we're looking at.
And when I hear when I go out
and I visit with my colleagues
is, um,
Prior to those passage of those
entities, um, sometimes it felt
like we were all just holding
on.
But I hear a different tenor in
the communities now I hear we're
looking to advance healthcare in
the rural areas. We're looking
to grow, we're looking to bring
new things to our communities
and, and I encourage you if you
haven't visited with some of
the, the, your administrators
and CEOs at the hospitals in the
area do that.
They have some great ideas and
some great actions that they're
putting into place, and we'll
share some of what I'm doing and
some of what uh some of their
Presbyterian ones are, but I do
want to acknowledge all because
I do truly it is, is your
actions with HDAA and and some
of the other bills that you pass
have allowed the rural hospitals
to actually be in a different
place today than what we've
been, um, and I've seen over my
9 years in the state of New
Mexico.
Um
You know, it's mentioned and,
and sender Trujillo, I heard
you, you, you, you, you really
stole a lot of my thunder when
you talked about the distance
and where we look at across the
state, you know, when you look
at other parts of the country,
uh, they do not have that land
mass that we that we have to
deal with in the state of New
Mexico, and I'll give you an
example and and with Sequora, I
think Sequora is a great
hospital that that so that when
you look at their impact and
what would happen if
There were not a Secorro
hospital, regardless of building
the hospital in Los Lunas.
The, the truth is, is you have
no OB care from Las Cruces to
Albuquerque from Ruidoso to
Sholo, Arizona.
And you might sit back and
think, well, there's not a lot
of people living out there, but
you do have the Alamo
reservation out that way. You
have a variety of different
populations that need that
service.
And when we talk about the
services that rural hospital
provides and, and we talk about
these potential cuts that are
coming to HDA and things like
that. And I think Troy mentioned
this to you all, um,
You know, I, there's not a fear
of closing hospitals necessary,
but there's a fear of starting
to have to eliminate the
services.
And one thing I don't know if
this body knows and that you
should be aware of.
Um, just within the Presbyterian
system, we know this.
Medicaid only pays half the cost
it takes to deliver a baby in my
facility, a study done back in
19 in in 2021 found that
Medicaid only paid 44% of the
cost. And when you go to a
community like Socorro, and this
is all volume driven like you,
like you were talking about
Sinder Woods, um, when you go
back and you look at Socorro and
stuff, the, the smaller the
volume of the hospital in that
obese situation, the more the
costs are per delivery and then.
that study back in 21 showed
that the cost was actually
Medicaid reimbursed at around
30% of what it costs to deliver
a baby.
I'm talking cost. I'm not
talking charges that you were
talking about your souls. I'm
talking cost. And so when you
look at that when we talk about
a business environment and and
the expectation to meet the
needs of the communities that we
all serve. and the fact that we
know that the vast majority of
the obstetric patients that we
take care of in all of our
communities are Medicaid
recipients, and here is a
significant money loser that we
all face. I think you'll see
where I'm getting at. It's
pretty easy to see, right? So if
we see
these cuts and things, talk has
to be considered about what we
do to maintain the air
operations such as emergency
room and different things like
that. So I think that's very
important. And I want to talk to
some of the positive things that
happened with HDAA cause I think
that's even more important for
you all to understand as well,
so, and first off, my hospital,
according to the, uh, um, oh, I
just went blank on it. The, the
University of North Carolina
Rural Health Institute, um,
that's been out there, um, uh,
my hospital is actually
ranked as probably the 12th
highest Medicaid percentage in
the state of New Mexico. 31% of
my overall population in Ruidoso
is on Medicaid, um, and that's
our what we see from our
standpoint and I know a lot of
people, most of y'all know this
isn't true, but most people
believe Ruidoso is a fairly
wealthy community, I think
that's not the case. It's a very
service oriented community when
you talk about our population
and so, and in addition to that
with my hospital, we also are
the main hospital that take
takes care of the mescalero.
Population as well, um, in fact,
just so when we talk obstetrics
and stuff, 80 in 2024, 84% of
the babies that were born to to
individuals from Mescalera were
born at Lincoln County Medical
Center.
They weren't born in the
Almogordo. They weren't born in
Albuquerque. They were born at
LCMC and so um we're very key
component from that standpoint,
and of course with that comes
the situation that we talked
about with the Medicaid.
But let's talk about what we're
doing with HDA and stuff. So I'm
very excited. In fact, it took
me forever to get this thing to
happen, but last Tuesday I was
fortunate to turn on my CT
scanner that I just bought $1.5
million for a new CT scanner. I
can't believe how expensive
these things have got and just
just out of the world, but, but,
um, very excited to be able to
bring that new technology, these
new exams, so we're turning on
that we just turned on on
Tuesday of last week, and so
that's a new service that we're,
we've had CT but this is going
to expand what we can do.
that standpoint.
Yesterday, actually, I was in a
meeting with an architects and
we um.
LCMC is the only hospital in the
state of New Mexico does not
have a helipad on campus.
Um, and so it's been my goal
since I've been there for 9
years that I first hospital I've
ever worked at didn't have a
heel pad, but then I came back
and I said, boy, we need to
address this now if you've ever
been to Riodosa, you know we
live on a mountain and it's a
little hard to land a helicopter
in that type of environment. But
so just picking a place and
sticking it there doesn't mean
the helicopter can be successful
and can be safe, um, but we've
over the years we've acquired
land right next to the hospital
and we're now in the preparation
to build a helipad, um.
on our campus so that we can
reduce both costs because the
cost that it takes when we load
up a patient into our ambulance
to take him either to the Rue
Delsa Airport, which is 30
minutes away or to another
location to connect with the,
with the air. Um, that's cost.
And so by building this on
campus, we're actually gonna
reduce the cost overall for care
and it's gonna be a better
situation and a safer situation
for us too and HDA the HDAA and
those funds are affording us the
ability to do things like this,
so that's why I want to bring
across to you so you know that.
We're also nearing the
completion of construction on
our new women's health center,
um, uh, Doctor Rath and Doctor
Combs are our two OBGYNs that
work for us and, and we're
building them a clinic on our
campus and so we're very excited
to be able to get that completed
should be done in the month of
August.
Um, and then one other thing I
want to think the, the
legislature for that I neglected
at the beginning, and that is
the rural healthcare Delivery
Fund.
Uh, you know, that's another,
yeah, means that you have given
to the rural facilities to sit
back and say, what can you do?
Cause one of the things you fear
when you're in a community that
doesn't have a margin, as you've
heard from so many of the
hospitals is I can't take that
step to do something because if
I do, and it fails, it could
bring down the entire operation.
And you afford the rural
hospitals the ability to take
those chances that we weren't
able to do before. And so I want
to thank you for that too my
hospital fortunately was granted
a grant this year, uh, to try to
bring behavioral health. We're
actively trying to recruit
psychiatrists to to Riidoso, but
as far as.
I don't know, there's never been
a psychiatrist in Rio, so, and
so we're trying to bring those
type of services into our
community through the rural
healthcare delivery fund. So
again, I thank you for your
support.
Um
A couple of things and, and, and
my colleague Holly mentioned
this about pipeline. One thing
we do at Riodoso that I think is
very exciting along the pipeline
says we do a thing that I call
mash camp. It's something that
we created in Lincoln County.
Um, it's something that we've
spread. I know that uh Clovis is
now doing that as well. And it's
an entity where we bring in
individuals from the schools,
districts, and we give them a
true hands-on experience. They
spend a day with us, they, they
first of all they have to apply
to come and they spend the day
with us.
They get to go to the ultrasound
and use the ultrasound machine
on each chair. They get to go up
into a war and we have a
simulated situation that they
get to use the laparoscopic
equipment and we, the whole goal
of this program is to try to
plant a seed.
Give these individuals an idea
that there is something else
they can do and where we came up
with this concept from is we
realize in the rural areas, so
many people in the rural areas
have no idea of what they.
But the potential and what they
can do beyond what they've just
seen in the in the microcosm of
their, their world. And so
Mashcamp, the hope is, is that
we can have some individuals
come in and they'll look at this
and they'll go, you know what,
that's not that complex. I'm not
could be a general surgeon, or I
could actually be an obstetric
nurse or whatever that is, and
so we give them a whole day
experience at the facility and
let them
Rotate through all the clinical
areas of the facility and we
discussed pay. We discussed what
it takes to become those types
of individuals and what that
does, um, historically, we've
done this program with Ruidoso
and we've done it with the
Capitan schools. I'm so excited
this year because I was able to
get both Mescalero, Carazozo,
and the Hondo schools to
participate this year as well.
And so looking for that in the
future, I think this is just
such a great opportunity because
again, when you live in a rural
area, you don't see all the
opportunities that you see.
in an urban area, and we'd want
to give those individuals the
idea that they can look at
something.
One other area that we've really
worked on pipeline is with E&M
Uridos, and I want to thank
y'all for your support of that
entity because the NMU also has
really come in and has really
made a difference in our world,
the expansion that they've done
with the connection with the NMU
Roswell on the RN program has
put us in a situation where I do
not have an agency nurse at
Rudoso anymore and aren't very
many facilities around the state
that can say that, but it's
really because of what you've
done in your investments in
those programs that allowed us
to be in that situation.
as well. We've also been the one
to help them set up through,
through our laboratory tricorp,
um, a phlebotomy program there
too, and so very excited about
what those programs have done
too.
Um
A couple other things that I've,
that I've heard from some of the
other facilities that they're
working on, I'll bring up
espanola, um, because the
espanola is focusing on two
things one, they're focusing on
their substance abuse programs
and they've had a lot of success
in area. The other thing that
they're focusing on, I just
talked to Brenda today, is they
are actually actively hiring
primary care docs now, they can
take that opportunity to expand
their services and try to bring
in primary care docs, and I
believe she told me today she's
hiring two family medicine and 1
internal medicine right now.
And so hopefully we'll see some
expansion of that because that
access care, primary care is one
of the key things that we want
to see.
Um, in Curry County, Clovis, we
are seeing the expansion of what
we're doing from our imaging
services in that community and
then in Socorro because of some
of the challenges that they've
experienced with transport, uh,
when they need to transport an
individual to higher care, we're
doing investments there to
create a transport system so
that they can actually get
individuals that need that a
paramedic service and those type
of things to get there because
right now many of those are
being required to go by air by
ambulance, and extremely
expensive.
Uh, endeavor, which we can
resolve by, by creating a better
transport system. So those are
some things that we're seeing in
some of our other areas as well.
Um, I do want to say this, and
like I said it a little bit at
the beginning, just kind of wrap
up. Presbyterian has no, no
intent or thought that they're
going to close any of the
hospitals where you see us at
right now and everything.
That, that's not our intent
here, but our intent is uh what
I hope to bring across to you is
what you've done and, and
hopefully we can find a way to
mitigate some of these, some of
these issues that are coming
down from the federal government
as we go forward, is you've
given us the opportunity to grow
rural healthcare, and I don't
think we've seen growth in rural
healthcare.
Nationwide, like we've seen in
New Mexico since the Hill Burton
Act, and um for those of y'all
that can remember that, I guess
I'm a little old to know that
and stuff, so but the whole bird
that was um really why all these
hospitals existed in rural areas
and really you've given up that
opportunity to the rural
communities so we can see that
type of growth again.
So with that, I'm happy to stand
for any questions that you might
have.
OK. Questions, uh, Senator
Townsend.
Thank you Mr. Chair.
Thank you, I used your hospital
in Rio Dosa. I'm sorry for that.
I kind of like it.
your infusion center, um, I have
a question.
Report we saw earlier.
said that Medicaid and Medicare
reimbursements.
were less than
costs.
Is your business model so good
that it covers your costs.
I mean, is that what you're
saying or you, I'm trying to
figure out, is the Presbyterian
model.
Different than that as a whole,
so you, your costs are covered,
you're not in that same negative
position, um.
Cha so Senator Townsend, uh, no,
that I'm sorry if I, if I
conveyed that. So actually the
Presbyterian health system, I
think it's pretty widely known
since 2022 has been operating at
a deficit. In other words, we've
lost money since since that
time, so that is not the case.
Now we do see some differences
in different areas, um, uh, for
example, my facility has done
better as far as a margin than
some of the other facilities
within Presbyterian, but it also
comes to where we talk about.
You know, I have some unique
things, so even though I'm a
very poor community, I also have
a lot of um individuals that use
my community in the summer that
comes like that, so that pair
mixes a key component to why you
see some differences in my
success at LCMC that you might
not
see in some other facilities,
isn't it true, um.
That
Your
hospitals, it's not yours, but
hospitals in general, they're
diagnostic capacity is a great
driver to
The bottom line.
MRIs, yeah.
CT scans, Senator Townsend, um,
yes, in fact, what you see uh
specifically, you know, we
talked about inpatient beds in
the rural market.
But the reality is, is what we
really are for the most rural
hospitals, we are a diagnostic
service. We, we provide those
ancillary services, um, that are
needed to do those diagnosis
diagnosis and find those type of
treatments and those type of
things, our bread and butter is
truly what you see the imaging
laboratory and, and really our
clinic services and then, of
course, as the community gets
larger, you will see that the,
you're more inpatient care and I
think that's important. I mean,
you got
You have to
drinks
you just can't be able to be big
enough and have the wherewithal
with Ninja that can help you
facilitate that, which is a
little different than a lot of
small rural nonprofit and uh
So, but you do great job and
In Riosa and I appreciate Mr.
Chair and Senator Townsvill, let
me first of all, let me tell you
this, I always tell people I
don't want to meet you at the
hospital, I'm sure to reach you
somewhere else so when I meet
him in town, that's what I say,
but, um, but I do want to give
an example. I kind of mentioned
that about that risk that we
take, so we took a risk with our
oncology program.
We sat back and, you know, I, I
would sit there and hear from my
my patients that I see that they
would have to drive to
Albuquerque or Roswell or
wherever they'd be able to get
chemotherapy and that to me that
was, um, I, I honestly, I can't
imagine driving that if you
don't have to drive, um, what
that means. Um, so we took a
risk. It was a calculated risk,
but to bring oncology services
to Riodo, so we did that about 3
years ago, um, and I'm actually
I'm very pleased to say.
Say that I just signed an
actual, uh, so we've been doing
that in connection with the
Presbyterian oncology, LCMC just
signed um last month, our own
oncologist and working with our
nurse practitioner and so, um,
but that's a very calculated
risk, you know, you just, um.
You really have to think about
when you add on something when
you've got such a tight and such
a small window, uh, that you can
work with and stuff whether it's
safe to bring that on or not,
so.
But thank you for acknowledging
that.
Thank you, Senator Woods.
Thank Chris, and thank you for
your presentation today. And
yes, we, uh, you, you are well
represented in my district.
And I appreciate that.
Of the problem that I see and,
and maybe I'm wrong, is the
primary care doctors.
Now, are we deficient of primary
care doctors in the rural souls
in the woods, um, I, yes, I
think it is not just the uh the
specialist that, that Troy
mentioned that we've seen the
outmigration since 2019, a lot
of that's primary care as well.
Um, I think it's community to
community dependent on, on how
successful you are, uh, getting
them recruited. I know to carry,
which is one of your hospitals,
um, has had challenges trying to
bring, thank goodness.
had some very stable positions
and who can carry, but um,
But there are challenges trying
to bring him in, especially to
the rural areas, you know, um,
I, I, I joke with, but it's the
truth, um, also is the first
town I've lived in since I
graduated college, I had a
Walmart. That's sounds true.
And, and I say that to you
because um
Rule is a challenge in itself,
you know, the fact that, and not
everybody is willing to be in a
rural community.
And so trying to recruit into
some of these rural communities
are, are difficult. It's
difficult indos and I have a lot
to offer, um, but that doesn't
mean I can always get them to
come even to my community, but
you know when you see some other
communities, especially at the
community seems to be
struggling, uh, for whatever
reason and, you know, just
because of lack of economic
opportunity, um, that becomes a
challenge to bring them in as
well. So yes, primary care is
very key. Uh, we're fortunate
that we have uh some great nurse
practitioners in our community
and physician.
assistance throughout the state
that can help us out, try to
fill some of that gap, um, but
at the same time, you still need
to be successful.
Um
Yeah, that's the other part of
it and, and tell me, Mr. Chair,
and sure, I don't.
How does the
Reimbursement rate work.
For, uh, for a MD and a PA. I
mean, when we start talking
about reimbursement from
From Medicaid, Medicare, uh, all
the different ways do they both
get reimbursed the same amount?
Cheals and in wood. I'm, I'm,
I'm afraid I'm going to speak,
so, but um for the most part,
they do, but there are a few
variations that can exist, for
example, um, if you work in a
rural health clinic.
Um, so my facility operates a
rural health clinic and carezozo
and in Corona. They are both
staffed by nurse practitioners.
Your rate can vary and that
situation. Now these, these,
this is a Medicare
reimbursement, not a Medicaid
reimbursement. Medicaid's pretty
fixed, is how it works. Um, and
if I'm misspoke, I hope somebody
will correct me. Um, but when
you look at it from a rural
health clinic with Medicare, um,
it's dependent, there's a,
there's a volume indicator and
and the.
the federal rules on rural
health clinic expect a physician
to see effectively almost double
the amount of volum assistant
can. And if you don't see that
volume, so if you choose to put
a physician into a rural health
clinic, and you don't only see
the volume of nurse
practitioner, you can expect
effectively a 50% reduction in
your reimbursement. Um, however
you put a nurse practitioner,
they see the same amount of, you
know, their full amount, then
you would get 100% and those
were all cost-based models
that's where, you know, we
submit our caution.
Report and we get our funding
determined by the cost of the
services that we provide in
those types of situations, so
it's how that works so let me
dig into that just a little bit
what Todd, you, you were saying.
That if you were a, a physician.
And you saw.
Let's just say
5 people.
And the PA
The next clinic over, saw 5
people.
And you said that the PA would
be
Reimbursed
For more for those 5 people than
the physician would be for those
5 people. It's, is that the way
I heard that share souls, so let
me make sure I, I, I explain it
so cause it, it's, it's, it's
fairly complex. So I, I don't
remember the numbers off my
head, but I'll use, this is
roughly around what they are and
stuff, so Medicare expectation
is that a physician would see
roughly 4000 patients in an
annual year.
Um, and if that physician saw
2000 patients, let's say, then
whatever your cost-based
reimbursement would be, you
potentially would get 50% in
that situation, OK? Because you
saw half of what Medicare
thought you should see to be a
full-time, if it's a nurse
practitioner or PA and they sold
2000 because if I remember
right, I think a nurse
practitioner, PA, it's around
2300 visits per per year that
they expect, um, for the, for
that individual.
To see, you would see
effectively get 100% situation,
so.
Uh, and where this comes in and
it doesn't really impact me so
much because of our, the way
we're set up, but it, it would
if if I put a physician into
that situation, I potentially
would see a reduction in cars,
so, you know, carzozzo is a
community of 900 people. You put
uh an individual physician into
that situation, the ability to
pull 4000 visits. So it's really
driven to bring a nurse
practitioner in and then that
nurse practitioner probably can
pull. And so there you would see
a full reimbursement or get your
full cost.
back on the Medicare cost
report, whereas if you go in and
you put a position in there
because they wouldn't it because
it really is it's dependent upon
those per visit, you know, the
number of visits that they have,
you would, you would see a
reduction in what you get
reimbursed.
OK, let me just second.
Let me see if I can get this in
my head a little bit
If Presbyterian.
Let's just use clothes,
Presbyterian has 3.
Primary care doctors.
In their
Yes.
In clothes. I'm, I'm making the
number up, so I don't know how
many they've got.
Let's say it's 3.
And so they don't get to see uh
12,000 people.
Using 4000 per
Doctor.
They don't see the 12,000
people.
No, under Presbyterian.
We're talking about those
doctors are on a salary, right?
It, it tear souls was it
depends. Uh, we have a mixture
models that we, we, OK, it's a
mixture model.
But essentially, if they don't
see the 4000 per.
Then Presbyterian is not going
to
Received this much.
So money
Reimbursement
So and with so I wanna be clear,
this is specific to the rule
health clinic designation. That
is actually a licensed a
specific licensed clinic. So the
clinics in the Clovis does not
have a rural health clinic.
Um, in fact, I believe, I think
maybe Logan was a role health
clinic. I'm not sure if it is
anymore, so I don't want to
speak on that. In my case,
corona is a rural health clinic
and Carrazozo's rural health
clinic, and there are other
rural health clinics throughout
the state, but, um, so that
reimbursement I discussed is
specific to the rural healthcare
to the clinic. It is not, it's
not the same for what you would
consider in a Clovis situation.
OK, that makes I'm, I'm getting.
too far.
Thank you very much. I
appreciate it and, and like I
say.
Uh, we're doing our best in and
carry to get a better facility
in there, so we hope that uh
we're able to do that so that we
can get upgrade.
Hopefully more services. Yeah,
uh, that you can provide, so.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Senator, uh, floor leader
Spansky.
Thank you, miss you both. Uh, I,
I think I just had some big
picture questions, which you may
or may not be able to answer,
but I'm curious to hear your
thoughts.
Where do we go next in terms of
hospital financing because it
seems that.
Not only
has our current.
set of revenue sources been
somewhat inadequate.
If this federal legislation goes
into effect, as is proposed
today.
Which is a big if, but if it
does.
All of those revenue sources
will be tightened.
And
Your
Patient
Load may be sicker, you know,
they may be they may be ending
up.
On your doorstep in a worse
position, um, then, then where
we would hope they would be
today, because they may not be
accessing preventive health care
or primary healthcare. Um, they
may be putting off those bills,
um, you know, something we've
seen and uh
states that have implemented
work requirements similar to
what's being contemplated at the
federal level is the rates of
medical debt at the individual
level went up significantly and
so I could see.
Someone saying, oh, I, I, I feel
this pain, but you know I'm just
gonna put it off or I don't, I
don't wanna, I don't wanna go to
that doctor today. I, you know,
or, or maybe we face even a
greater shortage of physicians,
and so that doctor visit may
instead of being a 30 minute
drive is now a 2-hour drive, and
so that just increases put off
that care. um, so I, you know,
it's kind of a broad question,
but my question is, you know, do
you all have ideas about?
Support from additional support
from the state.
Other financing ideas.
Uh, other things that we can
enable to attract investment.
Um, to support rural hospitals
because I think it would be
catastrophic to consider.
5 to 8 to 12 rural hospitals in
the state closing. Um,
And and so I'm just curious, you
know what, if, if, if this
legislation goes into effect.
What are your plans? Um, what
are some ideas that you might
have for us as policymakers to
consider in terms of funding or
other I will ping pong off each
other, representative, thank you
for your question.
First of all, I think we're
already in that world right now.
Some of the consequences that
you described actually happened
to all of us in COVID, right?
They had to pivot hard, um, even
without some of the other
financial challenges, we had to
pivot hard in order to make sure
people didn't miss care.
So I, I think we're all started
off and I'll I'll tee it to, um,
Todd.
is we're not going anywhere.
We're staying here, we're
dedicated. We're already putting
solutions in place. Remember
when I talked about just some of
the technology investments.
There's a lot of other AI
enabled investments that are
really starting to spread even
in our ambulatory um environment
and we'll come to the hospitals
that
help us see those care gaps
ahead of time, right? So we have
a particular product in
ambulatory that we put in place
that can track multiple care
gaps, such as, did you get your
blood sugar? Did you get your
last A1C so that we can make
sure your diabetes doesn't
spiral out of control and that
you don't get sick and need
hospitalization. So some of
those things are already in
place and we're looking how to
scale them
down that preventative track
mindset, because we know these
things are at risk.
Even if funding doesn't go away.
We just know these are a risk in
the state with all the social
determinants of health that we
have and because we are really a
rural service provider, right?
Obviously, as you shared, if
some funding changes happen, um,
these challenges, the wall gets
a little higher.
But we have, we're expanding
telemedicine. We've had that in
place for years, but are looking
at how we expand that further,
even for hospitals, we are
developing a concept of virtual
care, virtual hospital. And how
can we even start to consolidate
some of the services we provide
in our hospitals to serve all of
them, but in a more virtual
capacity where it's appropriate.
So I would say we're gonna
continue to lean in technology
is a big part of this answer. At
the same time, it, it
costs money as well. Um, so we
have to be thoughtful and
careful about that. But we're
gonna, we're not going anywhere.
We're, we're gonna stay united
and to try to solve these
problems and be a good partner.
Um, technology is a big part of
the solution, and then I'm going
to pivot to Todd so you can talk
more about the rural focus. Um,
and I'm gonna just do a little
shout out for rural healthcare.
I round in all of our hospitals
regularly, and I, it never
ceases.
To amaze me and touch me in
regards to how rural hospitals
are amazingly creative and
united. They understand their
communities with great depth
and, and many of the staff, if
not all of them, are
cross-trained to multiple
positions, cause that's what it
takes in order to meet the next
need that the patient will
present. So, the way they, the
way they work, the way they are
operationalized, um, is a, is a
real
Strength, but I, but you heard
Todd say thank you for all the
funding and what you've
supported to date, because it's
made rural healthcare.
A better place to be for our
patients and for our teams, so
pivot to time. Thank you. Thank
you. Cheers, uh, Mr. Chair and
uh four leader Savansky, um, I
think the, um,
You know, with, with what we're
talking or what we, you know,
what we potentially see from
federal standpoint, um, a lot of
what they're proposing is, is
going to be somewhat back to pre
HDAA, but, but you bring up a
good point. The concern about
the reduction of the, of the
accessibility for is concerning,
you know, we've seen, I've seen
studies where, um, you know,
the, the vast majority of
individuals who are on Medicaid
do work, they meet the
requirements of that potential.
built in, but we also know that
the documentation requirements
typically, or at least what
we've seen in other states, um,
Impede a lot of individuals'
willingness to, to imply, to
show that they meet those
standards that potentially are
going to be in place. And so the
fear that I think, you know,
that exists is, is a lot of
individuals are going to not,
um,
Follow through and, and, you
know, because of those
requirements and then therefore
they will not uh receive
Medicaid benefits, um, is of
concern.
And then again, when you look at
that in the r situation, then
suddenly you've got a, a, it's,
it becomes a bigger, uh, a
bigger ball rolling down the
hill because just the the
percentage that we see and um uh
you know, that, that it was the
chef's uh center that I was,
couldn't think of earlier when
you look at that, um, every
hospital they listed in the top
15 in the state of New Mexico, I
think except for one as a rural
hospital. Um, and it's based on
because
we see so much Medicaid. I had a
friend that asked me um why is
there so much Medicaid in the
state of New Mexico.
And, and the reality is, is it's
not that the overall state is
as, as poor as a lot of people
portrayed. That's definitely
part of it, but it really is
that we're so rural.
Because there are not large
employers that exist in our
communities and stuff in in
also, for example, if you don't
work for me every or the school
district or one of the
governmental entities and maybe
Mescalero, you will not most
likely have a commercial
insurance product in that
situation, it's just not
affordable or it's not available
to you. And so, uh, when you're
a rural state like ours, that's
the problem. I think you touched
on what we would have to really
try to focus on the change.
and, and, and, and, and
honestly, I don't know how we
get there. We've talked about
this forever is and, and Holly
mentioned too I focus on trying
to address significant disease
before it becomes a critical
situation because that's where
the money goes, right? And if we
can put more dollars in to try
to address it on the primary
care or upfront in the
outpatient setting, we can save
money all the way around, I
think.
Um
The, the problem is, is the
consumer doesn't always um
follow through on what they need
to follow through, you know, we
all of us have overburdened
emergency rooms with things that
don't need to be in the
emergency room. And we've had
conversations about this ever
since I've been in healthcare,
how do we change that? How do we
get individuals to realize that
the emergency room is not the
place for care, it's really we
need to get you into that
outpatient. And, you know, I
can't sit there, yeah, I used to
always sit back and say, you
know, it was those guys before.
me that caused all the problems
in health care. The truth is
I've been in it 31 years, so I
can't kick back in anymore. I
don't really know how we changed
that, that mentality, that that
process that individuals go
through that it's an easy
process to go the ER, but it's
harder to go to the clinic, but
we got to do that. And because
the truth is, I think the first
thing we have to do is we have
to find a way to individual.
And, and if we can have an
effort in that situation, I
think we can.
Thank you, Senator Trujillo.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I'm
just gonna take a point of
privilege here, um, you
mentioned a number of uh
School programs. We have uh
medical science program at
Capitol High School for well
over 10 years, maybe even going
on 15 Presbyterian has always
been a great partner with that,
and the summertime we, I don't
know if we still are doing it,
but we've done the scrub
program, which brings 5th
graders in and gets them excited
to do some of those things, so
they'll get into the program at
Capitol High School and be
excited to go. They have nearly
100% graduation rate and I
always ask the kids, um,
I always, I call them kids, they
look like kids to me, but when I
go get blood drawn, I ask the
phlebotomist, where did you go
to school? And many times
they'll say capital he.
Thank you, Senator, uh,
Representative Rivera.
Thank you Mr. Chair, and I too
would like to tell a personal
story, um, I lived in in butro
and we go to Presbyterian
Hospital, um, and I met with
Brenda, uh, about a week ago for
an hour and a half, and I was
amazed at what they're doing,
uh, currently, it, it, it really
is an amazing story. What, what
they have been able to assemble
at that hospital, and I'm sure
you all hear about it at other
at other hearings, but I just
want to tell a personal story.
My
during COVID came over Christmas
Eve and you know, he walked in
the door and I said.
What are you doing? I can't
believe you drove from Santa Fe,
you're sick. I said, you have
pneumonia. And he said, well,
I'm feeling better. I said,
well, just go to the other room
and my husband is, you know, has
oxygen and other stuff and they
get put them on a nebulizer and
gave him his oxygen, his, his,
you know, his vitals were on the
marginal, but they were OK. And
I said, well, maybe you are
getting better, and so sure
enough.
Of the next morning, uh, he had
gone down and he said I I said,
he said I need to go to
emergency, and of course, a
blizzard was happening that
morning, and I called my uh son
who's a, um, paramedic, and I
said at Los Alamos Fire
Department, I said,
Uh-huh. Will you help me drive
through the canyon through Taos,
so I think it's gonna be a rough
drive, he goes, you know, go to
go to Espanola, go to
Presbyterian, and we went down
there.
And I wanna say we walked in the
door, and within 5 minutes, I am
not kidding you, because I
happen to look at my watch. In 5
minutes he was on an oxygen
machine and an IV.
And they were taking all of his
vitals, and they were getting
all of his information, you
know, while he was still in bed.
They like took one look at him
and.
I mean, it was, it was
incredible.
How fast, uh, that emergency
room was, and it wasn't like we
were the only people there, and
it was in the middle of the
blizzard, and it was Christmas
Day, so I just want to say all
things considered, it was just
amazing care that he got. And I
hear that from everybody really
who goes to a Presbyterian in uh
Espinilla and I'm, I'm very
grateful for that and um
I
I guess as we go forward, um.
Um, in this, you know, in, in,
in what we're trying to do here.
Uh, I, I just want to say I'm
very grateful for a nonprofit
hospital.
You know, I've never understood,
you know, uh, this is a take on
the private equity that you were
talking about. I've never
understood why we should make
money off people's cancer. I
have never gotten that.
And in 2030 years ago when all
these hospitals, including, you
know, you and you and him, and
uh now anchor well now um uh
Saint Vincent's, all of them
have gone over to private equity
out of state corporations. I
think, I think that really
represents a huge challenge for
our state. So I'm so grateful to
those hospitals who are
non-profit hospitals, and that's
really, you guys in the Holy
Cross.
So, I think we have 7, I'm
pretty sure we only have 7 in
the state, and uh we do have our
clinics, we do have nonprofit
clinics, but for nonprofit
hospitals, it's really
Presbyterian and Holy Cross, so
I think we need to take.
Your leadership and your
expertise.
Because those are kind of the
organizations that I trust in
serving our communities. Um, and
I certainly believe everybody
should get a great salary, the
best salary, the best, you know,
the best equipment, the best,
you know, hospital environment
they can have. I, I mean, I, I
support that. I just don't think
we ought to make money off of
it.
So I, I, I don't really have
many questions, uh, Mr. Chair. I
just wanted to make that
statement and say that uh I am
personally deeply indebted as
are most people in the north,
too. Thank you. Thank you,
Senator Nava.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um, I
just want to commend you both
for your passion and your
commitment. It's very clear that
you're just really committed to
not only fostering the next
generation of uh healthcare
providers, but really foster.
your hair and uh passion in New
Mexico, um, and I wasn't going
to go on a personal route, but
actually I was reminded, um,
that given your passion for the
CT scan and the CT machine,
which we know saves lives, um, I
learned that very effectively in
2021 when I had a bad headache,
ended up running around because
it was COVID, right? And land up
in a Presbyterian on Pace del
Norte.
Where I thought I had COVID and
they took me in and they, they
asked for my symptoms, right?
And I said, oh, you know, it was
just a headache. And I said,
well, yesterday I had some
tingling in my legs, and they
said, oh no, you're not going
anywhere. Put me in the CT scan,
come out, and then they say I
had a brain tumor, um.
You know, it changed my life. I
mean, 17 days hospitalized, but
it had, had it not been for that
CT scan, I would have never
known I would have left because
I was ready to go after the pill
that they gave me to remove the
headache, right? I couldn't, I
kept thinking about the amount
of folks that, you know, take
headaches, you know, as
something that's normal and
don't have, you know, the access
or the opportunity to go and get
a CT scan, get an MRI, have that
access, um, being, even if I was
in, you know, rural.
Mexico. What I, what have I had
that access, so I thought about
it often sitting in that
hospital bed and I think about
it often sitting in this space,
so I thank you for your work,
um, because not only does it
save lives, um, these are folks
each and every day, whether we
are, you know, elders and
dealing with aging populations,
which obviously will be more
prevalent to need the access,
but we as humans never know when
we might end up in such a
situation regardless of our age,
so I just want to thank you and
commend you for your work.
And also for investing in the
next generation of healthcare
providers. I know you mentioned
the partnership with CNN, um,
and I believe I heard 100 nurses
per year is what you guys are
getting, and I did have a
question about do you have any
other partnerships with other
institutions. Do you foresee
growing that, um, and how, how
so.
Absolutely, thank you for that
question, Senator. Um, we have
partnerships with UNM to produce
certified nurse midwives and
nurse practitioners for rural
communities. We shared a Hearsa
grant with them for many years.
We continually engaged in that
program.
With CNM are, are really
expanding the amount of tech
programs, literally they are
saying to us, what do you need
in your workforce and then
customizing programs we just
recently did that with sterile
processing technicians, and
they're they have the students,
they have the funding, and
they're helping us to build our
workforce, where it is
strategically and operationally
needed. And then they've really,
um, we've got a lot of new
apprenticeships through them,
which then gives that
flexibility.
2 employees that might not be
able to work full time during
that arrangement. So they've
been really creative and um and
really are experts in the space,
they've been a great partner.
Um, with, um, the, uh, the
program where we're putting out
100 nurses a year. That is
through an online school,
Unitech, that's affiliated with
our New Mexico, Brookline
College, so that's the
relationship there, um, and I
just want to also give a shout
out to, we have so many
employees that are embedded in
all of these schools, while
they're working because they
want to really lift up their
community and make sure there's
no gaps in instructors to be
able to.
that, and especially in the
espanola Mescalera area, um,
there, there's many different
examples where our employees are
stepping in and becoming those
mentors or those instructors to
be able to support that work.
Um, Todd mentioned.
You know, many of the younger
school programs, I mean, that is
another thing we are actively
doing of trying to grow. Where
is the next place? Where is the
next pocket of students that we
engage with, you mentioned with
Santa Fe, um, Santa Fe Community
College in the next couple
weeks, and their representatives
are coming to our simulation lab
in the last year, we built a
brand new simulation lab where
clinical staff, physicians,
nurses, others can come in
safely practice the healthcare.
skills, they need to provide
great care. So we're bringing,
um, about a dozen people from
Santa Fe Community College. We
have worked with them for many
years, but they want to be able
to expand and they want to be
able to build that partnership,
so I could go on and on and I
know we're probably at the end
of time, but I appreciate your
enthusiasm for that as well,
because that lifts up New Mexico
and helps people want to stay
here and help us make sure we
can give great healthcare. So
thank you.
Thank you both very much.
Thank you all very much. I
appreciate your, your
presentation and clearly lots of
interest in, you know,
appreciation for what our rural
hospitals do and taking care of
people and stuff. So thank you.
Uh, we did hand out in a
revisement to the agenda
tomorrow, please take note, we
start at 8:30 tomorrow, not at 9
o'clock, um, also the two
presentations by the Finance
Committee have combined into one
at 8:30, uh, the other two
presentations stayed the same,
but please be advised 8:30
tomorrow, same time, same place.
