produce cell will start with
Representative Hochman V. Hill,
please. Good morning, Madam
Chair. um, thanks for.
Holding this meeting in
beautiful Taos, New Mexico.
Happy to be here. I'm
Representative Dayan Hockman V.
Hill, House District 15, North
Valley of Albuquerque. Thank
you.
Good morning, Madam Chair. My
name is Mary Lara. I represent
House District 34 in Southern
Donana County.
Good morning, Madam Chair, Vice
Chair, and the members, um,
welcome to Taos. So this is my
district.
And uh representative.
Uh, no it's uh Ortiz.
No, no,
but,
uh, so just want to welcome all
of you to Taos and uh it's
always a treat to be up here and
to see uh.
What's happening and the
economic development that's
happening and uh just everything
that brings uh.
The environment to to this part
of the county and Taos and again
welcome for being here. Thank
you.
Thank you, Senator.
Representative.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
agree with the, uh, rep, uh, hi
there. The place in this
location is a great place to the
meeting, so we thank you for
your hospitality, um, Mark
Duncan, I represent, uh,
District 2, San Juan County.
Morning, Madam Chair. Mr.
Co-Chair and members, um,
Catherine Brown drove up from
Carl's bed yesterday, long
drive, lots of rain, always a
treat to see that.
And, uh, thanks for having us in
today.
They are co-chair, senator.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Bill
Souls, state senator from Las
Cruces area, I've been up here
in northern New Mexico all week
for meetings and it's very nice
to be back up here at the, the
Taski Valley. Thank you, Chris,
for hosting us and things and
hopefully we'll have a very good
productive meeting. Thank you,
Chairresentative Herrera.
Uh, good morning, everybody.
It's beautiful to be up in Taos.
Uh, it's always a pleasure to
come here. I represent District
41, which is really kind of Rio
Riba North, uh, and, uh, I have
4 precincts in Taos.
Unfortunately, not the ski
valley, but I have, uh, uh, 2 in
uh Arroyo Hondo, Upper and Lower
Royal Honda, uh, Tres Piedras
and Ojo Caliente part of Taos
County, so, uh, we all, all
consider this our home too, so
it's great to be here. Thank
you.
Thank you very much,
Representative, and I'm
Representative Patty Lundstrom.
I have the honor of this, uh,
interim to serve as the co-chair
for this incredibly important
committee. I represent House
District 9, and that's Gallup in
McKinley County.
I've, uh, served in the
legislature since 2001, so I
guess I've been here a quarter
of a century as a member of the
of New Mexico legislature. When
you think about it that way,
it's a long, long time. I, uh,
want to, um.
I think, uh, Chris for hosting
us and the community here. I
know when I called and asked, is
it possible if we can come up?
He said, sure, and, uh, just no,
uh, no questions asked. So here
we are, and you couldn't find a
more beautiful venue for, uh,
particularly the important
issues that we're gonna talk
about today. Before we, uh, ask
Chris to make a few comments. I,
I wanted to share something with
all of you that, uh, yesterday
on my way up, I, I unfortunately
we got a um a sad call a friend
to the people of New Mexico and
certainly to the New Mexico
legislature has passed away, uh,
the lady's name is Carol Lee.
Uh, Carol was long time, uh,
attorney for the, uh, energy and
minerals and natural resources
department, and she also worked
for Concho Energy for many
years. So if we could, let's
just keep her in our thoughts
and prayers, uh, as we go, go
through the day, but I found.
that yesterday that Carol had
passed away, darn it, so anyway,
with that being said again,
Chris, we're super happy to be
here, uh.
You want to introduce yourself,
Clinton, and, and our staff.
sure, thank you, chair. uh
Lundstrom, I'm Clinton Turner,
and we also have a couple other
um council service staff, um,
serving you today. We have
Nicole, uh, I guess back and
Sabina Gaynor here today. Thank
you very much. We're gonna turn
it over to you, Chris, and tell
us all about the ski valley.
Well, thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. It's
nice to see you. It's always
nice to have a committee
meetings up here in Tuske
Valley. We like to show it off
and, uh, you picked a pretty
good day to be here, so, uh,
congratulations and thanks for
that. Um, I'm Chris Stag. I'm a
former mayor and a member of the
village council here in Towski
Valley and also a um officer
with the Towski Valley
Incorporated, uh, you know, it's
a small town, we do a lot of
jobs, the joke.
is, uh, we're such a small town,
we don't even have a town drunk,
so we all have to take turns.
Um, but, you know, I really
think that uh Towski Valley, uh,
the last 10 years particularly
he's been on a roll. Our owner
Louis Bacon has invested a lot.
You can see that around the new
hotels and all the facilities.
Uh, we are working hard. We're
talking to Senator Soles this
morning of trying to develop our
summer business. So the lifts
you see out here run on the
weekends. This one does, and
then the, the one up at the
Cachina Basin, uh, runs every
day. We have mountain biking up
there. We have Via Ferrata tour.
which is, uh, uh, kind of a
ropes type course where
everything is in permanently, so
it's very safe, but it is kind
of, you know, hands on rock
climbing and that sort of thing.
And then we also have been doing
tours of the mountain with, um,
ATVs and things like that. So we
really try and, you know,
promote the summer, um, we have
events going on on the weekends.
This weekend, there's a, an up
and over race, uh, where you get
to run a 10k up the top of the
mountain and back down again. So
if any of you are feeling like
You're not getting enough
exercise in this committee, uh,
you could certainly stay around
and, and run that. um.
A little bit about the company
at Towski Valley. We are a
certified B corporation. We've
tried very hard to embrace
conservation, uh, ethics here.
Um, we're also uh certified
carbon neutral and, um, you
know, there's a lot of things
that we've done that try and
promote the whole um uh
improvement in the environment
and, and climate sites and all
that sort of thing, so, uh, we
are recycling products and
things like that, uh, we have,
uh, recycling for our food
waste.
And things like that. We have a
food digester and things like
that we try very hard to um uh
reduce our carbon footprint, um.
We've converted to mostly
electric snowmobiles in the
wintertime, so that was a place
where we use a lot of gasoline
and now can use electric. It's,
it's kind of low hanging fruit.
We also had the first electric
snow grooming machine in the
United States up here and, um,
so again, we're really trying
hard to, um, not only run our
business and be part of the
mountain environment, but to
take care of it as well. Uh, and
one of the things I was gonna
show you is if you use one of
these are aluminum cups, uh,
they're totally recyclable.
But if you also want to take
them home as a souvenir, you
can, you can do that as well. So
anyway, it's a pleasure to have,
uh, all of you here and if you
need anything, I'll be around
the next couple of days, just
feel free to ask and I'll be
happy to answer any questions of
him.
Well, thank you very much, uh,
Chris, we, I.
I did ask you earlier today, uh,
can you talk a little bit more
about the economy, that'd be
interesting to for us to know.
Yeah, the, uh,
the ski business has been
relatively flat nationwide over
the last few years, but Towski
Valley, um, has been doing
fairly well, uh, obviously, last
winter was a little, uh,
challenged because we didn't
have as much snow as we'd like,
but, um, over the 10 years at
Louis Bacon has owneduske
Valley, we've invested somewhere
in the neighborhood of $8
million in our snowmaking
system, so, uh, even though we
didn't have a lot of natural
snow, we had very good skiing
and our blue and green runs, um,
because of that.
And um
With the uh with the addition of
the hotels and the residents
condominiums and the other
projects here, we've invested uh
somewhere in the neighborhood of
$300 million in Towski Valley
infrastructure, uh, that
includes upgraded, um, things
like water lines, uh, sewer
lines, uh, road improvements,
things like that, and we have
much more to do. Uh, we're also
working on this, uh, hotel over
here. It looks like a big
battleship right now, but that's
uh slated to be a 53.
room, uh, boutique European
style hotel, um, we put it on
pause right now because we were
having a little problem with
getting supplies and uh and
workers and things like that up
here on the, at the end of a
dead-end road a long way from
civilization, um, but that's got
a new team that's coming in and
redoing that, uh, the, the plan
for building that and we'll
start again in April and
hopefully finish that in a year
or so. Uh, generally the economy
up here has been doing fairly
well, and I think in Taos
County.
As well, we're lucky we have a.
Community that people want to
visit and, uh, you know, it's,
uh, this time of year, of
course, it's perfect because
it's hot down in Texas and, uh,
you can come up here to New
Mexico and particularly in Taos
where you have the high
elevation and so you have great
summer climate and a lot of
things going on both in Taos and
and Taoski Valley, so.
I know the last time we were up
here, one of the issues that uh
was raised was housing in this
county across the board, uh, I
had read in the newspaper that
that's getting better and that,
uh, there's been more activity
and more uh more homes built is
that, is that true? Yeah, um,
you know, housing, uh, I think a
lot of places is a challenge
and, and Taos is no exception,
although generally, I think we
don't have the same issues that
you might have in another.
name uh resorts like Jackson or
Summit County or Vaile and some
of those places, um.
But, you know, healthy
communities have 3 things. They
have a good education system.
They have good housing and they
have good healthcare and all
those things are always a little
bit, uh, challenged in Taos,
but, uh, the community works
hard to try and fix those, uh,
we've really turned our hospital
around in the last, uh, 5 years
or so, and it's, it's still, um,
financially marginal, but it's
doing much better. We've got uh
to the legislature, we have a
new medical office building
we're gonna work on building
it'll let us bring a lot of the
services together in one campus
and have us cut down on the
amount of rent we pay. Uh, the
town has been aggressive in
trying to, uh, develop and build
affordable housing, and I think
that's the right thing to do for
a community like Taos, and, uh,
you know, the schools are doing
well in town, so, uh, I think,
you know, we're, we have a good
foundation and we need to
continue to work, but, uh, I
think those things are moving.
long. Forowski Valley, we
realized that um accommodations
for workers was a big deal and
that we were having a hard time
getting uh getting workers. So
we developed 250 units of uh um
housing for our staff and those
are it can be, you know, almost
hotel-like accommodations for
some transient staff, but they
can also, uh, we also have
purchased homes and different
things so that uh if you have.
More moderate or senior level uh
employees that they can have
housing for their families and
that kind of thing as well. So
we, we have personally for the
business, uh, set out to try and
uh deal with that for our
employees, but that's kind of
for our employees, not
necessarily for the community at
home, but.
One thing we did do just quick
thing is kind of interesting
when they had a big fire in the
um
In the north rim of the Grand
Canyon was tragic. That was my
favorite.
One of my favorite parts of the
canyon. Um, and they had to
displace a lot of the workers
that were there, we actually,
um, expedited if anybody wanted
to move and come here, work here
for the summer, we would
expedite that application and
make sure that they got housing
in our staff housing and things
like that, so people could
relocate and hopefully not have
too disruptive a summer, so.
Go to the committee. Any other
questions for Chris? uh, let's
start with Representative
Duncan, then we'll go to
Representative Brown.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Just a
quick question for you. Um, what
kind of, uh, time do you get out
of your snowmobiles and your,
and your snowmaking.
Grooming machine, um, the, uh,
you know, the grooming machines
usually you get to about 3 or
4000 hours, then you, you want
to turn them over, you know, and
we usually do a trade-in project
and, and they, you know, get new
machines and things like that.
The electric ones, we haven't
had it long enough to see, um.
Uh, the snowmobiles we typically
get, uh,
again, about 2500, 3000 hours on
them before it's time to turn
them over, as you might imagine,
working on this mountain and a
lot of the snowmobiles they use
at night for snowmaking and
things like that, uh, it takes a
horrible toll on them. I mean,
that you're running over rough
terrain. I mean, they get
knocked over, turned over,
banged up, you know, so, uh,
there's a lot of wear and tear
on, on those particularly.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I didn't
ask my question right, Chris.
How many hours do you get on
that battery life? That's what I
was concerned the battery life
is, that's interesting. The snow
grooming machines, we get about
4 or 5 hours. So, you know,
that's a little bit of a
challenge for the, because we,
we, we start grooming at 5
o'clock in the evening and we
groom through till 9 o'clock the
next morning, on different
shifts, um, and so the, the
electric snow cats have been a
little less, um, uh, versatile
in that regard.
Uh, the snowmobiles are fine
because you, uh, you, you
probably get 56 hours, but a lot
of the times it's uh, it's a
lift mechanic driving from the
top of this lift to the top of
the or the bottom of this lift,
the top of the lift, and we have
uh charging stations all over
the place. So he can drive in,
plug it in, go do his work, come
back, unplug it and go on to the
next thing. So that's actually
worked pretty well. Uh, the
other thing, and this is
something that the legislature
could really help us with.
There's a product called HVOD.
It's hydro-treated vegetable
oil.
Um, it, it's actually refined in
New Mexico, Sinclair has a, has
a refinery down in um Artesia or
something and um it's we
actually use that in our diesel
machines, and it reduces the
carbon emissions for our
machines by 60% over using
traditional diesel. You don't
have to modify the engines. You
don't have to do anything, uh,
wintertime you need a little bit
of a different formulation
because it's cold weather, but,
uh, you know, when the
legislature passed the uh
Standards Act, a couple sessions
ago that helped us, but anything
we can do to encourage, um,
production of that and, and to
get it to Mexico right now,
Sinclair produces way more than
we'd ever use, but it all goes
in a train and goes to
California and it's, it's not,
they're not set up to bring it
into uh the New Mexico market,
so things that could encourage
that would be, would be helpful
for us and I think for the
environment and for a lot of New
Mexico because it's, it's really
a no brainer. I mean, it
doesn't, doesn't change anything
and it's
It's a whole lot less polluting,
so.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Yeah,
um, Artisia Sinclair, uh, is in,
yeah, and we're very proud of
what they're doing. I didn't
realize it was mostly going to
California though, so we
actually um have had
conversations with them, you
know, we use about 50,000
gallons of diesel a year. Well,
it sounds like a lot, but
compared to what they're
refining is like nothing. And
so, um, right now we're not a
big enough customer to get them,
uh, to be able to afford to
change on this stuff, but those.
kinds of things where I think if
you had um just an ability to
fill up a tanker truck or two
and, and move it around in New
Mexico and I keep thinking that
if you looked at um
Free Freeport McMorran and some
of these other operators, uh,
and convinced them to use this
product that would be good
opportunities for New Mexico
refinery and, and, and good for
New Mexico to use these
products, so noted and Madam
Chair, um, I guess I noticed on
my drive up yesterday that there
are several schools of music
here in the Tas area. I know
this is an arts community. It's
world famous for that. Tell me
about the, are these private
schools.
private schools, the Tao School
of Music, which is on right now,
and that's probably what you saw
the signs for, actually started
65 years ago, up here in Towski
Valley, they used to hold the
concerts and, and stay at the
Saint Bernard. Uh, they still
stay here in Towski Valley. It's
a world-class event. We have,
um, internationally known
quartets that come here as
faculty.
And the students are all um
either professional musicians or
uh graduate level students, um,
we're actually now to where some
of the people that came as
students are now coming back as
faculty and these high level uh
quartets that travel all over
the world. So we had the
American string quartet, the
Brittano is here, uh, Bormio, so
it's really a cool program, uh,
and, and you know, you go, the,
the concerts up here are free.
The ones are in town are like 35
bucks. If you were in New York.
work and went to hear that same
concert, you'd pay hundreds of
dollars. So it's a great, it's a
great program and the kids love
being up here in the summer and
hiking in the mountains and, you
know, playing their instruments,
so congratulations on that. It's
very special. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Yes.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for the information. It's
beautiful up here. I brought my
family up and, and I know
they're gonna get to walk around
and do nice things while I'm
here.
Uh, you had mentioned, uh, the
utilized digesters for your
food.
Do you also use the digesters
for the wastewater system as
well, Madam Chair. Yes. Yes. OK.
Good. Thank you, I think, uh,
you know, that, that's, that's
some really innovative stuff
that that I think that really
can be utilized around the state
and it's really it's, um, and
it's something that's very uh.
It's just
It's positive all the way
around. I really like what those
machines do. I really like how
that process happens, uh, if you
don't mind, would you mind
explaining to us exactly, you
know, more or less in, in, in,
in simple terms how the
digesters work and what what
they do, um.
Yeah, yeah, it's, it's, it's
basically a composter, right? So
you throw all the food waste in,
and it, it heats it up and just,
uh, actually works on the
natural process, but speeds it
up over what you do in the
compost pile in your garden and
uh after about 24 hours, take
this thing and then you have a
product that's in, uh, rich in
nutrients and you can take it
out here where we do reseeding
on the mountain and things like
that and, and use it, uh, to
replace the nitrogen.
and the things in the, in the
soils for that. So it's for us
it's doubly good. One, it, it
takes care of the food waste
that would otherwise go into the
landfill, and 2, it we have a
big land area so we can use it
on the mountain in in a way that
maybe uh other places couldn't,
they have to give it away or or
do some way to distribute it.
But so it works well for us on
that, and it, but it basically
just works on the same natural
process that um you would do if
you have a compost pile in your
garden, it just.
Accelerates it.
Thank you for that. I appreciate
that because I think uh that's
something that uh I have been
pushing back home, especially
with our wastewater systems with
those digesters. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair, um,
I just want to mention that for
many years.
You know, the welcoming part of
uh Tulske Valley to to many from
uh employment to our businesses,
but also a real special to uh
what they have worked with the
schools.
To bring a lot of the young
people to learn how to ski and,
you know, just enjoy the, what's
here in, in our backyard, and
uh, that has just been a
tremendous, you know, big, big
programs and it goes even
further, you know, we had a
students coming from uh Pohuake
from the surrounding areas that
travel, you know, for the day
to, to be here.
On a field trip, the other two,
Madam Chair, maybe uh can ask uh
Chris to expand a little bit is,
um, when you see this.
You know, but unless you're
sitting there, it's like uh on
one of these towers.
You know, uh, they actually have
to bring in their own
infrastructure like a batching
machine.
For concrete
And then, uh, the use of
helicopters and, and they can't
afford to lose 2 or 3 minutes.
It's one loading.
Unloading and the other one
rotating and it was just amazing
to to see that and we witnessed
that uh last summer.
You know, which I thought was
just incredible, but that's how
the.
Infrastructure is built because
you know you couldn't get a a
cement truck up here, you know,
uh, no way that you could come
on that way. Uh, the other part
of Chris, maybe if you can just
uh very briefly, uh, what the
tax, uh, that TI has done for
Towski Valley, and that was
through the New Mexico
legislature.
Well, well, thank you. A couple
of things. One, to, to begin
with the youth, uh, as a company
we looked at, you know, hey, how
do you give back to the
community and what do you do?
And, you know, there's obviously
a lot of different options you
can have. But our focus, we
decided is on, uh, uplifting the
youth of Taos. And, uh, just
recently we, we made grants over
$100,000 to different uh
organizations in Taos focused
on, uh, youth advancement. It
can be education, it could be
getting them in the outdoors, it
can be.
Ski programs can be a lot of
different things, but, uh,
taking care of the youth of our
community is one of the
priorities of the company. Uh,
secondly, uh, the, um, the
building of lifts has changed
and the almost it'd be 70 years
this year that Towski Valley on
the anniversary. The first year
Ernie built the lift up Al's run
with, uh, a few of the helpers
from the Taos Pueblo and a, and
a mule and, uh, you know, the
mule quit after a few days
because it decided he didn't
like it, um, and nowadays.
Did you almost everything with
helicopter, it's just, uh, so
much faster, um, and so as Bobby
said, you'll, you'll mix the
concrete down at the base and
then the helicopter will come in
and pick up these buckets, fly
them up, come down and pick up
the next one, fly down and, and
you have a helicopter in maybe,
well, you want a little time as
possible because they're very
expensive, but, you know, we
poured all the footings for the
new lift in the top terminals
in, uh, in a day.
Doing it that way. And then
he'll come back and he'll set
the towers so we can build all
the towers down here. Uh, to put
this, uh,
Uh, mechanical parts together
and the helicopter will fly up,
drop the tower on, bring the,
the shiv train on, you know,
and, and again, we can set the
whole, uh, whole tower
structure, including the top
terminal in in about a day once
it's uh once the helicopter
comes in. So it's very different
than the old days, um.
And then, uh, let's see, what
was your, uh, oh, the tid, uh,
and I'm, and I'm happy to talk
about the, the, y'all know kids,
you guys have been through them.
This is one I think it really
worked. So you have the
developer, create a TI, we get,
um, uh, gross receipts tax, uh,
back from the state of the
incremental bit. So it's like
because the economy grows, you
get the incremental bit of the
gross receipts tax from the
state. We get, uh, some, uh, uh,
Property tax from the county and
75% of the incremental growth
strategic receipts tax from the
municipality. And then that goes
into a pool. It allows the
developer to put in
infrastructure and then it gets
reimbursed out of those, uh,
revenues. If you don't have
economic growth, you don't have
revenues, so the developers at
risk, so it isn't something
where a municipality bonding and
then can't pay their bonds back
or something. This is something
where the developers is totally
at risk, but it allows us to go
forward and, and do projects.
that you need to be able to, um,
advance the community. So a
couple of things we did, we, we
undergrounded from town of Taos
up here to Tawski Valley. We
have underground power, we have
fiber optic, and we have natural
gas. So that brought natural gas
up to the community, which was
a, a big benefit. Um, we were
also able to pave roads, put in
water and sewer infrastructure,
um, uh, some of the plaza area
out here, we, we dedicated to
the kids, so the paving.
and all that stuff is uh, is
now, um, dedicated to the
community as a community asset,
but it was paid for, uh, and
then reimbursed by the TI. So,
um, it's been a really, really
important tool for us and I, I
know there's some in the state
where they haven't gone like
they're supposed to, and that's
puts a little cloud over kids,
but this one has really worked.
And just coincidentally, we're
thinking of coming to the
legislature this winter, uh, in
this session and asking for an
extension.
of the tid. And the reason we'd
like to do that, there's two
things. One, the Forest Services
approved a go would start right
out here in the corner of this
building and go up to the base
chair for the Bavarian and the
Phoenix restaurants and um it
would keep the hiking traffic
off the roads right now, there's
a lot of hikers who want to go
to Williams Lake and to Wheeler
Pe Peak, and they drive up and
down this road. It's a dirt
road. There's dust. It's, yeah,
there's wear and tear, there's
environmental impacts for that.
So the gondola would be a, an
all-electric trans.
port ation system from here to
connect the other part of the
village. Um, but by the way,
it's about a 25 to $30 million
project.
Um, and that's a little hard to
justify if you're just thinking
of it in terms of lift ticket
sales, but if you look at it as
a community transportation
program, uh, then it's a little
more palatable. Uh, the other
thing is we built a firehouse,
uh, the company built a
firehouse we'd like to find a
way to transfer that over to the
municipality and uh making that
part of a TI project would,
would help with that. So we, we
may come back to the legislature
this session and ask for, uh, an
amendment to our existing TI to
be able to.
Do those two big projects, so
but it it it really has led us,
uh, put in infrastructure to
support, uh, the otherwise the
private development. Thank you.
Madam, I just want to add a
little part.
When uh when we talk about
helicopters, you know, you would
think that it would just be.
Starting it, loading it, and
coming back. And actually, the,
the process is um because of.
Well, the entire
The entire company just keeps
safety as a very, very high
priority when they're doing
that, they actually
Every single time that they're
moving anything, they have to go
back down here to build
altitude.
Before they can go up to the
mountain.
So it's not a matter of just,
you know,
In and out taking off. So it's a
very interesting. I can imagine
the expense.
Well, and then, you know, this
time of year, what are you
competing with your
firefighting, right? So any of
the big powerful helicopters are
off fighting fires and getting
paid a lot of money, so they
gotta, you gotta pay him to come
down here, do the work, and you
know, go back home. And as uh
Senator Souls knows, uh, when
you get in higher altitudes,
particularly in the summer with
warm air, even the biggest
helicopters struggle to carry
the kinds of loads that we need
up here, so you, you really
need a big sky crane or a, you
know, K-Max or one of the, the
really, really powerful
helicopters to do this work. So
it's, it's pretty interesting.
Just a short question. You
talked about the 300 million,
um, Chris, uh, in, uh,
infrastructure that you've done
as a company. I'm curious, uh,
can you give us the numbers for
the economic impact on Taos
County and the communities. You
know, we've done that study and
I don't know the numbers
offhand, but I'd be very happy
to find it and I'll get it to
you, uh, later today.
Because we did, we actually did
go out and do that. We, we hired
um
Uh
UNM to uh and Charles to come in
and do some of the stuff on
that. So I, I'll get you that
report. Well, thank you. I'm
sorry I took up so much your
time this morning. I know you
have important work to do, so
thank you for being in Towski
Valley.
Sorry. Is that what that meant?
OK, I thank you very much,
Chris. All right, before we
start, uh, can we have uh
Senator Pinto introduce herself,
please.
Morning. I'm Senator Shannon
Pinto. I represent district 3,
San Juan McKinley County. Thank
you, Madam Chair and members of
the committee.
All right, thank you very much.
If we could go to our first
presentation, Helen and Richard,
uh, on state tax impacts.
Let's get into our light reading
this morning.
And, and members of the
committee, you should all have,
um, a large, um, good dense um
uh presentation in your folders
that they're gonna um hopefully
make it clear. Thank you very
much.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, thank you for
having us this morning. uh,
Richard and I are going to give
this presentation. I'll just say
at the, uh, at the outset that I
did most of the slides here. So,
um,
Uh, I'm gonna, I'll probably do
some of the talking and then
turn to Richard and make sure
that he's got a chance to weigh
in on some of these issues, um,
and feel free to do that.
The um
I want to start with just a
little bit of background on who
we are, for those of you that
are not as familiar with
Our organizations. So I
represent the multi-state tax
commission. So if you go to
slide 2 in the, in the slide
deck, you'll see a summary of,
um, what my organization does.
So the multi-state tax
commission is an
intergovernmental state agency.
So we are an instrumentality of
the state governments that are
members, and we have about 26,
uh, compact and what, what are
called compact and sovereignty
members, New Mexico is a compact
member. They've been a member
since our founding in 1967.
Um, we do a lot in the area of
policy trying to make, uh,
uniform, uh, consistent rules
between the states so that
taxpayers who have multi-state
businesses and multi-state
income, uh, their taxes are
simplified somewhat, um, and we
do that for, uh, we do that as
part of a big public process and
we invite all states to
participate along with, uh,
taxpayers and practitioners. We
also do audits.
of multi-state, multinational
entities, um, and we have a
nexus program where companies
that have uh expose themselves
to tax in a state but haven't
filed there for whatever reason,
can come forward involuntarily
comply.
He in just one second. We want
to make sure everybody knows
it's listening that this
presentation is online,
so you. Thank you, yes, that our
slides are on line for, for
those who are watching remotely.
Um, and I'll turn it over to
Richard and let him talk about
the institute.
Good morning.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, it's wonderful to be
here, especially here in Taos.
We've heard all that over and
over again this morning, but it
certainly is true when it's 95
degrees in Albuquerque. It's
nice to be at the ski valley,
so.
Um, I'm the president executive
director of the New Mexico Tax
Research Institute or NMTRI.
We're a nonprofit, nonpartisan
members supported organization
dedicated to providing
fact-based principled research
and analysis to the tax policy
debate in New Mexico.
Um,
what that's code for is, you
know, I'm the only employee of
the organization, so I am both
the president and, you know,
Yeah, um.
I sweep the floors, um.
But we were actually born out of
an organization by the name of
New Mexico first. Some of you
might remember New Mexico first.
It was a bit bit Bingham and
Domenici thing and they would
have town halls and in 1999 in
Angel Fire, they had a town hall
on taxes, and one of the
recommendations was there should
be an independent group that we
could look to as an alternative.
You can't always trust
government and businesses tend
to be very
Self-focused, um, so.
That's how we came about and
I've been doing this for about
18 years since, um, previously,
I worked with Helen at KPMG and
the taxation revenue Department
and I worked at Grant Thornton
as well, leading a state and
local tax practice.
which we can
uh, Richard and I both worked
for the tax agency for the New
Mexico, uh, taxation revenue
Department.
In our
Oh
OK.
It's own.
It is.
So
Hmm, he doesn't want to.
Right.
So you're talking.
Yes.
OK.
Am I doing something? OK. All
right. Anyway, so we worked at
the tax agency. We've known each
other a long time. You're going
to hear a lot of us talking back
and forth to each other.
Um
And so we're sort of tax
administrators to, you know,
this is our shtick, um, and we
have, uh, worked in private
practice as well as for
government.
And I will just say I'm not an
economist, so there's a lot of
questions about this new federal
legislation and whether or not,
you know, what effect it's going
to have on federal revenues and
the focus on the federal budget,
but also what effect it's going
to have on the states that
conform. We'll talk a lot about
that. Um, it's hard to estimate
at this point because there are
lots of moving parts, and it
also depends on what is going
on, uh, outside of the tax
provisions, of course, the
administration.
is negotiating with its trading
partners over, um, what kind of
tariffs and other measures that
might be imposed, um, so it's
really hard to sort of project
what some of these effects will
be. Um, that said, we're going
to try and focus on the things
that we think.
Probably matter most to the
states and to New Mexico, um,
but there is a lot that we're
not going to cover and we'll
talk kind of more about how we
decided to cover what we're
going to cover.
Excuse me, Helen, let me have
the senator introduce herself,
please, and then we can fire up
again. Go ahead.
There you go. Well, thank you,
Madam Chair. Good morning,
everyone. I'm Senator Cindy Nava
representing Senate District 9.
Pleasure to be here with you
all.
And uh thank you again uh for
being here and Helen, if you
would let us know what page
you're on or Richard, as we're
going through, that's super
helpful. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Yes, so, um, good reminder.
Thank you.
So I'm on slide number 5 now,
um, some history.
So why does what the federal
government is doing in the in
the income tax provisions that
are that were in the OBBBA, the
why, why did that, why are those
of a concern for New Mexico and
for the states. And the reason
is because over time, the states
which had the income tax first,
states initially had income
taxes and then the federal
government, uh, imposed income
tax. They were, um, not always.
In conformity with the federal
rules. So you can imagine you've
got 30 or 40 states that are
imposing an income tax and doing
it a little differently,
calculating income a little
differently. Um, how complicated
that could be for anyone who had
to file in more than one state.
Uh, so your federal income taxes
are computed one way and your
state taxes are computed in
another way.
So 60, 70 years ago, the
Congress and the courts at the
federal level, began to say,
well, states need to be able to
tax.
Um, this income, even if it's
earned in multiple states, but
they need to simplify if they're
going to do it. So one of the
things that uh that the federal
government did was sort of
pressure the states to say, why
don't you just conform to the
federal tax code, um, and that
will simplify for everybody, and
you can just compute your tax on
the same base that we calculate
for federal purposes.
So that makes some sense, um,
there is, there are a few issues
with that, um.
It means, for example, that
states rely heavily on the IRS
and I want to talk just a little
bit more if we have time at the
end of the today about what that
means, relying on the, on the
Internal Revenue Service to
essentially make sure that
taxpayers in general are
reporting and conforming to the
tax rules.
Um, because if they don't, then
they can also, um, we, the
states can miss those taxpayers
as well.
Um, information reporting and
sharing, um, so the federal
government collects a lot of
information and they share that
with the states, uh, and that's
an important aspect for the
state enforcement of taxes.
Refund offsets, of course, this
is a big thing where uh we'll
share information and also
share, uh, income, you know, tax
that's been overreported, but
there's a liability on the state
side. The IRS will often offset
that, send that money to the
states to offset that.
That liability.
And then there are audit
adjustments, the IRS audits or
has in the past audited a lot
more of the big taxpayers than
the states are able typically to
audit. Uh, and so we get that
information as well.
But even though all of this has
led to more conformity with the
states and the federal tax law,
there are lots of ways in which
states can, what we call
decouple or deconform in sort of
minor issues. So let's say a
state doesn't want to follow the
federal rule for some type of
income or some type of
deduction, they can simply say
in their rules, except for, and
then make an exception for that.
Uh, and of course, that, that
does tend to complicate things.
It means the forms are more
complicated. It means the rules
are more complicated, and it
also means to some extent that
the states are on their own with
that particular issue to make
sure that that's done correctly.
Um, so they're trade-offs. I
think the biggest trade-off
again, I'm not an economist and
I'll ask Richard what he thinks
about this, but the, um,
The, the biggest thing is
oftentimes federal policy is
focused on counteracting
whatever's going on in the
economy. If the economy is going
way up, you might have some,
some policies that tend to kind
of moderate that if it's down,
you would have policies that
tend to moderate that and
they're, and they're often sort
of counter counter to each
other, uh, in the sense that the
federal government is going to
maybe spend more.
tax less if the economy is in a
downturn because they can,
because they can borrow money,
what I call print money, uh, and
they can have long-standing
deficits and debt, um, whereas
the states can't. So sometimes,
uh, the, the federal tax
policies make the income from
the income tax a little bit more
volatile for that reason,
especially for the states where,
you know, when the economy
is down, you know, revenues go
way down, uh, at the state level
in the income tax or vice versa.
Um, I don't know, Richard,
thoughts about that?
Um,
not really, um, I mean, what you
said is true and I think states
sometimes, I don't want to give
them the misimpression, um,
because we're gonna be talking
about how the states, especially
New Mexico, tied to the federal
government and therefore the
recent changes, um.
And I think a lot of people
reflexively think in terms of
decoupling, you know, we're
going to control our own
destiny.
Coupling has very good
advantages, and one of them is
compliance, leaning on the IRS,
but it does take away some of
your flexibility, so you know,
to decouple means.
You know, for instance,
California has their own
depreciation rules. We rely on
the federal government's
depreciation rules. Um,
immediate expensing, guess what?
That's gonna get incorporated
into our, into our tax code just
by the way they connect, so, um,
but that's neither good nor bad.
um, so don't, please don't run
away thinking, oh, we must
decouple or we can't decouple
because, you know, like I said,
there's pros and cons to all of
it.
OK, so on slide 6, this is real
basic, I know, but it's easy to
get lost in the tax rules, so
I'm just going to try and keep
it kind of basic, and then we'll
dive into the details a little
bit and, uh, and you'll see what
it is that makes some of this
more complicated, but, um, so
when you're computing the income
tax, sometimes people talk
about, you know, how the tax is
calculated. There are several
sort of moving parts here. So
the first is what is
included in the gross income,
and we tend to think of that as,
uh, things that are taxable or
things that are exempt or
excluded. So that's the first
step is this kind of income
value, you know, increase, is it
included in my income or not
when I'm paying taxes, um, or is
it exempt because there are some
things that may just be exempt
and they're not reported.
Then the next step is, OK, how
do you get to what we call
adjusted gross income. So you're
going to see this is an
important concept. It's both a
federal concept and a state
concept, um, it's IRC section 62
is where you find the definition
of a just a gross income, and
there are certain deductions
that you can take from your
gross revenue to get to adjust
to gross income. So we call
these above the line deductions,
basically.
Then there are other deductions.
The next step is deductions from
AGI. Why do we separate these?
Because it just, that's been the
tradition over time. There were
certain things that were, uh,
sort of general deductions that
go above the line, and some
other things that were more
specific, but there are a bunch
of different reasons for why we
separate these, but when you
talk about deductions, it's
important, especially for state
conformity, whether you're
talking about above the line or
below the line, because
states may conform to those
above the line but not below the
line. It just depends.
And you, of course, you've got
tax rates and credits, um,
federal tax rates and federal
credits typically don't affect
the states.
So in the next slide, Richard,
do you want to talk about this?
Yeah, um, federal taxes can
increase or decrease in a bunch
of different ways, um, one way,
which definitely affects the
state level is inclusion or
exemption of gross revenue from
that initial calculation that
Helen was describing.
Um
Ditto for increasing or
decreasing deductions from
taxable gross revenue to get to
to adjusted gross income.
Increase or decreases in
deductions from AGI to get to
that taxable income.
Um, any of those things.
Basically flow through to the
states depending on
On your particular calculation,
um, the last two on slide 6 or
7, changes in tax rates, and you
will repeal tax credits. Those
do not affect our tax revenue.
Now they might affect economic
development, that sort of thing,
federal policies, good or bad,
um, but they don't directly
impact direct state revenue and
general fund.
Right
So when you hear, you know,
sometimes in the media, like
everything else, you know, the
media simplifies everything. So
sometimes you'll hear about, oh,
the federal government cut
taxes, and it won't be clear,
does that mean an exemption?
Does it mean a new deduction?
Does it mean a credit, a tax
decrease in terms of rates. What
does that mean? Um, and all of
those things affect New Mexico
differently. We're going to
focus on the two things that
tend to affect New Mexico. What
is included in the, in the gross
revenue base and
What are the above the line
deductions. It's not that New
Mexico doesn't also recognize,
uh, these deductions from AGI.
We'll talk about how that works.
And I'll just say at this point
that we know that, uh, Secretary
Chardon Clark is going to be
speaking this afternoon with her
folks as well, and I would defer
to the tax agency to answer
specific questions about whether
or not New Mexico could forms or
how it conforms to some of the
provisions of the federal tax,
uh, the recent bill, but we're
sort of kind of bringing these
issues up because we think these
are the ones to pay attention to
and then exactly what New
Mexico's policy is on those
things, um, I think that's
probably where we need to pay
attention, but there may be
other things that we're not
going to cover today, just so
you know, this is why we're
focusing where we are.
So the next slide, uh, slide
number 9, just shows you that
all states do in some manner,
generally speaking, conform, um,
those states at the bottom,
Alabama, Arkansas, Mississippi,
New Jersey, and Pennsylvania.
They typically conform, but they
do so provision by provision. So
more than just saying, um, well,
we're going to conform to net
taxable income or AGI, they will
say, we start here with these
provisions. We include these
things. So they're much more
specific about how they go
through and conform.
Um, as you see, New Mexico falls
into the category of generally
of states that conform to AGI,
but again, it's a little more
complicated than that, um, but
this is a typical kind of thing
for states to do.
Um, and then the next slide, uh,
the other important thing about
conformity is whether or not
it's, um, what we call static or
rolling. So static just means we
pick a point in time, the states
pick a point in time, conform to
the, uh, federal tax code at
that point and say, all right,
if the, if there are any
changes, we will have to take
action before we conform to
those changes.
So a lot of these states will
update their conformity over
time, but it's a regular process
for them, whereas in the rolling
conformity states like New
Mexico, uh, what happens is the
legislature will look at things
that have happened at the
federal level and then decide
whether they conform and if so,
whether they want to deconform
to that change. So it's a little
bit of a different focus, um.
00.
Sort of a
I don't know, Richard
preference, you see a difference
between how states deal with
these issues. I like the rolling
conformity model because it
keeps us from having to react to
every single thing the federal
government does. Again, it puts
us.
At their whim, when they change
a policy increase, decrease the
deduction, all that kind of
stuff. But it automatically
flows into our tax, and that
makes it a lot easier for
taxpayers and the tax
department, I think, to deal
with them. Um, some of you may
be old enough to remember, I
believe it was our standard
deduction, um.
We weren't coupled with the
feds, so it was this body's job
to go in every year and see if
they felt like raising the
standard deduction to match the
feds, and there were a few years
when that didn't happen. We
didn't have the money and, and
therefore there was disparity
between your state return and
your federal return. That
doesn't happen anymore. So for
those reasons, I, I, I think
rolling is simpler, but you
don't have quite as much control
as you would from a static
model.
Not that you can't still assert
control, but
Things don't happen as
automatically.
All right, so on slide 11, um,
For, for state tax for New
Mexico, everything is in the
definitions. So if you're
looking at the tax statutes,
you've got the uh personal
income tax and ISA 7-2-2, and
you've got the corporate income
tax and 72A2 those definitions,
those sections with the
definitions, that's where the
conformity happens. So if
you're, so if you're thinking,
you know, how do I decide to
what extent New Mexico follows
this.
Those are the sections to keep
in mind, and each of those
sections is a little different,
so what I'm going to tell you
about personal income tax and
corporate income tax.
Two slightly different
approaches, um, but both use the
term base income is kind of like
the, this is how we get to our
real starting point. We start
with the federal information,
but then we come up with base
income, um, and then we, uh,
adjust that to get to net
income, uh, so there are
adjustments that are made at
that point and then taxable
income, which is also net income
minus some or
Plus or minus some deductions.
So these are also terms that may
be used, um, in the federal
definitions, just so you know,
it can get a little confusing,
but in addition to defining
these terms, you may also see
throughout the, um, both the
definitions and other sections
of the New Mexico statutes where
specific provisions in the
Internal Revenue Code are
mentioned by name, so, so
sometimes you have to look at
the details to say, OK, we know
we can form this way. This is
our general
approach, but we may also have a
section that actually references
some provision of the federal
tax code.
See, I wanna ask you a question
before I forget, so when we have
A legislator stand up on the
floor and say this is just clean
up language.
And they're never get into any
kind of real detail about what
we're talking about.
Isn't it trying to conform then
in our statute with what's
happening at the federal level.
So, Madam Chair, I think the, I
think the answer to your
question is yes, the, the, in
general, where we've got some
Uncertainty. I'll give you an
example. Um, so in 2019, uh, New
Mexico adopted combined filing,
and at that time, the federal
government had just enacted the
tax cuts and Jobs Act in 2017.
And as we were doing this change
to the corporate income tax,
we noticed the there was a
provision in the Federal rules
that changed how the NOL uh
deduction works. So you've got a
net operating loss carry
forward. In the past, you could
carry it back for federal
purposes, New Mexico and other
states didn't allow that because
it makes the tax even more
volatile, but um, uh, then when
COVID came around, they said,
we're gonna
Let people carry back those
losses now, so we're going to
undo what we did in the tax cuts
and Jobs Act and allow this
carry back and so then, uh, we
said, well, that not, that's not
what we intended. We intended to
match what the what the Congress
did under the tax cuts and Jobs
Act, and we expect them to go
back to that after the pandemic
is over, um, and so we made a
moderation, a change at that
point, and I say we because I
helped the
agency in the administration
with that, um, to get that, uh,
change adjusted. So in some
ways, yes, I mean, when we see
things at the federal level and
it's not as clear in our law
what we intended or what we what
we meant to do, whether or not
we intended to follow exactly
what the federal government is
doing or
You know, not quite, um,
oftentimes those take the form
of cleanup or
changes that are sort of
conforming changes.
Does that answer your question,
Madam Chair, it helps us when
when we're thinking about
recommendations, you know, we,
the the responsibility of the
committees to provide
recommendations, not just to the
uh budget committees but also to
leadership. It makes sense to me
when we start looking at those
FIRs now that we actually
understand what the heck we're
voting for. I mean, and, uh,
where we understand what it
means for this clean up and how
it ties back to what we did the
previous year. I don't think
that.
to get into that kind of detail.
Um, but I, I think, and, and we
do have members of leadership
here today that can hear this.
We, we need to have, I, I
believe we need to have clearer
understanding.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Um, if you go to the next page,
OK, so all my practitioner
friends, um, you know, I worked,
I, I worked in the tax agency
before I went to private
practice, and I was surprised
how little practitioners wanted
to pay any attention to the
statutes or regulations. They
want to pay attention to the
forms and instructions. Um, and
the forms and instructions model
essentially the what we've been
talking about here, how do we
get to the final tax amount.
What are the calculations that
we have to
through.
So you see on the federal tax
return, sometimes this is the
easiest way.
I give him credit for figuring
out how these changes affect
taxpayers. Uh, nowadays, of
course, you've also got, um,
Software companies, data
processing companies that do
this automatically.
I don't know if we want to, I
mean, we've seen problems in the
past where the technology
companies get it wrong. Um, so
not only does the tax agency
have to pay attention to the,
you know, what do we need to do
in our statutes and regulations,
what would we advise to
legislators to do, but also, um,
making sure that the people who
are putting out, you know, the
software are doing it right. So
we had a problem with the, um,
A deduction for, um,
What was the capital gains.
Yeah, so.
So, and we found one software
company that wasn't doing it
right, and some practitioners
were catching it and correcting
it, and some were not, so.
Um, it's all sort of tied
together. But you see, the
Federal Return here on uh
Page on slide number 12 and then
the New Mexico return again, you
know, this is our, when we say
this is our starting point.
That's kind of what we mean, uh,
in terms of the calculation.
OK, so now we got to get into
some of the details and, and I
don't want to, I, I will say
that both Richard and I started
at the tax department when
people still talked about
Franklin Jones, uh, who had been
the commissioner of revenue here
in New Mexico. It was called
that at the time in the 1960s
and helped draft a lot of the
tax statutes, and he would
always say to people, I don't
give an answer about the tax
rules unless I go look it up and
read it first.
Um, and that's how complicated
it can be sometimes. So this is
the guy who wrote it, saying, I
don't go. I don't give answers
unless I go look it up.
Um,
so, uh, that, all that said, you
know, the, you can, it's easy to
get lost in some of these
provisions. So I'm going to make
some, some notes here about
things to keep in mind as we go
through. This is not, you know,
we're not supposed to try and
memorize everything today, but
why is it that it's a little
difficult to see how we can form
sometimes well, here are the,
here is the issues.
So
In the definitions, adjusted
gross receipts means what it
means in the Internal Revenue
Code. It's defined in this
section 62 of the Internal
Revenue Code. So if you see a
reference to Section 62, it's
referencing adjusted gross
income.
Um, then base income talked
about how we make adjustments to
AGI to get to base income. Now,
it's different for estates and
trusts than it is for
individuals.
So, we're going to focus on
individuals here, uh, why it's
different again, it's a historic
anomaly, but, um, the taxable
income is used for estates and
trusts, whereas AGI is used for
individuals. So if you go to
slide number 160. So this is
base income for um
Anybody who's not in a state or
trust, that is an individual.
It's just a gross income.
And then we start making
adjustments to that. So we've
always added back the federal
NOL because we allow our own
computed NOL as a separate uh
NOL at the state level.
Um,
there is a, uh, in, I'm going to
talk a little bit more about
this, the pass-through entity
tax that was enacted, um, back
in 2023. We add that tax back uh
that would be deducted, so we
don't count it twice, basically,
because, um, the pass through
entity gets it and then also,
uh, the taxpayer, the owner
partner gets a credit for that
tax.
Um, so that's all that does.
Um
This provision all so added to,
uh, the AGI is income of the
taxpayer not included in AGI,
but upon which federal tax is
calculated. So if there's
something below the line amount
that gets added back into
taxable income at the federal
level, it gets included in base
income as well.
Um, and again, this is kind of,
you know, trying to kind of pick
and choose what parts of the
federal code we're going to
conform to.
And then it also, uh, includes
for all taxpayers.
Um, these amounts for, uh,
section 529, uh, funds that some
folks have for funding higher
education. I'm not going to
spend a lot of time on that, but
here on slide number 19.
Is the New Mexico forum that
does this. So again, you know,
you want to understand how the
law works. Sometimes it's easier
just to look at the forms.
So this uh this New Mexico pit
adjustment schedule again starts
with uh AGI and then make
certain adjustments to that
based on the statutes.
Um, and then base income also,
um excludes, so the federal
government doesn't, you know,
this doesn't allow an a
deduction for expenses that are
incurred in connection with the
sale of illegal drugs, so states
that have legalized marijuana,
uh, have a provision like this
that says, even though this is
not allowed for federal
purposes, we're allowing it for
state purposes.
Um, and then you've got the, uh,
definition of
Uh, net income on page
21. So here's where it gets kind
of important. So, uh, net income
is based income adjusted to
exclude, and then it says the
standard deduction, which is
found in section 63 of the
Internal Revenue Code.
So while we conform to adjusted
gross income, which is this this
item here, there are deductions
that are taken from AGI that we
also conform to.
Uh, in general, so you've got
the standard deduction and then
in subsection 2 here, uh,
itemized deductions in section
63.
So again, you have to, you know,
keep reading because even though
it seems like we start with AGI
and then all bets are off. We
actually can form, uh, to the
general deductions from AGI as
well.
Um, if you go to the next slide,
I've highlighted the um
reference to IRC 160 or 63B. So,
uh, you'll see in a in a minute
that section 63B.
is part of this general section
63, but these are not itemized
deductions. So this definition
of itemized deductions, uh,
excludes some things, so their
deductible, but they're not
itemized deductions, and that
can make a difference.
Um, here's on the next slide is
that section 63. So itemized
deductions under the federal
rules, OK, they're defined here,
and they say, uh, other than, so
my deductions are things that
are in this chapter that we say
are deductible, um, and they
don't include, uh, anything in,
uh, subparagraph B, subsection B
of that section. Um, and so if,
if it's
listed there, it's not an
itemized deduction.
And so for state purposes, it's
also not an itemized deduction,
so going back to our rules for,
um, how we get to net income.
That wouldn't, those, those
items listed there would not be
included in itemized deductions.
Um,
and then finally, there is an
amount for, uh, 151, Section
151.
Which is just a provision for
um, I can't remember actually
get this confused with um
Alternative minimum income, but
um, not a big deal for us, going
to skip through that. And then
finally, taxable income is, uh,
net income less this lump sum
amount, again, not a big issue
for what we're talking about
here, but it just goes to show
you that there are multiple
steps that we go through and at
each step we've got some kind of
reference, uh, directly or
indirectly to parts of the
Internal Revenue Code.
Anything you want to say at this
point about personal income tax.
Um, I think you probably.
I
So, no, I don't have anything to
add at this juncture, but we are
moving into federal conformity
mechanics under the corporate
income tax on slide 26.
You'll see the key terms Helen
was mentioning earlier and you
recognize those same terms from
the personal income tax, but
they mean different things in
certain cases, as she was
saying.
Um
Base income is federal taxable
income with adjustments, um, so
base income equals net income,
um, apportioned income and
losses.
Allocated or apportioned our net
income.
Taxable income, but loss is a
portion of net income, um, in
other terms, you may run into
in, in our own statutes
referring to the, to the
federal.
statutes.
The next page is actually an
example of our corporate income
tax return, the CIT or SIP one.
And you can see it's starting
point just like Helen was
walking through.
How all these kind of come
together. You can see what
they're adding and subtracting,
um.
Right, so the same kind of have
to do sort of the same exercise
here with um the corporate
income tax.
Basically, you're trying to get
to what is the net taxable
income for New Mexico, of
course, with corporate income
tax, you've got another step
involved basically. So with
corporate income tax, we start
with, uh, the federal taxable
income before, uh, effectively
before net operating losses
again, because we, we
traditionally specify what kind
of loss you can take at the
state level. But we also do, um,
apportionment.
Allocation of multi-state
income.
So
national company that has
activities in multiple states
will report their, uh, federal
taxable income, adjusted as we
may adjust it to New Mexico, and
then they'll allocate and
portion of that income to New
Mexico. Uh, we use generally
formulary apportionment, and I'm
going to talk towards the end of
the slides here, a little bit
about how different that is from
the, from the method that, uh,
is
used internationally. So the
federal government and other
countries, you may have heard
lots of discussion over, you
know, uh, President Trump going
to the G7 and going and talking,
having his Treasury Secretary
talked to, uh, the OECD because
all of these international
groups are focusing on what tax
policy should be
internationally. So if you ever
feel like you're sort of in the
swimming in this big pool.
Talking about federal stuff, um,
yeah, it's an even bigger pool
that the US itself is swimming
in and trying to make sense of.
So, um, that coming up with the
amount of income from these
multi-state and multinational
entities that can be taxed in
New Mexico, uh is really
complicated. And New Mexico and
other states do it one way and
the federal government and, uh,
other countries do it at a
slightly different way.
Um, so I'm gonna just kind of
flip through these slides real
quick and just note on slide
number 30.
Um, that this issue of how to
tax international income. So the
federal government has made
changes starting again in 2017
with the tax cuts and Jobs Act.
It created this whole new amount
of income that was called
guilty. It stood for global
intangible low taxed income. So
this is from companies shifting
income overseas to jurisdictions
that we think of as tax havens
or low tax countries, and they
can do that by having
transactions between the
entities. Um, we only tax
certain entities of the group,
and so the group can use these
transactions to shift income.
Um, that has, uh,
when the tax cuts and Jobs Act
came up with this new thing.
Uh, a lot of states said we're
just going to wait and see what
happens with that. So one of the
things that we'll see is that
the recent bill, the OBBBA has
extended that and actually
broadened it in some ways.
Uh, but, but New Mexico still
is, uh, makes an exception for
that.
And then again, uh, section
280E. Again, this is for those
companies in New Mexico that are
engaged in the production or
sale of marijuana. If we didn't
decouple from this provision,
they wouldn't get a deduction at
the state level for their
expenses.
Let's see, I think the next
slide, not a whole lot there
except to just say, again, this
is, this is how everything is
connected.
Um, apportioned net income,
apportioned net loss. Again,
because we have to divide the
federal income between the
states. We follow the uniform
division of income for tax
purposes Act.
Um, that's been modified
somewhat in New Mexico has
adopted some of those
modifications, um, in recent
years, um, with respect,
especially to how services and
intangibles are treated. So,
Uh, so if you look to the
customer and say, OK, we're
going to look to the customer
and then use the amount of
income in this state from those
customers to apportion that
income. That's what most states
do now, and that's what New
Mexico does.
You want to,
take,
so apportionment, I'm, I'm
assuming everyone kind of has an
idea of how that works, but
effectively, and this is an
overly simplistic example. If
you do half of your business in
Texas and half in New Mexico,
um, your federal return is going
to show 100% of your income.
but you're in New Mexico return
and your Texas return should
should reflect half of it and
the way they get that is
You've heard the term single
sales factor, that's if you're
just using the sales factor,
otherwise you use an average of
the three factors, property,
payroll and sales.
So it's just a way of divvying
up a multi-state entities's
income amongst the specific
states they're engaged in
business with.
So I'm gonna skip to
slide number 2035.
All right, so slide 35, um,
So, so, all right, so we've
talked about this a little bit.
What does conformity mean?
Again, it's not just that, um,
because New Mexico's a rolling
conformity state and, and
its starting point to adjusted
gross income.
It's not just that that's.
You know, the way we do it, it's
any changes above the line are
going to affect New Mexico's own
taxable income. So we'll talk
about trying to identify those.
That's the first question you
probably want to ask, you know,
how much of this has a direct
effect on our tax system here,
uh, and again, you kind of got
to trace it through the
definitions to figure that out.
Um, but it's not just that, it's
that the Internal Revenue Code,
I think has more than a million
words, a million plus words. Um,
but the internal revenue code,
the IRS regulations interpreting
the internal revenue Code has
like 3 million plus words.
Uh, so all of those regulations
together.
So there's a lot, as you know,
tax law tends to be pretty
general, and it's written that
way for a reason in part so that
as the economy changes or
markets change or products
change, um, you don't have to
come back every time and say,
oh, we meant this, or oh we also
include this.
So it's written in much more
general terms, but then
taxpayers and practitioners and
tax administrators have to
figure out how to apply it in
particular situations.
And so when the IRS does that
with the Internal Revenue Code,
we automatically conform to
those regulations. So there are
times when, um, IRS regulations
can be a little controversial,
um, and in fact, probably even
more times when there just
aren't, you know, the IRS hasn't
caught caught up yet. They
haven't gotten the regulations
in place, uh, they're still
working in fact on regulations
for the tax hits and Jobs Act.
Uh, so there are a lot of things
that have been around for years.
Professor Hammill, who we
admire, um, Jim Hammill.
always talks about in the
partnership area, for example,
there have been proposed
temporary regulations forever
that have never been finalized
in part because they just can't
get agreement on what the final
uh regulation should say.
But to the extent that those
interpret and apply the federal
statutes in a particular way. It
also affects the states that can
form.
Um
And finally, it's all connected.
So it'd be nice to be able to
say everything you need to know
about this term or this
deduction or this exclusion is
in this section of the law,
except that oftentimes those
sections reference other
sections, so you've got to go
read those other sections as
well.
Um, and it may be that there's
something sort of buried in the
weeds there that's important.
You want to talk about this?
Yeah, so, uh, the question you
all have been asking, I'm
guessing is what tax provisions
are in the big beautiful bill,
um.
Well, apparently, according to
Bloomberg, there's 120 separate
items that are either repealed,
extended, or added, and that's a
lot, um, but the devil's always
in the details. There's 31
credit provisions, um.
Which do not or mostly do not
affect the New Mexico tax system
at all because they, they don't
fall into that cal calculation
that Helen was walking through
with base income and AGI and all
that kind of stuff. Credits
happen separately on a federal
return, so they, those won't
impact us at all. Um, that's not
to say something like a
renewable credit won't have a
negative impact on the
renewable.
Investments or industry, but
it's not going to have a direct
immediate general fund
implication.
Um
There are also a significant
number of provisions that apply
to comp and benefits estate and
trust and exempt organizations,
so I don't think we're gonna
focus as much on that, but it's,
it's the ones that do flow
through to the New Mexico
numbers that you have to be
concerned about and that's what
tax and rent will be struggling
to score probably as we speak so
they can put numbers to some of
these concepts for you. Let me
ask you, Richard, I'm looking on
page 36 for the committee.
He's going through with the
provisions are in in in the
bill.
Uh, when we're talking about
list the changes by category. So
is that both above and below,
uh, OK.
Yep. All right. And there's
several.
For the home gamers out there, I
believe the FTA, the Federation
of Tax Administrators has
published a list. I think um the
tax foundation has published a
list, um, and there's a 3rd 1
out there too, um.
Well, the
The subscription services,
Bloomberg and state tax notes
and some others are also working
on lists, um, the comprehensive
list, of course, the best, the
best list is from Congress. If
you go to the Congressional
Library online and you look for
the bill, House Bill 1, and, and
you look at, it's got a detailed
description of a lot of the
things that are in it. The, um,
uh, the CBO, the Congressional
Budget Office, uh,
publish some estimates of what
the effects of these would be.
Of course, those are
controversial. Not everybody
agrees with those, but at least
they list them and you can kind
of tell in terms of hierarchy,
how big they are, um, so, um,
you know, ones that have a
bigger impact, everybody agrees,
OK, maybe they have a bigger
impact. It's hard to say what it
is. Those are sort of how we
determine what we think is
important here and Helen, let me
just ask you, is this list gonna
be prepared by?
How, how each state is affected.
Yeah, yeah, uh, Madam Chair,
the, um, uh, the list is
typically, yes, they, they will
focus on the deductions that
most states conform to. So
again, you've got just a few
groups that focus on the state
tax impacts of these things, and
the tax foundation is one that
has their own group.
The Council on State Taxation
does this kind of stuff as well,
um, subscription services and
then the Federation of Tax
Administrators, our sister
organization has, uh, is working
on a list saying, here are the
things to pay attention to. So
we're kind of trying to distill
all that into this presentation,
but, uh, there's still people
looking at these issues and
thinking about to what extent
they're going to affect. So
yeah, we're gonna.
focus on the things that we
think are the biggest impact for
New Mexico. OK, let's go to
Senator Gonzalez real quick for
a quick question.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
where would the LLCs fall on
this?
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, the,
um, uh, so LLCs are businesses
for purposes of the federal
income tax, they're allowed to
take the same deductions that
individuals or proprietorships.
So if I file a Schedule C, um,
I'm a proprietorship, then I get
to take certain business
deductions, uh, what is that?
Section 162. Um, I get to take
certain, uh, business-related.
deductions for the things that I
costs that I incur in my
business. The same thing would
be true for LLCs. They're not
necessarily subject to the
corporate income tax provisions
of the Federal tax rules, but
typically that's not a big deal,
um, especially the consolidated
rules, those are totally
corporate rules. But so the LLCs
typically would be subject to
the same deductions, etc. and
because
New Mexico conforms to
subchapter K of the Internal
Revenue Code, which says we
don't tax the entity, we tax the
partner or the shareholder of
the entity, and this is true for
subchapters as well.
We don't impose the tax
necessarily um just on the
entity's income, we say roll up
your share of that income into
your own personal return, you
get the benefit of those
deductions as well, so
presumably let's say you're
allocated a share of all of the
income and deductions of that
LLC, you'll get the benefit of
those because it'll reduce the
income, uh, that you report. But
then you also take into
account your own attributes. So
if you've had other businesses,
if you have profit loss from
other things.
All that goes into your
individual return, your personal
income tax return and gets
reported there. So typically,
those are above the line. So
typically these are things,
these business-related expenses
would come in essentially above
the line, and then that net
income, your share of it would
go into your personal return,
uh, if that makes sense. And I'm
going to talk a little bit more
about, um, this workaround that
states have developed to the
Federal cap on the state and
local tax deduction, um, and how
we're using pass-through
entities basically to avoid that
cap on on the state local tax
deduction. Does that answer your
question, Senator?
Yes, thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Yes, so we're on page 37. So,
OK, so these are the important
individual provisions. You've
probably heard about these
things. Some of them will affect
New Mexico. Some of them won't.
Um, the standard deduction, for
example, this is section 637,
and if you go back up to the
slide in which we had how you
compute, uh, the net income of
of individuals, you'll see that
we give a deduction for the
standard deduction. Richard
talked about.
this earlier. So that's been
increased, um, for individuals,
uh, heads of household and
married filing jointly. Those
increases are now permanent, uh,
as part of the new bill. Um,
there's also a new section 63F.
So these again are deductions
from AGI. This creates a
deduction for seniors, aged 65,
um, equal to $6000 reduced, uh,
above a certain amount.
So, so if you're up to that
amount, you get a $6000
reduction in addition to other
deductions.
And again, this is a part of
63F, so presumably, uh, New
Mexico would conform to that
even though it's below the line
adjustment because New Mexico
allows deductions from AGI, uh,
that sort of, uh, walk with the
federal uh deductions.
Um, and there's, uh, changes to
IRC 68, so I'm not going to get
into a lot of detail here, but
there's been talk about to what
extent did this raise tax on
lower income or cut tax on
higher income. It's a mixed bag.
Here's one example I think of
how, um, there have been some
changes to reduce the, uh,
ability of high income tax.
fares to deduct certain things.
This is sort of a change. This
is a very complicated issue
involving limitations on high
income earners. Um, so we
retained the federal government
retained that, but it's just
computed slightly differently
now. Um, and, and so this is a,
a provision in in Section 68,
and it doesn't affect some other
provisions, so there's, there's
been some, uh, again, some
Attempt to make this simpler um
and so that it's not, you know,
this five-tiered kind of thing
to calculate this amount of
limitation.
Um, IRC 170P. This is the
charitable contribution. You may
hear some talk about charitable
contributions. We're still
processing what all this means
for charitable contributions,
um, there are sort of above the
line and below the line
deductions for charitable
contributions and so if you
don't itemize, um, you can still
take a deduction for charitable
contributions.
Uh, but it's capped, and that's
what that provision does.
On slide 40. This is changed to
164B.
OK, so this is the cap on state
and local taxes, so, you know,
probably that for years, um,
again, because states had the
income tax first and then the
federal government imposed an
income tax subsequently, the um
they always provided a deduction
for state taxes, primarily
income tax and property tax,
although then there was a change
that allowed some states without
an income tax to
substitute the sales tax or a
portion of the sales tax for
that, uh, that tax deduction. So
the federal government allows
this deduction. It reduces the
amount of tax that the
individual then pays because
they've paid some amount of tax
at the state level.
Um, in 2017, Congress decided
that that was basically
subsidizing the states,
basically saying, OK, you know,
you're going to get a a
reduction in your federal taxes
because the states are allowing
or states are imposing a tax.
And they decided they wanted to
stop doing that or or reduce the
amount of subsidy, effective
subsidy that the federal
government was giving. So for
the first time ever, they capped
that, uh, deduction at $10,000
originally. And that cap was
affected a significant amount of
taxpayers, and some of those
taxpayers were small business
owners, so again, to the
senator's question earlier, the
way that partnerships and pass
through entities
and LLCs are taxed is their
income is computed at the entity
level, but then those items are
allocated to the partners and
they report those on their own
return.
So now you have a situation in
which the partner is paying
state tax on their return,
including that partnership
income, and they don't get a
deduction for that uh personally
at the federal level.
So the states said, well, what
if we taxed the income directly?
What if we just imposed an
entity tax on those entities and
then gave a credit and there was
already a system in place to do
that.
In, in a lot of states, New
Mexico had its own sort of
limited version called the
composite return and typically
in that situation, if you had a
non-resident partner and the
only thing they did in New
Mexico was they had a
partnership that was doing
business here. OK, you don't
have to file a return. You can
just let the partnership file a
composite return, compute the
tax, and then if you do file,
you get a credit and if you
don't file, that's OK. So we
took that and expanded it, the
states did.
and now of the 40 so states that
have a personal income tax, um,
like 35 of them have this, uh,
what's called pass-through
entity tax.
So the taxes imposed at the
entity level, the partners get
allocated that deduction as part
of their income, so it reduces
again their income. Um, they
don't have to pay tax on that
again, uh, at the, at the state
level, they get a credit for the
tax that they would owe, um, and
the federal government doesn't
disallow the the deduction at
the entity level.
So it's only on the personal
income tax return where that
deduction is taken that the
federal government caps it.
There was a lot of talk about
this. There was concern that
maybe this is not.
Valid, you know, if this were
ever to get in front of a court
somewhere to be tested would a
judge uphold this as a, as a
valid kind of workaround to the
federal tax.
And the IRS came out initially
and said, we think this works.
We think that
there is no limitation on the
deduction that the entity can
take and therefore, the partner
gets the benefit of that. Um,
but there's still been some
uncertainty around that. There
were provisions in the OBBBA
that would have restricted it.
They would have said, we're not
going to let states do this
anymore.
Uh, or we're only going to let
them do it in certain
circumstances. This is a big
deal for the federal government.
It's one of the biggest payors,
uh, in the tax cuts and Jobs Act
and, and continues to be one of
the biggest sort of this
limitation on the state and
local tax deduction.
So, um, it wasn't surprising to
us that they tried to limit it.
At least in the House version of
the bill, but it didn't get
enacted. Those limitations, so
all of those were stripped out
in the Senate version of the
bill. Um, and again, you've got,
there are some states that think
the whole
Thing should go away, the salt
cap should go away. Um, so
there's this, uh, fight at the
federal level, but in any case,
um, that, those workarounds
still appear to work, states
look like they're going to keep
those, um, and in some ways, it
makes things a little simpler
too. This is not, this is not
one of those quote fixes that
actually makes everything more
complicated in some ways, it
makes reporting tax at the state
level a little easier.
Anything you want to say about
that? Well, I was just going to
mention this particular
provision increasing the cap to
$40,000 is it both expensive and
it was one of the most
controversial, particularly in
states like California and New
York, where you find people that
actually pay $40,000 in state
income taxes, but the point I
was going to try to make is, is,
is bigger focus as this has
received, it's not going to
implicate New Mexico as much as
one might think because.
We just don't have that many
people at those income levels,
you know, um, most, most
taxpayers pay maybe a couple
2000 in state income tax. We
have low rates and low low
salaries, so.
I'm curious to see what tax tax
and roads says about the number
on this one, but uh, but it's
nothing you need to lose sleep
over today.
Um, so I think we've covered
most of the stuff on, um, slide
41. So moving on to slide.
Uh, and probably slide 42 as
well, um, yep, I think we've
covered most of that.
So slide 43, um.
So this makes permanent the,
the, and increases the employer
payments for student loans, so
that's a provision, not a huge
dollar provision, but good for
some taxpayers, obviously.
And it makes permanent and
amends IRC 60, 163H3F. This is
the mortgage interest deduction.
This is a complicated provision,
um, basically, they're trying to
allow a greater mortgage
interest deduction while not
allowing certain other things.
Insurance premiums are included,
um, equity, home equity loans
are not included, so it's kind
of a line drawing exercise.
Then 163 aged 4, and this is
also part of 62822. So this is
an above the line deduction.
Allows deductions of interest on
loans to purchase, uh,
applicable passenger vehicles.
So these are vehicles that are
assembled in US. So this is
brand new, uh, again, it takes
the form of an above the line
deduction, so potentially
affects the states, um, and it's
got certain limitations and
other things that go along with
it. But it takes effect for
2025. So for this year, um,
somebody buys a vehicle that was
purchased in the United States,
presumably.
they're entitled to this
deduction.
That's not always the case, as
you know, a lot of times new tax
provisions take effect the
following year or years in the
future.
Let me ask you on that Helen, so
when we're talking about
assembly in the United States,
is there a percentage of that
vehicle assembly that that that
they use. I mean, I know we
import a lot of sensors. We
import a lot of parts, uh, how,
how's that defined? Yes, a good
question, Madam Chair. So the,
um, this is one where a lot of
people have been saying, please,
IRS, get out the regulations on
this sooner than later. And so
we're watching to see what they
say, um.
It's hard to predict at this
point. I think it would probably
tend to be interpreted more
broadly, but, you know, there is
this idea of final assembly. So
what does that mean? Um, I think
it, I think that contributes to
the broadness, right, just
because you get the part from
somewhere else doesn't mean that
the vehicle isn't finally
assembled in the United States.
Um, then we've got, OK, so this
is the, um, you've been hearing
a lot about these provisions on
slide 45.
This is for tips and for
overtime, um, so these are in,
these are going to be changes to
IRC Section 63B, 5 and 6. And as
you remember,
Back when we were looking at
those slides, itemized
deductions don't include things
that are in 63B.
So when we say itemized
deductions.
Those things are not included.
So if these, my take on it, and
again, you should, you should
ask your tax agency this
questioning because um I'm not
the authority here, but, but my
take on it is those look like
they affect New Mexico, uh,
again, because they are, um, or
wouldn't affect New Mexico
because they are included in
this uh provision of 63B um,
which does not
Include, which is not itemized
deductions. So we referred
itemized deductions. These
things are not. Therefore, uh,
it seems to me we don't conform
to this. So taxpayers out there
who get a deduction for their
tip income or for their overtime
income on their federal return,
presumably have to add that back
or potentially have to add that
back to get to their taxable
base for New Mexico.
But I'm gonna ask.
So when it comes to the tip
income.
It has to be, uh, it would not
be um I guess reported at the
for the federal piece that we
would have to do for the state
peace unless we change that.
Right. So it would be reported,
it would be deductible. So they
would report it in their gross
income, they would deduct it to
get to AGI. That's my take on
this, um, and or they would not
deduct it to get to AGI. Well,
they would deduct it for the
federal purposes. Our, um,
reference to itemized deductions
that we allow doesn't include
that deduction for tip income or
that deduction for overtime
income.
So even though it's deductible
to federal level, uh, because of
where it's at in the, in the tax
code in 163B. Um, it wouldn't be
part of itemized deductions. So,
yes, so if New Mexico wants to
provide equivalent, um,
exemption or deduction for that
income, I think, again, this is
just my read of it, uh, pretty
preliminarily that that's one
that you would have to take some
action. OK. Yeah, and it might
also be worth mentioning there.
Well, um, the way those
provisions turned out, they're
not as lucrative as they were
originally sold, and a lot of
recipients of tip income,
especially in a poor state like
New Mexico, don't actually earn
enough to owe personal income
tax on their tips anyway, or at
least not much. So again, it's
easy to look at some of these
provisions with a little panic
in your eyes, you know, and then
you think about it and go, well,
this doesn't even connect, you
know, it's uh and the smart
people I see tax and reps here
can put numbers to those.
um council service, um.
And, and it's important, but
it's most of them aren't going
to be as bad as you might be
initially inclined to believe.
Let's go to Rep San Perrera and,
and this is a follow up and I
think you miss mostly answered
that because my experience is
that.
tipped employees are pretty low
wage employees and that they
hardly get it. I mean, what's
there, I think it's 6 bucks an
hour or maybe 3 bucks an hour
that they even get right now in
this state, uh, for their hourly
wage and most of them don't
report those tips anyhow fairly.
I'm just gonna say that's kinda
the reality. I would, I would
anticipate that it would have
very little impact, but we'll
wait till this afternoon, uh,
with the secretary to see what
isn't as broadly impactful as it
was originally.
discussed, um, and then the
population to who it applies to,
to your point, um.
You know, it'll, it'll it'll
soften any, any blows that that
provision might provide, I
think.
Yes, and, and, and I just wanna
say some states pay the minimum
wage to their, to their, uh, um,
to tipped employees. We do not.
Uh, we follow, you know, we
follow along with all the other
states, uh, that I think that
was done by Herman Cain back
when he was head of the National
Restaurant Association where
they pulled those wages down to
like $2 or $3 an hour. OK, thank
you.
Representative Duncan, thank
you, Madam Chair. My question
might be a little bit to you,
but it may be to a secretary,
uh, Clark as well so you'd
mentioned that that's something
that we're going to need to.
Um, work on, uh, with this, and
I was just wondering if
Secretary knew exactly how much
work is going to be needed. It
sounds like not a lot, but I was
just curious if you had a
percentage.
I'll be hesitant to put a number
to it.
Good morning members. Um, it's
nice to be here with you and
Lucinda Sido and I will be
presenting our preliminary draft
estimates of the fiscal impact
of some of these provisions
later today. So if maybe we can
hold questions to TRD until the
1:30, um, but I do agree with
Helen. We do agree with Helen
that uh tips will remain part of
the personal income tax base in
New Mexico under the current
law.
So
No, madam Chair, thank you.
We are moving
Moving right along, the next
slide 47 um list some of the
items that are being repealed or
phased out, and that includes
the residential clean energy
credit, the previously owned
clean vehicle credit. The clean
vehicle credit, the new energy
efficient home credit and the
bicycle commuting reimbursement,
um.
So if
If those apply to you or your
constituents, you probably want
to be aware.
And then,
so then, um, so now we're going
to turn to some important
business provisions, and this is
not just corporate, but also
other businesses, but, uh,
primarily we're thinking big
corporations here, um, because
that's who is going to benefit
the most from these.
So, or, or pay the most
depending. So, um, the first
extends and amends IRC 16, 179B.
Under that provision, uh,
taxpayers can expense some, uh,
purchase or expenditure on
assets that would normally
otherwise have to be capitalized
and depreciated over time. So it
raises the amount that can be
done, um, and it also phases out
that new, um, that new limit.
Uh, I thought this was
interesting. Uh, no one's
talking about this, but it might
be interesting, uh, for New
Mexico. IRC, uh, section 142, so
spaceports are now included
under the rules for exempt
facility bonds.
So previously, apparently they
were not, um.
And so, uh, this, this supplies
is effective immediately. So as
soon as the bill was signed, um,
this new provision for exempt um
facility bonds.
Um, on the next slide, slide 49,
the, this has changed, these are
changes that I think you may
have heard about Section 163J.
So this was part of the tax cuts
and Jobs Act originally, and it
basically said we're going to
limit the amount of interest
that can be deducted by
businesses because instead of
issuing stock and getting uh uh.
Yeah, getting cash from
investors. A lot of times
they'll choose to go and borrow
money because they can deduct
the interest on it, um, and some
of that, you know, maybe is
skewing how businesses are
conducted. So they limited that
interest deduction.
Um
This change takes effect for
2025. It raises the base on
which this is is computed, um,
and, uh, and so it's going to
take effect in the current year,
um, and that would be something
that New Mexico would look at, I
think.
Um, IRC 168 and, um, this is a
provision allowing bonus
depreciation.
Again, this is certain property
that you can take 100% deduction
in the first year, and again,
this provision, uh, applies to
July 4th, applies as of July
4th, as soon as the bill was
signed, so.
Um, and we've got the extension
on the next page of 168K, um,
this again is, uh, a permanent
100% depreciation deduction.
And also an election for certain
taxpayers so they can elect. Um,
these are basically timing
differences. So if you think
about it, um,
accounting rules are typically,
I'm an accountant by training,
accounting rules are typically
based on this matching
principle, uh, because we report
everything on an annual basis,
and yet business doesn't conduct
itself on an annual basis
necessarily. You may have a long
period where you're investing in
new property plant equipment.
And then time before you've
actually gotten production up
and running, let's say, and this
is true for all kinds of
industries where you create sort
of expenses and losses in the
first years that eventually you
hope to make money on down the
road.
Those NOL um, deductions will
potentially now be shifted,
right? Because rather than, uh,
taking the expense over time in
the form of depreciation, you
know, as that asset is used up,
you're taking that immediately.
So that may be reducing for
businesses that may reduce their
income in the year, uh, that
that spending happens, but then
presumably over time, their
income will be larger because
they
have fewer deductions during
those.
Uh, those years.
So this is really a timing
difference. Again, it makes the
tax more volatile, um, so, so to
depend on it over time,
especially when the economy is
going up and down is harder.
But for the federal government,
that's not as big an issue, uh,
and I hope, I think that this
would increase some kind of
investment in uh in domestic
investment in production.
Alan, hang on just a second.
Let's go to K Homan B. Hill
representative Hockman B. Hill.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, just
a quick question or
clarification, clarification on
that. So are we talking about,
as this extension applicable to
all types of businesses, LLCs, S
Corps, Corps, or is it just
Corps?
All all businesses, yes. Thank
you, madam.
Um, OK, so I was just gonna say
the immediate expensing dose.
It is a timing issue, but that
one does hit our returns
directly
and that means if someone takes
a
Has a large purchase and makes a
big acquisition and they expense
it all in that first year,
they're going to pay a lot less
income tax in that first year,
but to Helen's point, in the
years that followed that,
they'll pay more income tax. So
when we say timing, it's just
shifting when the revenue comes,
not how much revenue comes.
And I'll, and I'll just say one
other thing about that, um,
because states apportion.
Income, um, and New Mexico still
uses for most businesses, not
all, but for most, a
three-factor formula, um, that
property purchased, let's say
here, let's say it's purchased
here, will contribute to the
amount of income that gets, um,
sourced to New Mexico of that
company.
Um, and so those losses also it
contributes to the percentage of
losses that get sourced to, uh,
New Mexico, and that can change
over time too, so, you know, if
the business doesn't change its
footprint, then it really is a
timing difference. If the
business were to change its
footprint, let's say it doesn't
have a whole lot of sales today,
but it gets sales in the future
when it starts to have income
and it's got sales all over the
country. That's going to affect
its apportionment.
Formula in New Mexico, so it may
have a lower apportioning of
that income, uh, in the future
over time. It just, it just
depends. OK, Sam Duncan, you had
a question, and then Brown.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Just a
question about that, uh, do we
know, is this an economic driver
and, and, you know, is it, or is
it not?
So like with a lot of economic
questions, this one has
different views, um, I think for
certain industries, uh,
especially where the investment
is, um, has to be made on an
ongoing basis in a significant,
so high tech, for example, um,
maybe healthcare potentially. I
think there is this idea that if
we can again attract that
business domestically, um, this
is
one way to do it, potentially,
um, and I think, you know, as
with many things, there are so
many moving parts, it's hard to
say. That's the one reason why,
um, why this works.
But it certainly is the case. I
know from our time in private
practice that, um, when, when
businesses do their projections,
they take these investments into
account, you know, and not only
the cost of the investment, but
also the tax effect of it. So,
um, and it probably affects
different businesses a little
differently.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for that.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I, I
just have a
kind of a detailed question.
It's on page 50 and it talks
about
Um, the qualified personal
property. We're looking at
chattel property mostly
vehicles, furniture, machinery,
computers, and then it talks
about, um, certain real
property, computer hardware and
then film and television
productions, and I'm, I'm
questioning the word
productions.
Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative,
the, uh, I, I had that same
question again. I think this is
one area where the background on
this bill seems to indicate that
if you, you may recall, there
was a push early on by the
administration to do more film
production in the United States.
Um, the, this feeling that a lot
of the films that were being
released here are produced by
studios in the US were
nevertheless being filmed
overseas. And I think this is
trying to respond to that,
exactly how that's going to work
is not clear to me, but I think
some of those, and the reason
why it's not entirely clear to
me is some of those costs are
already immediately expensable.
so employees, you know, that are
doing the work, you get to take
a deduction for
wages.
Um, so it's not clear to me,
there may be some intangible
property that we're talking
about here, that would not
otherwise have gotten expensed
or had to be deferred, um, and
that may be what that's
referring to, but I'm, I'm
curious about that too. I'm not
exactly sure.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I
think for our film industry here
in New Mexico, this will be, we
really need some clarity on
that,
so yeah, it'll, we'll be looking
to, yes.
When I read that just now, I
remembered uh Chris Stag talking
about Holly Sinclair because.
I think they're probably within
the parameters of of this
provision.
Ferrera real quick.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair,
thank you. um, I just want to
say I appreciate these slides,
uh, with large print on it. I, I
just, I just want to compliment
you because sometimes we get
stuff no one can read, so I, I,
I really just really appreciate
this presentation, but I guess
my, my, my, my real question
here is would you explain to me
that
The non-residential real
property used in the man in
agriculture. That's what I would
like to understand.
And again, I think this is one,
Madam Chair, um,
Representative, I think this is
one where we're waiting for a
little bit of guidance. I had
not seen this. There are, there
were, again, I'm trying to kind
of connect the dots between what
we heard going into the final in
the Senate version of the bill,
um, early on was that, um, the
AG committee in Congress and
those proponents who thought
that there needed to be some,
you know, the, the agricultural
industry was worried initially
that they could be affected.
Uh, by tariffs in a way that
other industries were not.
Um, and certainly that is true
in general of agriculture. The,
so they were looking for
provisions that would give them
some boost. So I think this is
again,
A kind of, uh, I would call it
an incentive, but, uh, a kind of
An agreement to give the
agricultural industry something
that they wouldn't otherwise be
entitled to, so there's a line
drawing exercise between what's
allowable of property for
purposes of producing versus
what is if you're a farmer
living and related to your
personal expenses. So I think
that's what this is. Again, this
is, these are issues where I
think we're going to get
guidance from the Internal
Revenue Service fairly quickly.
Um, in part because the
administration wants it and is
directing its folks there to do
that. Um, but also because, um,
you know, it's, it's part of the
sort of promotion of this thing
to say, this is, this is a good
thing for these groups, these
industries, so.
Thank you for that. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
So we're going to turn to, um,
uh, slide 53 now, um, and if you
thought this was hard, just wait
till you get here. Um, these are
the changes affecting most
multinational entities, what we
call M&Es.
Um, so I mentioned this at the
beginning, the, uh, whereas the
states use this formulary
apportionment to just kind of
say, here's your total income in
the US. Here's our share of it,
and try to do that pretty
uniformly. That's part of my
job. The
Federal government and uh and
other nations use a very
different system.
Um, and it's long been, we've
long tried to keep those systems
sort of working together. Uh, so
we've got tax treaties, for
example, at the national level
that say we're going to do
things the same way.
Um, these rules were developed a
long time before the economy
became global.
And this is part of why the
states don't follow them,
because when we're trying to
source income of a multi-state
business at the state level,
there's no way that we can
follow the federal rules and
say, every transaction,
depending on what it is, we're
gonna source the income here or
there or whatever, and then the
directly related expenses do the
same thing, and then on top of
that, things that are hard to
source, we're gonna use some
other rules for. These are very
complicated.
rules and systems. And so that's
why we opted for formulary
apportionment.
But now you've got this global
economy in which even there,
it's becoming harder and harder
to apply these traditional
rules. Um, so you've got lots
of uh countries involved in the
OECD, uh, at the UN and in the
G7 to try and figure out how can
we keep
This race to the bottom from
happening, where a jurisdiction
says, hey, if you come here and
locate your headquarters here,
um, we won't tax you and you can
use all these income shifting,
uh uh strategies to shift your
income to, to us, and we won't
tax it. And so you'll lower your
income everywhere else.
That's been a big focus, uh, for
a number of years.
And including in the United
States. So I mentioned the, the
provisions that affect this, um,
that were enacted as part of the
tax cuts and Jobs Act.
So
Part of the problem is, even if
you're a member of an
international group that's doing
one business everywhere. Um, we
only tax those members, those
corporations, to the extent they
have a presence in the United
States. They have to have a
significant presence in the
United States. So that's how
this income shifting happens.
And with the rise of intangible
assets, so it used to be, we
could locate your income by just
saying, where's your plant and
your, you know, equipment.
Where's your
property at.
Um, but nowadays, so much of a
business is intangible. Uh, it
may be goodwill, it may be other
intangible assets, um.
You know, it's not just the high
tech companies that are
developing these things, it's
all businesses are doing it. AI
has become this big thing with
all of that, those are much
harder to actually source
anywhere. And this is kind of
what happens is they move these
things around, and they charge,
uh, within the group, uh, uh,
charge, and expense for the use
of those intangible items, and
it's hard to source those
things.
Um, so we've got these problems
at the international level. This
is part of what the
administration is grappling with
in its negotiations with our
trading partners.
Um, and on slide, uh, 56.
We've
had some exceptions to these
rules over time. So the first
one was probably in the 1960s,
uh, so-called subpart F income,
where Congress said, OK, if all
you're doing is investing, and
you're saying that activity is
really going on in the Cayman
Islands. We don't buy that. We
think that you're just moving
your investments somewhere where
it's easy to move them and
they're in a file cabinet
someplace, and that's not really
where your activity is
occurring. So we're gonna
say that certain investment
income can be sourced
domestically even though the
traditional rules would source
it someplace else.
Um, and in last year, New Mexico
enacted a provision, um, that
would also include the subpart F
income in the base.
Um, the most recent thing that
the OECD has tried to do is a
so-called minimum tax.
So if everybody had a minimum
tax, there wouldn't be a race to
the bottom. There wouldn't be
any reason to do income shifting
or less of a reason to do that.
So that's been their focus. Um,
Then on slide 58, the
Uh, changes to, uh, the, the
federal rules under the tax cuts
and Jobs Act kind of did
something similar. So, um, it
basically overrides this
provision 951A overrides the
traditional sourcing rules and
this guilty income, this global
intangible low uh low taxed
income is now treated as
domestic income. It's
complicated. So it includes an
amount of income in the base. It
gives a
Standard deduction for that
currently at 50%. We'll talk
about how that changed.
And then it also gives a foreign
tax credit for, uh, if that
income was in fact subject to
foreign tax someplace, uh,
there's a foreign tax credit
that applies to that. That's
what's going on at the federal
level. There have been big
changes to those provisions now
to try and again get our arms
around what's happening
internationally.
Um, you may have heard, uh, for
example, that, uh, President
Trump went to the G7 in Canada,
right before the final, uh,
OBBBA was passed and signed into
law and got some concessions and
maybe those concessions also
affected the provisions that
were in the final version of the
bill. So all of this is being
impacted by what's going on
internationally.
Um
So
There are, uh.
There are changes to what
foreign entities are included,
that's much broader now. Uh, the
base is much broader. It's not
limited now to this intangible
profit, uh, but it's a broader,
uh, base, but the deduction is
also based on that broader base,
it goes down from 50% to 40%.
And the credit for foreign taxes
goes up from 80% to 90%. There
are other details involved here,
but the idea is, of course,
President Trump has said he
would like to, um, onshore more
production, so bring some uh
production that's gone overseas
back into the United States. I
think that's part of what's, um,
going on here, but it's also
this idea that we can, uh, we
can determine our tax base.
Um, we, we're not trapped by
these traditional rules. So yes,
we may have these treaties, but
all of that is changing, so the
international agreements are all
changing.
So now it's a sort of an
opportunity to maybe do that.
Um, we've got the base erosion
and anti-abuse tax, that's not
something we conform to. This is
a separate tax, but it's also
part of this, so you may hear
about this beat tax at the
federal level that also tries to
target, um, some income that has
been shifted essentially
overseas.
Um
I would say that those
provisions, they don't affect us
now. New Mexico has a provision
in its definition of net taxable
income that excludes this 951A
income. So it excludes the
income, it excludes the
deduction, those don't go into
the, the calculation of New
Mexico tax. This is an area
where a lot of states are
looking at it.
So there are about, I think, 11
states now that do include some
portion of that guilty income in
their tax base.
Some treat it as a partial
inclusion, so they, they'll say
we're going to include 50% of
it.
Um, but I think this is gonna
get a lot more scrutiny in part
because it seems like the
administration is all in on
this. And so, uh, to some
extent, states could just go
along with that if they, if they
chose.
Um, yeah, let me say something.
Well, I was just going to
Say on slide 61, what's not in
the bill? The good news is
there's only 66 slides, um.
So what's not in the bill, um,
provisions restricting the use
of pass-through entity taxes as
a workaround to the salt cap
limitation. Uh, they were
introduced, uh, in the house but
removed in the Senate.
So those did not go away and I,
I don't know that they should go
away. I think there are reasons
why taxpayers and the department
would prefer to do it this way.
Yeah.
Um, but it didn't happen. Um.
The House bill would have
expanded the existing federal
preemption of state income taxes
on out of state businesses that
sell tangible personal property
into the state.
So that's called public law
86272, and that was passed in
1959, and what it does is it
says if you're selling tangible
personal property in our state
and all you're doing, this is a
federal preemption, by the way,
um, and, and our only activity
or connection with your state is
sales activity in your state.
I'm not making my widgets, it
doesn't apply to services
either, it's got to be the sale
of tangible personal property.
And if that's all you're doing,
um, 86272, which was supposed to
be a temporary provision in
1959.
You know, is unchanged, um.
Be be that good or bad, probably
bad because it's, it's, it's,
it's out of date, out of tune,
and, and we've been sort of
waiting for.
You know, how does this, how is
this affected in this new
economy with the internet, um,
so many businesses can sell over
the internet, shipped through
common carrier to the state and
would presumably be protected by
this, um, but now all of those
businesses, even though they may
be protected from income tax,
have to pay sales tax in those
states. So the sales tax,
interestingly, I think in some
ways is a little more burdensome
from an administrative side only
because
on those cellars at least only
because if they don't charge it,
then they're liable for it. And
if they charge it in the wrong
location, then another state
might say, oh, no, we want the
tax. Um, so whereas income tax
is just a portion, so you're
presumably gonna only pay tax on
part of your income and you can
determine it at the end of the
year. This has to be done
immediately, you know, so it's,
it's interesting that this
provision is not only outdated,
but it
protects businesses that no
longer have protection from
other taxes. So to what extent
is it necessary, um, not clear.
There was a case in, I think it
was Wisconsin, where the
taxpayer claimed they were
entitled to this protection, and
they lost in court, and it seems
like it was the Wisconsin
delegation that put this into
the bill and it got taken out
eventually, but, um, that's
through the efforts, by the way,
of the, I think the National
Council of State Legislators,
um, which helped to get that
provision pulled out of the
bill.
Um, and then there are a number
of provisions that have been
talked about in recent years.
You've heard me talk about this
if you've been around for a
while, uh, pass through entity
taxes and, and, uh, partnership
tax in particular, very, very,
very, very complicated compared
to everything else, probably the
most complicated area of the tax
law. Uh, there have been
provisions suggested over the
years to kind of fix it and, and
change some things, um, those
were not in the bill. So none of
that, uh, was introduced and
it's not.
clear that any of that's got any
future, at least in the
foreseeable future.
All right. Other issues to
watch, um, OK, so we picked
these issues in part because we
think they can potentially
affect New Mexico. You might
want to think about them, to
what extent they should affect
New Mexico.
But also because as part of the
bigger what's going on, um,
private partnerships, uh, the
private economy, what's called
the private economy, just
continues to grow, so
partnership taxation is a big
deal. Uh, the PTE tax and its
workability here in New Mexico,
you know, is important.
Uh, even though we did that for
the salt work around the salt
cap, as Richard said, it's kind
of a good thing. It seems to
work pretty well.
Um, digital assets, of course,
is a big huge thing, you know,
we just sort of get our hands
around the current economy and
then something blows it up. So
how, uh, foreign countries are
going to tax digital assets. Uh,
one thing that the Trump
administration was opposed to or
these so-called foreign digital
services taxes. Some states have
proposed digital services taxes
as well. Those are not, um,
Uh
They're probably not as
lucrative as they sound. Here's
a, here's an example of what's
happening. So, under, with AI
search engines now.
You can get the answer to a
question online without going to
the content provider's page.
And so because you don't go to
the content provider's page, you
also don't click on the ads on
that page.
And so the level of digital ad
revenue is, is declining.
Um, just shows you how
unpredictable things can be.
And finally, I just want to say
some words about the Internal
Revenue Service, um, so it
should be clear that we depend
to some extent on the Internal
Revenue Service to
clarify what Congress did and
to, to to share with everybody.
How they're going to treat those
provisions, how they're going to
apply them. Um, there has been
significant cuts to the internal
revenue code, or to the revenue
Service in the last year, um,
it, it's had, it's had declining
funding over time. Um, and
especially compared economically
to the growth in the economy.
Um, there are significant
backlogs in federal courts on a
lot of these issues. There have
been challenges now under a new
Supreme Court standard to those
regulations saying,
Just because the IRS says it
doesn't mean we have to agree
with it. Um, so the courts are
taking a position of saying
we're going to come in and
decide for ourselves, and we're
not going to give a whole lot of
weight to the Internal Revenue
code and it's to the regulations
that the IRS has come up with.
Um
So they're, there have been a
shrinking, uh, IRS workforce. A
lot of the leadership has left
and turned over, but even the
work, the rank and file folks.
Um
We've gone for years, and this
happened when Richard and I were
at the taxation revenue
Department thinking that any
kind of increased funding to the
tax agency will return. We'll
give you a return on investment.
So again, it's kind of like, you
know, I've got a production
plant here and I'm going to save
money by not hiring any workers.
Well, you're not gonna hire any
workers, but you're also not
gonna produce anything.
So the IRS, you can measure what
it produces, and you can measure
what state tax revenue agencies
produce.
And that almost always there is
a significant return on those
investments. So this is one area
where I think there's a little
bit of a question about long
term, what are these cuts that
the IRS mean? Um, does it mean
that one a lot of this work is
going to flow down to the
states.
And also, are we not going to
get the benefit of the IRS being
able to kind of deal with some
of these more complicated issues
and tell us what they think, you
know, some of this means. Uh, so
there are now, uh, folks working
on estimates for how this could
potentially impact, uh, tax
enforcement and the so-called
tax gap.
Which is the difference between,
uh, what everyone can estimate
should be reported as taxable
income and what actually gets
reported.
And with that, I think we're
done. Richard. Yeah, I think
we're ready to stand for
questions, Madam Chair. Um.
I did want to mention that
although we focused on income
taxes, because that's what the
news and the press focuses on,
and that's what everyone.
focuses on myself included, um,
there are other issues that, you
know, are a part of that bill,
um, for instance, the reduction
in federal uh royalty rates.
Right? We're gonna feel that in
the general fund immediately
because we get, we get almost
half, so we know that's gonna
have a direct budgetary impact.
It also might make our side of
the state border more attractive
for production.
Because they're not gonna be
paying Texas leases. It will
also make our, our trust land
money or lands less attractive
as well because they just went
up to 25%. I think the feds are
going to 13.
So
It'll be interesting, but
there's probably little nuggets
like that littered throughout
these provisions that a lot of
people haven't bothered, you
know, to really pay any
attention to, so stay tuned, you
know, pay attention to what
matters most, but um,
But there's always little
surprises like that in these
bills.
Anyway, I think this has been an
excellent presentation, very,
very complicated and it's gonna
take a while for the committee
to kind of get our arms around
some of these things. So when we
do break for lunch, I'd, I'd
like to invite you all to sit
with me upstairs and, and keep
going through this process with
me and any of the members that
want to sit at that table, feel
free. I mean, I think any
opportunity that we have to get
a better grip on some of this
is, uh, we, we ought to try to
take it so.
get a table when we go upstairs
for lunch and I'd like to have
the two of you sit with me and
then anybody else that wants to,
you're certainly welcome.
Um
So let's uh let's start with
the, uh, questions from the
committee, and I am interested
in those nuggets also, uh,
Richard, that you're talking
about, but we don't have to that
that's not in this presentation.
Um, but I'd like to kick off by
asking one question. My first
question to you is, is that
we're asking our, our staff to
put together a timeline.
Of everything that we think may
have impact inside the bill for
the state of New Mexico.
So when we make our
recommendations, we can be clear
about that. You put dates in
here for certain things, but are
there other dates for the things
you did not put date, uh, uh, a
date for.
Uh, Madam chair, yes, we tried
to highlight the dates where
they take effect immediately, so
typically the, the effective
date would be January 1st, 2026.
Um, so, so if it's, if it's not
assume that, um, but yeah, we,
we tried to say there are
provisions that take effect for
the tax year 2025, so currently,
um, so if you change the
approach to that particular
issue, um, you know, it's going
to be a going forward kind of a,
a change.
And that means that anything
that the state would want to put
in into this to comply or not
comply, uh, legislatively we'd
be not looking at this 30 day
session we'd be looking at the
60 day session.
Oh man, I'm sure I think that's
right, yes.
And there's no, there's no, no
dumb question here. I mean, it,
there's a lot that's been put
forward,
um,
if you look at uh the complexity
of some of these things, it, it
can become a little bit
overwhelming, but, uh, is there
any of the members that have any
questions at this point that
let's start with Representative
Hochman B. Hill.
Go ahead. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I have a couple of dumb
questions. Um, and I am not a
tax attorney or nor a CPA, so
please bear with me. Can you
just give me um a quick idea in
terms of you referenced above
the line and below the line
income quite a bit for those of
us dummies, can you just clarify
that?
Good question. And yes, so this
term, like a lot of terms, madam
chair.
Uh, Representative, these are
things that are, um, often
referred to in an offhand sort
of way. Um, and it may make a
difference in which, um,
You know, state you're talking
about this. So typically, what
the, what it generally means at
the federal level is, so there
are deductions to get to AGI.
Those are above the line. Those
are section 62 of the Internal
Revenue Code, and there are
deductions from AGI to get to
taxable income. We call those
below the line, and those are,
um, uh, to get from AGI to
taxable income and that section
63.
So they fall into these
different categories for reasons
that, you know, it's historical
kind of a thing, uh, traditional
kind of a thing, but even that
is not necessarily indicative of
whether or not a state like New
Mexico will follow that
particular deduction or not. So
typically, New Mexico starts
with AGI. It'll, it therefore
allows the above the line
deductions. If you look on the
tax return.
You know, that's kind of where
the term above the line comes
from.
Uh, so AGI is one of the main,
uh, calculations that you do on
the federal tax return. So
deductions going into that
number.
New Mexico typically conforms,
but not necessarily because it
can always opt out of particular
provisions. And then below the
line, uh, deductions to get to
taxable income, those are things
that, um, we think of as then
part of the deductions.
Uh, that have to be referenced
through the states that conform
to AGI, and many of them do.
Many of them will say, yes, you
can also take the below the line
deductions as well, but it's
just, if you start with AGI then
there has to be something
specific in the law that says,
and you can also take this below
the line deduction.
Um, so it's just, you know, the
weirdness of how the tax law
works. Um, that's the
difference. So, so when you're
thinking about just because it's
a deduction, New Mexico does or
doesn't follow it. It's more
complicated than, uh, you can
really answer in that form. You
got to look to, uh, the
definitions of the terms, what
goes into those, and then what's
included in the, in those
section 62 and 63 of the Federal
code.
Sorry, it's a long answer, you
know, wow, thank you.
Thank you. Um, so is it correct
to then assume that there's
really no discernible policy
differences to that which is
defined as above the line versus
that which is below the line,
uh, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative, yes, I think
that's right. I think there was
at one time, uh, one of the big,
um, sort of,
Anomalies, I guess, came along
with the section 199A, which is
qualified business income
deduction for past through
entities.
And we all thought it was going
to go above the line and it's,
and it falls, uh, sort of below
the line in this, uh, section 63
or uh non-itemized deductions
section 62B. So it's a
non-itemized deduction, um, it's
a weird place to put it. And
yes, I think to some extent, um,
when I asked the committee
chairs, staff.
After this was passed, why did
you do it there?
He said, because we didn't, it
was a big enough deduction that
we didn't necessarily want it to
affect all the states. We
wanted, we wanted this one to be
something that the states could
conform to, whether you, you
know, they don't typically think
that much about the states when
they're doing this stuff. So I
was kind of surprised by that
answer, but that could be one
reason to do it there. Um,
It, you know, they're, they're,
I think, influenced by, in part,
keeping the stuff at the top,
more consistent and new stuff
putting it farther down in a
sense, uh, I think that, you
know, temporary provisions
again.
That might be a reason for doing
it that way, but yeah, in terms
of their character, not, not
necessarily significant
differences between them.
Thank you, um, Madam chair and
thank you, Helen. So that
actually is a great caveat to my
last question, which is just a
quick definition of a qualified
business income would also be
appreciated. OK. Yes, Madam
Chair, representative. So the,
so this is a new deduction, the
tax cuts and Jobs Act 2017.
Um, lowered the, the corporate
income tax rate to 21%. I think
that's right. Um, and when he
did that,
Uh, the pass-through entities
said, wait a second, our income
gets taxed on the partners.
Tax return, and oftentimes
that's an individual. What about
those guys? Shouldn't we lower
the rate somehow, but it's hard
to lower the rate when you're
not taxing at the entity level,
right? So I may have income from
all kinds of sources and I have
a little bit of partnership
income.
Just lowering my rate doesn't
necessarily lower the rate only
on my partnership income. So how
do you do that? So this was sort
of the solution to that problem,
which is to say,
We're just gonna give you a
deduction, basically. And
because we like to put caveats
around everything and
exceptions, whatever, make it
sort of focused on what we're
trying to incent or encourage.
Um, some partnership income
would not be qualified business
income. It's typically, um,
things that are done like a
regular business. So
non-investment partnerships and
not some service partnerships.
Although real estate, I think,
is included real estate. Is it
real estate? No, it's engine is
it engineering? Well, some of
them pretend. So, maybe it's
engineering. So there's a
drawing these lines has been a
little difficult, but, um, but
mainly it's
So you compute this deduction
and you get to take that, uh, as
an additional deduction from
your, uh, share of the
partnership income, and that's,
um, effectively lowers the rate
on that income. So that's why
that's there, uh, New Mexico is
a provision in their law. It's
in the slides that says we don't
follow that, um.
I think that's the, the
provision that is referenced
there, so.
Very helpful. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Uh, I have, uh, Senator Gonzalez
and then Representative Herrera.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair and
vice chair.
Also was so representative
Herrera, I appreciate the large
print and, and also that every
page has a number, you know, we
get so many handouts that you
won't believe that, you know,
you just imagine,
but uh this is very nice and uh,
you know, I'm not a member of
the I'm attending today, but,
uh, to me it would be a really
good suggestion that all
legislators would receive this.
This handout because you know
there's a lot of information
that it's just very, very good.
Uh, a couple of things that um
that I was looking at is um
So will there be any changes to
uh deadlines and to penalties.
Nothing comes to mind, but I'm
sure, um, Senator, nothing comes
to mind in terms of the
penalties and deadlines.
Uh
Um
There may be something, but I
don't think it's significant, I
think is the answer.
And uh
Madam Chair, the other part that
I see is, I think that with our.
Individuals that prepared taxes
and assist.
I think they're going to be an
overload, you know, there is a
lot of information.
So is there any kind of uh
Dialogue with uh working with a
universities to start offering
um.
You know, some classes, some
training because uh I really see
that this is gonna be a.
Away overload, you know, on.
They are already as it is.
And uh with this many changes,
you know, what it's gonna, the
impact that it's gonna form.
Uh, yes, Madam Chair, Senator,
that I, that's a great question
because I've focused some on
the, you know, the cuts to the
Internal Revenue Service.
But also practitioners are part
of the tax administration
system.
I mean, they do a lot of this.
And, uh, this is what our, uh,
we refer to Professor Jim
Hammill, uh, who practices here
in New Mexico and teaches at
Texas A&M.
He's, uh, you know, he's said
many times that practitioners
are as impacted by these changes
as anybody, because they got to
get up to speed on it quickly.
I've got to advise their
clients, and unlike me sitting
here today, you're not, no one's
gonna sue me for malpractice,
but obviously, that's why you
hire an accountant or an
attorney to do your taxes for
you because you want somebody
that
Uh, we'll stand behind what
they're doing. Yeah, yeah, um,
so yeah, so there are a lot of
changes here that are going to
affect practitioners and
Again, the fact that some of
them take effect immediately,
um, and so there has been
planning and there has been
other things going on, as
typically happens, especially
with businesses that didn't
necessarily anticipate some of
these changes. I think that's
gonna, you're gonna see that not
only in the preparation of the
return next year, but in people
coming to their practitioners
and saying,
How is this going to impact me?
Should I be doing something
different, uh, all of that kind
of thing. I don't know. What do
you, what do you think?
More nuggets
Oh.
The, the less part of Madam
Chair, so I served in the house,
so tax committee for like 16
years, and one thing is.
That it's constant. There's
always change.
But this is not changed, this is
just really.
You know, really almost redoing.
You know, a, a big, big portion
of the tax part.
So it is going to take a lot of
time and a lot of understanding
and patience and.
Everything that goes with it.
But uh thank you, Madam Chair,
thank you.
a rep representative Ferrera and
then representative Duncan. Uh,
thank you, Madam Chair and Vice
Chair. um, thank you both again
for this great presentation. Uh,
I
I'm following up on, uh, Senator
Gonzalez's question. We, we
still have the same process
though that it's what I think,
you know, the IRS will, will
take these laws and put out
rules, and then, and then people
will respond to the rules,
right? And then supposedly the
department will go back and see
if they can adjust it if there's
a majority of people, and then
that's followed by lawsuits with
people who didn't.
agree with what am I correct?
And then we will get to a final.
A final product.
Uh, and, uh, depending on
whether the courts decide to
accept it or not, and we know
the state of courts these days,
and then I guess um.
And, and from what I understand
about this bill, most of the
major
Major changes, the big changes
come after November 2026, uh,
which is the election, uh,
midterm election, and we all get
that, we all get that, uh, so
I'm, I'm just curious, um.
When you think.
You know, I, I'm, I'm trying to
judge just both for our state
and and I was kind of hard to do
and uh working with any when
these rules will really when
these laws will really go into
effect.
And if, if it's hanging on a
lawsuit, that's another 2 years.
Am I correct? I mean, I, that I
would like to get your response
to that. That's what I'm trying
to figure out when will all this
really happen?
Right, so, uh, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative, the, um, the
other 22 sets of provisions in
this bill. We've only been
talking about the tax
provisions. We've not been
talking about the spending
provisions. The spending
provisions, a lot of those are
delayed for their, uh, effective
date.
Um, and, and yes, this is in
part, uh, I think to give both
Congress the time to go. We'll
see if, if we're committed to
this, but also, um, it may have
to do with politics, it may have
to do with the states, etc.
Um, so the spending side, I
think, is, uh, in some ways,
separate from, to some extent,
and, uh, obviously going to
impact indirectly at least in
some cases directly, um, the
states.
So on the, on the tax side,
there's a slightly different
process for things to get
resolved. I think it's much
harder on the tax side
sometimes. Um, in part because
at the federal level, um, I
think it's still the case that
the Internal Revenue Service, if
it's a district court or tax
court decision doesn't
necessarily have to abide by
that decision for any taxpayer
other than the one at issue in
that case. They can, but they
don't have to.
So unless it goes up to the
appellate court, the, the IRS
may say, uh, we're not following
this particular decision for
other taxpayers who may be in
slightly different situations.
Um, and of course, if it goes up
to the circuit court, there are
1211, 12 circuit courts. So, um,
you may get circuits deciding
things differently and how many
tax cases does the US Supreme
Court take each year, you know,
maybe one, maybe, um, so how do
you get these things ultimately
resolved. Um, what, what we see
more happening at the state
level with the state
legislatures.
is watching what's happening in
the field, watching what's
happening at the tax agency and
saying, OK, we need more clarity
around this. We'll come back in
and maybe provide some more
clarity, um, or we'll just say
to the tax agency, yeah, keep
doing what you're doing.
Um, in which case that gives
some certainty to, um, whatever
the interpretation is of the tax
agency.
But that doesn't happen at the
federal level. So if, if you're
used to how things work at the
state level. The IRS typically
does not give
Congress a full accounting of
what the problems are, uh, I
think in some ways they're too
good a soldier. They, they don't
admit that there are things that
just don't have good clear
answers and um and so there
isn't a process for Congress
often to come back in and say,
wait, we need clarity around
this. Again, that's, there are
some who are trying to make that
happen in the partnership area.
It's real hard to do that at the
federal level, so the court
system is about the only way.
Sometimes.
you get resolution of these
issues, and it takes a long
time. Yes.
Thank you.
OK, observed Duncan, and then
Repser Brown. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, I'm gonna, I'm gonna
maybe back into my question if I
could and, and, uh, um, maybe it
might make sense and it may not,
so I apologize ahead of time on
page 65, we're looking at what
the budget lab said and, and how
those funds will help, um,
generate more funds and close
gaps and stuff like that on page
60.
For we currently have a gap of
about $700 billion a year. How
long has that gap been there?
Uh, Madam Chair, uh,
Representative, the, the gap has
been growing, so, so that
particular gap, there have been
various estimates.
Um,
during the Biden administration,
the, uh, commissioner of the
Internal Revenue Service thought
that number was way too low and
thought it was maybe twice that
much, the actual tax gap. Um,
So it's one, again, one of these
things it's hard to estimate,
but, um, what has happened over
time is that the Internal
Revenue Service because of
electronic filing.
is now able to do things
automatically with the data
that's in these electronically
filed returns and captured that
they couldn't do previously. And
they're always 5 or 6 years
behind in terms of taking the
returns that they've processed
and then going back and doing
this kind of analysis.
But as they've done more and
more of that using these
electronically filed returns,
what they're seeing is a, is a
definite.
Uncertainty of weight, it looks
like
The number that we would have
expected given everything we
know, is not the number we see
on the returns when you put, uh,
the returns for this industry or
this type of taxpayer together.
So
The growth in it may be due to,
we're just not doing a good
enough job with enforcement, the
growth in it may be due to,
we're just doing a better job of
estimating it. Um,
But the, it's also do, I
mentioned the private economy a
minute ago. Public corporations,
there are fewer of them today
than there were. There are fewer
companies going public.
Um, most of the companies that
do go public are huge nowadays.
Much more, the economy is
private, meaning there aren't
there.
Not only are is the tax computed
differently, so it's this
pass-through system.
But it's also, um, you, there's
no
You know, uh, public information
reporting by these companies in
terms of here's what we say our
profit is and, uh, and yeah, so,
so all of that kind of
information that you have for
publicly traded companies
because they're publicly traded.
You don't have for the private
economy.
So there are, that's where a lot
of this gap falls into the
question of, um, and I've, I've
said this before, uh, to
committees.
Um, in 2016, the IRS studied
Partnership income and they
said, we're going to trace all
of the income from the
partnership return through to
the partners, and then we're
going to try and trace it back.
And they found about 20 to 25%
of it was missing somehow. They
couldn't trace it.
So even though these were
electronically filed returns and
they had all the data, they
weren't able to say, here's
where, you know, it got from the
partnership return on to
taxpayer return or here's where
this taxpayer is reporting their
income from this ultimate
partnership.
Um, and that, I think, uh, the
data on that is so good that
that was kind of a wake-up call.
And that was also part of why
the
Congress had enacted this
centralized budget, centralized
partnership audit regime so that
they can do audits at the
partnership level because they
just weren't able to keep up
with the enforcement. So there
are a lot of things that
impacted over time.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for that.
so.
That number is a staggering
number to me anyway, um, then on
page 65, it talks about what
they could do, and my question
then is if they.
Could have done that all along.
Why do they anticipate?
Or suggest that they could do it
now. And, and that's my question
for this, um, you know, we, we
hear from folks that, well, if
you just give us more money, we
can handle the problem better.
That doesn't equate to better
handling of the problem or even
better collection in some cases,
and so I'm just I'm just
curious, um, and, and, and
probably there is no answer, but
there is a problem and it's a
huge problem, and, and I for one
don't believe that, uh, just
because you give uh
Business more money or a
department more money that
that's gonna solve the problem.
There's got to be some heads
that figure out how to solve
that problem before it can be
solved, so thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you for the
answers.
Not Alan or anyone? I was just
gonna say I think part of the
problem, um, and
Representative He touched on
this. How long does it take to
get the system functioning. The
problem is we've been layering
on top of layering on top of
layering of really poor
foundation, you know, you've
heard complaints about the
partnership system that we have.
Well, that's when we're
gravitating to.
And that's the system that least
looks like someone.
created it on purpose, you know,
it's, it's, it just doesn't, um,
and I think that's why at a
state level, we have an easier
time with our own little
cleanups, you know, um, we'd go
to the tax committee and
everyone agrees, oh yeah, that's
a problem, that word's wrong.
It's an easier thing to do, um,
in New Mexico conforming to
federal stuff is a little
different. I see your question.
But we've always had a tax gap,
um, to Helen's point, you know,
the, our economy has quadrupled
in size over the last 20 years,
um.
IRSS funding is actually
falling, although I agree with
you. Technology and things like
that, it's not always about
money, but at some point you
can't operate a business without
some capital, um.
So, and I don't know where the
IRS is. I know from my personal
experience that every year
supposedly they're a little bit
worse than the year before, um,
you used to be able to get
someone on the phone, that sort
of thing, um.
But you know, technology does
make a difference, so maybe
that'll help.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Represent brown.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Well, first of all, I agree with
what's been, um, stated this has
been a really excellent
presentation.
And um
I'm not an accountant or
anything, but I just think we
really needed this information
and you made it very easy for
us, I think, to access it. So,
Madam Chair, um, this is House
resolution one, the big
beautiful one big beautiful bill
act. I need two hands to lift
it.
Um, there is so much in here and
I've been reading a lot of it
online, Madam Chair, and then I
finally realized I really need a
paper copy, uh, but there's just
so much here, but I even found
the kitchen sink in here,
believe it or not, and there are
things in here like the poultry
insurance pilot program and
just, it's just 10 pages at
least of index alone, so I think
it's very important that we, we
hear these presentations, but we
also do some reading on our own
to fully.
understand. So, um, Madam Chair,
I want to really, really thank
the presenters for giving us the
uh photo image of a personal
income tax form, the PIT, and
then the CIT.
Um, as a lawyer, if I were, um,
pursuing a case, I would start
at the endpoint, and that's the
jury instructions, and I'd say,
when you get all the way through
it, this is the form that you
have to go through. This is what
it all boils down to.
And I think that um this
committee, Madam Chair, could
probably benefit from someday
walking through a PIT and a CIT
just to look at line by line to
see where, where it all comes
together, and I know there are
computers that do this for us.
So thank you for that, um, I try
to look at things from the
perspective of my constituents,
and people are wanting to know
how this bill will affect their
lives.
And so first question, Madam
Chair, is, I know we're looking
probably at the 60 day session
for
Whatever legislation the
legislature needs to consider.
Is there anything that you can
think of matter chair presenters
that we would need to do in the
upcoming 30 day session.
Madam Chair, um, Representative,
I think that, um,
It is just as important to look
at what
New Mexico
Does not conform to that is big,
OK, so if it's, if it's uh
fairly significant.
Change at the federal level and
New Mexico conforms or doesn't
conform. Those are the places to
look first, um, I think from my,
you know, years of
Having advised taxpayers.
One question I think we're going
to see is, um, and maybe some
pressure on the tips and
overtime, just because there's
been so much press around it, it
is broad in terms of its effect
on people. If it's not actually
going to make much of a
difference in the
State tax computation and a lot
of the people who would be
affected by it, at least the
tips, uh, part of it. Um, and
getting that information out to
people and saying, you know, um,
this is not a big driver for us,
even that is probably useful,
um.
On the business side of things.
The we're we're monitoring what
the states are, are doing, so we
can at least give you some
overtime, the Federation of Tax
Administrators and the MTC can
over time give you some
information about um what states
are proposing. So states, again,
New Mexico is pretty common in
that they can form starting with
AGI. If those states have said
we're going to adopt some of
these provisions or include them
in our calculation, that
information.
can be useful as well to say,
OK, let's not try and recreate
the wheel herself, but let's
look at what other states are
potentially doing.
Um, so I would say it's a little
early maybe to
To say, to pinpoint certain
things.
Um, but the provisions that we
talked about here, maybe that's
a start, I think.
Thank you for that. Madam Chair,
I
Um, I think I, you know, I've
really heard something
reinforced today, and that's,
you just spoke to it that we as
a legislature have some leeway
in terms of how we, we deal with
all of this, and I think that's,
um, where we all should be
focusing on as well. So, Madam
Chair, um,
The fiscal impact, in my
opinion, the fiscal impact
reports that I typically see on
my legislation and other
legislation.
Sometimes it just seems to be
off base. And part of the reason
is, apparently there's a rule in
drafting that analyses will not
be done until the bill is put in
the hopper.
But in the case of
You know, whatever we do with
this bill, I think we need a
head start in terms of the
analyses, and it's not all that
uncommon common to have every
state agency give an analysis on
a bill. So there's a lot of work
that's going to go into it, but
I, I just think we need to give
them, um,
A head start when we come to
that. And then finally, Madam
Chair, I
I think I've read that a lot of
people use, um,
For example, TurboTax to do
their returns and someone
mentioned.
What if they don't get it right
and how they program everything.
I have a really big concern
about that because so many
people rely on that.
Do you know, Madam Chair,
presenters, if
The turboTax and other
technology folks are keying in
with
New Mexico or even the federal
government. I mean, how are
How are they arriving at their
formulas.
And what if they're wrong? I, I
just think that that could be a
really big tripping point, Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair Representative, they
do get it wrong sometimes. Helen
mentioned, uh, well, you
mentioned TurboTax. They, they
got some major item wrong this
last year in speaking with
practitioners, um, and they had
to go back and fix it in certain
states and things like that, so
it's a potential problem.
Well, thank you very much and
again, Madam Chair, thank you
for the time and again, thank
you for a great presentation.
All righty, thank you. Is there
any other questions from the
committee?
Well, with that being said,
we're all commit this to memory
and toward the end when we're
starting to put together our
recommendations I have certain
folks talk about it, but I wanna
thank all of you, you're, you're
welcome, as I say, to have lunch
with us, um, and anyone that
wants to sit with us and and get
a little deeper into the weeds,
but there's a couple of things
that we need to do before we do
break and uh wanted to, to
announce that today our
breakfast was provided by Joe.
Thompson.
Uh, a lunch today, our sponsor
for lunch and that's at Rhodes
just right out the door is uh
Devon Energy and Tiffany Rivera.
Tiffany, I, I thought I saw her.
Little earlier tonight our
dinner, which will be back
upstairs is the New Mexico
co-ops and Marla Schultz, um.
And then tomorrow our breakfast,
which will be a back upstairs,
is down in Jared Najar. So we've
got some great sponsors for all
of our, our meals while we're
here and uh if we could, let's
all look at the minutes from the
last meeting and I'd like to
take some, some action on that.
We got a senator Souls for the
motion.
Madam Chair, I move approval of
the minutes from the last
meeting.
We have a second, we have a 2nd
from Representative Herrera.
Is there any objection to that
motion?
Signum
motion has been adopted and with
that, we will go upstair or no
right down we need to have a
motion for the agenda?
Well, we didn't, we can do that
now if you'd like. Go ahead.
We're doing it now we're on the
agenda, and I know most of the
committees do that, so I move
approval of the agenda for today
and tomorrow. All righty. And we
have a second from
Representative Duncan. Any
objection? Saying no, that's
been adopted also. So if we can,
uh, Chris, do you have
directions for us or that way?
All right,
so thank you everybody, and
we'll see you at.
1:30 gives you a chance to.
