Cha Mo County, the west side of
San Juan County. Thank you. Glad
to be here.
Good morning, Mr. Chair. Uh, my
name is Ray Lara. I represent
House District 34 in Southern
Donana County.
Good morning, Mr. Chair and
members, uh, Cindy Navas, Senate
District 9, Sandoval and
Bernalillo County.
Good morning, everyone. Rena
Sapansky, state representative
District.
Good morning, everybody. I
representative Susan Herrera,
and I represent District 41,
which is Ria Riva Sandoval house
and a little bit of our, our far
left over here. Senator
Townsend, the far left on the
far right, right?
Uh, good morning. Uh, I'm Jim
Townsend, uh, serves Senate
District 34. Glad to be here.
Good morning, Mr. Chairman.
Sorry I didn't get by and shake
your hand this morning. I'll get
to that.
Uh, my name is Pat Woods. Uh, I
represent Senate District 7,
Curriquay Union, and Harding,
uh, were in full wheat cut and
mowed in my part of the world,
green grass, fat cattle, and
lots of wheat. Glad to be here.
Good morning.
Excuse me, Mr. Chairman, um,
Katherine Brown, state
representative for large
portions of Eddy and Lee
counties.
Thank you. Thank you very much,
Mr. Chairman. Good morning,
everyone. I'm Patty Lundstrom. I
represent House District 9,
which is Gallup in McKinley
County and I have the uh
pleasure this uh interim to
co-chair this committee with
Senator Souls and of course,
this meeting is Senator Souls,
and we've been rotating and I
think it's worked well. Thank
you.
Then Bill So, state senator from
Las Cruces representing the East
Mesa side, where the beautiful
Oregon mountains are, uh, we've
actually finally started getting
some rain down that direction,
catch up with northern New
Mexico that's pretty green right
now. Um, I feel very honored to
co-chair with Representative
Lundstrom, a very important
committee, uh, looking at how
New Mexico's response to to
federal changes to budget and
policies and things of that sort
and I appreciate people taking
interest, uh.
I get lots of calls, newspaper,
and others, I suspect my
co-chair does too, asking for
opinions and wanting to speak to
this committee because of the
impact that it's having on the
people of New Mexico and the
concerns about how that will
affect, you know, the people and
the state moving forward. Uh,
we've got a very, uh,
Bold agenda, shall we say, uh,
lots of presentations. Uh, I
would ask when we get the
question and answers, uh, please
ask short, concise questions of
our presenters and presenters
the same thing on answers so
that everybody gets an
opportunity, uh, as people can
see, these are directional mics.
They are very sensitive. It's
very important that we turn them
on and off as you're speaking,
don't just leave it on because
it's very likely to get
feedback, uh, when we do have
people, it's important
presenters that you do come up.
to the mic, we are being webcast
and uh I think some people have
trouble sleeping or whatever,
but I do know that there are
people around the state who are
watching very intently what's,
what's going on with this
committee. Um,
But, would you introduce
yourself and your staff, please.
Sure. Um, thank you, Chairman
Souls. I'm Clinton Turner, the
Legislative council service for
this committee, and we're also
assisted by a subpoena Gaynor,
um, Nico wag his back and our um
state librarian, um Joanne
Montague this morning as well.
Thank you and just in time,
Senator to heal, if you'd
introduce yourself quickly,
please.
Hi everyone, I'm Linda Trujillo,
Senate District 24, um, just
arriving back from Taos from
CCJ. Nice to be here today. I'm
excited to get more information.
Very good. And with that, we'll
start in on our first
presentation from the Healthcare
Authority uh program
administration impacts from the
Federal actions and proposals
and
Cer help, if you would please,
Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, good morning. Uh,
thank you very much for having
me here today. Um, hopefully you
all are getting copies of this
packet, um, I am Carrie Armijo.
I'm the cabinet secretary of the
Healthcare Authority, um, just
had my 25th anniversary in state
service, uh, all of it with the
same agency. I actually, uh,
grew up at the Human Services
department, and really proud to
be the first cabinet secretary
of the Healthcare Authority, so.
I thank you very much for having
me here today. This is the topic
of particular passion for me and
I really appreciate your
interest and your service to New
Mexico, really thinking through
these very complicated issues.
I'd also like to recognize my,
uh, brilliant and hardworking
team, many of whom are in the
audience today, uh, wonderful
leaders. New Mexico is really
fortunate to have them here, uh,
who worked really hard, uh, to
get ready for today.
Um, moving on to slide 2. I just
want to give a quick overview of
the mission of the healthcare
Authority, which is to ensure
that New Mexicans will attain
their highest level of health by
providing whole person
cost-effective, accessible, and
high-quality healthcare and
safety net services, and our
vision is that every New Mexican
will have access to affordable
healthcare coverage through a
coordinated and seamless
healthcare system, and I'm
really proud to say that today
is the healthcare authority's
first birthday. Uh, we had our
inaugural, uh,
agency first day one year ago
today, so a very successful
launch uh as the healthcare
authority.
Um, moving on to the slide 3,
just want to talk a little bit
as we consider the impact of the
federal reconciliation bill
that's really currently in
debate. It's important to
understand the importance of
Medicaid and snap in New Mexico
in particular, the healthcare
authority serves 848,966 New
Mexicans. That's about 40% of
our state's population are
Medicaid enrollment as a
percentage of the population is
about 39.
% almost 40%, uh, and our snap
enrollment by percentage of the
population is 23%, uh, New
Mexico does have the highest
percentage of Medicaid and Snap
enrolled individuals of any
state, um, which means that
changes that are currently being
considered at the federal level
will have a very outsized impact
here in New Mexico.
Moving on to slide 4.
So, um, we really want to talk a
little bit at a high level and
then we'll get into the details,
but um, the changes that are
currently under consideration
across the healthcare
authorities programs are going
to affect every New Mexican in
one way or another. Um, Medicaid
serves as New Mexico's largest
healthcare payer, uh, which
means that reductions in
Medicaid are going to impact
access and cost of healthcare
across all providers, uh, for
every New Mexican, no matter who
your insurance provider is.
Um, those costs are going to be
passed in some way, shape or
form, uh, to individuals with
private insurance, um, which
will ultimately limit the
healthcare authority's ability
to leverage its purchasing
power. For example, in the past
session we were able to utilize
the power of Medicaid to
negotiate lower hospital rates
for state employees, which is
now, uh, we are currently the
provider of health insurance for
state employees. We were able to
negotiate lower hospital prices
because we have that purchase.
power as the agency as we reduce
the purchasing power that will
start to um go away a little
bit. Um, we are also looking at
potential closures of 6 to 8
rural hospitals across New
Mexico in the next 18 to 24
months. It some of these changes
uh go into effect, um, rural
hospitals do disproportionately,
um, rely on Medicaid revenue.
And so as we look at um those
hospital closures, we're gonna
have to really think of some
strategies to protect our rural
healthcare system. Um, uninsured
individuals who roll off of
they are very likely to forego
preventive care, ultimately
costing the healthcare system
more, uh, resulting in higher
acuity and higher costs, more
crowded emergency rooms and
things like that. I think you
all know that. We're also
looking at some reductions in
the SNAP program, uh, New Mexico
currently, um, has about $1.3
billion in snap revenue at stake
for 1700 retailers that includes
grocery stores, farmers'
markets, gas stations, and
convenience stores all across
New Mexico very dependent on.
Snap revenue over a billion
dollars. Um, I will just call
out that New Mexico also has the
highest rate of child food
insecurity in the United States,
uh, which will worsen, um, I
think if snap reductions go into
effect, those downstream impacts
will affect school attendance
and academic performance. There
are lots of studies that link
the SNAP program to improved
academic performance and
improved graduation rates, um,
and then lastly, are the
investments that have been made
in New Mexico's safety net have
reduced child.
poverty, um, it was worst in the
country at 27.4% and now 17th in
the country at 8.9% above
average, um, and we're concerned
that federal changes will
potentially impact that positive
trend that we've made in New
Mexico, and you can also see
that uh New Mexico ranks highest
in the United States, uh, right
now as currently proposed with a
potential 1.7% decrease in jobs
resulting from the
reconciliation bill. So, on
slide
5. I'm gonna talk a little bit
about Medicaid. We'll get to
snap next. Um, there is a lot
changing right now, you guys
know, uh, that the bill is
actually in debate in the
Senate, uh, right as we speak,
there are lots of amendments
that are potentially being made,
um, so the details are still
looking like they're taking
shape. However,
Um, even if the details and the
time frames change, there are
still some themes that I think
are very likely scenarios that
we should anticipate in New
Mexico and and nationally um as
very likely to happen one way or
another, uh, so the first one
that we're really looking at our
community and work engagement
requirements for adults in
Medicaid, um, you can see on the
right hand slide that a
majority, uh 70% of New Mexicans
on Medicaid who are adults who
are working in New Mexico
either.
Full time or part time, so most
people are working, but we are
talking about administrative
workload to prove that you are
working, um, connected to your
Medicaid eligibility, very
likely to happen, I think all
but certain, um, more frequent
eligibility checks and
additional documentation
required to determine
eligibility. So again, really
making sure there's a
requirement that we check right
now, we check eligibility every
12 months, um, that would change
to every 6 months for a big
share of our population under
the current bill. Um, we're also
looking at some eligible
reductions, so reduction, um, in
that retroactive Medicaid
period. We currently provide up
to 90 days of retroactive
coverage. This is really to
avoid um uncompensated care when
someone is eligible and received
a healthcare service, um, that
looking to be either eliminated
or reduced substantially. We are
also uh pretty sure that they
will be um eliminating certain
legal immigration statuses from
coverage, uh, so today.
We cover, uh, we do not cover
undocumented individuals in
Medicaid, uh, but we do cover
people who are have legal lawful
status. They are changing the
statuses of people who are
covered, uh, and sort of
reducing those so there's lots
of uh examples of of ways that
they're reducing those.
We're also looking at reductions
in provider payments down to
100% of Medicare, um, there are
multiple ways that uh the
reconciliation bill looks to do
this. One is through phased down
provider taxes. Uh, we have a
couple of those in New Mexico.
One is for nursing facilities,
the other is for hospitals, um,
they are looking at reducing or
phasing down those provider
taxes from 6% down to 3.5% over
several years, uh, which will
reduce revenue available.
Of course, um, they're also
looking at phasing down
payments, particularly to
hospitals and through the
reconciliation bill down to 100%
of Medicare, uh, for those of
you who are tracking, um, the
work we've been doing over the
past couple of years we
implemented uh a new program for
hospitals this past year, um,
that pays the average commercial
rate through Medicaid and that
program is providing over a
billion dollars in additional
revenue to hospitals and has
been implemented, and that is
the.
program that will be phased down
back down to 100% of Medicare,
which takes us back to where we
started again. Um, we are also
pretty sure that they're going
to be changing payment policies
overall in the Medicaid program,
and this isn't likely in the
reconciliation bill, but through
administrative changes to reduce
provider payment rates down to
100% of Medicare across the
system, um, in Medicaid today,
we're paying 150% of Medicare
for primary care, behavioral
health and maternal child
health.
Um, we anticipate that there may
be a revised policy, uh, to take
those rates down to 100% of
Medicare, imminently and they do
not have to use the
reconciliation bill to do that.
Um, we are also looking at very
likely co-payments for certain
services and populations, um,
those are in the reconciliation
bill today, and that will be
another impact to our providers
who, uh, either have to collect
those copays or take that out of
their reimbursement.
on slide 6, just a couple of the
sort of anticipated impacts of
these federal changes, um,
federal funding in New Mexico
totals about almost $10 billion
every year under the
reconciliation bill, we're
looking at at least $2.8 billion
in lost Medicaid funding to New
Mexico, much of that supports
provider reimbursement, but
that's also considering people
rolling off of coverage, um,
sort of uncompensated care costs
to our provider network.
Um, having a higher uninsured
rate, for example, um, about
880,530 in New Mexicans losing
coverage. Most of that related
to those more frequent
eligibility checks and the work
requirements, um, an estimated
42,000 New Mexicans have a new
co-pays, and today they don't
have we don't have copays in New
Mexico Medicaid, 254,000 New
Mexicans subject to
administrative burden and
increased paperwork uh to stay
enrolled, even if they still
qualify. So.
just wanna make that qualifier,
which most people their income
hasn't changed substantially.
This is really a paperwork, uh,
kind of situation where um they
were most likely gonna have to
prove that they still qualify
more often. About 111 safety net
providers losing critical
funding that really uh refers to
our hospitals and our nursing
facilities, um, and at least 6
to 8 rural hospitals likely to
close within 18 to 24 months, as
it's currently drafted the
reconciliation bill.
Um, would reduce hospital
payments by an average of 189
million over several years per
year, $189 million reduction to
our hospitals.
career.
OK, um, gonna talk next about
the snap changes again with the
caveat that things are changing,
the parliamentarian uh has sort
of suggested the removal of some
of the provisions, uh, related
to snap, but people are forging
ahead as things are really being
revised. So I'm going to just
kind of again go over the high
level impacts that we expect to
see in one shape or another, um,
with a caveat that not all of
them may happen or they may take
a different shape.
So we are looking at a new
requirement for seats to share a
portion of the cost of SNAP
benefits, which are currently
paid at 100% federal funding
based on our payment error
rates, and I'm going to talk a
little bit about our payment
error rates, uh, in a minute. We
are also looking at reduced
federal funding to administer
the SNAP program. We currently
have a 50/50 cost share ratio
with the state and federal
government, uh, that ratio
looking to shift 75% of the cost
onto the states and 25% to be
picked up.
by the federal government. Um,
there are also changes that
would reset the maximum that
people can receive through Snap,
uh, through the benefit every
month, uh, so reducing the
amount that a household could
qualify for. We're looking at
additional work requirements for
the snap for Snap households and
more strict and enforcement of
those requirements, um,
currently, much of New Mexico is
exempt from Snap work
requirements because of high
unemployment or low number of
jobs under the uh
reconciliation.
version that's underway right
now, um, would only exempt Luna
County and the Hickory Apache
nation which are the two places
where unemployment exceeds 10%.
Um, we are also looking at
potential eligibility re
reductions through how benefits
are calculated, so, um, we're
sort of changing the deductions
that are allowed for calculating
the benefit, um, just a note
that Snap does create uh almost
over 18,000 jobs here in New
Mexico, uh, so really important
part.
our economy in the state.
On Spite 8, just a couple of
potential impacts here that
we've calculated, um, as I said
earlier, SNAP benefits total
nearly 1.3 billion in revenue to
1700 retailers across the state.
Um, the reconciliation bill cuts
between 224352 million in
federal funds from New Mexico in
the first year alone. That's
most of that comes from that
cost share in the benefit, um,
and the reason I'm giving such a
wide range there is.
Because that has changed. Um, it
started at about 25%. They look
like they've reduced that to 25%
based on payment error rates,
um, there's now an option where
a state can get to 0,
however, we don't really know
what's going to happen when the
bill passes back over to the
house where that original
requirement started.
Um, we're looking at about a 32
million to $57 million dollar
impact in federal in um funding
through the administration of
SNAP, that shifting to New
Mexico.
Um, again, the reason that range
is so high is because
It really depends on how they
interpret snap administration,
part of my salary is paid by the
SNAP program. Our whole agency
is cost allocated across these
federal programs. So it will
change the way that the whole
agency, uh, kind of draws down
federal revenue for uh
administrative costs.
At least 175,000 New Mexicans
will who are receiving Snap will
be newly subject to work
requirements, but you can see,
um, in the table on the right
that 79% of snap households in
New Mexico do have at least one
working adult, um, the estimated
463,000 New Mexicans will see
their monthly SNAP benefits
reduced by about 21%, so that
maximum amount currently at $292
a month going down to $231 a
month, and approximately 58.
in New Mexicans likely to lose
SNAP benefits altogether.
So, I'm gonna talk just briefly
about our payment error rate. I
think you all will have
questions about that, uh, given
the financial impact, um, and so
I wanna just give a little bit
of context.
Snap payment error rates are
really an indication of how
accurately states determine
benefit amounts uh for
customers. There's sort of two
components of the Snap payment
error rate. There's
overpayments, uh, sort of that's
when we have overpaid benefits
or over calculated the amount in
New Mexico, um, our current
payment error rate is 13.45% in
overpayments. Um, our
underpayment rate is less than
1%. So most of our payment.
rate is related to incorrectly
calculating the benefit amount
in favor of the customer, and
I'm going to talk about why that
is. Payment error rates do vary
across states, uh, there's quite
a bit of variation right now,
uh, currently the lowest state
is at about 3%, the highest is
at about 60%. Um, the focus of
the payment error rate has
really been to help states
improve, uh, and identify
opportunities for improvement.
It is not a measure of fraud.
Um, it really does.
reflect unintentional mistakes
made by states and households uh
in the calculation of the
payment uh for Snap, and um I
will say that changes related to
the COVID-19 pandemic impacted
payment error rates across
almost every state and in fact
there's no payment error rate
data at all for a couple of
years of the pandemic.
So, on slide 10, um, just to
give you a context of where we
are today. Our current payment
error rate is 14.5%. Uh, New
Mexico ranks forty-third out of
53 states and territories. Um,
there's two pieces, one, part of
the payment error rate is uh
errors that are caused by
households, uh, that, that part
of our payment error rate is
about 65%, and that's really
when a household fails to report
a change in circumstance, and we
find it later through a quality
review, so.
They forgot to add a household
member. They forgot to report
that their income changed, and
those are the kinds of um things
that kind of go into the payment
error rate. We also have agency
cost payment error rate, that's
about 34% and that's really when
we have used outdated or
incorrect information to
calculate. Um, I will say that
there are 5 major contributors
that influence the state's
payment error rate. Um, the
first two were deliberate
decisions that the agency made
to keep New Mexicans fed during.
the pandemic. Um, they are sort
of out.
Uh, out impacts of having made
those decisions. The first is
waved interviews, so the
current.
sort of status quo for Snap
requires an interview, um, the
federal government allowed
states to waive interviews
during the pandemic. Uh, we did
that for as long as possible. We
did that until we restarted the
interview process in October of
2024. That does mean that the
payment errors will be higher,
uh, because we waived those
interviews. The second is that
we have a, there's a 6 month
reporting requirement in Snap,
um, we waived that. It's a
process where a household has to
kind of
come back and report any changes
every 6 months. We waived that
also during the pandemic. We
were started that in July of
2023. So those two changes are
really, uh, one of the bigger
drivers of the payment error
rate. Um, we also have in New
Mexico, and this is something
we're really closely looking at
as we know how what high of an
impact the payment error rate's
gonna have on the fiscal impact
of the state. We have a
longstanding policy of accepting
self attestation for shelter
costs, utilities, and
independent care, um.
This is something that uh has
kind of caused additional errors
to come out of the determination
and so that's something we're
really reviewing closely. We
also have a new workforce, uh,
so we have almost had a full
turnover of our case load, our
caseworker workforce, uh, as
part of the great resignation we
had almost like a full turnover.
We do have some, uh, seasoned
workers, but we're really
looking at a new workforce and
these are very complicated
programs. Some of them have
never done interviews before
because they were waived during
the pandemic, so
really looking at um making sure
that our workforce gains
experience, uh, and you know,
we've kind of been able to
stabilize that attrition of our
workforce, but definitely have
some newer folks um on board and
then you all are familiar with
the Medicaid and Snap unwinding
um that placed a lot of pressure
on our application processing
timeliness during that uh time
period we made the decision to
kind of keep people get their
benefits, uh.
Faster, um, there are a lot of
people who do qualify for
expedited stamp these days as
housing costs continue to rise.
That means that we have to get
them their benefits in 7 days,
uh, and so we are under the
pressure, um, in terms of
timeliness and so we really did
focus on getting people their
benefits quickly.
So, um, on slide 11, just a
couple of corrective actions
that we're taking and what it
will take to really get our
payment error rate below that
target of 5 or 6% depending on
what um what that finally looks
like in the uh payment, the
reconciliation bill. So we have
a number of current corrective
actions that we're taking. We
are really focused on improving
our training of our caseworkers,
uh, they receive a very uh.
Um
I don't know, it's, it's a very
book oriented uh training today.
We're looking at making that
more hands on they're actually
processing cases and training a
lot more real experience, um, so
they don't have to remember
everything all at once. They've
actually gone through the
exercise of doing it, and we
received some additional funding
from the legislature to improve
our training, um, this year. We
are also really focused on
targeted interview techniques so
that we can get all the
information we need at once. We
don't have to, I kind of keep
going back or making it.
assumptions about what a
household is telling us, but
we're really getting all of the
information from the household
and really reinforcing a culture
of accuracy in addition to
timeliness. We've done a really
good job of reducing the ISD
vacancy rate, uh, which does,
you know, staffing levels do
contribute to our ability to do
a good job with cases and be
accurate, um, we started the
fiscal year with a negative 6%
vacancy rate. So we are doing
really good with um keeping our
caseworkers staffed. Um, we are,
as I said,
izing the impact of accepting
that self attestation.
And we will be sending an ISD
team that's our income support
division uh that does the
eligibility for these cases, we
will be sending them to sort of
look at uh low error rate
states. I have a lot of
connections in states that have
lower error rates and so we'll
be um trying to connect our
teams so that they can kind of
go shadow workers in those other
states and really find out how
they do business, uh, so that we
can replicate any best
practices, and then we're really
looking at business process
redesign. How can we do things
more effectively, more
uh streamlined. How could we be
more administratively smart in
how we do the work we do, um,
there, there, I will just say,
uh, as we look at reducing the
payment error rate, there are
needed investments in HCA
operations, including the
adequate staffing of the income
support division. This division
is going to have additional
pressure as we have to roll out
work requirements, more frequent
eligibility checks, this all
falls on this division. Uh, so
it's really important to think
about how we're going to do.
all of that and reduce the
payment error rates. It's a lot
of workload for this division
and so we're really going to
have to, they're gonna have a
lot of pressure as we need to
make sure that they are
adequately staffed, and then
we're really looking at um more
complete snap documentation
checks and longer interviews,
which mean more time to take to
process a case, which may mean
additional staffing needs for
the agency.
There are also a number of IT
system changes that we can make,
um, in terms of predictive
analysis, uh, for errors, um,
guardrails for workers so that
the system doesn't let them
process cases as easily, um, if
they might not be accurate,
making sure that we um get
complete information from our
customers and really monitoring
our caseworkers to sort of look
at their accuracy and having the
right tools for that. On slide
12, I do want to just call out
the income support division, um,
they have really
and demonstrated their ability
to deliver for New Mexico, um,
you can kind of see their
performance historically, uh,
which we have not been this
timely in years uh with
processing cases. So I want to
just give a shout out to them,
really amazing work. Uh, we are
97% timeliness for Medicaid, 98%
timeliness for snap. Um, this is
really, really impressive data.
Especially if you can see how
painful the unwinding was, the
work has gone into really trying
to clean up that workload so
that people are getting their
benefits and hopefully we're not
getting as many calls from your
constituents about delays in
benefits because we've really
done a good job and I, I credit
our income support leadership,
uh, for their hard work.
Flight 13 just really quickly,
um, want to mention that SNAP
and Medicaid are not the only
two programs affected through
the reconciliation bill, um,
there are also going to be
impacts on the healthcare
affordability fund and how we
support individuals who purchase
coverage on the exchange, um,
without our programs, uh,
between 23,000 and 38,000 New
Mexicans would lose marketplace
coverage because many of the
subsidies on the marketplace are
expiring or going down, so.
will become more expensive and
we use that affordability fund
to make coverage more affordable
for New Mexicans. Um, so we just
want to kind of make sure that
you're aware of that and there's
like a downstream impact uh on
the financial.
Sorry, the private market as
well.
On slide 14, um, I'm gonna just,
you know, I'm not gonna go
through this in great detail,
but I do wanna make sure you're
aware that um we have a number
of IT system changes that will
need to be made to comply with
the reconciliation bill staff
and training costs customer
outreach and mailing costs and
our call center, uh, customer
operations that will cost about
$51 million in general fund uh.
implement right now, the
timelines and the reconciliation
bill for the work requirements
and many of the other changes to
Medicaid are very aggressive.
Um, they, they're, it's gonna be
very hard to meet those
requirements, um, and so we
really, we will have to talk to
you all as the legislature about
how we finance the operations of
the agency and so with that,
I'll go to my last slide, which
is what is keeping us up at
night. Um, we really think a
lot.
about our obligation to do a
good job and serve 850,000 New
Mexicans that come through our
doors every day, um, we know
that we have to do things
quickly, um, and
We are very mindful of state
resources and the decisions you
all have to make every day
because of our agency and
because of the budget of our
agency, not being able to fund
other programs, other services
for New Mexicans, we understand
that tension, uh, so we just
recognize that.
When you sacrifice one or the
other of these legs of the
stool, whether it's fast, good
or low cost, um, you're kind of
sacrificing something else, uh,
you can't hold it all up, uh, if
you're legs are uneven. So we
just wanna kind of mention that
that's something that we're
really uh grappling with right
now, we think, I will say, you
know, in the 25 years that I've
been with the agency, this is
probably the biggest change, um,
and I was the Affordable Care
Act implementation director and
implemented the Medicaid
expansion. This change is much
more
um, aggressive uh in terms of
time frame and ability for
states to plan and get ready. So
very concerned about that. Uh, I
just want to make sure you all
are aware of the impact it will
have on our agency. So I think
with that, uh, Mr. Chair, we
have to stand for your
questions. Thank you.
Thank you. People would like to
ask questions.
Vice chair Lindstrom.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate the opportunity to
ask a few questions here and
thank you for your presentation.
I do have a few I'd like to ask
first, my basic question is, is
um this federal bill scheduled
to take effect October 2026 if
it's approved.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Madam H chair,
there are different provisions.
Depending that there are
different timing provisions in
the bill right now. So for
example, the Medicaid work
requirements and the biannual
verification checks. Those take
place December 31st of 2026. So
my last day of work, um, those
would be that that's the
timeline for those. Some of the
other ones, the timeline has
changed or shifted, um, there
was a provision that wasn't
would not have allowed states
much time to improve their
payment error rates, for
example, on Snap.
Those that cost share would have
taken effect immediately. It
looks like now they're looking
at giving states a bit more time
to improve their payment error
rates. I think that takes place
in FY 27 FY 27. So depending on
the policy provision, the timing
is different, the copays go into
effect on, on a certain date,
but I will say the timelines
keep moving, um, and so we've
kind of been kept on our toes by
uh that consistent shift, um, I
think getting anything done in
2026 is gonna be very, very chal
OK, so let me ask you then on
page 11, you have.
and other places you've talked
about predictive analysis. How
are you doing predictive
analysis if the whole bill isn't
going to go into play until
different time until different
timeline.
Um,
uh, Mr. Tay, um,
Vice chair, those are um changes
that we could make now to bring
down the payment error rate, uh,
to sort of get ready. So these
are things that we think would
make a big difference as we look
to reduce the state's payment
error rate. We fully recognize
and accept the responsibility uh
for doing that for the state of
New Mexico, given the huge cost
impact.
These IT system changes will
cost about $10 million. So
that's the cost of that. I think
we would need to kind of really
want the reconciliation bill
passes and it's clear what we
are looking at.
Kind of think through budgeting,
whether that's through a special
session to kind of invest in the
agency through some additional
planning, whether that's through
our budget for fiscal year 27.
So those are things that were,
those are decisions we're making
based on the timing of the bill,
but these are changes that we
would like to make to get ready
for what we think is going to be
a pretty big impact. OK, so, uh,
also, Mr. Chair, uh, what is
your current vacancy rate?
Um
Mr. Chair, uh, Madam Vice Chair,
our current vacancy rate sort of
ahead of the fiscal year was
-6%, so we don't have much
vacancy. We don't have any
vacancies really in income
support division, however, we
did get some additional funding
for fiscal year 26. We have some
additional positions um that we
are hiring for right now in the
income support division, so
because we have run out of all
space with our hiring, so we
have about 50 that we are on
boarding now.
50 additional case workers. So
have you already identified
which rural hospitals would be
scheduled to close in this
presentation, you say there's 6
to 8, madam, uh, Mister Chair,
Madam Vice Chair, I think it's
very likely that we would see
the closure of at least one
hospital in Gallup.
Um, I think it is very likely
that we will see the closure of
the hospital in um Las Vegas,
potentially in Taos, I think
there are uh the Union County
Hospital, I think those are
probably the ones that I know of
that are at the highest risk,
and I know you have the hospital
association coming later today
who may be able to also talk
through that, but it's those
rural facilities that I think
are in um pretty substantial
danger because I, I know that I
hear I take their phone calls,
um, and even with the 750
million dollars that has gone
out the door, uh, in new funding
just in the past couple of
quarters, they're still
struggling, um, and so we, we
know that they're, there are
hospitals that will be directly
impacted. So the one thing I'm
gonna ask, Mr. Chairman, that
I'd like the staff to have
prepared for us is we need to
have a 5-year, a 5-year spending
forecast. We need that from LFC
and we need it from DFA.
We need it, I need to see that
the last time I saw was was in
23. I don't know if LFC has been
doing that for the finance
committees, but we need to see a
5-year spending forecast.
We need to see it for all of
these agencies and I'd like to
see it for our next meeting, Mr.
Chairman, if that's possible.
I'd like to have LFC bring
something like that to us. You
could easily dig it up, bring it
to us after lunch today, so the
committee knows what I'm talking
about. You can bring the one for
FY 23.
So they understand what we're
looking at and what those
Those rows are underneath those
spending plans because what I'm
concerned about.
Mr. Chairman and committee is
the fact that we have a whole
bunch of things in that budget
that, that is booked as
non-reoccurring.
And is it really not
reoccurring? And the new
initiatives like behavioral
health and all the other new
initiatives that occurred the
last couple of years. Does
anybody know?
So we need to see that. We need
to see what that 5 year spending
plan looks like.
And uh I know we've seen some
stuff on revenue and and revenue
projections and that looks good.
But if we are going to be making
recommendations from this
committee to the two finance
committees, we need to know what
they've got on the docket for
spending. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you, Vice Chair. Uh,
Senator Woods.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. It
sounds like uh a lot of these
requirements, uh, especially
like this error rate, a lot of
this requirement was in law. We
just didn't do it. And uh, I'm
assuming we got some kind of
waiver, Mr. Chair, to not have
to do that. And so, I mean, it's
not like you were breaking the
law, but it sounds like they're
requiring
A closer following of the law
than we had before.
On some of these things. I is
that right, Madam Secretary and
Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chair, Senator
Woods, I think that that may be
one way of looking at it. I
think that um the payment error
rate.
Uh, calculation has been around
for decades, um, that's not
anything new. uh.
I think what is different is the
financial hit that states are
being asked to sort of
contribute to the actual snap
benefit, which has been 100%
federally financed, um.
So, you know, I think it's, I
think it's true to say that
those are requirements, but
there's no new requirements
there in terms of the payment
error rate calculation. I think
that they're not changing that
necessarily or fundamentally,
uh, but that difference really
is that typically the way that
that's been handled is states
would be put on corrective
action. They would be looking
for targeted improvements, those
kinds of things over time, um,
the federal government will be
making recommendations for how
states can do better. I think
that's what's really.
changing is now there's just
going to be a big financial. So,
so they're going to bring about
a financial penalty if, if you
don't comply now.
Is what you're saying, Mr.
Chair, Senator Woods, that's
correct. I think, um, originally
the original version of the
reconciliation bill would have
had a penalty no matter what,
uh, it had a zero tolerance and
so any payment error rate over 0
would have resulted, uh, which
is not really possible for any
state. I don't think, even the
states that are in the lowest,
uh, tier. Um, what has changed
now is that states in the
current version, if they have a
payment error rate below 6.
They would be exempt from the
cost sharing requirement and so
that would be the state's target
is absolutely to get down to
below that 6% threshold cause,
you know, it's over $200 million
impact to the state of New
Mexico or um some states won't
have snap anymore, uh, and so I
think that is another option
that states are looking at,
which we would not recommend,
uh, of course, at least I
wouldn't recommend.
It's just in a timetable sort of
way. If we wanted to, if we
could comply with this, just in
a, you know, it says 6 months
reporting requirements,
different things like that. And,
and documentation of different
things.
It's just in a timetable, how
long would it take us if we were
perfectly on board and, and had
trained staff and everything.
The next time reporting day when
could we be in compliance.
Mr. Chair, Senator Woods.
If it's OK with you, I'd like to
get back to you on that. I don't
want to make any commitments
about getting the payment rate
to X by 12 months from now, I
would really like to sort of
project that out.
I think we have a phased plan.
Our goal is to get to to below
5% by the time that takes
effect, but I would like to kind
of present you all with a full
plan so that you can see each
task with that reduction will
be. Um,
I think you know our goal is to
reduce it as quickly as
possible, but the payment error
rate actually went up again, uh,
recently when we sort of
implemented the interviews and
so I'm just a little bit nervous
about making some kind of time
commitment. Um, I think we do
need the investment in the
agency and the IT and all of
that in order to make things,
but I can give you the perfect
plan, um, and that perfect
commitment and then
But, but as you say, Madam
Secretary, Mr. Chairman, we're
talking about $2 billion here.
So it's
You know, a plan is pretty
important. The goal is.
It is important, but the plan
itself, Mr. Chair, is very
important if we're going to lose
$2 million.02 billion dollars on
this deal. So, you know, I would
encourage you to
Bring something forward to us
pretty quick and tell us how we
could help you.
fix that in order, you know,
you're already over
Negative vacancies are, I hadn't
heard that in the, in the state.
scheme of things, that's, that's
a new term to me. I've only been
here a little while, Mr. Chair,
but uh I appreciate you hiring
ahead. I do, because uh it
sounds like you need all the
people you can get.
Uh, to accomplish what you need
to do, and I know you're the
biggest
The Biggest agency we have.
The most money is spent in your
agency.
And I know that there's, with
that brings a lot of
responsibility. And uh,
You know, you, you certainly
gave us a lot of, of scare in
this deal, and, but you also
have the opportunity to fix a
lot of this stuff.
So
You, you know far better than me
or what it's gonna take, but I
would encourage you to kind of
keep us abreast as to what you
need from us, um.
The spending
The, the, uh
Administrative costs that kind
of stuff.
Is uh
Always a lot of money.
And I know that that's your
deal,
administration.
So
Anything we can do, I appreciate
that you let us know, Mr. Chair.
Thank you very much Mr. Chair,
may I respond, um, I just want
to be clear. It's, I think it's
sort of nothing else was
changing. I'd feel very
confident and sort of saying we
can reduce the payment error
rate in 12 months. But we are
looking at also some other very
big changes, um, the Medicaid
work requirements, the biannual
verification of documentation,
the additional documentation
that's required.
That is the factor that's a
little a bit unknown for me, and
it's the reason that I'm having
we're we really have to look
very closely at this, um,
because we don't know what those
impacts will be
administratively, but we can't.
Operate as status quo with our
current
Number of workforce, for
example, and reduce the payment
error rate and do all of those
things. We're gonna have to
really look at it all together,
payment error rate is going to
have to go with the
implementation of all of these
other policies, and that is the
part that the agency is
operating in a bit of unknown
territory, um, I will say that
work requirements have been
implemented by other states very
poorly, uh, in fact, the courts
have kind of ceased their
operations of that in many
cases, so it has been, you know.
do it good. It is going to be
challenging and to do it fast,
it's going to be challenging.
It's going to require some
investment. And so I just wanted
to make that clarity. It's not
that I don't want to make a
commitment about the payment
error rate specifically, it's
that I'm concerned about doing
that with all of these other
unknown factors.
Thank you, Senator. Uh, next,
uh, Senator Trujil.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Secretary.
Congratulations on your
anniversary for your service to
the state, and thank you for
that service. Uh, did you say 20
or 25 years?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, 25
years. Congratulations. That's,
that's a real big
accomplishment. Um, Mr. Chair,
uh, secretary, on page 6, you,
um, are talking about the
potential impacts.
And
I think it's just important for
us to remember and I know that
you do every day that you work,
that these numbers are people.
These numbers are people, and
these numbers are kids, and um,
you know, we're looking at the
potential of decreased health.
And increased serious.
Illness, um, and that means kids
with earaches that don't get
treated, who, uh, potentially
have hearing loss, all kinds of
different things, so, um, I, I
just, this is kind of sobering,
uh, to look at these numbers. I
do have a question though, in
regards to this reduction have
hospitals over the course of us
increasing access to healthcare.
Have they seen decreases in
emergency rooms because it seems
to me
When I go to the emergency room,
very seldom, um, but it's not
packed like it used to be.
10 years ago.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Trujillo,
I
would be a really great
question, I think for the
hospital association, which is
coming later. I do believe that
the investments that the state
is making through other
mechanisms in primary care, um,
have sort of alleviated some of
that. I don't know if it's like
really where we need it to be
because I know our ERs are still
people are waiting a long time
and it depends on where you are
in the state, of course, but I.
Think
Um, we've done a lot of
investments through the rural
healthcare fund to implement
additional primary care and
specialty care around the state,
uh, particularly in rural
communities so that there's not
as much spill over into our ERs.
We've also implemented those
higher Medicaid rates and so
we've seen over 4000 new
providers, uh, you've heard me
talk about that last week at
LFC, um, in our network, sort of
new network growth is really
improving, so access to care is
overall really improving, I
think.
As that sort of looks to shrink,
that's going to have an impact
again and sort of put that
additional pressure on our
hospitals, sort of as the point
of care where people go when
something really goes wrong and
they don't have a regular source
of care. Thank you. Um, and
then, um, Mr. Chairman,
secretary on page 8, you talk
about the work requirement of
those 175, 9079 people who are
going to be subject to
newly, uh, newly subject to work
requirements. How many of those
are, are potentially already
working.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator Trujillo,
so our data show that 79% of
Snap families have a working
adult in the household and so,
um, most of them are working.
You can still qualify for our
programs with a job because
You know, if you're working a
minimum wage job or you can't
get a full time full time hours,
you can still absolutely
qualify, uh, unfortunately, uh,
because we are tiered to the
poverty level. So most families
have someone working or they
have a disability or they're a
caretaker, and so those are
really the conditions often or,
you know, sort of a reason that
they cannot work a valid reason.
So most of them are working.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman
Secretary. That was my
understanding is that the
majority of
people, so you said about 79%,
that only leaves 21%, and I
would think that in that 21%, a
good portion of those are
disabled or caretakers for
disabled. Um, what about
seniors? Are seniors going to be
required to work? And what, at
what age do you get to be
solitary at home during life,
uh, Mr. Cha, Senator Trujillo,
great question. Uh, so the
reconciliation bill does
contemplate extending the work
requirement age.
Um, I think it ends at 60 under
current rules, and it would
extend to 64, I believe.
the
proposed revision. Thank you,
Mr. Secretary. 64 is not too
bad. I was afraid that it might
be 70, or, or older. Um, and
then the last question I have is
on page 14. Um, I actually am,
uh
Very excited about the prospect
that uh you'll be able to
implement um updated IT
procedures, and I'm sure that
was something that the
department has in their
forecast, my concern is that
it's probably wasn't forecasted
for at this very moment and for
this very short time frame. Um,
I recognize that the
information that Thaksin Rev has
in that it's very confidential.
Is that would that be an
accurate statement?
Uh, Mr. Cha, Senator Trejo,
absolutely it's a HIPA protected
information.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, secretary,
and so, um, you indicate that
you need about $20 million. That
seems like a fairly low amount.
It cost us 15 million just to
get that regulation and
licensing, all of our licenses
on, and almost none of that
information is confidential.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senators, that's
just the general fund portion,
so we do get a federal match on
that, um, for Medicaid
eligibility or are match is
about 75%, so we would get, uh,
be able to draw down from that,
um, and those, that is really to
make the changes to implement
the work requirements which are
current IT system does not do to
configure things for co-pay
tracking, which would be
required um for all of those
kinds of additional changes, um,
and to try and make it as easy
as possible for customers to.
their work compliance, um, so
that's really what that is, but
it's just the general fund
portion. OK, thank you, Mr.
Secretary.
uh, Mr. Chairman Secretary, last
question. How quickly do you
need that money so that you can,
uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, I really
feel like as soon as we know
what this final bill is gonna
look like we, we need to have
some serious conversations about
appropriations and what the
agency needs to get ready. It's
going to depend on.
The timing, um, when we were
originally looking at the first
version, the house version had
pushed timelines out pretty far,
2028, 2029, they have become
very aggressive and so it it
looks like we're gonna need some
funding pretty imminently, uh,
to make some changes. So as soon
as we know it's premature now.
We don't really know what the
bill is gonna look like today,
but we might know in a few days,
in which case I think then we
should really engage in some
earnest conversations about that
and um make sure that you have
all the
information you need to make a
decision.
Thank you, Senator, uh, Senator
Townsend.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh,
thank you for your presentation
and your service and your
anniversary, uh.
Congratulations.
Um, did I catch the number is
the cost of the PER currently is
estimated to be about $200
million.
Is that correct?
Um, Mr. Chair Senator Townsend,
there's a range. It is on slide.
It's about 224 million, I think,
uh, under the current iteration.
That's
That's, uh, sorry, it's on
flight 8. So that range is
between 224352 million. The snap
cost share is about 295 million
right now. I think that that's
assuming we don't make any
improvement, like that's if we
didn't make any improvements at
all. I am sure that's not how
any of you all want this to play
out, and I anticipate, uh, a lot
of additional oversight of the
payment error rate from the
legislative.
body, um, rightfully so, given
the impact of the cost, and so,
um, you know, that is, that is
really just as if it were today.
That would be the reduction in
cost uh to New Mexico or
reduction in federal funds. So
um.
and Madam Secretary, there seems
to be
at least maybe some driving
economics to become better, and
I mean, we all understand that.
And in most
problem solved.
Processes that I've been
involved with.
There is a certain amount of
what I would call low hanging
fruit.
You probably are very aware of
an area that wouldn't cost much
money, but would have
Significant savings.
Can you expound on that a little
bit.
Um, sure, Mr. Chair, Senator
Townsend, I do think that's, I
think that's right, and we were
talking about that.
A lot internally yesterday, I
think one of the areas, for
example, of low hanging fruit is
really um on slide 10, you've
got item 3. This, this
long-standing policy. It's
probably goes back over a decade
of accepting self attestation
for shelter costs, utilities and
independent care when we
calculate the benefit amount.
What happens is we sort of
accept what the customer tells
us and then we get the
documentation later and when we
go back and do these.
quality checks, we find out like
the rent wasn't what they told
us or something doesn't match up
exactly and that's where you get
a quality hit, um, so that seems
like a very logical place for us
to really kind of take a look at
what we're doing in our current
practice and see if we can make
some really big improvements in
terms of, you know, kind of
requiring the documentation from
the customer upfront.
There is an impact to that,
which is it takes us longer to
do the eligibility determination
where it's more work intensive
and so we would potentially be
looking at
Additional timeliness findings.
Um, it's really kind of, I don't
know if it's both and or either
or. I think that's really where
we have to sort of really pay
attention so that we don't
implement a change and then all
of a sudden we can't get
benefits out the door on time
because this front process is so
time, so time consuming, so we
just really wanna make sure. I
think that's something that uh
we were talking about, but I
would, I would say the
interviews have restarted,
that's already going to sort of
implement.
Some improvements. We've also
got the interim reports. So
those factors 1 and 2 are now
kind of addressed because we've
restarted those processes, um.
Number 3, we're really taking a
close look at that and then I
think the other two sort of that
pressure number 5, we are under
continuous pressure for
timeliness. We do have federal
findings if we aren't timely
with our benefit issuance, but
we have really worked on sort of
getting a new workforce
experienced and trained, um, and
really appreciative of the of
the investments of the
legislature sort of to improve
our training of case workers, so
I think we're kind of really
addressing all five of those
factors, but I would say that
low hanging fruit is probably
#3.
I noticed the
chair and secretary death.
Uh, I suspect in any process
it's this big.
And as Senator Wood said, you
You're the gorilla in the room
as far as the department size.
You have to address a certain
amount of fraud.
Can you quantify that.
Um, Mr. Terror, Senator, we do,
we do have processes. We have an
inspector general, um, and we
do.
fraud investigations and we are
curtailing there's a number of
steps that we're actually
taking, um, for example, this,
the state has been pretty
generous with its policy around
issuance of new EBT cards, um,
the replacement of those benefit
cards and kind of been.
Um, I would say very generous.
We're revising that um to kind
of follow what the federal
government says, I think
somewhere along the way we've
kind of started issuing more
cards to people. So that's like
one of the issues. We also have
a new fraud detection system,
um, where we can sort of see
more clearly as people are
selling their EBT cards. So I'd
be happy and it kind of provides
some additional follow-up
information and prepare anything
on fraud today, but happy to
provide you with some additional
information about how we're
taking a look at that.
I, I would appreciate that.
Yeah.
Um, secretary, um,
Representative Ronstone talked
about a spending rate, I think
is very helpful. If we could get
income on the same chart.
Where we can
quickly look at
where the lines might cross, it
might be very helpful.
Oh, that would be a great tool.
Um.
And I think the only other thing
that I caught my eye that
I would like.
Explanation on.
On slide 4.
There are 2 comments made, uh.
One is New Mexico has the
highest rate of child
insecurity, childhood
insecurity.
And the next one says
investments in New Mexico safety
net have reduced child poverty
from the worst.
In the nation of 17th.
It seems contradictory to me
that we would be able to do such
good.
But still be last.
Can you
Explain that to me Mr. Chair,
Senator, um.
Well, it can explain the way
that the poverty metric works,
which is to sort of take into
account.
Investments in
Safety net programs. So it sort
of accounts for
You know, states that have, for
example, in New Mexico, we
implemented summer food
programs. We've um expanded the
eligibility level for Snap up to
200% of poverty. Those are
factors that kind of count
towards household income in the
poverty metric, and so when you
invest in those public programs,
it reduces the poverty level of
those households. I think
without those we, I, I think, I
guess my best answer to you.
that those are counter the
reasons we've made those
decisions is to counteract that
item number 2nd to last bullet
with that high food insecurity
sort of recognizing that without
those investments, families are
really struggling in New Mexico,
um, and that our kids really
often are struggling, um, and so
I think it's, it's both, um,
those investments, I think
without those investments we
are.
We're struggling with food
insecurity pretty substantially
across. I appreciate that it
just caught my eye that if we
had done such good, and I hope
we have, uh, to reduce child
poverty.
That we had also addressed.
food insecurity commensurately.
It would, it would
seemed to me that they
The, the last question I have,
and you mentioned it briefly was
the um immigration status.
And I know it's, it's, it's, um,
It's a subject of much
controversy but I'll, I'll try
to do it in this manner.
Is, is there a
For for those people that have
immigration status, they to be
in a court, immigration court,
those would be those people that
had that.
That were in that system would
be eligible.
Is that correct?
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator, I think
they're making substantial
revisions to that. So currently
I'm talking about today
um many, not all, lawfully
present individuals can be
eligible for Medicaid depending
on their income. There are for
some a 5 year waiting period,
um, and that is waived for
children, for example, so it
really kind of depends, but yes,
today, pretty comprehensive in
of people who are lawfully
present in the United States,
being able to access
benefits if they qualify based
on income.
Secretary.
One follow up is that
is do you have the ability
And do you monitor?
The court appearances.
maintain their eligibility.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator, no, we,
we are not able to. We do uh
eligibility checks with um
United States database. I don't
remember what it's called, but
um the database that kind of
checks immigration status. We
actually ping against that
continuously, um, and so we do
verify uh through electronic
means, um, the immigration
status of every individual. I
appreciate it. Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Thank you, Secretary.
Thank you, uh, floor leader
Sinsky.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Madam
Chair, uh, secretary,
congratulations on your 25
years, um.
I did want to let the committee
know that the Senate did just
pass the bill. I think we'll all
be.
Uh, reading it and trying to
understand exactly what ended up
in the bill as a result of the
uh all night negotiations, um.
But that is on its way back to
the
The US House.
Um, I just wanted to ask about a
couple of topics. Um, one, I was
especially struck by
The number of uninsured that we
could potentially be facing, um,
and it looks like to me,
That we would have.
Around 88,000 individuals losing
Medicaid coverage, another
potential 38,000 losing exchange
coverage, um,
And that's a total of about
127,000 or so in addition to the
roughly 200,000 or so that are
currently uninsured.
So that takes us up to about
325,000.
New Mexicans or so that are
potentially going to be
uninsured, uh, in the next year,
and I just wonder, um, a couple
things. How does that sit in
sort of historical context in
terms of an uninsured rate,
Madam Secretary, uh, Mr.
Chairman, I don't know if you
can comment on that. Is that
It seems to me that that's a
little bit higher, but not
dissimilar from rates that we
have maybe 1520 years ago.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Le Spansky, uh, I
think it's actually probably
still lower and we still do have
more coverage and when we talk
about the 88,000 New Mexicans
rolling off of.
coverage, we still are covering
254,000 people through the
Medicaid expansion who didn't
have coverage prior to 2014. So
the previously uninsured
population, uh, back when New
Mexico had uninsured rates that
were upwards of 18, 19%, um, on
slide 6 we are looking at a 4%
change in uninsured predicted,
um,
You know, so I think we've had
some fluctuations in the
insurance market in New Mexico
recently, partially because of
the Medicaid unwinding, that's
probably contributed to some,
some growth, but
I think still having we would
still have the Medicaid
expansion, at least unless that
changes, um, and then we still
have the exchange where people
can purchase coverage even if
it's.
So more expensive, um, with
those two things, those are
still in place things that we
didn't have back in 2014. So I
do not think our insurance rate
uninsured rate will go back up
till like 18, 19% as worse in
country, uh, but it's still a
pretty big impact, um.
Across New Mexico. Thank you,
uh, Mr. Chairman and Madam
Secretary, and what um what
proportion of these folks do you
think will be children?
Um,
Mr. Chair, uh, leader Spansky. I
don't think that we are talking
about kids mostly, although kids
live in families and when
families are struggling to kind
of keep up with paperwork. I
mean, I would ask you how many
of you have an unopened unopened
mail at home or have gotten a
confusing notice from the
government, can affect the whole
household. This number, this
88,000 is really adults, um,
that we think will.
roll off as a result of the
expansion. There is some
possibility that some of the
policy initiatives we've made in
New Mexico will be rolled back.
At the federal level, we, we
have continuous eligibility for
children 0 to 6.
I wouldn't be surprised if that
changes, um, but it's not in the
bill, so I think you know those
would sort of impact our
coverage losses for kids, but I
think right now we're mostly
projecting adults, uh, in in
that.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chairman and
secretary, um, and, and the same
with Snap. What percentage of
the individuals affected might
be kids through the snout
changes. Well, uh, madam, Mr.
Chair, um, leadersansky, I think
that actually will be more
children because you're talking
about a household benefit, uh,
so you're kind of.
Really talking about and you
know sort of a one EBT card for
everybody kind of thing, um, and
I think it affects the whole
household. It's more likely to
affect that benefit, so I think
that there probably are more
kids that would be likely to
lose Snap eligibility. We can
kind of provide that more
granular projection to you. Um,
I don't know that I have that
today, but we can certainly.
Thank you for that. um, Mr.
Chairman and Madam Chair, I
think it would behoove the
Committee to consider the food
assistance programs that exist.
Outside of Snap, particularly
for kids in the school-based
programs or other programs that
may need to be beefed up.
Um, to ensure that kids have
access to food so they can
continue to stay in school and
um be healthy.
Um
The other uh Mr. Chan, um.
Madam Chair and secretary.
Healthcare providers seem to be
very impacted by these changes
and
I wonder.
Is there anything in the
proposed legislation as far as
you know, and I know we're still
gonna be unpacking that for a
little bit.
That is designed to assist.
These providers that it seems
like are gonna be suffering from
a loss of the higher
reimbursement rates potentially
greater uninsured patients,
patients that maybe they've been
treating for quite some time
that suddenly don't have
coverage, um, and we'll be
seeking care and they'll, you
know, these doctors are gonna be
having to make these difficult.
Decisions about how to provide
care to them, um, in hospitals,
of course, that we've been very
focused on, uh, shoring up
financially and otherwise.
Um, was there anything?
I know that this is discussing
the cuts to these programs, but
is there anything in the
legislation designed to support
those providers or the
hospitals. Uh, Mr. Chair,
Leader Syansky, not really. I
would say that there's an
exemption that was contemplated
in the most recent iteration
that I saw of the Senate bill,
um, that exempted nursing
facilities from some of the
reductions, um, so we do have a
provider tax that affects
nursing facilities that look
like they might be exempted.
There's been so many different
versions that considered
grandfathering in existing
programs to support hospitals,
but there's really no additional
support offset the losses, uh,
in revenue, which is why I think
we're trying to
make sure folks know that, you
know, we're facing a potential
$2.8 billion dollar loss in
revenue to our provider network
here in New Mexico. I, I one
other factor that I just wanna
call out is another concern is
that um when the rates are set
at 100% of Medicare. New Mexico
has relatively low Medicare
rates. Uh, we are low compared
to Texas. Uh, we are low
compared to our neighbors, and
so there is a very real risk of
of providers sort of
exiting and kind of moving out
of the state, um, if that's the
reimbursement thresholds that
were set at and there's really a
as you point out, no sort of
Counter policy to sort of
suggest how we might hold our
providers up and like kind of
keep that from happening right
now in the bill.
And, and Mr. Chair, Secretary,
those Medicare rates are set at
the federal level for our state.
Uh, Mr. Chair leader Spansky,
that's correct.
OK, so,
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, Madam
Chair secretary, I think.
Um, the thing that I am sitting
with is that it's really going
to be upon us to figure out how
to assist providers and
remaining in this state,
providing care, uh, in the face
of
Very serious revenue issues for
individual practices for
hospitals, um,
And and and just potentially,
you know, uh.
Uh, sickening population or a
more ill population that they're
treating, um, that I think.
On top of
Being able to earn less money is
really going to create some
challenges for retaining the
home.
Um, Mr. Chair leader Spansky,
that's, that's right. I think,
um, as I mentioned earlier, the
other sort of place where I
anticipate the cost to come is
from the commercially insured
market, so, you know, as we
That's sort of the natural
place, right? If a provider
needs to make up lost revenue,
they're gonna look for where
they have a payer source, um,
and so the rest of the market
probably will bear a big share
of these costs. So when people
see their
You know, premiums go up. It's
probably gonna be related in
many ways to this revision
downward of the rates, which is
why I was kind of referring to
the agency's purchasing power
and the ability to to use those
Medicaid rates to drive prices
down and we've really made some
good inroads on that, but I
think it's.
Mr. Chairman, secretary, so in
short, you know, the, the
increased costs.
Uh, and losity.
Um, OK, thank, thank you, Mr.
Chairman, Madam Chair.
Thank you, floor leader. uh,
Representativelata.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Madam Secretary. I think I'm
gonna, I, I'd like to uh.
Talk about job losses.
Um, before I came up yesterday,
I met with um some agencies in
my, in my legislative district.
In between two of the uh two of
the agencies, 2 of the entities.
They were telling me that the,
the cuts to Medicaid happen the
way they're supposed to happen
or the way they're, the way it's
rolling out, that between the
two entities, they'll lose about
1000.
Employees.
Uh
11 entities aren't much larger
than the other covers several
counties in the southern part of
the state.
And I'm thinking uh along the
lines because of uh uh
chairwoman lustro brought up,
uh, something that, that I
thought was really important.
And so I'm thinking has, have,
has your agency or maybe
legislative finance, you know,
modeled the cumulative impact.
Of all those job loss.
On the state as far as the the
the GDP employment, poverty
levels.
Because I figure, uh, Mr. Chair
and Madam Secretary that
With these, if all these people
lose their, lose their full-time
job with benefits.
Um, they're more than likely
gonna apply for staff.
There are more than likely gonna
apply for other assistance.
So the numbers that we're
looking at now are the people
who are eligible or who are
participating currently, it's
gonna multiply significantly.
So I'm, my question, uh, Mr.
Chair and Madam Secretary, is,
has your agency considered or
looked at that as far as the
larger impact to the state
economy.
Um, Mr. Chair, um,
representative, I think we've
started to do that. I think if
we probably need to do.
a more rigorous economic
analysis and we're happy to work
with LFC folks on that together,
uh, you can see on slide 4 that
based on national estimates in
New Mexico is looking at about a
1.5%, almost 2% decrease in
jobs. I would say probably more
of those jobs gonna be in some
of our rural communities because
hospitals closing, for example,
hospital might be your biggest
employer in some of your rural
communities.
And so you're kind of looking at
loss of food workers and, you
know, cleaning service and all
of those people that make a
hospital really run those people
that um kind of keep the doors
open and lights on and all the
things. Those are those are
gonna be the job losses that we
experience, so I do agree with
that. I think we could do some
additional modeling in terms of
like maybe what that looks like
by county or region of New
Mexico, um, I definitely think
it's a reality. Similarly, if
snap.
Spending goes down, um.
You know, through, because, you
know, the states.
Can't meet the obligation or
whatever of the of the cost
share, and that's 1 in $1.3
billion in revenue to retailers
across the state, every grocery
store, every gas station,
dependent on this revenue. So it
is, it will have an impact and I
think we, we can do a better job
of sort of modeling that by
region, but um in terms of job
loss and happy to work with my
partners at the LFC on that.
Thank you for that. I really
appreciate that because, you
know, this 111 of the agencies
that I was uh discussing this
with. So they provide uh
At home services for people with
disabilities and seniors and,
and, and, and, and, you know, if
this were to happen and these
people were to lose their jobs,
and then these folks will go
that's, that's I I'm looking at
the larger, I wanna see the
larger impact it would have on
our state as far as that's
concerned. And uh so any, any
information that you can have
for us, I would greatly
appreciate that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Representative, uh,
representative Brown.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
Secretary Armi, thank you very
much for a very, we have a lot
to deal with here. Um, I do want
to go back briefly. I know we
talked about the payment error
rate, and I just have another
question or so about that.
Um, it says that one of the
current corrective actions
that's in process, and right now
we're at 14% in the error rate
goal, I think, is to get below
5% and one of the
Um, actions underway right now
is apparently to um send a team
to visit states with low error
rates.
And understand their processes.
So I'm just curious, Mr. Chair,
Madam Secretary, are we not
already
Contemplating what other states
are doing, and I don't know that
we need to send a team, but
maybe we do, um, are we not
aware of what the high
performing states are doing to
have low error rates, Mr. Jar.
Uh, Mr. Terror, Representative
Brown, I think that's a fair
question, um, certainly we hope
to be doing more learning
across, you know, sort of like I
think those states there's about
6 states that have payment error
rates below the 6% threshold. So
every state, uh, is really
interested in what those states
are doing. One of the reasons
that I kind of thought maybe it
would be good to send a team out
there is that it's really
helpful to see practically.
How they are processing cases,
like how they are sitting with
work, how they're conducting
their interviews. Um, it's one
thing to say, improve your
interviews. It's another thing
to like watch them do it and
really kind of understand the
implementation, so that was
really my thought was that, you
know, probably for relatively
low cost, we could send a few of
our leadership team out to
really learn from another state,
how they're doing, what best
practices they've implemented.
How are they managing traffic in
their offices to kind of get the
thing. Are they asking for all
the document
ation upfront. How are they
communicating that with
customers, um, there will be uh
sort as this issue takes on new
prominence a lot of technical
assistance calls across states.
There's big networks of people
like me and people like our
leadership team, uh, who kind of
connect across states to really
watch and I know that there's
going to be a lot of opportunity
for that. So it doesn't
necessarily have to be in
person. It's just, um, I don't
think it hurts to really have a
team walk through or how they do
it, uh.
We consider um making big
changes, which are really
challenging to implement with a
workforce this large, you know,
so you're trying to get everyone
to do the same thing. How do
they train folks to do it? How
do they monitor the performance
of those workers, um, so I think
there's a lot of really good
questions that might be valuably
learned in person, but um, it
doesn't necessarily have to be.
Thank you, uh, Mr. Chair and
secretary, which states, let's
say, let's name 3, are doing
really well in this regard.
Well, the 3 lowest are on uh Mr.
Chair, um, Representative Brown,
the 3 lowest states are South
Dakota, Idaho, and Vermont on
slide 10.
Thank you.
Um, there's a reference in here,
Mr. Chairman, on it's, I think,
um, slide 10 to the great
resignation, and that's
apparently in regards to losing
um case workers, social worker,
whatever it is, what is the
great resignation and when did
it happen and how large was the
impact, Mr. Chair. Uh, Mr.
Chair, Representative Brown, um.
That started sort of I would
probably say that that started
in 2021, uh, and did not really
end until.
Um,
Last year, I think we've done a
lot of work to really stabilize
the workforce, but our agency
was running.
20 to 30% vacancy rates in case
workers, which is why we're
really proud of getting into a
negative vacancy rate, um, we've
really tried to make our workers
happy and make sure that they
know how to do the work that
they do and support them and
sort of change the agency
culture to really
And make sure that, you know
that there's a lot of strain and
those workers were the front
line during the pandemic. They
were showing up every day in the
office, um, and serving
customers and it was a lot of
pressure, um, I don't know if
you all are aware, but are
enrollment had over a million
New Mexicans at one point during
the pandemic, um, so really, you
know, they were the ones showing
up every day to do that work.
It's a very high pressure job,
um, there's a lot of competition
out there too, uh, for people
who can have
Jobs that aren't quite as hard,
um, and, you know, not as much
pressure, so we've really worked
to sort of bring that down, but
I would say that we've seen that
stabilization happen over the
past 12 months, really, um,
through a lot of hard work, um,
but prior to that, we have a lot
of fluctuation and a lot of
exodus of workforce.
Thank you for that. And then Mr.
Cherry, I just one other
question.
Uh, when we talked about
eligibility for Medicaid or
whatever programs are involved
in that.
Um, I imagine the top factor
would be income of the
applicant, um, do you, and I
imagine there are other, you
know, number of people in the
household and all that. Uh, do
you look at assets, Mr. Chair,
Madam Secretary.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Brown for most categories of
Medicaid, we do not count
assets, uh, per federal law. You
are not allowed to count assets,
uh, but for institutional care,
sort of our, um, long term care
categories, individuals with
disabilities who are getting
home and community based
services we do, there are
assets, um.
Calculations and we have an
asset verification system, so we
ping against uh bank systems and
life insurance and things like
that, so we actually do an
electronic verification of that.
It sounds like it's, it's very
complex. Uh, Mr. Chairman, so
also related to eligibility
then um I believe I read that
the uh federal dollars flowing
into our state for Medicaid.
We're looking at $9.56 billion.
Is that accurate, Mr. Chair, Mr.
Chair Representative Brown,
that's correct.
OK, and then, um, the last
component of that question, Mr.
Chair, if, um, in the next
fiscal year, New Mexico were to
receive the exact same amount of
money, 9.56 billion.
Would you consider that a cut?
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative.
It, it really depends on the
enrollment. Um, I can tell you
that if we lose 90,000 people
from coverage.
Probably more than maybe more
than what we need, um, because
we would be sort of rolling
people so much of the Medicaid
budget is really driven by the
enrollment numbers and so if we
start to see that go down, we
won't need as much money, so it
really depends on the enrollment
and then of course there are
other factors like how much it
costs to provide care, um, who
rolled off of the program. Are
they the people that don't use
services very often and so we're
kind of left with population
that has more acuity or a higher
cost, so.
It really depends. I wish I
could answer that question more
directly in the health care
inflation is a real thing, um,
and so the cost is going up and
we are seeing lots of drugs that
are hitting the market that are
really costly. I mean, there's a
lot of things that drive costs
upwards and I will say
healthcare isn't getting less
expensive on in general. That's
not the trend, uh.
So
So Mr. Chair, thank you for the
time and again, thank you for
those uh really good answers.
Senator Lopez.
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair,
Madam Co-Chair.
Uh, just a question, um, and I
didn't see it listed in your
information, but are there any
Anticipated changes for child
support.
Um,
Mr. Chair, Senator Lopez.
Not in the reconciliation bell.
There are, um,
There there is. I was at a
meeting and Philadelphia
recently and the head of the
administration for Children and
Families spoke at that meeting,
um, he talked about really
getting back to basics with
child support and really making
that about enforcement. You all
are very aware, I know, uh,
about the work we've done to try
and get.
Non-custodial parents to work
and we've had a very strong
partnership with DWS.
The indication was that they're
really not interested in that
direction for child support that
they really want to focus on
enforcement, establishing
maternity, so it's looking a
little bit different from what,
uh, what it looks like today
where we've really tried to
modernize the program, um, but I
haven't heard any changes, you
know, we've done statutes,
statutory changes in New Mexico
to kind of modernize the program
pass through more benefits onto
kids, uh, more of the child
support actual payment to kids.
Did not hear that those were
that there would potentially
change, so I haven't really
heard much on the child support
front, but happy to keep you
posted if I hear anything else.
No, and I appreciate it, Madam
Chair, because, of course, child
support is uh integral with
regards to um healthcare issues
and um, you know, the list is
long for families, so I'm just,
just wanted to ask on that
particular one.
And then
questions have been asked, and
these are Madam Chair, just a
couple of.
Statements, I guess, you know,
we talk about SNAP benefits, um.
We still don't provide enough
for families anyway with what we
give.
Especially when you look at
those of us who are getting
older to survive on SNAP
benefits, but um in my
community, there are still lines
for food distribution.
Even though New Mexico has
improved the number.
Numbers and I'm seeing numbers
on paper. There are still many
families in my community, and I
have lines at the distribution
centers, and I've seen some even
here in Santa Fe.
So I, I, I question sometimes
how we calculate poverty.
Um, especially the new numbers.
Um
Madam Chair and Mr. Co-chair,
for those who lose coverage, and
you did mention it, Madam
Secretary. um, health issues
could increase.
And for those, especially
adults, our cost gets more
expensive and as recently, um,
this last, this earlier this
year, spending 17 days in the
hospital myself with pneumonia
and other issues out and who
else could afford that?
Right? Especially um for those
who are
Uh, unable to um have an
adequate income or a job that
provides.
Um.
Healthcare coverage.
So that's a concern because if
you don't have a doctor, uh,
federally called federally
qualified healthcare center or
other areas to go for
healthcare, even just to get a
checkup.
We're
Expanding the cost for down the
road for us.
Um
And then, of course, too, I, I
mentioned that for adults
because um
The costs are spread for private
insurers, yes, that could cover
it, but the government, remember
we also provide coverage for our
employees, municipal
governments, county.
in our schools. So those costs
are going to go up and then who
has to pay for it, right? The
taxpayer or government in some
shape or form.
Um, and then, of course,
healthcare is one of the larger
employees in the state and you
alluded to that, Madam
Secretary.
Uh, any loss of Medicaid money.
that we receive, which of course
then is reimbursed and sent to
the uh healthcare providers, um,
there will be a loss of jobs.
And so it's kind of that circle,
Madam Chair, Mr. Co-chair, that
um we can anticipate what's
going to happen.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um,
You know, when my wife tells me
she's got a good idea.
And then she proceeds to tell me
what that idea as I listen.
I waited for a month for the
federal government to tell me
that this good idea is a good
idea, and tell me what it is.
So, um, like uh Le Spensky, I'm
waiting to see what it is, so
I don't want to say we're
looking at things that may not
happen, but we are probably
looking at things that may not
happen. So, and I'm still
secretary, I'm still of the
opinion that if I do my job
correctly, as a legislative
body, we can get people off your
programs, and that's our idea,
that's my idea that we actually
do that. So, um, page 4, just a
quick question on the
investments that we've made for
the safety net for reducing
child poverty.
If
And I say if, if something
occurs with this bill.
What will it take for us to make
sure that we don't go back to
being first.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative
Duncan, so I think part of it
will be for the absolute
responsibility of this my agency
to reduce the payment error
rates so that we can sustain the
SNAP program in New Mexico. We
take that responsibility really
seriously. You won't hear any
argument from me or excuses
about it, so, uh, just to be
really clear that I think that's
the number one thing uh to
sustain the investments that
we've made in Snap.
Uh, because that has had a very
big impact on reducing the child
poverty level. There are other
things like child tax credits
and things like that that are
kind of factored in as well, uh,
so I would just encourage you
all. Those are not necessarily
at the healthcare authority, but
they are, uh, things that are
really important. We've also
implemented the continuous
eligibility for children 0 to 6,
uh, get the, get those kiddos to
kindergarten without their
parents having to worry about
this fluctuation of their
coverage, get them vaccinated,
make sure that they've got
All the services they need, um,
so, so kind of continued support
for those really important
policy initiatives, um, New
Mexico also has sort of done a
great job of supporting maternal
child health, really trying to
invest there, uh, so really
continuing those investments
where we can. I think it's gonna
be challenging where we might be
losing federal funding. We'll
have to talk about how do we
sustain those? Is there, are
there pots of money in this? I,
I don't know that.
There are, and so we kind of
really need to look at this, but
I do.
100% agree with you that I would
love nothing more than for
poverty to just go away. I mean,
I think our whole agency would
just
The ecstatic if that was the
case and the reality for every
New Mexican is that no one was
born into poverty and no one
lived in poverty at all, uh, in
our programs really kind of were
unnecessary. So I do think we
agree on that, uh, but that does
require a lot of work about how
do we improve education? How do
we improve jobs? How do we have
good paying jobs around New
Mexico. Those are all really big
factors that kind of go into the
poverty rate. So I would
encourage you all to think about
sustaining the investments where
you.
can really trying to look
together about, you know, how
can we support our healthcare
providers. How can we keep our
kids healthy, um, and how can we
support family income, you know,
how can we do that here in New
Mexico so that families aren't
struggling.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thanks,
Madam Secretary. So that's a
thought that you're already for
the last month, you've been
going through this whole process
and looking at the what ifs and
what, what if it doesn't happen
as well, right? Uh, Mr. Chair
Representative Duncan,
absolutely, uh, I think we're
we're we're definitely being
kept on our toes by this bill. I
will say it has changed by the
minute, um, but we are actively
planning, really looking at
options, um, will be very happy
to continuously.
engage with you all on what our
options are here in New Mexico.
Thank you Mr. Chairman and and
uh secretary on page, my next
question on page 6.
You, you talked a little bit
about that 88,000 that will be,
could lose their coverage.
Are they able to get coverage
elsewhere.
well or any other program we
might have out there, Mr. Chair
Representative Duncan, if you
qualify for Medicaid, you cannot
get coverage through the
exchange through Bewell. So, um,
the answer is no, uh, because
they most likely would need to
kind of come into compliance
with the Medicaid requirement in
order to get coverage. Uh, so
it's not like they could lose
coverage and then go over to the
exchange. Most likely they would
be uninsured or have to figure
out how to come into.
clients with the Medicaid work
requirements or, um, you know,
some of this is gonna be just
much of it, probably mostly,
most of them are probably
working, um, and they're really
looking at additional paperwork
so they might come in and come
off, come in and come off. I'm
really kind of we're looking at
probably some additional churn,
um, particularly where folks,
you know, kind of wait until
they're really sick.
Go to the hospital, a hospital
helps them sign back up with
Medicaid. They're signed up for
6 months or so, and they kind of
fall back off again. Uh, so
we're looking at that kind of
coverage pattern, most likely.
Thank you, Mr. Chair Secretary.
Um, my next question is on page
7.
The total jobs created and
supported 18,549. That's not
specific to snap, that's
specific to folks that are in
this industry.
Or are you suggesting that all
of those are snap jobs. Uh, no,
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Dunkin, those are jobs created
by Snap revenue to our
retailers, you know, these are
grocery store workers and
farmers and other people who do
work that's, that's really what
that is.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
Secretary. That's all I had.
Thank representative,
representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
Secretary Armi Hahn. Thank you,
uh, for your service to the
state, it's deeply appreciated.
Um
I was hoping against hope that
the boat wouldn't go the way it
just went, uh, in the Senate,
uh.
I know they, I, I read that
there is uh 50 billion for um
rural hospitals. I was probably
put in by Mikowski out of
Alaska, uh, so I, we won't know
anything until we have time to
read this and see what happens
in the house, uh, but I, I do
think it's gonna pass, and I
think we're, we're looking at
dire circumstances, that's all
there is to it, and um.
I guess
I wouldn't mind, you know, if
they're a huge
tragedy in the country that we
were taking care of, but when
it.
Gives tax breaks.
To billionaires, and uh just the
policy is abhorrent to me. Um,
in general, I just will make
that clear. And uh yeah, let's
not get into the federal
politics of things, let's try
and stick to what we're doing in
New Mexico. Thank you so my
question to you and and when you
brought this and I deeply
appreciate this report.
Uh, when you brought this report
forward.
You must have been thinking
about.
Where you would cut if you had
to.
You know what programs would you
scale back on? I, I know this
report gives us a full kind of
Medicaid and snap layout if we
kept everything the same, and I
think I know we're gonna have to
change things. So, and I know
you probably internally have
been talking about, and it can't
be just, you know, saving cost
effective measures. I, I don't
think that's the kind of cut
we're gonna need, and we have
all these other agencies to
consider, you know, it's not, we
just can't do it all.
Medicaid's back. I mean, you
know, we're having huge cuts in
aging, huge cuts in education,
and, and we'll be hearing about
this, but so have have, has your
agency been talking about what
would be kind of a major
cutback, something that you
could do.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair
Representative Hadera, um,
typically.
Um, and unfortunately, because I
have been here a long time, I
have been involved in multiple
cost containment cut type
situations over the years, uh,
much of that in medicating, it
could be, it's very hard to cut,
you know, $25 million out of
Medicaid because of the federal
maps when you're cutting general
fund 25 million or really
cutting 100 million out of the
programs. It's very, very
challenging. You typically have
um.
Benefits.
So you can kind of trim down
your benefit package.
You can pass some costs on to
consumers, although it's very
limited on what you're allowed
to do in Medicaid. So, um, and
you have eligibility and you
have what you pay providers. So
I think one of the changes here
is that eligibility looks like
it's going to be curtailed uh
through people rolling off and
provider reimbursement rates
look like they're going to be
curtailed. We're actually
looking at
Saving money in the Medicaid
program. I think you will look
at sort of a lower budget, uh,
if those things come to
fruition, um, the way we
anticipate, so I'm not sure
we're gonna cost containment
scenario in Medicaid because the
way that the federal government
is looking to save money here is
by
Um
Sort of rolling people off of
the program and curtailing
provider reimbursement rates for
states. Um, I think that's kind
of what we're looking at, um.
You know, the snap situation is
a little bit different. I think,
um, you know, maybe there's some
some revisions or cuts that
happened there, but much of the
program criteria set by the
federal government, not really
by the states and so what's
interesting about the snap
dynamic is that, you know,
unlike Medicaid, snap has not
been administered kind of like a
state federal partnership where
states get a lot of control over
the policies. Medicaid, we do.
We get a lot of control. We put
a lot of money in and they
think.
That's a change, um, Snap is now
looking like it might be more of
a state federal partnership. And
so how does that look for
states, um, do, are there gonna
be cuts, and I, I just don't
feel prepared to put any re uh
reductions on the table because
the federal government is also
looking to reduce the maximum
benefit. Um, for example, so we
are looking at those lovers. I
don't know if they're gonna be.
Need it because like I said, I
think that the budget might
actually go down. The enrollment
will go down and those provider
payment rates might go down, and
so I think we're looking.
Uh, thank you, secretary, and
really that's all I had, Mr.
Chair. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative.
Anyone else? I've got a couple
of questions and
We're doing really well on time.
We might have a chance for, for
one
quick for sure.
I did have one quick question
for you. I'm looking at your
map, uh, where you talked about
HCA services, so many New
Mexicans. So I'm reading this
correctly and McKinley County.
You're talking about 55.7%.
Of the population.
In that county is being served,
is that include adults and kids.
Uh, Mr. Chairman and Vice Chair,
yes, that is 55.7% of the
population,
the entire population is with
these managed care contracts.
Yeah, uh, what happens is that
renegotiated now or what's the
plan on that?
Um, Mr. Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
I, I don't think so. I don't
think that we would reduce or
eliminate or renegotiate the
contracts, um, however, we do
have 4 managed care plans, um,
two of them are very small in
enrollment, two of them are very
large, Blue Cross and uh
Presbyterian large market share,
um Molina and United, who just
joined Medicaid about a year
ago. They are smaller.
It, it may be that.
That there's some market, you
know, they may need to sort of
um,
It may be that we don't have
enough population to sustain all
three. I, I don't know, um, so
that is a possibility, uh,
Chairman, the federal government
has to approve what you
negotiate with them.
And that includes their profit
level. So is that gonna be
renegotiated. Um, now, Mr.
Chair, Madam Vice Chair, I
haven't heard any changes to
that. Yeah.
Thank you, Representative. I
have a couple of questions on
page 4,
says nearly 1.3 billion in SNAP
revenue at stake. Is that the
total amount of staff revenue or
is that the vulnerable part that
might
You'll get changed. Mr. Cha,
that's the total amount of snap
spending in New Mexico, so
that's the total portion. I
think it's, it's what's not
clear in the bill is what
happens if the state can't pay
its share. Uh, does the snap
benefit completely go away? Does
New Mexico not have any snap
benefits. I think that's really
not totally clear to any state
right now, so, and that's why
that full 1.3 billion is at
stake.
Thank you. Uh,
Some of my concerns, I mean,
we're talking about children,
people living in at or near
poverty, you know, our most
vulnerable parts of our
population. Uh, New Mexico is
very fortunate that as a state
we are wealthy, but we have many
vulnerable people in our state
that are going to be very
directly affected by many of
these changes. Uh, one of the
things that people that I've
heard talked about on the news
is some of how they're planning
on reducing Medicaid roll.
and other things is they
calculated how many people won't
sign up because of the administ
the red tape burden.
Does your agency have a
mechanism, a plan for how to
assist and help people who are
fully eligible for benefits, get
those benefits and not get
dropped off, not forget to fill
out a form and thus get dropped
and, you know, what is the plan
to ensure that we minimize the
number of people who lose
benefits or don't get them
because of the red tape.
Uh, Mr. Chair, great question. I
think most of that 90,000 people
likely to roll off or probably
likely to roll off because of
red tape, uh, not because they
don't qualify. Um, the challenge
will be, and this kind of goes
back to the my final slide,
which is how do you do it fast?
How do you do a good job and how
do you do it in a cost effective
way. That is gonna be very, very
difficult with these aggressive
timeline. I'm not gonna. I am
not gonna lie to you all. I
really want to be clear. This is
gonna be very, very.
heavy lift for the agency to do
it well, um, and it's keeping me
up at night because it's like my
last day of work, uh, for this
administration. I'm not happy
about that, to be honest. Uh, so
I've been thinking a lot about
what does that last day look
like when we go live with these
very big changes. And what if
that fails, um, that is really,
really gonna be hard. So our
task will be how do we do this
in a way that's very customer
focused. Um, I can tell you we
just got through the Medicaid
unwinding.
where we had to do a
redetermination on every single
Medicaid, um, household over a
12 month period. We did so much
communication we sent everyone a
notice and a turquoise envelope.
We still only got about half of
that male that half of the
redeterminations back. So that
redetermination rate pretty low,
it's about 42% and that's with
the very massive campaign
commercials on TV, you know,
billboards on the highway about
the turquoise envelopes. Make
sure you send your stuff back.
It is.
is very hard and like I said
earlier, if you have any
unopened mail in your household
or if you've ever received a
communi confusing communication
from a government agency, then
you know why this is so
challenging. So it is gonna be
hard, um, we will be very
focused on our customers. They
are at the North Star of
everything we do to try and keep
them sort of at the center of
all the decisions we make and
the communications we roll out,
but it's gonna be hard and I'm
not, I'm not expecting a perfect
rollout of these changes by.
by any means, so it's gonna be
challenging.
Thank you, and I, I appreciate.
The things that you've got set
up that you're trying to reduce
the error rate, um, I think you
had indicated uh cost of 51
million was the
The estimate of, of what your
organization would need. Is that
a need that is in this fiscal
year or is this for the budget
that gets approved next year
that begins next July.
July 1, I think is when it
starts. Mr. Chair it really
depends on those time frames,
those final time frames in the
bill, um, I think if we're
looking at 2026 implementation
we need to come together really
quickly, uh, and figure out a
plan for financing the what the
agency needs and getting it
staffed up so we can do all of
the things that we need to do,
um.
If those time frames are pushed
out, it's probably like
something we'll be looking at
for the 27 budget request. I
mean, we would be putting that
in, starting to put that in, and
it's less urgent if those time
frames are out for, but.
I don't know. You guys might
know more than me because that
bill seems to have passed while
he was here, uh, doing this
conversation with you all, so
I'm not sure what those time
frames will be, um, but I think
the sooner we can get planning
on things we know that are going
to happen, uh, the better will
be.
Thank you, and I think that's
kind of the point of this
committee is to, to do some of
that, that early planning, uh,
might point out that the cash
reserves from this year's budget
were, I think 32% on $10 billion
budget, so about $3 billion in
cash reserves, you're 51 million
would lower the 32% down to
about 31.5% and we could fully
fund everything that you're
doing if we choose to do that
out of this current budget.
You know, by reducing that cash
reserve from 32 to 31%,
essentially funds everything
that you're asking for. Um, and
I would hope also in next year's
budget that there is a request
for what you need in order to
make all of this happen. Um, I
think many people have already
indicated that besides the
direct money, this affects
future revenue. It affects how
many people are working, it
affects keeping people from
getting on in the future. It's
much bigger than the direct
number.
As far as the overall that we
are taking care of the most
vulnerable, the children, the
people that are living at or
near poverty, and I think there
was actually there was a comment
about and people doing.
caretaking, that is a job, it's
unpaid work. I mean, they do
have a job. It's just not being
paid from an outside group,
they're essentially paying
themselves for what is real work
of uh child care or elderly care
or disabled care within their
own households. Um, and so I
think it's, it's important that
we fully fund your group and
organization to do all that we
can, if both protects the, on
the low end, I think it was $250
million.
of SNAP funding by getting our
error rate down, but also
ensuring that people who are
eligible know they're eligible,
get the paperwork done and stay
eligible all the way through,
uh,
But
We have workers and people and I
think it was Senator Lopez, but
almost every day I drive by our
one of our food distribution
centers and there's a waiting
line outside every single day.
And so we know we have people
who are food insecure. We know
that there's a need, uh, beyond
just uh and I think the numbers
were in here somewhere
approximately $300 a month of
SNAP benefits that someone gets,
you know, that, that's the
grocery bill for our house of
about a week. I mean, that
doesn't pay for very
much. And so please make sure
that you are asking for what you
need in order to fix the error
rates for reimbursement, um, and
make sure that we're protecting
and taking care of people. The
budget of New Mexico, we don't
want to protect New Mexico's
budget. We want to make sure
that budget is being used to
protect the people and
particularly those most
vulnerable, the children, those
living at or near poverty, those
who are disabled, the elderly,
etc. So again, thank you.
Um.
We have about 5 minutes. Anyone
else has one last follow-up
question, if not, I would
recommend Senator Lopez and then
we'll take a very short break
while we transition and, you
know, people can get a cup of
coffee or, or whatever.
Senator Lopez, Mr. Chairman,
just
Oh, I guess piece of history
when we went through the.
Welfare reform back in '96, that
was my first term here in the
legislature.
And the
Money's, um, you know, the
system had been different as to
how we were helping families in
need of financial.
Um, help
Um, the anticipation was as the
comment was made by the chair,
and, you know, maybe some others
somewhere else, um, that there
would be an anticipated drop in
persons because of paperwork and
all of the other, what I call
obstacles put in place, so it,
it's a, it's a given, Mr. Chair,
that there will be people who
cannot and will not because of
the different obstacles that are
put in place. It happened under
welfare reform, and I anticipate
that the feds may be looking at
block grants.
We were given a block grant at
that point in time, which looked
wonderful, those first couple of
years, but as time progressed,
the state had to own up more
cash, and of course, we serve
less people.
So there's history, Mr. Chair.
Madame Cochair, as to where this
could lead. Thank you.
Thank you. And again, thank you
very much. I appreciate your
very straightforward answers,
uh,
just with the boat that was
taken today, there's kind of
this uh concern about we want to
control things that we don't
have control over. Uh, and so
this committee, I think I, I
mentioned to to Clint, there's
kind of this somber overview in
the.
There's a little bit of
helplessness feeling that, you
know, others are doing things
that we don't quite know what we
can and how to react. But I
think it's important that we
continue to discuss those and be
prepared so when we do have
solid answers, groups like you
are ready to move into act and
again to protect the people of
New Mexico, um, who are our
neighbors and
And fellow, fellow New Mexicans,
so thank you. We'll take about a
5 minute break to start again at
11.
We can start getting everyone
back in their seats so we can
get started. We've got our
presenter patiently waiting for
us to, to get back.
And Sarah, when I mentioned that
a couple of people walked out.
So maybe we ought to just start.
Or, or they figured, oh, I was
supposed to do a bathroom break
and I didn't I better hurry, so,
but Sarah, if you will, an
overview of the Be Well New
Mexico and the impacts of
federal policy proposals on the
coverage and the access.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, um,
members of the committee. My
name is Sarah Fitzgerald. I'm
director of policy and
compliance at BWwell, New
Mexico's health insurance
marketplace, um, really pleased
to be here this morning just to
share with you, uh, some of the
coming changes.
Uh, thanks to the very quickly
changing federal environment,
um, and how that will affect the
New Mexicans we serve, so, um,
I'm just going to very quickly
kind of uh introduce be well,
what we do, how we do it, um,
and then go into those federal
changes, um, and of course, have
plenty of time at the end for
questions.
So about be well, um, as I
mentioned, we're our state's
health insurance marketplace.
Um, and that was established
under the Affordable Care Act,
and of course, also created in
state statute, where a
state-based marketplace, uh,
which is a model that really
gives states the autonomy to
serve their state residents in
unique and meaningful ways, as
opposed to being limited to the
Healthcare.gov platform. Um, and
so we are here, of course, to
help New Mexicans.
coverage if they don't already
have it through their job or
through a program like Medicaid
or Medicare.
Everything we do falls into
these, these three categories of
our our purpose, we have access
to financial assistance, which
is how we keep coverage
affordable and reliable for
folks. Um, our technology that
we maintain to actually operate
the marketplace platform, um, in
education and outreach that we
do all year round, um, all
across.
Um, so more specifically on on
that access to financial
assistance, um, Bel is the only
place that New Mexicans um can
get uh federal and state
financial assistance that lowers
their monthly premiums or out of
pocket costs. So, you know, you
can always go to the carrier
you're interested in and enroll
directly, but you're not going
to be able to access these types
of discounts, um, and, uh,
financial assistance that that
we're able to get.
people access to. Um, so on the
federal side that includes
federal advance payments of the
premium tax credit or APTC, um,
and that is, um, that applies to
your premium every month, so
it's based on your income, your
household data, those kinds of
things, um, and at the end of
the year, that's what you report
back to the federal government
when you file your taxes to say,
this is the kind of um tax
credit I received, you square
that up and reconcile.
Um, they're also something
called cost sharing reductions,
which are more discounted plans,
um, that are available to
certain people for, you know,
certain criteria that they
satisfy. Um, and again, that's
only through Bewell and for
those those federal programs on
the state side, we have a number
of other state subsidies that
further help to lower those
costs. So we have the New Mexico
premium assistance, the Native
American Premium assistance,
which is limited to our Native
American residents.
Uh, the Medicaid transition
premium relief, which comes in
and covers that first month's
premium, if you're transitioning
from Medicaid to um the
marketplace coverage just to to
smooth that transition for you.
And then we also offer um
turquoise plants which offer
further discounted plans. So all
of these are funded through the
Healthcare Affordability funds,
marketplace affordability plan,
uh, or program, excuse me.
And those are the kinds of
subsidies they're unique to New
Mexico, and that's exactly why
we became a state-based
marketplace on the
technology side, we maintain uh
a platform that's actually the
place that people come to
enroll, so it's maintaining that
application that is secure, it
keeps people's very private data
secure, um, it enables them to
uh shop and compare plans side
by side so they can make
informed decisions on the plane
that's right for them, um, and
then
ultimately enroll in a plan. Um,
it also generates a really
important form, um, when they go
to, uh, if you receive that APTC
when you go to file your taxes
at the end of the year.
We have to be able to give
people that information to um
correctly uh file their taxes if
they've received that tax
credit.
And then on the education side,
um, we are always available. We
have a uh a website, we have a
customer service center that's
open Monday to Friday, 8 to 5.
We have even longer hours during
um open enrollments that were
always available to people as
their, um, filling out their
application, selecting their
plans. We also assist New
Mexicans in getting free
enrollment assistance kind of
over and beyond that, um.
Uh, we have, uh, sisters that we
certify, um, so agents, brokers,
enrollment counselors, uh, we
train them and make sure that
they know all of the updated
regulations and laws that they
have to abide by, and then we
connect consumers with them so
that they can get help on, you
know, how do I do this? How do
I, uh, submit my application?
What kinds of documentation do I
need? How do I weigh my needs
that I'm selecting the right
plan, and that is completely
free um to New Mexicans.
who enroll through BWwell.
And then all year round across
New Mexico, we do all kinds of
outreach and education. Um, we
do in-person and virtual
enrollment events. We go to our
native communities to talk to
them about the benefits of be
well coverage, um, and we work
with our brokers as well so that
they're getting plenty of time
in the community that they know
um to to serve New Mexicans and
and help us serve them directly.
A quick note on what Bwell does
not do, just to to really kind
of um help clear up any
confusion if you're not familiar
with the marketplace. Um, so we
are not an insurance carrier, so
we don't sell coverage, we don't
set provider networks. Um, we
don't do pricing, commissions,
um,
Insurance cards, those those
kinds of aspects. We also don't
do regulatory work. That is the
Office of the State
Superintendent of Insurance, um,
who oversees carriers, um, and
enforces those insurance laws,
um, and we don't administer
Medicaid, although our our two
systems do talk to each other.
So for example, if you um apply
through one way and you're not
eligible, your account will be
transferred to the other one to
help you find, um, where you
need to go for the right
coverage.
Um, and then a little bit about
um our numbers, so we have um
almost 73,000 enrollees across
the state, um, more than doubled
over the last two years, um, and
that's really thanks to very
targeted, very intensive
outreach to our state
communities. These are all types
of plans across all types of um
income brackets, you name it.
Um, and
Over half, 53.4% of our
enrollees, almost 39,000 people
paid $10 or less per month in
premiums, and that is thanks to
those, uh, those subsidies and
financial assistance programs I
mentioned earlier. Um, so about
88% of our enrollees are
receiving about $583 on average
per month, um, thanks to that
advanced premium tax credit, um,
and then on top of that, another
54% of our enrollees.
are receiving state funded uh
premium assistance as well.
There's a lot of overlap between
those categories, but
altogether, um,
I mean, it's a smaller
proportion of people who don't
receive um assistance at all,
um, compared to the 88% of folks
who are getting some kind of of
support to help keep that
affordable.
Um, so more about this
affordability program, um, this
is, uh, funded by the Healthcare
Affordability Fund, um, and as I
mentioned, every month, more
than 39,000 new Mexicans are
accessing some kind of uh
subsidy through here. On
average, it's about $41 which
doesn't seem like a lot, but
when you're looking at the
difference between a $50 plan
and a $10 plan, um, that really
is important in making sure that
people have stable and reliable.
um access that they can afford.
Um, so this is actually talk a
little bit more about this. Um,
our dashboards are always
available, so that that last
graphic in this one they're from
our dashboards, um, we feel
really strongly about
transparency, so our enrollment
information, um, and all kinds
of, you know, all of these tabs
are are different kind of
visualizations of our subsidy
types and levels, um, income
levels, county by county.
maps are on here, um, and it's
updated every month, so anytime
you go and visit this, that is
the most updated data that's
available, um, so you can always
rely on it, on it being very
current.
All right, to dive into our
federal legislative and
regulatory changes.
Um, you know, big picture, I
think this is very true for
marketplaces. We've seen these,
these rationales across uh just
a number of federal policy
discussions. Um, we've heard
both the executive
administration and Congress talk
about, um, needing to uh achieve
cost savings for the federal
government.
fight fraud and and strength and
program integrity and catalyze
market-wide premium reductions,
particularly for unsubsidized
plans, right, people who aren't
receiving um premium tax credits
or subsidies. Um, most recently
we had a rule from the uh
Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid CMS, that's the
regulatory agency that we are
accountable to, um, they
finalized a rule that
Uh
Realized in a number of these
policies, but on top of that,
uh, the reconciliation package
um has a lot of overlap with
that. In fact, at one time, um,
one of the committee.
Amendments actually would have
codified all of the original uh
Proposed rule language. So we've
been watching both of these
very, very closely as things
have changed very rapidly. Um,
and you'll hear me kind of speak
in the hypothetical simply
because as things have changed
so quickly, um, I certainly
don't want to speak too
definitively too quickly, um,
and then I think there's,
there's a likelihood for future
legislative and regulatory
mechanisms that double down on
some of these um intents to
increase cost savings, cut down.
On what they define as fraud and
those types of things.
So how do these goals translate
for New Mexicans on the BO
marketplace. Um, we are looking
at likely an an increased
administrative burden, um,
namely more, more paperwork,
more documentation, higher costs
in the form of monthly premiums,
and we'll talk about a number of
different uh reasons behind
that.
Um, and then narrower
eligibility both for coverage
and for financial assistance.
For that administrative burden,
we are seeing a number of
proposals that would add a
number of stricter requirements,
especially around documentation,
and that really shifts the
burden, um, so much of what
we've been able to implement in
the past has been around
convenience, because that's
really what it takes for some of
our more vulnerable populations
to have that stability with
their coverage. Um, so a couple
of the more uh concerning
provisions that we've seen.
Uh, there was one that said, if
you have a $0 plan because of
APTC.
And you don't act too.
Select a new plan in the new
year if it just automatically
renews, then that $0 plan
becomes a $5 plan for every
month. And again, that doesn't
seem like a lot, $5 is not a
lot. Um, but we've seen that
generally speaking, New Mexicans
are very sensitive to those
kinds of administrative burdens.
Um, and, frankly, automatic
enrollment is a very convenient
option that.
Private coverage uses, so it
seems kind of a.
An unusual, um, restriction or,
or requirement to place on
marketplace plans. There was
another proposal to eliminate
all automatic re-enrollment
entirely.
There have also been a number of
proposals to really shorten
timelines and decrease
flexibility just in those
windows, um, so a shorter open
enrollment period, shortening
that by as much as 30 days, um,
eliminating a special enrollment
period for people with very low
incomes up to 150% of the
federal poverty level.
Um, or perhaps eliminating all
income-based special enrollment
periods entirely. So we've seen
very just sweeping um
consideration of, of proposals
that would um really just
increase the, the paperwork for
New Mexicans.
For higher costs, um, there are,
of course, financial impacts to
administrative burden, um, when
you consider missing a window
for submitting documentation
could mean missing out on
hundreds of dollars in financial
assistance that you know, marks
the difference between what's
affordable and, and what's not.
We've seen a number of proposed
changes to funding, um, this
next one is a little bit wonky,
so, so bear with me. There's
something called silver loading,
which uh is a kind of a
mechanism that carriers use to
pay for all of the benefits that
they're required to under law.
If they're not allowed.
to utilize this. Everybody's
premiums go up, like across the
marketplace, everyone's premiums
increase, um, and by as much as
maybe $1200 per year on average.
So that's a pretty significant
It
Um
You might be aware of some
enhancements to the federal
premium tax credit that were
enacted under the American
rescue Plan, the inflation
reduction Act, um, those, those
really just beefed up those
subsidies so that Americans were
saving more than ever on their
coverage. Um, in fact, it even
uh.
awarded those premium tax
credits to people with incomes
over 400% of the federal poverty
level, which had never been done
before, so unprecedented
savings, but those are set to
sunset at the end of this year
if Congress does not act, and
that could have another impact
of around $700 a year, um, per
member per month.
There are also a number of just
macro market effects, um, you
know, as there's this
uncertainty in the market due to
these these changing um
requirements, just a changing
environment, um, and carriers
raise their premiums as a
result. Um, there's also the
more indirect effect of a sicker
risk pool, so as that
administrative burden increases
as there are more hoops to jump
through, the people who really
urgent.
need that care, they're willing
to go through that. Uh, the
younger, healthier people,
sometimes we call them
invincibles, right? They, they
might risk it and choose to go
uninsured because it's just too
difficult. They don't, they
can't bother. Um, and so you
have a, a pool that is
increasingly comprised of people
who really use those benefits
and it's not balanced out by.
For narrower eligibility, we're
looking at a lot of um
definitions, changes in in
particular, um, so back in the
fall, the Biden administration
included DACA recipientss,
Dreamers, um, to be eligible for
coverage. That was a first time,
um, that is very likely to be
rolled back, so they would again
be pushed off the marketplace.
Uh, there's also the likely
creation of a new definition of
an eligible alien, um, and
that's a, it's a very different
definition than what we
currently operate on, which is
lawfully present, and that
includes a wide variety of very
specific, um, but, but a number
of um different types of
criteria that people have to
meet if they're non-citizens,
and they are, um, there's also,
uh being considered an
elimination of premium tax
eligibility.
For anyone who enrolls through
income-based special enrollment
periods. So a minute ago we
talked about eliminating those
special enrollment periods
entirely. This one is
Almost as challenging because,
OK, so you can enroll, but you
can't access any of the
financial assistance that really
makes that possible for you, so
it's the net effect is almost
the same.
This last one on here, um, I do
want to highlight.
There was what was called a a
Medicaid marketplace lockout at
one point in the reconciliation
bill, which would have
explicitly excluded from
marketplace coverage, people who
lose their Medicaid due to
procedural reasons, um, like the
work requirement. Last we
checked, this was not in there,
fortunately, but I think at this
point we're saying never say
never, so we're watching that
very closely, but I, I did want
to flag that because while we
are here to serve every New
Mexican we can and we
want to be there to step in, um,
if some of these safety nets
fail, this would be one of those
areas where our hands would be
tied and we, we might not be
able um to, to serve that.
So as far as uh impacts for New
Mexicans, more specifically, you
know, we have those higher
premiums, those are the two
numbers that we talked about
earlier, due to the silver
loading changes, um, and the
sunsetting of those
enhancements. Um, there's also
those, those increased
requirements for documentation,
viewer and smaller windows for
enrollment and for verifying
your information, um, and
ultimately that makes it harder
to get coverage, harder to keep
coverage.
And harder to afford coverage,
which at the end of the day
spells uh decreased coverage
through BWwell.
I do want to leave you with a
couple of bright spots, um, all
is not lost, fortunately. Um, I
know I mentioned earlier a
finalized CMS rule, um, in that
role, we're very surprised, they
really affirmed some of our
autonomy and some really key
areas. Um, we submitted a joint
comment, uh, one of 26,000
comments they received on this
rule. Um, we, we wrote that with
HCA and the Office of the
Superintendent of Insurance and
It felt like we were heard,
which was really gratifying. Um,
some of the areas that we, we
really spoke to being concerned
about, um, and they're not
being, um, you know, the, the
fraudulent activity that that
they had, uh, kind of
rationalize those with.
Um, they, they walked some of
those back and that was, that
was really heartening, um,
because we're gonna be working
with these folks for the next 4
years.
Um
I also want to add a big thank
you because with those
sunsetting enhancements, um, the
New Mexico legislature actually
uh appropriated $72.3 million to
help backfill some of those
foreign New Mexicans up to 400%.
That's not quite everybody, um,
but that, that will go a long
way in offering stability, um,
for the, the New Mexicans we're
trying to serve, so big thank
you, not every state has been
able to do that very we might in
fact be the only ones and having
been on calls with my
counterparts in other states,
um, they are terrified, so the
fact that we were able to step
in with the resources that we
have, you all took the
initiative to do that, um,
that's, that's huge, so.
Thank you very much. And then,
of course, if Congress acts to
extend those enhancements, um,
that funding could be repurposed
elsewhere where it's needed. Um,
so we'll, we'll keep working on,
on that advocacy as well.
Um, but I think that is all I
have for you, so I'm happy to
answer any questions the
committee might have.
Thank you, Director Fitzgerald,
I appreciate it. Um, I thought
it was interesting when you went
through the stuff be well does
not do I that read like a list
of these are the most common
things people call about we say,
nope, that's not us, that's not
us. I'm trying to just let
people know those, um.
And Senator Trujillo questions.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you for the presentation,
director, um, on page 12.
Um, you indicate that one of the
rationales.
Um, was a market-wide premium
reduction, especially for
unsubsidized plans.
Um, but then on page 15 and 17
that contradicts that in that if
we get rid of or if the silver
loading is eliminated, then our
plans will go up as much as
$1200 which is about $100 a
month.
Yes, uh, Mr. Chair, Senator,
that's.
That is correct, um, and I, I
think it's one of those things
where so many of these uh
provisions overlap and interact
with each other. It's kind of a
confounding factor where it's,
it's as these layer and it
becomes harder to calculate.
Who it's, it's impacting and and
to what degree, uh,
And then when you consider all
of the the those market wide uh
factors as well. It's, it's very
difficult to predict some of
these.
I will say some of what CMS said
in their finalized rule was that
they're actually going to be
reversing a number of these
provisions that they're
implementing this year, um, and
of course the reconciliation
bill could codify those, it
could add things, it could
change them, um, but
I don't know. I, I think it's
interesting that some of those
provisions are only temporary,
and it will
remain to be seen what, what
happens to the market, but, but
yes, I, I think you, you make a
good point that in some of these
maybe in theory, um,
Plugging these, these holes,
cutting down on fraud, which may
or may not be there to the
degree that that.
They believe, um,
Should lower premiums, but I
think what we're likely to see
is, is an increase of chair,
director, so.
Just between my husband and I,
we just, we pay just under $900.
On page 16, um,
Interesting.
The explicit exclusion. I know
you said they took that out, but
I'm trying to figure out what
the rationale seems illegal. It
almost seems this is um in my
mind, I thought, it seems like
we're saying if you don't
qualify for food stamps, you
can't buy groceries. Um,
basically, I, I, I to, you know,
representative Duncan's point,
the goal for all of us is to try
to get people into higher paying
jobs or to be self-sufficient
and there's some, you know,
there's some individuals who
just
want to be self-sufficient.
Not qualifying for Medicaid, and
now you're, you're explicitly
excluded from marketplace? That
seems completely.
I'm glad it's out, but I just
don't, I mean, what if it comes
back in? I'm sure it'll be
challenged legally. Mr. Chair,
Senator, yes, I think that one
is, is likely to.
Attract some some legal review,
um, as far as why I don't I
think.
Um, there was a push for that
among a certain kind of subset
of uh legislators on Capitol
Hill, um, and I'm, I'm hardened
to know that it wasn't there in
that that last draft that we
saw, but.
As we've seen so far, I think
this, this nothing seems to
stay, uh, still for long and and
so there is a possibility, and I
just wanted to flag that um for
our state legislature as as you
all plan to, um, just adapt to
these changes. Thank you, Mr.
Chair.
Thank you. Co-chair Lindstrom.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I had a
couple of questions. Can you
tell me what 400% of part of the
poverty rate is for a family of
4.
I would have to get back to you
on that, Mr. Chair,
Representative, um, and I'm, I'm
happy to do that if you'd like.
Yeah, what we want to know is
when you give us a number like
that, we want to know what that
means. We need to be able to
translate it.
Um, I also had a question for
you on page 8.
When we're looking at be well by
the numbers and I'm looking at
the 87.9% receive an average
advance payment of federal
premium tax credit.
And then 54% receive New Mexico
state funded premium assistance
programs. So I want you to tell
me what the difference is
between,
yes, so there are two different
sources for the types of
financial assistance that you
can receive. There's the premium
tax credit which is federal, and
that is what has to be
reconciled at the end of a tax
year, and then there is these,
uh, the, the marketplace.
affordability program, which
funds these subsidies, including
the New Mexico premium
assistance, the Native American
Premium systems. Let me ask you
what is the premium tax credit.
What's the premium based on, do
you know Joey or John somebody
from LFC.
Uh, Mr. Chair Representative
that is based again on, on your
income, your household
information that is determined
when you apply, um, your
eligibility is assessed based on
the information that you're
including on your application.
It's, it's a sliding scale, so
it's, it's very difficult.
To offer more specificity than
that, I'm afraid. What's the
base of the money? Where's the
money coming from?
Um, Mr. Chair, I.
It is a federal source, I would
have to get back to you on,
on specific source from
It is a federal source, I would
have to get back to you on, on
specific source it from,
from, uh, private insurance.
The state source.
Mister Chair, um, no, it is
coming from the, the healthcare
affordability fund. OK.
Coming from the healthcare
affordability.
Is that a general fund.
Uh,
Madam Chair from the LFC. It's
a, it's a, um, the revenue from
it comes from the surcharge tax,
and it's a separate fund, uh,
just the healthcare
affordability fund.
And we use it to pay for the
subsidies on the exchange.
OK. And some other items too.
Alrighty, thank you very much.
And Mr. Chair Representative, I
do have an answer for your
earlier question on that 400%
threshold. That's about
$125,000. So it's $125,000 for a
family of four. That's correct.
OK, because I did want to
mention also, and we will need
to keep an eye on this is that
I, I have experienced in the
past, it wasn't this agency, but
it was another agency that after
budgets were done, there was a
change in poverty rate, and it
was done in administratively.
That, um,
And it puts the budget into a,
into a spiral, if that has
changed administratively.
Um
We want to make sure that that
doesn't happen and and I know of
another agency that had done
that in the past.
Thank you.
Thank you, co-chair, uh, Senator
Novi.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Uh, Mr.
Chair, presenter, um, thank you
for being here today. Uh, my
question goes in regards to page
16. Do you all have the
percentage of marketplace
coverage for non-citizens, and
if you do, do you have the
breakdown of the exact
immigration status for every
person who qualifies under the
definition of eligible alien.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Nava, um,
So going, going back to your
second question first, yes, I, I
do believe we could get you the
breakdown of those different
categories of non-citizens that
we cover, um, could you please
repeat your first question?
Yeah, no, just if you have the
actual percentage of marketplace
coverage for that population.
Right now, Mr. Chair, I would
have to also get back to you on
that, it's, it is a.
relatively small number, I
believe, um, so I know our, our
DACA recipient recipients
offhand. It was only 88 people
as our last check, um, so still
significant to each one of them,
but, but quite a a small
segment.
I greatly appreciate if I can
get that. Thank you. Thank you,
Mr. Chair.
Thank you. Other questions,
Senator Woods.
and the uh
Um
So this federal reimbursement
that we get for our tax credit,
that is uh just to reverse, uh,
uh, reimbursable tax credit from
the federal government. In other
words, you're sending out,
you're helping with the form to
accompany the
Individual tax for in order to
show that they qualified for
that.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator, um.
So that the way the form works
is it actually spells out the
amount of that tax credit that
they took each month, so that
they can report that back.
Um, they have the option, in
fact, of, of taking the tax
credit all at once at the end of
the year, just like a regular
refundable tax credit.
Um, but
But they're really checking
against is if there was any kind
of change in their income or or
their household size, for
example, during the year that
could have impacted what they're
eligible for and that amount,
um, that is where they, they
reconcile that so that they're
uh they they repay any um
improper or um overpayment that
they might have received, um, or
they are receiving a greater um
tax credit at the end of that if
they didn't take everything that
they were eligible for.
In, in Mr. Chair, in
Madame Cucer and
So
You're doing that paperwork for
me.
You're, you're keeping up with
that individual's status.
Income status.
To monitoring their income, how
do you do that? Um, Mr. Chair,
Senator,
So yes and no, we do.
Um
So that, that form is a record
of the amount that they
received.
Not necessarily the amount that
they were eligible for. Those
things should be the same, but
depending on how their
circumstances could change in
the course of a year.
It might not, so we, we maintain
a record of what they received.
But we, we are not kind of
tracking their eligibility as it
changes in real time. Yes, it
does, it tells me that
Uh, last year's tax form
indicates how much this year's
credit's gonna be, and then it's
uh reconciled at the end of the
year, something like that.
Mr. Cha, something like that,
yes.
Technical terms.
And, and the only other question
I have, uh, the, uh,
In the same process comes
through on the state money.
More or less, yes, more or less,
but because that is not a tax
credit. It doesn't have the same
tax implications when they, they
go to do their, their state
income tax.
Well, it goes back to the point,
Mr. Chair and Madam Colche is,
is that you have an individual's
records.
That gives you an idea of, of
the subsidy they get.
And that's, that's how you
determine how much subsidy they
get on the exchange.
Madam Chair.
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator, so we
mostly function off attestation,
so when they report to us what
their income is, how large their
household is, those kinds of
pieces, and we check that
against federal sources. So the
IRS, uh, the Department of
Homeland Security, those kinds
of things. And if there's any
kind of an inconsistency there
that gets flagged in our system.
We reach out to them and say,
hey, we need a little more
information. Would you please
send us a list of these.
documents and it could be um pay
stubs. It could be uh some kind
of uh an identification, those
kinds of things. So we, we
don't, um.
You know, store those records
ourselves for review. We, we ask
people as they apply, um, and as
they reapply every year, um, and
we check those against federal
sources to to verify them.
So those, those federal sources
are available to the state.
Is what you're telling me, Mr.
Cherry, yes. OK. I, I didn't
know that. I didn't know that
you could go back and get those.
Individual.
In code sources from the federal
government. Well, Mr. Chair,
Senator.
We don't have access to them in
the terms of, you know.
The IRS sends us their
information. It's more of a
Red light, green light.
Sort of thing where if if there
is uh any kind of inconsistency.
We're notified that we need to
reach out to them, and if it's
good, it's kind of no news is
good news. So we're not actually
seeing their information, um,
that is private information,
it's uh personally identifiable,
um, and it's federal tax
information which has even more
protections around it, so we
don't see it, we don't receive
it, we don't communicate it.
Uh, or store it, but we are able
to to verify it just kind of in
those those
gives you that information and
then you ask to verify that, I
mean, you said it in red light
green light, is this true or
not?
Yes. Thank you, Senator
Representative Hadera.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank
you for your presentation. I
I, how was the, you have 70,
3000 enrollees. Is that how is
that spread throughout the
state? I'm just curious.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative,
um, I wonder if I might show you
the dashboard page because I
think we have a really great
visualization of that.
Um, just give me 11 moment, but
it is, it, you might be able to
predict it's, um, you know,
large.
Uh, populations in our more
urban areas and um less
concentrated in a more rural
area, Mr. Chas the dashboard
show a percentage of each uh of
the population in each county, I
think it might be by the number.
So these are the.
numbers and then we're tracking
the percent change, that's the
percentage you see.
Here.
And those color codes are.
Uh tied to the change from month
to month.
Um, Mr. Chen, and, and if you
could just print that out and
just give it to us, that'll be
fine. I, I'm just curious about
how if counting, if it's kind of
a fair distribution if it's, you
know, I don't know.
3% or 1% of each county, that's
what.
Anything else represented? OK,
thank you. Uh, Representative
Brown, thank you, Mr. Chairman
and um, Fitzgerald, thank you
for the presentation. Very good.
Um, so,
I really appreciate the slide
talking about what be well is
not because it's hard for me as
a legislator.
To kind of keep track of what is
an agency and what is not, and
so, I guess, Mr. Chair, I think
it be well is sort of like air
traffic control.
What you're doing is trying to
get people to the right place,
uh, to match their needs.
Um, but you do get, do you not a
state appropriation, I imagine
you do, Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Chair, um,
representative, I like the ATC,
um, image very much, um, but no,
we, we do not receive any public
monies um for our operations for
the past, not even the pass
through, um, because all of
those subsidies that I
mentioned, they actually go
directly to the carrier on
behalf of.
Uh, the consumer. So we really
don't touch any, any public
monies at all.
Thank you for that, that, that
is good news, I guess in a way,
more of an enterprise um
operation. Mr. Chairman, so, um,
we heard the healthcare
authorities say that it will
need about $52 million and
that's making some assumptions
about what passes eventually in
the bill.
Um
So not public money in the case
of Bewell, but do you have an
estimate of what your
administrative costs would rise
too.
Um, and what you'd have to make
up internally to um
To make these changes, uh,
happen, Mr. Chair.
Um, Mr. Chair of Representative,
do you mean?
Like truly like internal.
Uh, yes, Mr. Chair.
Miss Fitzgerald, um, Mr. Chair
Representative, I
I don't have a number for you
and I can, I can get one for
you.
I will say, you know, over, over
the years, we see these kinds of
changes happen almost on a, on
an annual basis, there's always,
uh, some changes, some tweaks
here and there that come down
from um from CMS and from other
regulatory bodies, um, and
We just have to comply. It's,
it's part of our, our federal
and state mandate. Um, so I
think, you know, does it have?
Budgetary impacts, yes, but
they're more or less absorbed
simply because they must be, um,
so I can, I can help kind of dig
into some of those, those more
granular details, but I, I think
the short answer is
Almost no impact simply because
we have to make those changes,
um, and we have to work with
our, our vendors as well who are
also obligated um under
contracts to, to accommodate
those changes.
Thank you. Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Director.
Um, if I'm following this right,
you have 73.
And um that is on page 8, and on
page 9,
Yeah, the statement is each
month more than 39,000.
Receive on average 40.
Which is a million 6.
number.
But if you take the 73,000
enrollees divided by the 6.
So
I'm trying to, I'm trying to
Ascertain
But the cost of this program is
Um
Because it looks like the $41
and tell me if I'm thinking
about this wrong. You have
39,000 people that are receiving
$41.
Which is a mains monthly.
On top of that
Yes, your statement is that you
have 73,000 people that are, but
if you take the 73,000 divided
by the 6, it's about half of
that.
I'm trying to figure out, where
does, where does that, where is
all the funding coming from is,
is all of that funding.
Am I looking at two separate
pots that I shouldn't be, I
mean,
Are you, are you following me?
You're, I, I see the wheels
turning, but I, I'm not sure,
um.
Maybe, maybe I'm following. I'm
not, I'm not quite sure. I will
say that $41 is only one of
those uh subsidies funded by the
state.
Um, and it is an average,
um, so it's only one of the,
because we also have the premium
assistance premium relief.
OK, so what are the other
subsidies then.
just but my be might be
available.
Um, Mr. Chair Representative, so
this is the subsidies, um, and
again, these are, these are only
averages, so not completely, you
know, the, the full story, but
along with the uh that $41 for
the New Mexico premium systems
we have an average of $22 for
the Native American, um, and
then
I thought the other one was on,
I think that might just be
reflected in a, in the full
month there, so that's $9540 for
16.
OK,
um, there and director.
Of these of these 73,000.
enrollees.
What is there
What is the total cost?
of their coverage.
Mr. Chair, uh, I think I would
need to get a little bit more
information from you as far as
do you, do you mean?
And I, OK, let me just say this,
I'm probably not going to be
able to give you an answer
today, but do you mean cost of
their coverage in terms of their
Net premium or their gross
premium or what subsidized net.
OK. I would have to get back to
you on that, Mr. Chair. If you
would, I, I would appreciate
that. I think it's, it's
interesting, um.
Another on this uh green light,
uh,
Red light coverage.
That you spoke of where you look
at the
What if they are not filing a do
they get a red light or a green
light. Senator, yes, so that's,
that's a really good distinction
because sometimes that does
happen. occasionally we'll check
something against uh the hub and
the IRS does not have tax data
available for, for whatever
reason, um, and so when that
happens, we have to.
Get some kind of documentation
from them about, OK, can we, can
we see a pay stub? Can we, um,
get some other kind of
You know, documentation that
that verifies what you're
telling us in your attestation.
Um, and so that's, that's kind
of the, the backup we have there
in place, but that's a person.
You don't have a third party
like a.
W2 or they just bring you a pay
stub for a week and you
Extrapolate that to an annual
salary of how do you do that?
Um
Mr. Chair, yes, so.
I mean, we, we accept their
attestation as as.
The Federal uh regulations and,
and law allows.
Um, and it's.
It is on a monthly basis, which
I think is also important to
note, so our our income, it's
not.
Um
Actually, no, forget I said
that, Mr. Chair.
Um, so we, we use what
information we have coming from
the hub, um, and
Failing that, we asked them to
to furnish information.
Um, to, to verify that to the,
to the best that they can. If
they're unable to verify that
within a 90 day window, um, they
may or may not be able to
receive um that tax credit, um,
or, or others. And Mr. Chair and
director.
When you, uh, I'm sure that what
type of
What does that audit show?
Um, Mr. Chair, Senator, we are
subject to a number of uh.
Federal oversight checks and
balances. We have one that's
called the Smart audit that
looks at um uh a lot of our, our
processes and gives us feedback
on best practices, um, and it
considers
I mean, all, all kinds of things
from how we get information to
how we verify it. It looks at,
um, you know.
How many improper payments were
there? How many people had to uh
kind of fix their premium tax
credit when they when they um
filed again. So it's, it really
is kind of a holistic view of
how we're doing as a
marketplace. Um, and I believe
that those are um.
I think some of that information
is is publicly available, but I
can, I I was just thinking um
um.
So
If a person
And I derive
And you're looking at the
taxable income.
How does that, I mean, if, if
50% of my income is not taxable.
And I don't report it as taxable
income.
Do I get a green light or a red
light?
Um, Mr. Sheriff senator, um, I
am not sure offhand, and I would
hate to misspeak, so I think
I'll have to get back to you on
that if it's all right. All
right. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Director. Thank you,
Senator Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, if, uh,
Senator Townsend was a waitress.
I don't know what kind of tips
you'd be getting to worry about
that, but uh he asked my
question Mr. so I don't have a
question. Thank you.
Thank you. Any other questions?
I had one on page, I think
that's 8, said nearly 73,000
enrollees that that had doubled
in the last year. Why the
doubling
In the last year, why more
people on this and from your
estimation, how many people
might be eligible for some of
these subsidies and are not
getting them because they don't
know about the administrative
burden of filling out the
paperwork, but how much are we
missing of people that could be
getting additional assistance.
Mr. Chair, so that's, that is
the question. I do want to
clarify, so that was that
doubled over the last two years,
um, but, but yes, I, I think
you're, you're right that there
could still be more folks out
there, and that is exactly why
we do the outreach and education
that we do. We do it all year,
um, we spend a lot of time in
particular reaching out to our
native communities just because
um they tend to be more rural
and they they don't know that
this kind of coverage is
available to them. Um, I think
there's a, a
a lot of misinformation or just
misunderstandings about
How this interacts or interplays
with your IHS coverage and what
we've been really working to to
show those communities is is
really complements it well, um,
and that's really been one of
the, the greatest barriers uh
for for New Mexicans who are
eligible, so they're not aware,
they don't know that we're here
and that it is so affordable,
um, and that's something that
our brokers, our enrollment
counselors, um, tell us all the
time is the conversations they
have with people when they
enroll them is.
I would have enrolled years ago
if I had known just how
affordable it would be, um, and
so that's, that's why we spend
so much time, so much of our
resources doing the out. Thank
you, um, you had indicated there
are a number of young people
that think they're invincible,
that, you know, don't need
health coverage until they do.
Do we know how many of them
there are, are there mechanisms
for identifying people who would
benefit in doing direct outreach
to him as opposed to just, uh,
you know, this blanket.
Outreach program, uh, and hope
that they're going to sign up.
Is there a way of reaching out
directly seems like some of
these programs might help.
alleviate some of the concerns
about people getting dropped off
from the earlier conversation
with Medicaid, if these are
there as backstops if they know
about it or directly approached.
That's, that's right, Mr. Chair,
um, we
I think we do, uh, far more
sophisticated um than than
simply just a blanket outreach.
We do try to partner with and
piggyback off other community
groups who were doing events, we
try and show up where we know
that the the kind of folks we're
trying to reach will be there,
um, I, I think you.
You raise a good point that as
as needs change, we're going to
have to adapt, um, we'll have to
do more outreach, um, probably
more frequently, um, as the
goalpost kind of continue to to
move for some of these things,
and we have, we have plans to do
so, um, our marketing and
outreach teams are are always
planning ahead, um, and I think
back in March when the rule
first came out, they had already
started planning for this open
enrollment this.
and they had to redo everything,
so they, they think, um, you
know, really, uh, strategically
about how to reach exactly who
we need to reach, um, but of
course always broadening that
too, because we know that there
are people who were missing for,
for whatever reason.
Thank you. I know lots of
communities put in substantial
medical funding for indigent
care at their local hospitals
and other places. Is there a
mechanism of when somebody shows
up with indigent needing
indigent care where they aren't
able to pay and then trying to
reach out to them about getting
them signed up directly. It
seems like that's a place where,
you know, this is somebody that
clearly is in need of, of
getting them on some sort of a
list database so that you can
reach them directly, um, and
yeah.
I know local communities put
substantial funding into their
local healthcare programs. Mr.
Chair. Um, so, you know, I
mentioned we we certify uh
people we call sisters, people
who facilitate that enrollment
process. We have agents and
brokers, and then we have um
enrollment counselors, and by
and large, those people are
embedded in um our our
healthcare delivery system
across the state. And so when
they come across someone who
doesn't have coverage or
or who needs some other kind of
a different need, they're able
to help, help them get through
that. We actually, um, we
distributed some, some special
little notepads for them last
year that has a QR code, so that
is there writing notes, writing
up prescriptions, whatever it
might be, they can hand that off
to someone, say, by the way,
scan that and you're gonna get
some help um to get the coverage
that that's right for you.
Thank you. That's nice to know.
Uh, any other questions? And by
the way, I want to thank the
committee. We are right on
schedule in time. Questions have
been to the point short, not
long, diatribes about policy or
issues or other non uh
Non-relevant types of things,
which is very nice that uh we
haven't had to limit anyone's
time or, or call anyone back for
anything, so I appreciate that.
Any last comments on this
subject? If not, we will break
for lunch. It is almost right at
12 o'clock now.
It is right at 12 o'clock now
and we will start back at one
