Uh, it's a pleasure to be here
with you. Thank you for the
opportunity to present the
department's economists work,
um, uh, wanna basically just
first introduce myself. I'm
Stephanie Chardon Clark. I'm the
cabinet secretary at Tax and Rev
and with me at the table is
Lucinda Sido, the chief
economist, and then sitting
right behind us is Dewald. She
is both our chief legal counsel,
which is the position over tax
protests and litigation, as well
as now our interim tax policy
director, so our deputy
secretary for policy.
You'll see a lot of her and I
together again in the next
legislative session.
I also would be remiss not to
thank Sarah Grubbs, who is an
economist on Lucinda's team and,
and the two of them worked very
closely on this.
Right. Um, so first on slide 2,
we just have an overview of uh
what we'll be covering and I, I
think it does dovetail nicely
with the presentation that you
received this morning from Helen
and Richard, um, whereas they
covered a much broader swath of
sections of the bill. We really
focus here on a couple of
things. We're gonna focus on New
Mexico's conformity with federal
taxation and income taxes, the
sections of the bill that
directly impact New Mexico
personal and corporate.
income tax and then some
indirect implications, um, where
we'll talk about those more, but
basically not direct but in a,
in a roundabout way, things that
will change our tax base or our
tax activity, um, we'll talk
about some things that do not
impact New Mexico taxation and
some other indirect revenue
impacts.
Um, to start on slide 3, I'll
first talk a little bit about
conformity and, and the bill
itself, um, we're calling it
OPA. We have a lot of different
names for it, HR One also works,
um, but of course this, uh, bill
is one of the largest changes to
the federal tax code that we've
seen in decades. Um, a lot of
what's, what's in it is
expiration or um tweaking things
that were in the 2017 federal
tax bill, the tax cuts and Jobs
Act or TIA.
So we've made a lot of the
aspects of TikTA that we've
already been used to for over 5
years permanent, but some, some
of them have been expanded or
changed.
Um, the sections of the bill
that we are focused on as the
tax department are generally in
the finance section of of OPA,
um, which is Title 7 and then
chapters 1 through 5 are the
ones that primarily impact New
Mexico revenues.
Chapters 1 and 2 of Title VII
Impact New Mexico Personal
Income tax, Chapter 3, it has to
do with corporate income tax
that that we somewhat conform to
as well. So we'll go into more
detail about all the different
aspects of that in the next
slides.
Um, and then, oh, finally there
are those indirect impacts also
in chapters 5 and 6 with regard
to pit and sit, um, they have to
do primarily with, uh, phase
out, for example, or a
cancellation of certain federal
credit that New Mexico has
something that dovetails with,
so that'll impact our credits as
well. And then finally, Lucinda
will talk in a bit about some of
the changes to Medicaid and the
SNAP program that will
indirectly impact New Mexico's
GRT and Medicare, Medicaid
program.
So first, a note about
conformity, and you heard a bit
about this from Helen and
Richard this morning, but as we
all know, New Mexico is one of
the states that generally
conforms to the federal income
tax. Excuse me, Stephanie,
everybody, we're on page 5.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
So when we talked this morning
about above the line and above
and below the line. I thought
Helen did a nice job describing
that, but basically if you think
about when you do your state and
federal tax returns each year.
You do your federal return first
because the New Mexico returns
starts with your federal AGI.
You can't start your New Mexico
to return without first knowing
your federal AGI. So all of that
is above the line. And then
below the line are things that
New Mexico may or may not
conform with things that we
choose to do all on our own.
That have nothing to do with
your federal return and don't
impact your federal AGI, um, and
conformity is sometimes
inconvenient, but I would say
on, on net, most people think
it's a good thing because
conformity reduces the
taxpayer's burden to to complete
and file correctly both of those
returns and also reduces the
state's administrative burden,
the more that we can form, the
more we follow federal guidance,
the more taxpayers are doing it
right. It's, it's kind of just
for ease of administration.
on both sides.
All right, so let's dig into
some of the details on slide 6,
we'll talk a little bit about OA
and standard deduction and uh
where, where we have them, we'll
be sure to highlight for you
what we think are going to be
the revenue impacts to New
Mexico of these things. I want
to say, uh, before going any
further, that the bill is very
new, the dust is still settling.
Uh, we and all other state
revenue departments are still
making our way through it,
waiting for the IRS guidance
that will clarify some of it.
Um, we're getting a lot of
support through 2.
National Tax organizations that
we belong to, that's the
multi-state tax commission and
the Federation of Tax
Administrators, all of the
states are looking for this
guidance and to make sense of it
together. So these numbers are
preliminary and they're the work
of the department economists,
um, we will, we're also part of
the consensus revenue estimating
group that is presenting a
consensus revenue estimate on
August 19th. So while these are
the department numbers, we think
they're not that far off from
what will be included in the
consensus estimates in August.
All right. So the standard
deduction uh is something that
was um altered in Tikha, the
2017 tax cuts and Jobs Act
federally, um, but what we've
done in OA is, is the federal
government has now increased and
made the increased standard
deduction permanent. So it
increases the base standard
deduction for tax year 2025 and
a note on tax years. What are
those? Tax year is the year the
income was earned, the calendar
year generally and so tax your
2025 are the returns that will
be due April 15, 2026. Just,
I'll be talking a lot about tax
years, that's what I mean.
So it increases the standard
deduction base amount for tax
year 2025 and continues with an
inflation adjustment to the
standard deduction, um, and New
Mexico will conform to that.
That means New Mexico's standard
deduction has increased and will
be subject to inflation, and we
preliminarily estimate that that
will reduce general fund
personal income tax revenue by
an average of $45 million per
year on average over FY26
through 30, um, the numbers
won't be exactly equal.
In all of those years, but for
right now we have an average, so
45 million per year.
And as far as we've, we've given
just some high level thoughts on
tax policy, um, the lower your
income, the more likely you are
to use the standard deduction.
The higher your income, the, the
better the chance you'll have
enough itemized deductions to
make it more sensical for you to
itemize. So in general, the
higher um standard deduction
reduces the number of taxpayers
that will have to itemize, which
makes filing your taxes simpler
and it just reduces the
administrative burden. It might
not shift the tax burden of who
pays what.
very much, but it makes it
simpler for lower income filers
to not itemize.
On flight 7, we'll talk about
the dependent deduction, and
this is something that New
Mexico already um statutorily
decoupled from and got out ahead
of following Tik in 2017.
So what OBA does in section
70103 is permanently terminates
the federal deduction for
personal exemptions. So if you
are a family, basically with
dependents, you're claiming
exemptions on your uh tax
returns, the federal government
did away with that temporarily
in TIA in 2017. Now they've done
away with it permanently.
Um, as far as conformity, this
one's interesting. New Mexico,
um, saw this happen in Tikcha in
2017 and then in the, I believe
it was the 2019 session, we
created our own $4000 dependent
deduction to hold our lower
income families with children
harmless from that what would
have been a federal tax
increase, so New Mexico, the law
is basically says as long as the
federal deduct uh personal
exemption is 0, ours is 4000.
Um, and now we know that the
federal and
stay at 0, so ours is basically
permanent. And since we've put
that in place in response to
Tija, the New Mexico General
Fund is losing about $25 million
per year. That is now a
permanent revenue reduction for
the general fund, but I think
that in general the consensus
group has expected the tick tick
to changes to be extended, so
they had already made that
exemption assumption and that
was already counted in the
previous consensus estimate.
So they had to, you know, guess
whether they thought Tiko would
be extended. They thought it
would and it was. So that's
already built into the revenue
estimate.
Um, it, it, it high level from a
tax policy standpoint, we would
say that this is probably a less
progressive tax policy change,
uh, because federally you're
increasing, um, federal tax on
families, especially with
children, and it tends to hit
lower income families more, um,
but New Mexico has offset that
just for New Mexico families.
All right. Next, um, on slide 8,
we'll talk a little bit about
the itemized deduction
limitation, um.
In the past, there was something
called the Pe limitation. That
was named after a national
member of Congress. And
basically, there was a
limitation on the tax, the
amount of itemized deductions
that probably high income
earners could take, um, so
they're overall limited
deductions, um, but now we've
created a formula for a new
itemized deduction limitation
and is only applicable to
taxpayers who are taxed at the
top federal marginal tax rate of
37%, so we
have the highest income earners
that are subject to this new
formula that limits their
deductions, um, itemized
deductions in a new way.
Um, this is effective for tax
year 2026, so a year further
than what the ones I was talking
about earlier, and we do conform
to this change, so to the extent
New Mexico has quite high
earning taxpayers that could
reach this limit limit to their
itemized deductions, more of
their income will be subject to
tax federally and for New
Mexico. So this is predominantly
progressive because those with
those high itemized deductions
or like again likely to be high.
earners, and this will make more
of their income subject to
taxation.
Um, we have very few though
relative to other states of
those high income earners, so we
don't think the impact of this
will be as high fiscally in New
Mexico as in some other states
that have we wealthier tax base.
At this time, um,
We don't have an estimate
currently available. It's, it's
a little too early.
OK, next, um, we can move on to
one of the
Uh, one of the others that
directly impacts New Mexico
personal income tax. This is the
provision that provides there's
a deduction for interest paid on
car loans, certain car loans.
Um, so there's a new federal
deduction. Again, it's above the
line, so it impacts the New
Mexico return as well. Um, car
loan interest payments that an
individual makes will be able to
be deducted if the car loan
meets a certain um a certain
qualifying factors. Basically,
The car has to have been
assembled final assembly in the
US, so that means we're here
only incentivizing car loans for
US built cars. It also has to be
a passenger vehicle of certain
criteria.
Um, the deduction is limited to
$10,000. So if you're paying car
interest loan over $10,000.
You'll still pay income tax on
that, and the amount you can
deduct phases out, um, as you're
adjusted gross income rises, um,
and this basically just contrast
previous law where it didn't
really matter what car you were
financing your car loan interest
payments were not deductible.
Um, and this is effective for
tax years 2025 through 2028.
So we will start seeing this in
New Mexico, reduced revenue
starting in fiscal year 26.
Um, and estimating early, we
think this will reduce general
fund revenue by about $7.6
million per year, each year that
it's in place.
And again this is predominantly
regressive in this case, um,
it's the deduction is likely to
be used and maximized by higher
income taxpayers who can afford
to finance more vehicles or
higher value vehicles.
And next, um,
We turn, that was everything on
Pitt um next, returning to the
corporate income tax and an area
that has gotten a lot of um
Attention over the years is the
limitation on salt or state and
local taxes paid. So there has
been a federal deduction uh that
is capped currently at $10,000
for taxpayers who paid up
whatever they paid in state and
local taxes. So the federal
government is increasing the cap
on the salt deduction up to
$40,000 or $20,000 each for
married individuals filing
separately and then they're
phasing out the
cap for taxpayers with modified
adjusted gross income over
5,000,500,000, um, so it phases
down from 4000 down to 10 or
$40,000 deduction down to
$10,000 deduction as income
rises.
And this will be in place, um,
and adjusted for inflation from
tax years 26 through 29. And
after 2029 unless there's
further federal legislation, the
cap would go back to the current
$10,000 cap for tax year $30.
And um this will happen again a
direct revenue impact on Mexico
corporate income tax.
But all states uh in response to
TikTA, I'm moving on to slide
11. Um, what they could to sort
of work around um the salt cap.
The salt cap applies uh to
basically corporations and and
those that are filing personal
income tax, but it does not
apply to taxpayers paying um as
pass-through entities and
partnerships basically. And so
the way that New Mexico grappled
with this legislatively like did
basically every other state that
was subject
To this is create a way around
it, uh, so that if, uh, a pastor
entity elects they can choose a
pastor entity tax instead of the
corporate income tax, and then
they're not subject to the salt
cap.
And so it's a way and but in
doing so they must elect to to
agree to also pay the highest
marginal income tax rate at New
Mexico, which is 5.9% on all of
their income. So actually in
reducing federal revenue a
little bit, we increase state
revenue a bit by subjecting all
of these pastor entities that
elect this, putting all
subjecting all of their income
to the 5.9% rate. They don't get
the benefit of the marginal
tiered rates.
Um, we do think though that the
that the changes that have been
made in OA to the salt cap will
result in a general fund revenue
loss of about 52 million per
year over those same forecast
period years of FY 26 through
30.
Um, some of the, the policy
concerns with this would be
horizontal equity, no longer
treating taxpayers at the same
level of income equally, uh,
because you'll have some that
stay with the marginal tax rates
and some that go to the highest
rate and, um, and are capped
with their deduction.
While some will get around that.
And it is predominantly
regressive, um, again, these
pastoral entities and the those
that can maximize their salt
deductions over 40,000, uh, if
you're paying over 40,000 in in
state and local tax, you have a
fairly high income base to be
paying it on.
So it is, um, primarily
benefiting higher income
taxpayers.
And that's my share of the
slides. I'll turn over to
Lucinda.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, again,
my name is Lucinda Sido, and I
will be continuing with the
presentation on slide 12.
Covering some other corporate
income tax impacts and we split
them up to start with ones that
were under Tija that are now
continuing under the big bill,
and starting with, um, section
70105, the extension enhancement
of the deduction for qualified
business income.
Um, Section 70301, full
expensing of certain business
property that's made permanent
starting in tax year 2026 and
then finally, um, section 70303,
the modification of limitation
of business interest also
effective tax year 2026 as these
are a continuation of the
current law, there is no impact
to the forecast because we as
secretary mentioned, we, some of
these we felt were
We're going to be extended and
we're already built into the
forecast. So these are examples
of ones that will just continue
as the status quo.
If we turned aside 13, we've
listed here just a sampling of
ones that are, um,
Modified and in modifying them.
Um
potentially increasing the risk
to the corporate income tax
revenue, um, two examples that
we've, um, listed here, which I
believe you heard discussed this
morning in more in detail is the
increased dollar limitations for
expensing certain depreciable
business assets and then another
one here is an expansion of the
qualified small business stock
gain, which is effective now for
any stock issued after the
enactment of this bill. Now, a
lot of these depend on.
taxpayer behavior and we at this
moment haven't um modeled or.
Put in a fiscal impact, at least
in our department, but the
consensus revenue estimating
group as a whole is looking at a
fiscal impact based on all the
modifications to the corporate
income tax, um, code as well as
new, um, new, uh, federal
changes, so while we as a
department are not estimating
anything as a Craig, we are
going to estimate a global
impact without saying, you know,
without.
Partitioning it per se to any
particular section, but that we
feel that there is a downward
risk to the corporate income tax
revenue with the overall impact,
um, at the federal level, um.
So with that, you know, most of
these we feel are regressive
because.
As you are a company that can
can expense more on the
accounting and the taxpayer
evaluation of what's beneficial
it it those companies that can
have those resources we, we, we
tend to think of this as more
aggressive versus your small
businesses that, um, maybe
cannot take advantage of all the
particular changes in the bill.
If we, if you turned aside 14,
we just highlight some credits
that are at the federal level
that we don't.
pair with, you know, if, if you
have a state credit, you're not
required to take these federal
credits, but taxpayers often are
incentivized with their uh with
our state credits with the fact
that there are similar federal
credits and so we just list 3
here, the clean vehicle credits,
um, energy efficient building
credits both for residential and
commercial and the advanced
manufacturing production credit,
so like I said,
Our credits are not dependent on
these, but with the termination
and the phased out of these that
that will, that may change
taxpayer behavior and that they
will choose to purchase things
differently if they can no
longer have a federal match, so
we, we list this as a uh upside
risk to the forecast because we
have built into the forecast,
our own clean car credits our
own advanced manufacturing
production credit. So that's an
upper risk if those.
Taxpayers determined that they
don't want to take the state
credits and that would mean more
revenue for us with the assumed
take up of credits at this
moment.
If we turned aside 15.
Again, you heard a lot of detail
on this this morning, but just,
um, summarizing again some below
the line adjustments to the
personal income tax side that we
do not conform to, the first one
being the no tax on tips, which
creates a new federal deduction
for qualified tips, but below
the line, so this is after
adjusted gross income, and the
final passage of the bill, they,
they did cap that at 25,000 per
taxpayer and it
does have a limited time frame.
It's effective for tax years
2025 to 2028.
This is predominantly um
progressive in that tipped
workers are
You know, majority low income,
so that is, um, from a tax
policy perspective progressive,
but it, it also at the same time
violates horizontal equity
because other low income earners
who are not an attempt
environment are not gaining this
benefit at the same time. So
it's, it's treating people with
the same adjusted gross income
differently, so hence it's, it's
seen as um.
Going against that equity
principle and it also um goes
against the principle of
simplicity because for these
taxpayers, they will have to be
a little more attention to to
documenting this this income
and, and making sure that they
are properly following the new
federal deduction requirements.
On side 16,
A similar new deduction that's
below the line is the no tax on
overtime similar to the tips,
um, deduction. It's, it's also
capped at 25,000, um, for joint
filers, 12,500 for other filers,
and it is also for a limited
time for tax years 2025 to 2028.
Um, similar to the tips, it's
again treating people.
who might have the same income
differently that if you have
overtime income, you can now
deduct that. Well, if, if you
have the same income in another,
um.
And another salary or wages that
is not over time to find then
you will be taxed, um, at a
higher, at a higher rate and
again it, it is seen as
Making the tax, federal tax code
more complex because you have to
track those types of wages and
salaries that meet um the
overtime compensation.
Um, in a different way and a
burden on the taxpayer and
therefore.
finally on slide number 17.
There is a new, um,
deduction for seniors that is
below the line and it's this one
is also temporary for tax years
2025 to 2028. It, it's creating
a new temporary deduction for
seniors of $6000 66,000 dollars,
yes for 65 and older, um, with a
phase out for a little higher
AGIs and once again this would
be seen as
Violating horizontal equity
because again, people with the
same adjusted gross income.
Are are treated differently, so.
Um
But again, we do not conform to
this, so this is just, um, at
the federal level, um, for a
temporary deduction for seniors.
On slide 18.
We just want to touch on
Some impacts that are not
directly with the tax
administration and the of the
income taxes, but rather
um impacts to other tax revenues
from sections of the bill. And
the first one is under the Title
I subtitle A changes to the
supplemental nutrition program.
Some of the changes.
are expected to reduce the
population on Snap and
therefore.
There might be some changes in
consumption among people that
used to have food purchased
under SNAP, which would not be
taxable because under the
federal preemption we we can't
tax that food, but if they, if
people who are no longer on SNA
are now purchasing food, um, in
our communities it's still
deductible, it won't be taxable,
um, because it will be
deductible under other, other
deductions, but it could impact
our whole harmless, um,
distributions to communities if.
we see more of a population that
is now purchasing food through
that deduction and hold
harmless, so.
You know, we, we don't have an
estimate on an impact because
again it's, it's gonna depend on
many different factors of um.
Of the administration of SNAP
and just.
People's own consumption
patterns.
On slide 19, the, the other, um,
Section of the bill that we want
to highlight is title um 7,
which is also where the tax code
changes are and some title B
they have some changes to
Medicaid as, um, you know, has
been discussed several of the
changes, um, including work
requirements and the
redetermination of eligibility
are expected to reduce um the
enrollment in Medicaid and with
that,
As we have some disenrollment
for Medicaid, you will have some
people who are no longer covered
under the managed care program,
and that is, um, these are
premiums that are taxable under
the insurance premium and
surtax. So this is seen as a
risk because it could reduce the
insurance, um, taxable base and
therefore we could see a
downside risk to insurance. Um,
the Craig is looking at this,
um, we, we feel we have enough.
Information from healthcare
authority to, to estimate some
reduction in the taxable base.
So we don't have an estimate
here at the moment, but the
Craig itself will be, will be,
um, putting that into the
forecast.
On slide 20, the other secondary
effect from Medicaid is, um, the
change to what is called state
directed payments, so.
Um
And, um, the legislative session
number, uh, in 2024 we
implemented Senate Bill 17,
which is gonna have state
directed payments to hospitals,
so under um the federal bill
starting in um.
January of 2028, I believe you
have to start reducing the
amount of payments to whatever
entities you are paying in our
case, hospitals, so there will
be um a 10% reduction on what
will be paid out to hospitals
This will have a direct impact
to grocery seats tax and to the
insurance, um, and healthcare
taxable base because of the
amount of of money that we are
sending to the hospitals that
they will be using.
We're reducing the tax bases for
both those tax programs, um,
this is also.
Um, will be estimated in the
Craig forecast because we had
already estimated a fiscal
revenue increase from Senate
Bill 17, so we'll still have an
increase, it will just not be as
large as expected under the
original passage of Senate Bill
17.
And with that, we get to decide
21, which just reiterates that.
What we've presented here is
from our department. We are
collaborating with the other
economists in the consensus
revenue estimating group and we
will have.
You know, the full consensus of
of these impacts in that
forecast that we're presenting
August 19th and has been
reiterated by the secretary and
the presenters this morning.
This is a this is a large bill
that we are continuing to
analyze every day and flushing
out and working with our
national colleagues to, to
understand this fully and to
understand, um.
That we've we've gotten fiscal
impacts as best we can, so with
that, I think.
Right to stand for questions.
Go ahead and start with uh
co-chair uh Souls.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
Thank you, you know, I always
find it very interesting
and always try and bring it back
that, you know, we're worried
about the budget, but it really
comes down to the people. So I
appreciate that you put in there
which parts are seem to be
progressive.
Which means it to me a fairer
tax system and which ones are
regressive, which means the
wealthy and affluent are doing
better off at the expense of
others. So I appreciate that
kind of analysis.
Overall, would you say for New
Mexico that it's neutral,
progressive, regressive as far
as our tax policy and how it's
going to affect people.
Thank you, um, Chairman,
co-chairman Souls, um, I don't
know that we're at a point where
we could honestly say that the
total thing for New Mexico is,
is one or the other, um, you
know, the, the sense is that,
um, the corporate income tax
cuts, and that's a lot of what
was expanded and extended and
made permanent through Tikcha.
Um, they do benefit
corporations, they do benefit
higher income earners, but
there's a lot of new stuff in
here that that wasn't included
in Tikcha and like particularly
tip.
ers um, that, that's
interesting. It's one of the
more progressive aspects of it.
So,
I, I think the answer is right
now, we don't have an answer.
Thank you. And I understand, and
you know, the questions may not,
I mean, I'm just trying to get a
sense for things, uh, from the
earlier presentation, uh, Madam
Chair, it indicated that the tip
worker in overtime in the big
scheme of things is probably a
yawn, you know, it's a
distraction more than actually
having a, a very big effect.
Um, as I went through on where
you actually put numbers for how
much the change is gonna be, it
comes up to about $130 million
of reduced revenue through the
various tax ones. Is that
accurate or pretty close at this
point from what we know. Mr.
Co-Chair, members of the
committee, yes, I think that's,
um.
That's, you've, you've, you've
calculated it correctly, yeah.
It's pretty easy adding 5
numbers together or whatever it
was. But, um, but as this
committee is making
recommendations then to the
finance committee,
it's going to come down to, to
either just eat that, do we need
to raise revenue in other
places, I mean, or or our
reserves and others robust
enough that we can see this is
kind of a, a tax benefit for the
people of New Mexico, which gets
back to, you know, is this?
aggressive or regressive as far
as, you know, who's getting most
of the benefits. Um, couple of
other places and
I apologize cause I know you
said we really don't have
estimates yet, but I'm gonna
ask, um, on the state hold
harmless amount.
I think it was on page 18. Are
we talking hundreds of thousands
or millions of dollars just in
broad. I'm not gonna require you
to give me a straight number,
but I mean, is this a big deal
we need to be paying attention
to or it's like, oh yeah, and
that too type of thing.
Mr. Co-chair members of the
committee, the, the way I've
been thinking about this is
because we have the face down
that I don't see this as a large
impact, but those communities
where you, you, we still have a
100% hold harmless and if you do
have this shifting population,
I, I think in the whole, it's
not a lot of money to the stage,
but it's going to be a lot of
money for them, so for the
general fund, I do not see this
as a large impact, um.
But do you see it as a a a very
large impact for some of these
small communities that are, um,
that might have, you know, a
disproportionate number of
people that will no longer be on
that, that food program.
Yes, and, and thank you. And I,
I think, you know, you're kind
of hitting at the main thing is
it's going to affect real people
and real communities if the
state doesn't backfill that hold
harmless that we've kind of
promised to them under these
areas when they're seeing a
lower amount coming in and how
are they going to manage on
their budgets, or is this just,
you know, it continues to flow
downhill until you get to the
bottom.
Yeah,
thank you, Mr. Chair and
members, um.
I, I would be surprised if the
impact to the general fund were
more than a couple million
dollars across all local
governments, and then again,
that will, that number will
shrink, not grow over time
because we're partially phasing
out the whole harmless payments.
Um, but, you know, over the
years, a lot of people that are
reasonable on all sides of this
debate talk about whether we
should or shouldn't be taxing
food in New Mexico. One of the
things you hear from people that
say, no, we should get rid of
that deduction and lower the
GRT. I'll say, well, SNAP
benefits make food not subject
to tax anyway for the lowest
income New Mexicans. Well, I
think we knew probably generally
that before this SNAP benefits
often didn't cover all the food
needs of a family and now less
so. So, um,
for, for those that are
concerned about hunger in New
Mexico and making sure that
families are, are at least
having the food necessary or
deduction is playing that role
in making sure that if your SNAP
benefits are going away, at
least you're not sort of getting
kicked while you're down by also
paying a 6 to 10% tax on the
food.
Yes, and thank you, and it is
supplemental nutrition. It is
not designed to be their sole.
So numbers on that, uh, sort of
the same question on page 19 and
20. What's the size of the risk
for the Medicaid and what's the
broad risk to hospital bases,
and again, I don't need a
straight number, but are we
talking a million dollars? Are
we talking $50 million or
something less, bigger or less.
Mr. Co-chair members of the
committee, um, on the Medicaid.
Shrinkage of the tax base.
Again, I, I, I don't want to put
any of our my economists in the
corner, but we're talking a
larger impact, um, depending on
the magnitude of what, um,
One individual people's behavior
and whether that the changes um
and redetermination, um,
discourage them, but also what
we as a state can can supplement
to keep them on, um, Medicaid.
So that one I see as a larger
downward, um, impact to the
state for the hospitals, um.
You know, it's
It's because of that face down,
the 10% and that we were already
forecasting an impact because
we, we are, we're still pushing
more money to the hospitals.
It's just that we're, we're,
we're slowly reducing that, but
that's, that's a slow, a lower
scale impact versus the overall,
um, Medicaid population impact
to the tax base.
Thank you, and uh, that helps me
a lot in, in kind of
understanding the scale of where
we are and, and I always try and
bring it back that though this
impacts the state budget. The
budget is there to protect
people, and we want to make sure
that we're talking about is this
progressive, is this helping
people that are struggling or is
this padding the pockets of the
affluent more and how are we as
a state going to respond to that
to protect people, not just
protect state budget as if it's,
you know, something.
Thank you.
Alrighty, let's go to Senator
Gonzalez.
Thank you, Madame Chair and Vice
Chair, uh, just a couple of
things and uh for uh I have two
questions actually 3 but uh it's
coming more from my constituency
because I know that it's gonna
come.
And on page 9.
So, uh, on that car loan
interest.
Does that apply to you or to
used or to both.
Thank you for the question,
Madam Chair, Mr. Chair, and, uh,
Senator, we're we're looking up
to see what original owner.
See, we're, we're looking at our
notes and the, the car loan
interest has to have been paid
where the vehicle is owned by
the original owner.
So that's to us sounds like it's
for new cars.
OK, and, uh, the other part
where it says that um uh the
final assembly in the United
States, uh, who will have that
list, the dealers.
Um, Mr. Chair, Ms. Madam Chair,
um, members of the committee,
um, to quote Helen Hecht, I
think there's going to need to
be IRS, um.
definitions of this to help, um,
at the federal level and at the
state levels to, to fully be
able to vet the, the compliance
on this.
Thank you. On page 18.
Oh
So, uh
Changes within snap.
Include work requirement for
certain population.
And I guess I'm looking at is.
How will we be able to tell if
someone's working or not
working.
Because what they're gonna come.
I can visualize it.
You know, well, I have tried,
but I can't get a job.
I think um, co-chairs and
Senator Gonzalez were probably
both hesitant to get into the
programmatic management that's
overseen by in our state, the
healthcare authority, and then
by their federal counterparts
were certainly not experts in,
uh,
You know, SNAP eligibility
determinations, but the pop, you
know, uh, the population will go
down, uh, in part because of
work requirements and in part
because of other things. I, I
generally think that sometimes
there's a demonstration that you
have tried, um, and for some of
these uh programs like this and
TANF, but I'm not an expert on
that.
OK, thank you, that's fair, um,
the last one is uh.
Uh, you mentioned that, uh.
And uh you mentioned about the
food tax.
And that by if it was reduced or
somehow less.
That uh that would allow the
capacity for gross receipts tax
or lower the gross receipts tax.
But uh I guess what I'm looking
at is uh what is the safeguard
because the last time that we
did that just recently, a couple
of years ago.
Arkani commission erased that
portion in 2 weeks.
So there was no reduction.
You know, and if that was to
happen, uh.
You know, how can that be
protected to keep it at what
it's meant for to be lowered.
Um, co-chairs and Senator
Gonzalez, it's a great question.
And, and when we did reduce the
GRT by 0.25%. It was the first
time we had reduced the state
GRT in about 40 years. There was
debate about whether to include
in that bill a provision that
preempted uh local rate
increases for a period of I
think 5 years is what was sort
of on the table and it was
lobbied against ferociously, uh,
on, on behalf of local
governments, which I can
understand and, and so the law
of the land is that they were
not prohibited.
From, from doing so, um.
I think as a legislator, the
Maybe there are ways outside of
statute to
Make it known that that the
investment of the state in tax
relief is important and you
didn't want to, you know, don't
want to see the tax rates
increase, and maybe there's
another way around it, uh,
through other funding mechanisms
or something, but
Uh, we also saw tribal
governments increase rates in
the last couple of years, but I
would put that in a different,
uh, under a different lens
because we also just changed law
a couple of years ago to allow
tribes to set their own rates
outside of the neighboring
county, right? So that was to be
expected and I, I wouldn't say
that it was in response to the
state reducing its rate, but the
state rate is, uh, you know, is,
is, it's actually quite
competitive right now, but the
statewide rate is not, and
that's really an um a function
of local option taxes, right?
amazing.
Oh, Madame Cheno, when we did
that, you and I worked on that.
And it was pretty defeating to
go back and to see that he got
back.
raced back again in a couple of
weeks and um, you know, so like
we sort of missed the whole
intention.
But uh I really feel that if I'm
going that direction.
You know, safeguards need to be
in place.
Thank you.
Let's go to Senator Lopez.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you very much for this
information. Um, always, uh,
good for us to to learn and see
where the impacts of the.
The triple B I think is what the
madam chair said, Bill, I like
that one because I can remember
that.
Uh,
you know, when we talk, Madam
Chair, um, Mr. Co-Chair with
regards to, you know, the impact
of Medicaid, um.
I remember when
Uh, Medicaid, not Medicaid, when
uh we had the, the TANF reform
temporary assistance for needy
families back in '96.
And when the changes that were
proposed at that time, we had to
work through here at the state
level in the legislature on
implementing the changes that
were made at that time and.
You know, we're we're still, I
think, waiting, uh, the law was
passed, there's still rules that
have to be implemented for
guidance for the states to
implement some of these changes
although I think we can do them
quite rapidly, um, but when you
do the 6 month rule for
recertification, that's an
automatic given that people are
gonna drop off. It's hard enough
for families to keep up with the
one year, you know, every year
annual, um, so there's, you
know, there's, there's certain
things that have been
Um, words that have been put
into the law that have a driving
force unto themselves, Madam
Chair.
And you know, in thinking as to
how this is gonna work with the
SNAP. I mean, true, it's only
supposed to be supplement, but
in certain communities that is
the driver of food, um, so
they're not just to supplement
it does buy the meat and other
basic necessities, um, in
certain communities that I am
aware of.
The SNAP benefit, you know, with
the reduction with persons not.
qualifying whatever the
terminology may be, Madam Chair.
There's also could be another
impact on the small businesses
because there are food deserts
in New Mexico.
And some communities only have a
Dollar General or Family Dollar
or something and that's where
they go buy their food because
they can't drive into the big
city or wherever they go to that
to um purchase food again.
So I think there there may be
another economic downturn which
may not be like a big thing, you
know, when we look at the
millions of dollars, but for
local economies I think that
we'll have an impact.
Um, so I think there's still
some outcomes so.
may be hard to forecast at this
point, but I do believe that
we're gonna see some in this
next couple of years as the the
rollout comes for these um
determinations of both SNAP and
Medicaid and of course it's
gonna hurt the, the healthcare
industry basis to what you know
the, we give them money, then we
get it back, um, type of effort
there's gonna be some hurt and
in our um LHHS Health and Human
Services Committee meeting
Secretary Armijo did give us
also um
of information just as she did
our committee meeting with
regards to, you know, the
hospitals in our communities
that um are on the potential
list of closing, so there's kind
of that other fallout that we
have to still to keep in mind as
we look for recommendations to
make to the LFC, but also what
we bring forth, uh, for this
upcoming, um, 30 day session and
the subsequent 60 day session
when we have a new
administration. Just wanted to
add my
My little bit of words, thank
you.
Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um, I
just, just have maybe a couple
of questions and then maybe you
can help me understand a few
things.
Um, so after COVID we lost about
200,000 people off of Medicaid
in our state. Is that correct?
Do you remember those numbers?
OK, so I again, I would have to
defer, Madam Chair and
Representative to our colleagues
at HCA. OK. And now we're
looking at about 90,000 that
that may potentially lose this,
so, um, the question I wanna ask
is.
You know, as we're talking about
these.
These folks, if, if our work
Whether they, for example, if
they can't and they they go
donate their time somewhere uh
volunteer somewhere that's one
thing, but if they get off of
this and get a job and are able
to do some of this on their own.
Tell me those benefits that
will, that the state will
receive as a result of somebody
actually going and getting a job
as a result of this.
Co-chairs, um, representative.
There's certainly a trade-off,
isn't there? Because if, if
someone is in a job, they might
be getting insurance through
that job, um, and then they
might be then earning more wages
and salaries to contribute to
personal income tax and to more
to grocery seeds tax, so
certainly there's indirect
multiplier effects if, if, if
some of these people, um, moved
to that a different, um, wage
level that um allows their
consumption patterns to change.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for that, um.
And I, and I hope that people
are able to get off, as I said
to the secretary when we were
talking about that, I said it's,
it's our job, I think as
legislators to try to lift
people up.
And, and I said, and it's your
job, it sounds to me like you're
trying to get people on here.
That would indicate that that
those who are on Medicaid don't
have a living wage yet and it's
our job to try to figure out
what we can do to our state and
with our state to bring those
people out of it, so I hope that
we get more of those people out
of, of that than we do, um, uh,
just lose to fall through the
cracks, um, is what I'm hoping,
um, I've got
I've got some other questions,
madam Chair, but I think I'll,
I'll I'll just hold off on them
and, and, and, uh, maybe I'll,
uh, get with the different.
Secretary and and uh ask those
questions so thank you.
Representative Pereira.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you for your presentation.
I'm
I'm trying to get a handle on.
On how much we're gonna lose
under.
Under the Medicaid provider, uh,
you know, reimbursement or, or
the lowering of the, the
threshold under uh this uh OA
bill versus what we did with
Senate Bill 17.
And, uh, uh, you know, I'm, I'm
looking at the numbers here and
I'm, I'm trying to get this, I,
I think, and I can't tell what
was our recurring cost in 2025.
I mean, I have, I have two
numbers here, but I, I don't
know if you know that for Senate
Bill 17.
When we were trying to help
hospitals by giving them an
increase in provider rates.
Um, the co-chairs and
Representative Herrero members,
um, it might be good if we
follow up with our colleagues at
Healthcare Authority about that,
but just in real round numbers,
what I, what I remember was that
the hospitals were going to be
paying in somewhere between 300
to 400 million per year. And at
the time we scored as about a 3
to 1 federal match on, on that
funding that would come back
through. So it's somewhere in,
in that order of magnitude,
maybe 400 million from
providers.
That comes back to them in terms
of provider reimbursement rates
of
More like 12 1.2 billion. That
was sort of high level, um, what
Senate Bill 17 scored like.
And
And with these um with with this
new downward.
Payment method to Medicaid,
what, what will that, what will
that mean and uh you know, if,
if we wanted to keep that if uh
you know, we're at a desperate
situation of keeping our
providers here and keeping
hospitals open. Certainly our
rural hospitals and our
nonprofit hospitals, and I think
that's what this bill really
primarily affected as, as I
recall, but it was a heavy piece
of legislation and I'm not
unhealth and Human Services, so
I'm desperately kind to read
this. I'm just trying to see if.
If we wanted to keep that even.
What would about what would that
cost?
Co-chairs representative and
members of the committee, um,
just dovetailing on the
secretary's numbers, you could
just proportion that because
it's a 10% reduction every year.
So 10% of the expected 300.
And then 400 million going back
to them just scale that down by
10% and that's what you're
looking at, um, year after year
40 million and then increasing
that every year.
Right. Another 10% exactly
exactly 40, 50, 60, 70 over so
probably 80 or probably close to
100 after a 4-year period. I
don't know. I'm not doing. I'm
not a math major, that's for
sure, but I know it's gonna
increase if
If we try and keep the same
level of provider assistance.
It is that true?
I think so, but chairs, um,
after this meeting, I think I'll
follow up with my colleague at
the Healthcare Authority to make
sure that they have the
opportunity to give you a lot
more in-depth information than
we can as the tax department. We
know a lot about the revenues
coming in, but not nearly as
much about the intricacies of
the appropriations going out.
Uh, thank you and thank you
Madam Chair. I think that's
really what we're gonna need to
know, uh, because our, our
choice is.
Uh, do we help hospitals stay
open, really, which is what SB
17 was all about.
Do we help hospitals stay open
by increasing the provider
rates.
And do we keep that steady or
Do we face dramatic downfalls,
certainly in small rural
hospitals, uh, you know, the
hospitals in my area are
Presbyterian and Taoists, and
they're not gonna close, you
know, we're, it's, we, it's two
nonprofits and, and they're not
gonna close, but there are
hospitals in this state that
will close without these rates,
and I think those are the
numbers we really need to know,
not that we could totally make
up that figure.
Uh, but we certainly ought to
look at, you know, who's gonna
be in impacted what
What regions are a state are
really gonna be hard hit.
Uh, by the closure of hospitals,
and there will be nobody to take
their place.
And, uh, and people will die,
you know that those are the
choices we have right now, I
think.
As as a state.
And uh I think we've done a lot
of work in trying to.
Make a health care more
accessible?
Uh, but, but this is really
gonna be a hard, hard hit, and I
think those are the numbers we
need so I thank you for your
help in providing them for us.
Thank you, Madam Chair. All
righty, thank you.
Uh, go to Senator Pinto, then
we'll go to Representative
Brown.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
And talking about the hospitals,
um, a lot of the DEI stuff
already think displaced a lot of
workers, especially when we talk
about the middle income range in
the higher income range right in
there with the contract workers.
We're talking about
professionals that have degrees.
And chose this as a career feel
that they're not coming into
those communities to provide
those services and they're not
gonna be paying that tax base is
gone for those communities, um,
we see the BIE schools closed,
that's a whole school too, and
that's a whole another
professional group that we will
not see any income, um, taxes
from them.
And I think one of the things
I'd really like to know if you
can take this back to the, the
tax people you guys were working
with is how do we influence
these guidelines. How can we
influence the policymaking that
is coming up. Do we need to, you
know, take motions and letters
to the um congressional leaders
or does it need to go to the IRS
or, you know, because that
coordination um should be
happening right now as they're
drawing this up so we can make
sure we're as a state addressing
some of the issues.
Thank you
Thank you, Senator Pinto and and
co-chairs members, um, there's,
there's two ways from sitting in
the executive branch in the tax
department, uh, we have these
two national tax organizations
that are active as a voice for
states when it comes to state
and, uh, and federal tax issues.
Those are the Federation of Tax
Administrators and the
multi-state tax commission,
which we are a member of that
compact commission. um, and so,
uh, they've been very active,
uh, uh, all the, all the way as
this bill was being drafted and
making its way through.
committees informing their
members about what is included
in each version, but also, uh,
combining concerns and technical
issues and things that just will
not be possible, uh, along the
way and bringing those back, um,
it's hard to say whether all
that feedback, uh, was, was
received and, and made a
difference in what, in a lot of
ways was a party line, uh, vote,
um, so there's that. There's
also, of course, our
congressional delegation.
There's our tribal councils of
government, um.
The tribal summit, uh, this
summer, it came up this idea for
tribal members and leaders and
governors to actually go to
Washington. I I don't know if
that's being coordinated, but
that could be impactful, um, so
and as legislators, I think you
have a voice and so, um, to the
extent we run up against
anything that we feel like we
need changed. I, I would love to
be able to reach out to, you
know, this branch of government
as well as through our national
and through the Governors
Associations to just make sure
we use every voice we have.
to try to be heard.
Representative Brown.
Thank you Madam Chair.
Um, so I believe there's some
actually some good news in the
reconciliation bill, uh, for
rural hospitals. It's my
understanding and it's, it's
right there in the bill that
Congress has
Allocated $50 billion for rural
hospitals. I serve a rural
hospital community. Uh, they're
all around me and so I, I'm very
concerned as well. So the New
Mexico share of this will be at
least $100 million for each of 5
years.
So there are resources that are
being provided to help with that
situation and kind of good news
on top of that is there's no
state match required for this
assistance. I think the key to
this, Madam Chair, will be being
sure that that money reaches us
in time, uh, so it can be um
applied where, where it's best
needed or best used, so I, I
think that's kind of the rest of
the story on that one.
I know, Madam Chair, that UNM.
is planning to expand its
medical school, which is also
good news. We need the providers
and we hope to grow them here at
home.
And, um, so I, I think there's a
lot happening in the medical
field that is actually gonna end
up proving to be very good and
worthwhile.
And um something I've read, I
don't know deep details on it,
Madam Chair, but, um, I know
every time I go to a doctor, I
have to give him my health
history all over again every
single time. It's a new provider
and this is going to manage so
that we do one record.
And we save ourselves a lot of
time every time we see a new
provider, so there's some good
things happening here. I just
wanted to point that out, Madam
Chair, thank you.
Um
Anyone else, I have a couple
questions if there's not anybody
else, um, I'd like to start with
page 21.
My
to ask and get a better
understanding from the
department. When we say a state,
the state policymakers may
choose to decouple from areas of
conformity under current law.
Can you tell me uh what your
department will be looking at
when you're evaluating
decoupling.
What are the kinds of things
that help make that decision.
Because you'll be the one making
the recommendation to the body.
And to the governor, so what,
what are those things?
That's a great question, Madam
Chair. um.
And I think, to be honest, this
is kind of off the top of my
head because all of this is very
new and we're, we're not kind of
there yet, but um.
I am very proud that in the last
6 years, the legislative body
and our governor have worked
together to move the needle on
making New Mexico's tax code
much more progressive. Uh, we've
moved from the middle of the
pack to the last study we were
the 9th most progressive tax
system amongst the states and so
that's certainly one thing that
we want to protect and enshrine
uh throughout New Mexico law,
so, um, that's one thing that we
would look to, and then there's
just the fiscal balance. I mean,
um, I don't.
Uh, envy those of you in, in the
legislative Finance Committee or
a DFA that have to intake every,
uh, the, the numbers that we're
saying, you know, the, the ways
that OA impacts the revenue
stream are a drop in the bucket
compared to the way they affect
appropriations and so I really
think there's that we will have
sort of a sideline, uh, dialogue
about tax decoupling compared to
figuring out how to supplant
federal funds and our Medicaid
program and insurance.
and rural hospitals and
everything else that you have to
think about continuation of, so,
um, we would look, you know,
basically at fiscal impacts and
how that can balance into a
sustainable budget. What's
what's doable. I be looking for
from your department is not only
looking at fiscal balance but
enhancements if we think that
something is gonna go away and
may have a major impact. What
are those kinds of things
through tax policy.
that we could look at then as an
enhancement, you know, and I'm
not, I've never been big on
let's give away a bunch of
credits. I've never been big on
let's look at, uh, how we can
give away things because I'm not
sure how we measure success.
I've never understood how we
measure success with a lot of
the tax policy we have today.
Uh, and it's because some of it
happened 2030 years ago, and now
we're, we're still looking at
it, we're still using it, but we
don't know if it works.
Or if it works well. So will you
be looking at some kinds of
enhancements.
For, for funds that we may lose,
but also in, in building the
economy. I mean, at the end of
the day, it's about the economy,
I think.
So
Yeah, absolutely. I mean,
there's Madam Chair, there's
ways that we can support the
people of New Mexico directly,
like, for example through the
working families tax credit or
the child tax credit, things
like that you can, you can see
easily just exactly how that
will benefit families and bring,
for example, children out of
poverty, but it's a little, you
have to use a little more
imagination to imagine how um
aspects of the tax code can lead
to economic development that
indirectly create jobs, create
income, induce decision making
that leads to
more prosperity in New Mexico.
So certainly, um, the governor's
office um economic development
department and others are still
looking at ways that, um, we can
provide through economic
development through the tax code
and and through other
mechanisms. Um, I know there's
still a lot of talk and I've
seen a lot of interim agendas of
the legislature too about
quantum computing, that's an
exciting um development that's
happening and still seems to be
well supported federally, um,
whereas, um, for example, we're
seeing clean car.
It's going away and some of the
other advanced um energy
manufacturing, uh, subsidy is
going away for, um, clean
energy.
We're not seeing that for
quantum computing.
The other thing that struck my
interest was the issue around
space ports, um, I'm not sure
that we've had a dynamic
program. I'm not, I haven't been
close to it, so maybe I
shouldn't say that, but.
Um, I'm not sure what that
means.
Yeah, are, do you have any feel
for that, Madam Chair.
I'll wager a guess, um, I, you
know, I, I have seen Richard and
Helen's, um, uh, presentation
and it talked about adding space
ports into exempt facilities. I,
I believe what they're talking
about there has to do with
issuance of tax-exempt bonds.
Um, there are, in general, tax
exempt bonds can only be issued
for public purposes like roads
and public infrastructure and
things, but there are certain
exempt facilities like maybe air
well it might be like a
privately owned airport or war.
for port or something like that
where you can still issue tax
exempt bonds, lowering the cost
of financing for these things
that are publicly held, and I
think that provision is adding
space ports to the list of
things that can be more
affordably financed. Well,
that's what I'm hoping that
we're not only evaluating what
we think the impacts are, but
you value evaluating where we
think we can use these things so
that we, uh, I think as
Representative Brown was saying
there's some good things too,
but we.
need to know what they are and
how they work.
And how they can be implemented
and how can we, um,
Actually use them in our state.
I'm, I'm not sure, but if this
spaceport, um, component is
something I'm sure that county
where the spaceport is located
and 3 counties that passed a tax
to support it initially want to
see some uh return on
investment.
I know Representative Laura, you
come from one of the counties
that made a major investment in
tax support for the spaceport,
but I, I don't know, has there
been much.
That we've seen
I, I don't know. I'm just, I'm
just asking what in this in this
uh initiative can we use as a
state?
The other question that I had
is, um.
When we're looking at changing
our code to be in.
Conform to conform with what we
decide to conform with. How long
does that actually take? Is that
something that's pretty easy or
do you have to issue rules and
all that other or can you just
do it?
Madam Chair, it would be, um,
similar to any other legislative
change we might make in a tax
package each legislative
session, uh, basically the
legislature would amend chapter
7 to say something is or isn't
exempt or deductible, and we
would implement it the next tax
year.
OK, I, I also had kind of a
more, uh.
I guess I'd say personal
question. I'd like to know why
the legislative per diem is
treated like income.
Why are we issued, I think we're
issued 1099s, aren't we? I, I'd
like to understand that. I, I
know that's a little off subject
here, but.
We might be impacted by, by this
bill in some way. I'm just
curious why that why is that the
deal?
Madam Chair, um, this question
has come up a couple times, and
I believe it's something the
Legislative council service has
a dialogue ongoing with, uh,
DFA's payroll bureau or
financial control division, uh,
basically financial control is
the state agency that issues
W-2s and 1099s to anybody
involved with, uh, state work or
state contracting, and I believe
there may be an issue, a
technological issue or a
reporting issue.
between council service and
DFA's financial control
division, and it comes down to
which box.
They're putting wages in for you
all and so I would it's, it's
crazy and I, I, I wanna raise
that issue as at least for
myself and maybe everybody else
cares about this, but it's it's
crazy it's crazy making.
Um
It's, it's, it's not income for
goodness sakes, it creates, uh,
we're we're pulling our hair out
with our CPAs.
Uh, next thing you know,
somebody's uh.
Asking questions from the IRS
and you're trying to explain it
and there are groups that don't
get back to you for two years.
to
Yeah, why don't you introduce
yourself and explain why we have
an IRS audits.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, my name is Dee Wald.
I'm chief legal counsel and
director of policy for the New
Mexico Revenue Department. I'm
happy to be here today.
Um, the first thing I'm gonna
say is the IRS taxes everything,
um, so under section 61, your
income is defined as income from
whatever source derived.
And unless federally they
provide some of an exemption or
deduction for these types of per
diem payments to you.
Then they're going to be taxed
by diRS. If you wish them to not
be taxed federally or by the
state of New Mexico that is of
of course policy decision that
you would have to make to make
those payments exempt for you,
but
Unless the feds do something,
those will be considered.
Income to you, uh,
Representative Herrera once.
You know
I've been asking this question
for 7 years and for 7 years I
haven't gotten an answer and I
haven't gotten a valid answer. I
ran a nonprofit foundation. I
had 25 people on salary. We had
when it was travel, we had a per
diem expanse and, and, uh, you
know, we just, we just gave them
a a per diem allowance and, and
that worked and when I did their
W-2s at the end of the year that
was considered, uh, that was
considered.
wasn't part of their pay. It was
only given when they were on
travel. We only get per diem
when we travel to an interim
committee meeting which is a
business, so I have never
understood the difference, and I
have never gotten a clear
answer, and they don't have one
and they, they basically said
well when we did this law years
ago we said we do it this way
and that's how we got per diem
for members because they didn't
even get per diem before and
that's how we kind of got it
through, and that's the best
answer.
I've got, and if that's the
answer I've gotten, I think we
should just take a bill to
legislative council and do away
with it. I, you know, if
legislative council did it
before, we can do it again. It's
my attitude, but you know, I'm
not a tax attorney and I'm not
an accountant, but I have run a
nonprofit, uh, where we did
have, you know, a, a per diem
amount for people that were
traveling, we followed the
federal per diem guidelines that
they have, and we went with
those and, and that's.
how it worked.
And let's go to reps in brown
and then Gonzalez.
Go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair, so.
No
we're mad about it.
Well, Madam Chair, you know,
for,
from, from my perspective, it's
even worse because there are tax
implications that we have no
control over. For example, um,
for, OK, so when we get our our
sheet from the state of New
Mexico showing our travel and
what we, you know, and all that.
We have to file a separate piece
of paper. It's, is it a 1061 or
a 61, it's some some kind of.
Anyway, there's some section
that we say I live more than 100
miles from the capital.
There you go. And so I do that
every year, but
Madam Chair, the accountants
just really don't know. I mean,
how do you know they're, if you
file online, how do you include
that form? I know of no way to
do that.
Hm. I was told you can't file
online, it has to be the paper
copy to claim that that's what I
do is paper copy because I don't
see how to fit it in, but even
worse than that is the what was
the, it's just changed recently,
but the wind windfall, um, um,
provision, prevention provision.
So we received this.
Per diem and
It, it's as far as the IRS was
concerned.
Um
That was something we couldn't
get taxed on because when you're
you pay is 00, you know,
whatever percent of 0 is still 0
and they're saying you didn't
give enough in.
Uh, for Social Security
purposes, so we're gonna dock
you for whatever Social Security
you are getting.
And that, that has been battled
for 20 years and finally just
recently, uh, that provision
went away, but that was one of
those little hurdles that, and
we're the only state in the
nation where legislators don't
get any kind of salary.
So we were just an outlier and
um it drove some people, some
accountants crazy.
And then, you know, how do you,
how do you end it? so it'd be
nice to see something there,
Madam Chair, if I may just kind
of circle back to the first
thing I said, we have heard
about this, uh, several times
over the years, uh, I really
think the root of this has to do
with the paperwork that's coming
from the council service to DFA
and the way DFA is populating
the tax forms that you receive
as as an employee each year or
as a contractor either way.
Um
I know I cannot remember the
names. It's been 5 or 6 years
when Raoul Borsaga was there. We
met with DFA and some
administrative staff at the
council service, and I, I don't
know where things landed between
those two, but I believe that's
where the solution lies.
Madam Chair, actually, I would
need like 3 hours, but I'll,
I'll do it very short, uh,
Representative Herrera, you're
lucky. I've been dealing with
this for 31 years.
And uh within that I have been
audited 3 times, and uh one of
the times Paula Tackett and
myself.
We traveled to Albuquerque to
the IRS office 3 times.
And we finally got it to where a
little bit of an understanding.
And uh
Several things happen is one
thing is.
The entire nation doesn't know
how to deal with it because
we're the only state that
doesn't get compensated.
So within that you had to fall
within our congressional group,
and that's finally when they
actually did work on Form H,
which is basically an in and
out, but you're still subject to
audit because it's a 1099 and
form H you can only apply if you
leave 50 miles away from the
capital, you know, so if you're
within, it's different.
So within having that.
And then the problem is that
this person at the IRS who
finally understood what New
Mexico was doing.
That person's gone, the new
person coming in has no clue of
we're back again to ground zero.
You know, and the whole argument
is again.
So, uh,
The last part that was given to
us was if we really wanted to do
something, it has to be done
through our congressional.
And then they would come down to
our
offices of tax, DFA and work
with us on that matter.
So, uh, Madam Secretary, as a
constituent, I'm asking you to
do something about it is to find
out.
I'm a constituent.
And I, I want to know if it is
something as simple as how
legislative council is reporting
to uh DFA.
I mean, we, we need to have
this, we need to have this
resolved
Madam, Madam Chair, I would be
happy to. It's probably been 9
months since the last time I
emailed and my and our deputy
secretary or other deputy
secretary, Ms. Moura, we've been
in touch with uh Mark Melhoff at
DFA with the council service
staff. We will do so again.
I keep hoping it'll resolve
hoping it can be, uh, I mean,
we're closing out with the
current administration now all
those people are gonna change in
a couple of years. It'd be nice
that we could start out with a
clean slate.
All right, is there any other
questions or concerns? Go ahead,
Representative Pereira.
I live 49 miles from the
capital.
It's problematic. I'm just
saying, uh, so while you're
looking at this, when you look
at that mileage requirement too.
Thank you.
Uh
55, you're fine.
Senators 99. He didn't qualify
by 1 mile.
Take advantage of that might
work for our state, um, as
we're, as we're moving along
with this committee.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, members. All righty, thank
you very much.
I see.
All right, we have about a 5,
6-minute break here before our 3
p.m. presenter is here, so now's
the time to get
a bio break, OK. And as soon as
that, that, uh, presenter gets
here, we'll fire back up.
