Great questions that were short
getting information from others
and things like that is, I'm
very honored to, to be able to
share this,
um, having
Except that, um, any first any
comments, questions before we
get started.
If not our first presentation is
from the finance.
LFC uh on sort of the basics of
where we are and you know,
things shifted or at least uh
shook yesterday and so we're
still trying to keep up with
that, but Charles, please go
ahead.
Sure, thank you, uh, Mr.
Chairman, members of the
committee, if we could skip to
slide 3. I just
Every chance I get, I want to
remind people like the annual
federal budget $1.9 trillion.
Uh, I left some of these slides
in from last time just as a kind
of a uh
Uh, help level set kind of where
we're at from a big picture
budget standpoint at the federal
level. So overall, $1.9 trillion
deficit, uh, the, the bill that
the Senate passed over a 10-year
period will increase that by 3.3
to 3.4.
Trillions, so about 340.
billion a year.
Uh, if you spread that out.
Uh, so even that's, and, and
when we get into the deficit
reduction components, you'll see
that it's kind of like not
really addressing that big, big
picture on an annual basis. So
we've got
Uh, big, big challenges as a
country when it comes to
balancing the books.
Uh, slide 4 just gives you a
historical.
Uh, how does deficit compare to
uh GDP.
Uh, over time.
And what we're looking at is
like, you know, right now, uh,
our federal debt in aggregate is
the equivalent of of.
Flight 5 revenues.
Uh, revenues have actually
grown. I've, I've found some uh
data on CBO yesterday, uh,
going, I said, well, what, what
were revenues, you know, before
the pandemic in 2019.
And they've been growing about 7
to 8% a year over time. So I
mean, especially coming out of
the pandemic, you saw a lot of
uh income growth, uh,
nationally, you know, especially
folks at the lower end that
doesn't generate a ton of money,
but there's a big stock market
gain, so, uh, revenues have been
growing at a clip of about 7 to
8% a year.
Online or on on page 6, Federal
spending overall has been
growing about 11%.
A year. So continuing to outpace
Uh, that revenue growth. And
where are some of the big
changes, you know, we looked at,
uh, the big buckets uh last
time, social security, Medicare
and Medicaid, Social Security
grew a half a trillion dollars
since 2019, so about 10% a year.
Um, Medicare was growing at
about 6.8% a year, you know, 865
billion up from 644. Medicaid
had been growing at about a 10%
clip a year.
Uh, and, and part of that was uh
big increases in enrollment
nationally, uh, that occurred
during the pandemic and then a
policy of not to disenroll
people during the pandemic and,
and uh delaying kind of an
unwinding, uh, but you're
starting to see those numbers,
um, come down in, in New Mexico
in terms of the number of people
enrolled, we're not seeing a
lowering of the of the cost,
because we've been pumping money
into the system, uh, through
rate increases, which will be
impacted by both budget.
Conciliation and I'll get into
uh some other new risks that
we've learned about, um, for
some of the rate increases that
you've um enacted, uh, that
could be a fairly significant.
If you're trying to balance the
budget, looking at mandatory
spending, you know, once you get
outside of those big 3, those
numbers are just really hard.
To dial back and get to your uh
1.9 trillion. I
the committee, the biggest
growth in the federal spending
is the interest on the national
debt, which grew at 135%.
You know, more than doubling
during that period of time.
And that those interest payments
are, are set to go up even more
because we borrowed so much more
during the um pandemic, uh, as
part of economic and individual
relief. So there were not only
structural budget deficits over
this period of time, there was
an extraordinary spike in
federal spending in response to
the pandemic, that then uh
federal spending started coming
down the last couple of years.
There was also
Uh, a couple of big, uh,
spending bills that were passed
during the Biden administration,
many provisions of those are
being rolled back now. In the
grand scheme of things, the
numbers that you were seeing
over the past couple of years
coming out of DC for those
reconciliation bills, again,
they were 10 year numbers.
So on an annualized basis, you
saw like, wow, we're gonna get a
flood of transportation money.
Well, it ended up being like a
nice 10% bump.
To what we were getting about 80
million a year, but in terms of
like transformative, like huge,
massive influx in a, in a year
from the federal government, not
so much.
Same thing with lots of the um
Energy economy related uh
potential federal grant
opportunities, things people
were seeing, they were looking
at the 10 year number, not the
annualized figure, or when those
kicked in, or when those even
expired.
Uh, cause there was a lot of
things that were started for
like a 44 year period and then
when it would expire. So
mandatory outlays on slide 7,
it's just very difficult to, to
see how the federal government
can balance the budget, uh,
eventually.
Without uh dealing with the big
three in a, in a pretty
significant way as well as
revenue. I mean, you can't have
continue to decrease revenues,
uh, and, and continue spending
at the same level. So
You could get rid of on slide 8,
the entire discretionary budget
and still have a deficit.
All of the fence.
I love domestic spending, that's
how big it is.
And so, and again, the numbers,
uh,
When I pulled this from 2019,
the, the actual big.
Increase, the biggest pot now
are certain veterans benefits
that jumped up from 3rd or 4th
largest expenditure. So that's
almost
From a political standpoint,
also untouchable, very difficult
to go in and change veterans'
benefits. But those are up about
60%.
Um, transportation, increased
about 6% a year, uh, education,
training, employment, those
increases were running about 5%
a year health, which might be on
the chopping block through the
um the appropriations process
was growing at a 10% clip a
year, so outside of what the,
the revenue growth was
international affairs, um,
during that period of time,
increased significantly.
On the military side, military
spending has been growing below
the revenue growth. So it for
about 4.4% for Operation and
maintenance a year, military
personnel at about 3%, uh big
increases in the military budget
for research development, uh,
test.
Slide 9, you ask us to try to
figure out the totality of uh
federal revenues coming into the
state and, and how it comes into
the state. This turned out to be
a pretty challenging exercise
because there's no easy single
website. There's lots of
different websites that give you
big picture that doesn't tell
you much. And then the minutia
of like a federal grant that we
can't tie to anything in
between. So, uh, Eric did a
great job of, of working on this
for you, but
Here's how money comes into the
uh into the state.
One, we all know about the
payments to state governments.
Uh, and then you all through the
appropriations process.
Allocate out money out to our
universities, private entities,
other entities like school
districts, uh, as well as uh
individuals, you know, cass.
There's also sometimes uh
federal direct payments, uh,
that go directly to local
governments where they may apply
for a national.
Then there's a lot of direct
payments that come into the
state, uh, to individuals, um,
businesses, and um other
organizations, you know, a
program that like bypasses the
state government, a good example
is like Head Start, where there
are local uh community
organizations that going back to
the inception of the Great
Society, uh, have a direct
relationship with the federal
government and get their money
from the feds, uh, with no state
uh rule.
Snap you heard yesterday is kind
of a hybrid.
Where
Uh, for snap, the federal
government uses states to help
administer it, but doesn't
really give states.
Uh, a policy role.
And, uh, the benefit structure.
It's largely, and that's because
the feds historically have paid
100% of the benefits.
Which is a very different
relationship to say, uh,
temporary assistance for needy
families, where in the, in the
90s, welfare to work uh reforms
took an entitlement program
where it was a similar kind of
structure, and gave the states a
block grant and said, here's
Fort Broad purposes that you can
spend under uh you as a state
legislature's appropriate that
money uh to meet the, the broad
purposes that can be cash
assistance, but it can be
childcare, it can be pre-K, it
can be a variety of other.
Investment opportunities where
you have broad discretion, uh,
on, on how to appropriate that
money. So two very different
kind of uh approaches within the
social safety net um for those.
Next slide 10, again, the
The big entitlement spending
just kind of dwarfs everything
else, um.
And tin's kind of hard to look
at, but the the the entitlements
are where the big money are.
Uh, non-defense contracts and
other kind of research coming
into the state.
Uh, wages and salaries for
federal employees, grants and
other assistance and nonprofit.
Slide 11 gives you a breakdown
of some of the direct, uh,
federal spending that's coming
in outside of our state budget
uh process to individuals and
entities, uh, those can include
refundable amounts for the
earned income tax credit, child
tax credit.
Um
Pell grants, again, like Head
Start is a program, so a variety
of ways that uh funding flows
into the state. Some of these
will be impacted by the federal
reconciliation, for example,
there's the expansions to uh and
increases to for uh children
related uh.
Tax credits, uh, in that
reconciliation. Uh, there's a
new, uh, baby bonds uh program
that's a different than the one
that was considered um by by the
legislature in, in New Mexico,
but it's similar kind of concept
where
The government essentially
fronts, you know, uh, a lump sum
of cash that can be invested
over time and then taking out uh
eventually for uh expenditure
for um limited purposes,
including education.
The slide 12 and 13. This is
just a reminder of of what
budget reconciliation, this is
the fast track, it's supposed to
only deal with.
Uh, mandatory spending, but what
we see in, in the package that's
passed out of the Senate and the
House, as they did include
annual appropriations, things
that are subject to the annual
appropriations process, where
they jacked up
Uh, uh, defense spending, uh,
border security spending, uh,
money for ICE, things that
normally should not be part of
reconciliation are in this
package.
Um, and they won't have to get
the 60 vote threshold through
the annual appropriations
process.
Um, debate was obviously
limited. It went all night, um,
but that's very different than
normal debate that might drag on
for a longer periods of time,
the Senate, as you saw,
deadlocked 50/50, it took the
vice president um breaking that
in order to pass that bill, um,
back over to the house. The bird
rule we talked about, um, you
know, that I did some more
research on this.
You know, Congress had been
passing reconciliation bills on
a pretty regular basis, uh,
starting in the 80s.
And they got to the point where
they said, hey, we keep like not
doing what we said we were gonna
do.
And so Senator Robert Byrd um
had legislation and, and enacted
like reforms to basically say
we, we got to stop ourselves
from including extraneous
things.
In these bills that are that are
bypassing Senate tradition of,
of the filibuster. We shouldn't
be including like annual
appropriations and then we
shouldn't, you know, all of
these different things, uh, were
put in place in the late 80s and
they started adhering to them,
and so when
Uh, the Senate was developing
its proposal, you saw that it
was submitting that to the
Senate parliamentarian.
Who, and there's process, you
know, think about all the kind
of thing terms we have around
here above the line below the
line. Well, they've got the same
things in Congress, and so they
had a process what was called
the bird bath.
Everything goes to the
parliamentarian and they figure
out whether it follows.
Um, the bird rule or not, and
there was a number of things
that were kicked out when I
presented to LFC last week that
uh made the bill look
Less bad uh for us financially
than what we originally thought.
Those things were resubmitted
over the weekend. They made
technical changes to kind of
comply with the bird rule, uh,
and they were doing that up
until yesterday morning, right
before they they passed the
bill, so there was even other
changes that I'll talk about to
snap that will impact what our.
So what are some of the big
differences, slide 14.
And we are looking at things
that would impact potentially uh
the budget, but then we included
some other extraneous things
that would impact, uh,
communities and, and
individuals.
One of the, the interesting
things will.
You know, there was definitely
different um policy goals
between the House and Senate.
You can use this reconciliation
process to increase the debt
limit.
So the Senate increased the debt
limit to 5 trillion, well, well
above what the house target that
they were, they said they were
willing to do. We'll see what's
happening.
So, essentially, a couple of
more years of being able to run,
um,
Annual deficits.
Uh, before they're gonna have
even more debt.
Uh, snap.
So
Snap was an area where the house
was pretty aggressive with um
Uh, a very new policy that
frankly came out of left field
for me, uh, not getting more
people that are able bodied to
work. That was in existence
before the pandemic, the
pandemic allowed states to sort
of
Uh, pause, have more exemptions,
um, for people needing to do
that, but basically they're
going back and saying let's uh
get folks that are able bodied
back to work. Uh, the Senate.
Adds a new categories of
individuals, basically, uh,
parents.
Of older children, uh, or would
be subject to work requirements.
That is a new, a new thing.
Usually have been limited to
able-bodied adults without.
Without kids. Uh, so now parents
with kids would be subject under
the Senate.
Um
The big change was, and you
heard about this, uh, tying like
a performance and how states are
administering the program to
whether states have to kick in.
Money for the SNAP benefits, and
we are going to, we're one of
the most challenged states when
it comes to our performance
outcomes and we're gonna have to
kick in the highest amount. So
that was looking at, you know,
and then increasing spending um
for administration, the
administrative cost shift is
still in, uh, the Senate
version, uh, the House version
would have had us kicking in 25%
of benefits.
Uh, the Senate version cut that,
uh, basically in half, but
that's still, you know, 175
million of spending uh in your
budget.
That goes towards something
that's not new and better for
New Mexicans. It's just like
paying for the the same, you
know, it's like, it's the kind
of worst backfill I can think of
because of the opportunity cost
that uh could be um before you.
So,
Some in the Senate might say we
did you a favor by cutting that
in half, but that's still a
pretty big uh change in federal
policy.
Um, Medicaid state-directed
payments. So this was one.
Um, for the hospitals and the
nursing homes where
I
We had been authorized to
increase our rates well above
what Medicare pays.
And now the federal government
saying you need to bring that
back down.
to what Medicare pays, and I'll
get into a little bit more
details about how that's gonna
work.
And some other uh new
developments for uh non-hospital
and non-nursing home payments.
Uh, changing the provider tax
limits, so the providers in this
case, um, are actually paying
the state's share.
Uh, the federal government has
seen states increasingly turn to
this funding mechanism and, and,
you know, the proponents of the
reconciliation bill I felt
that's caused that Medicaid
spending growth to outpace uh
revenue growth overall, you
know, 10% versus the 6 to 7%,
uh, and so wanting to dial that
back in the house they said no
more.
Can't do it anymore. In the
Senate, they said, whatever you
did, um.
There was changes in um
You know, the Senate wanted to
do more tax cuts on top of
extending the ones that were
already in place. And so one
place was the senior deduction.
Um, there was also a lot of um
policy uh debate back and forth
on wind, clean energy, tax
credits would phase out when the
start of them would be, this has
an effect, you know, on projects
in New Mexico, you know.
And for, for me, where I sit,
this is a challenge of
reconciliation is going to be
flip-flopping big.
Kind of tax policy changes that
require, you know, lead time for
business investment, whatever
they are.
You know, there's under the
Biden administration, uh, taxes
on oil and gas drilling were
increased.
Uh, under this reconciliation,
they go back to what they were
before the Biden reconciliation,
you know, so that kind of tax
policy back and forth is, I, I
think challenging for us as a
country, but we just visited an
LFC, uh, Kit Carson Energy,
which has got a a big project
for green hydrogen, um.
You know, using very little
water to create uh enormous
amount of power for that
community, um, that would not
Uh, that would be.
Basically, the, the power for
the green energy would come from
solar energy, uh, and then their
hydrogen technology that's been
widely used in in Europe would
provide uh clean energy, but
Aside from a federal grant that
they got, they're, they're
really bank and so they're at
the time felt that if they got
the project started by the end
of the year, they would be
grandfathered in.
We need to look at the details
of what's what's going to pass
to see if it already had to be
started, or if it needs to start
by 2027 or finish by 2027, you
know, all of those rules could
impact a project, you know, like
that as well as projects all
across um the country, and
you've heard the news on the new
tax on on tips that has
implications of uh putting more
money into people's pockets that
are working, that might be on
Medicaid, uh, that are gonna now
be required to pay copays. Uh,
maybe they're already working
and they're not getting uh
Their tips, uh, charged is that
can have an impact on their
eligibility. Uh, how does that
play out for affordability for
people that um might rely on
those wages for uh premium cost
sharing on the exchange, whereas
today it's free, but those um
those subsidies are going away,
so
Some tax policy things you may
consider, um, as you consider
whether um other kinds of
changes need to be made.
This is a really important table
on slide 15.
When do these things happen and
you'll hear nationally folks
talk about like, you know,
Um
Billions of dollars in.
That.
And in some cases, it could be
just slowing the rate of growth.
And so the cut is against uh a
baseline forecast that CBO has
that
You know, it's gonna grow 10%
and maybe the growth of that
program will grow 7%.
So on a year over year basis,
there still might be more money
going out for Medicaid, but
Uh, the amount of money going
out to providers for services in
Medicaid could be coming down.
So that can be kind of confusing
and how the media reports it,
but just remember these are 10
year numbers that are being
thrown out.
And so when do these things go
into effect.
You know, the, the provider tax,
um, and a state directed
payments.
Well, there's a phase out over
time.
Uh, in the Senate version of
about 10% to get back down to
Medicare.
Now, the hospitals just got
their first quarterly payment.
So they've been at
You know, the upper payment
limit.
Um, you know, as, as soon as
last year.
So they haven't felt the full
effect of even a year.
Of those increased payments.
Uh, a question for you all will
be,
Do you let that continue to go
into effect.
And then over a multi-year
period just allow that to be
dialed back.
Died back down with them
complaining every year. And
what's really important about
These think that the provider
taxes in particular, and how
they're phased.
Is Congress did this for
Medicare.
Uh, in the early 2000s, where it
said, OK, we're coming up with a
new formula, we need to control
spending on Medicare.
Um, we'll have this baseline
forecast for specifically
physicians.
And we'll need to reduce it if
we're not.
You know, in compliance with
some other policy.
And so every year we hear about
like the physician, you know,
Be fixed, that's needed. It's
like, if we don't fix this,
we're gonna cut physician fees
by 20%, and Congress always
comes in and like.
fixes it and like restores it.
So, even though you may see some
of these things in place, there
will be a question like through
the annual appropriations
process next year.
Will Congress like come back and
say after the all the hospitals
say we're gonna close and the
physicians, you know, come in,
you know, if they're subject to
the provider tax decrease and
make a change.
That's
Kind of an outstanding question.
Making a change just further
further exacerbates the deficit
problem, um, but I think that's
just important for the committee
to understand as well as the
public.
of when these things are going
to affect.
I'll come back
It might be in here, or it may
have put it in yesterday
afternoon or not, but I'll just
get to it now, snap is another
good example.
Over the weekend, they were
trying to exempt.
Alaska and Hawaii from the Snap
policy changes to do cost
sharing.
Kind of obvious on why that was.
Uh
It didn't pass muster with the
bird bill, and so they were
trying to figure out
How to help Alaska out.
Uh, as early as like early in
the morning yesterday, and what
they came up with that pass
muster with the parliamentarian
was, let's take the top 10
states with the worst
performance.
And
Give them uh reward them
essentially, with a delayed
implementation of this new
Cost sharing, sort of like you
could say, we'll give him a
chance to.
Um
So this is like, they pushed it
out to like 2029, I believe.
So what looked like a near term
problem that I was really
freaking out about, to be honest
with you.
It maybe it's not. Now, the
language is
Not entirely clear exactly how
this is gonna work. Who's gonna
be really in or out?
Um, but at, at the very least it
looks like that's an example of
where you're going to hear a lot
of people saying there's gonna
be big cuts for food security in
New Mexico, and it's like, let's
take it, that's gonna occur and
then give you time as
policymakers to figure out how
you're going to deal with that.
Give us time to help advise you
with options based on federal
guidance of like, do you have to
automatically like replace that
money. Do you have I mean, maybe
that you're just like
automatically want to do that,
but what are your options? Do
you at least want to look at?
So it gives us time for that.
Uh, so you can see like even the
work requirements, there's a
delayed implementation, there's
a delayed on slide 15, there's a
delayed kind of effect.
But over time, what I worry
about
is upon full implementation.
It's a pretty um significant
change for say,
hospitals.
You know, if you figure for the
last 15 years, as a matter of
public policy, we said we want
to expand coverage options.
States have choices to do, start
out with the mandate, then it
turned in states have choices,
we opted in.
We had one of the highest
uninsured, uh, rates in the
country, 25% of our population,
we've brought that down by more
than 50%.
The federal government said, you
know, if we're gonna cover more
people.
We don't need to be making these
supplemental hospital payments
that had been allowed for years,
but that basically were designed
to offset.
And so the federal government
entirely phased those out.
Those are not coming back.
But the potential for an
increase in the number of
uninsured are.
And the associated uncompensated
care costs.
And at the same time, hospitals
are supposed to eventually live
off of what Medicare pays, you
know, Medicare will make
adjustments every year might
change.
But
What will that do to hospital
financing? No supplemental
payment system that's
eliminating, uh, uncompensated
care for the for the large part.
Uh
More people putting pressure on
increasing uncompensated care.
Uh, in an environment where they
just started getting pretty big
rate increases that
Either could
start decreasing by 10% a year,
you know, what's the confluence
of that, which hospitals can
weather that storm, you know,
there's some that were kind of
teetering just before.
Um, this act, there's some,
frankly, that are very, very,
very profitable in rural areas.
Um, so I think that that's where
a lot of work, um, for you all
will be, um, this committee, our
committee, legislative Health
and Human Services is monitoring
that.
Let's get down into the weeds on
slide 16.
Again, the, um,
The provider taxes I just talked
about, these are uh phase outs,
uh, starting in 2027, um, of
modest amounts.
So the question will be,
You know, how will that really
play out, uh, in New Mexico, and
Uh, do we wanna kind of get the
hospitals hooked on the new
amount that it's going to be
ratcheted back down over the
next 5 or 6 years, you know,
they haven't even had a full
year's payment, so that's,
that's a policy question, not a
recommendation. Uh, notable
changes, uh, to Medicaid, uh,
work requirements.
Again, this started out with
focusing on able-bodied adults
without kids.
Um, one thing that's really
important.
is in the house version that if
somebody was disenrolled for
some of these administrative
reasons, they weren't complying
with the work requirement, for
example, they don't qualify for,
I had an expectation that we
would see an opportunity uh to
move people from Medicaid into
the health exchange.
Um, because they were either
working too much and earning too
much for Medicaid, um, or that's
a more appropriate spot for
them.
Uh, you heard yesterday there
was a lot of provisions in this
bill that are intended to
shrink, uh, the amount of people
participating in this exchange
or to make it much harder for
them to stay on, uh, because of
administrative changes. So that,
that's a concern.
Um, the Senate expanded.
Um, the work requirements to uh
parents with older kids.
And delayed the full compliance
date to the end of 2028.
Page 18.
Uh, there was one provision in
the house, uh, bill that I
thought that's good public
policy. There's this spread
pricing deal going on with these
pharmacy benefit managers were,
uh, we wanna make sure we're
getting a good deal, uh, if the
public is paying for
pharmaceuticals.
That ended up getting thrown out
by the bid rule.
Uh, in the Senate. So that's
out. Nobody tried to figure out
a way to uh work with the
pharmaceutical industry to get
that back in. Um,
But
Let's see
Cost sharing is in both.
So that's
somewhat controversial here in
New Mexico for a number of years
on
Uh, is the juice worth the
squeeze on.
Um, certain clients um being
asked to pay for a copay or or
co-insurance is the collection
costs gonna be more than the
cost of what they're required to
pay, um, so, you know, that will
be another um
Potential barrier for some
people to access medical care.
Uh, it's not very much money, so
at the same time, you could say
it's not, you know, everybody's
got to have some skin in the
game, um, so we'll be
interesting to see how that
plays out.
OK, this is one that's got us
worried on slide 9.
In January, in early June.
Uh, the White House issued a
memo, you know, there's a lot of
discussion about waste, fraud
and abuse.
And
You know, one person's uh
definition of abuse is different
than another person's.
And in this case, uh, the White
House's version of abuse is uh
paying providers more than 100%
of Medicare.
And so they had a, a one-page
directive to CMS to basically
try to root out waste frat
abuse.
Uh, and specifically to not
allow Medicaid payments to
providers that exceed what
Medicare pays.
Well, as a matter of policy and
through our budget.
We've been trying to shore up um
through Medicaid.
It's covering 40% of our
population if we're trying to
recruit.
Providers to say like Roswell,
and they look at their potential
panel of patients.
And an aggregate, say 40% of
them are going to be on Medicaid
and Medicaid pays 90% of what
Medicare pays, and, oh, by the
way.
Uh, if you talk to your
provider, uh, primary care
physicians, they'll tell you we
think Medicare underpays us here
in New Mexico.
And that's another 35% of their
panel, yikes, like why would
they want to come here.
So you've invested significant
rate increases and pay them 150%
of what Medicare pays. We're
already seeing some movement in
the number of, uh, providers
within the network. This is
something that LFC is is focused
on through our legiststat, uh,
process. You did the same thing
for infant and maternal
healthcare, you know, Medicaid's
paying for, depending on the
year of the first.
In the state, making sure that
that system is adequately funded
to, um, and it's a little bit
odd that we anchor, uh, those
rates to Medicare, to be honest
with you, but that's
The only anchoring that we as a
state could come up with, uh,
behavioral health, not all
behavioral health rates are
anchored to Medicare. There's
some, but there's actually a
lot. So the primary care ones in
particular, if CMS were to come
back, uh, and say as part of
implementing this directive, uh,
we're gonna take those back
down. Another little
administrative issue, and I
don't know if uh Secretary
Armijo brought this up.
They had submitted all the
paperwork to increase the rates
from 120 to 150. We've done this
in phases.
And I guess CMS has been behind
on the official approval
process, but say go ahead and
implement these things, and then
we'll get to it. Well, there's
been a change in administration
and a change in policy directive
now.
So
Uh, will they just
send a letter saying, like, go
back, will it be go back to what
we had already approved at 120?
Will it be part of like a
re-approval process of our
waiver or something else, little
bit unknown, but that's
Uh, you know, we've got a
significant number of
significant amount, will it be
phase it out just like we're
supposed to be doing for the
hospitals over a multi-year
period.
You know, a 10% a year.
It's hard for me to see how you
can backfill this, if it all
goes away at once.
From just an administrative
standpoint.
It's it's hard to see how that
would work.
Um, so I think if it happens, we
need to think of other
alternatives and.
You know, if you're putting in,
you know, we, we put in a fair
amount of general fund for
these.
With an expectation that
something happened.
in the very early stages, and
frankly, it's not very clear
whether it's going to happen.
We want to
Triple
Down.
And if we do want to do
something in terms of
supplemental rate increases that
it actually results in something
tangibly better for New Mexican,
cause you're gonna.
like 20
So the modifications to the, uh,
work requirements for
able-bodied adults that will
kick in.
That will potentially result in
just decreased enrollment.
So
And I think Secretary Armijo
talked about this yesterday
between
The provider rate issue and the
enrollment issue.
Those will just result in
Uh, lower costs for Medicaid.
Again, it's very difficult to
see how you do any backfilling.
Uh, on either of them, if
there's just fewer people on, on
Medicaid. We won't get big
savings if they're rolling off
of
Um, the expansion.
You know, we're only paying 10%
of the cost there, but that's
where the federal government is
focused on trying to achieve
pretty significant savings
because I know for 90%.
But if there are other things
from having to reapply every 6
months versus every 12.
Uh, you know, and we drop
another 800 to 100,000 people,
um, that's gonna, uh, decrease,
uh, pressure on the, at the same
time, I predict that
The department will come back
and say, um, the people that
were healthy left the program.
The people that were sick are
still on it, and so the acuity
levels have gone up and so you
can't some bases we're having to
cover increased cost because
we've got fewer people to to pay
that premium. We've seen that
happen before in the past with
big enrollment matching fund
requirement, this one will
change.
Um, and, and potentially uh for
us even be pushed out if we can
get our
Um, snap error rates down could
change even more on how that
would potentially impact New
Mexico.
Um, but other numbers again.
Um, depend on when they, they're
implemented. These are against
The, the changed numbers, so
minus the 8 billion is against
CPO's forecasted cost.
Which increases
Uh, this is just a table showing
uh at the time we prepared this
on slide 21, how
The error rates.
Uh, would result in the Senate
version, um, cost, uh, in
aggregate for the country.
And on slide 22.
It just shows the estimates, uh,
of increasing the the state's
share of administrative costs
from a 50/50 to a 75, um, state,
and then slide 23, this just
gives you some ideas about some
of the things that were
Um
Related to the bird.
And then to wrap up, uh, Mr.
Chairman.
You know, the, the timing of
these are all key.
Uh, there's still some
Unknowns within the, the
provisions that passed. We'll
see what happens with the house.
Will they go along with.
Um, steeper cuts.
Uh, bigger, uh, tax decreases,
bigger deficits, uh, today, and
will there be any other
modifications. Administrative.
And a rulings outside of budget
reconciliation or uh on our
radar.
And the annual appropriations
process hasn't really even
started.
Uh, the annual appropriations
process for domestic.
Uh, discretionary is where
you'll be seeing constituents
come and say, you know, the
president's budget said, we're
eliminating Head Start.
Very unlikely to see dramatic
changes in there because that
would still be subject to.
Uh, the Senate filibuster. Um,
so that's why you're seeing
reconciliation, trying to
include things to get around
that filibuster on the defense,
uh, and the immigration side,
uh, and, and so far that's been
successful.
So, a lot still to come through
the annual appropriations
process, the
The efforts to cancel contracts.
Freeze money for impoundment. I,
I kind of predict that's gonna
taper off.
Um, you know, each
administration's gonna come in
and say, I didn't like what the
last one did, I'm gonna review
it, freeze it, and sometimes if
I've got legal authority, I'll
cancel it.
Cancellation of a lot of them,
you know, they can't not spend
money that's appropriated by
Congress, they're getting
reversed in in the courts all
across the country.
You know, and then you have to
ask yourself,
For some of these things, even
if they do get canceled, is it a
sufficient scale and importance
for us to take notice through
the budget process and and
backfill it.
So with that, Mr. Thank you,
Charles and lots of information
on moving targets as, you know,
we still will see what happens
as it gets over to the, to the
house. I want to thank you. I
appreciate what we say on slide,
such and such, so we're not a,
it's easier to keep up than
trying to, to see when you flip
the switch and stuff. And so as
people ask questions, I would
ask the same thing if you're
asking, please indicate which
slides so we can all flip over
to that and, and follow along.
Um.
And so, uh, questions and first
uh co-chair Representative
Lindstrom.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman and
thank you, Charles for the
presentation. You have a couple
of, of things I'd like to
request for our next meeting at
the end of the month will be,
we'll be up in Taos and uh
there's some things I'd like to
see. I'd appreciate your staff
bringing in the um
2023 general fund reoccurring
appropriations outlook, I know
in the old days we used to do
that 5 year projection.
And I think we need to do that
again.
Um, I'm looking just basically.
At page.
15.
Of your presentation.
And I'm looking at what our base
outlook was in 2023 for 2027.
Now, if you look at
2027 and go down that column on
page 15.
Assuming that everything is
implemented at the same time,
that's about 51 million743
dollars negative.
And then you look at what we had
our outlook for FY 27.
We were gonna put $1.7 billion
into Medicaid, according to your
according to our 5-year outlook
when we did this in 2023.
So what I'd like to ask is for
the meeting in Taos that we have
a prepared 5-year outlook.
Of of spending, I think we need
to have a base. This committee
needs to understand what at
least the appropriations base
is, uh, going forward, and more
importantly, I'm interested in
what you're reoccurring
adjustments look like currently.
I know we've added a bunch of
stuff in there with behavioral
health. We've added stuff in
there with this grow program,
some other programs that um
They're intended to be
non-reoccurring and then lo and
behold they're recurring.
So I think that'll be super
important for this committee to
see is what those reoccurring
appropriation adjustments could
be. Some of these things have
stayed here for a long time and
will probably continue.
But I'd like to have you have
you do that, I, I, I think we
need to see that as a committee.
Uh, the other thing I'd like to
ask for the our next meeting is
that you prepare a timeline.
Uh, and it's tied to the various
parts of the bill to help us
understand when these things
actually do kick in.
Maybe by then, uh, both the
house and the Senate and
everybody and their brother
understands when this is gonna
happen, and they've all approved
it.
But we need to have a grip on
when these things come into
play, so we understand what this
outlook is actually how this
outlook is actually gonna be
impacted.
Uh, at our next meeting.
We're gonna be dealing with all
the tax issues.
About the staff to put that
together for us, so we have a
better understanding of those
federal tax issues that tied to
this budget and to this
information.
So, uh, who do we have on that
Clinton, that's going to present
it? Are we gonna have, uh,
anybody else? OK, so Izzy will
be there also. So we'll have
Richard and, and Izzy help us
with understanding the tax
piece. Charles, we had good
commitment at our last meeting
from uh the DFA secretary. I'm
not asking that you have a
consensus outlook.
But we would ask DFA to also do
something like this. I, I, I
think you guys were great
together and there was a
commitment at our last meeting
that you would continue to do
that.
It would be helpful if we could
possibly have something that was
more of a consensus like outlook
for for spending. I don't think
it's been that different, um,
maybe in the stuff that's been
non-reoccurring, I would assume,
but, uh, you know, that is where
I think.
This committee is going to be
able to have some um opportunity
for making some recommendations.
I think uh you've
The what I looked at and looked
at your post.
Oh,
session
Review, uh, the actual
non-reoccurring spending hasn't
been that high, but the uh the
reoccurring hasn't been that
high, but the non-reoccurring
has been outrageous.
I, I've been shocked.
And I've been shocked at what
it's for. I mean, I think some
of that stuff is clearly
reoccurring that went in there,
but.
But, but maybe not. Maybe it's
got a different definition to
it.
So I think we've got some, we've
got some room in there. We've
got some room for some
recommendations, but yesterday I
made the comment to this
committee that
If all this goes away.
There would not, it would not be
possible for the general friend
to come in and back seal
everything.
That's why the more tools we
have in front of us
understanding what the spending
pattern is, at least through
this administration in
Washington, a five-year outlook
helps us then in where we can
put money, where we think we
need to.
I've also asked the staff to
look at um.
Putting together some
multipliers on what this
actually means.
I mean, you've, you've given us
the hard data on
Um, uh, reduction things like
hospitals, but what does that
actually mean in a community?
If you lose, I mean, I've been
thinking about what I read in
the paper about Sandia Sandia
lost what, 500 jobs last week or
something. I, I saw that in the
paper. What is that multiplier
look like?
What will it look like for these
hospitals, especially in rural
New Mexico.
Um, yesterday, the cabinet
secretary, I think she said it's
between 6 and 80, but it's
between a large number of them.
What does that do in places and
I'll just put it right out there
in places like Gallup or Quay
County or those that were
listed.
It's a big impact. It's a major,
major hit to these communities.
Not only are they not able to
provide needed services.
But they're also um gonna be
impacted with every other piece
of the economy in that sector.
So I would, I'm going to I'll be
um discussing this with our
co-chair and with staff.
We may even have a on the 2nd
day, we may.
I need a work session on this
and it's like we used to do and
we have those before the actual
committee start uh meeting would
start.
Because you're gonna know a lot
more. You're gonna know a lot.
But this isn't easy to get your
arms around, and it's not easy
to understand what those impacts
are, because Medicaid has
tentacles into everything.
Even when you think about school
districts, school districts
charge.
Medicaid services.
Uh, there's other groups, these
nonprofit, uh, nursing homes.
All these other things, their
tentacles go deep into other
agencies and other services, so
we might want to take a peek at
that. I know we're usually
schedule our 2nd day, or at
8:30, but, you know, I'm an
early bird. I like getting
everybody up and, and early we
could probably start at 7.
People need to understand how
Medicaid works.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Charles, great presentation.
I read
An article that was
And the article basically the
synoptic during um the first
reconciliation bill and Trump on
if I can, if that's that, the
CBO had it uh word it like.
I may be off on my numbers like
1.5 trillion negative. I mean,
it was, it was bad then too.
But it, because of the
performance in the economy.
That it was really performing
about 1.5 to the good until
COVID hit. And when COVID hit,
everything, we lost all of it.
Do you think there's a chance
that we will see
The same
Economic growth.
With the inscribed measures that
may be there'll be some offsets
that we're really, we haven't
anticipate.
As, as part of scoring at CBO
and the joint, they do some of
that dynamic. I think one
version that I saw was, you
know, an expected increase in
GDP of like uh not enough to
offset.
Um
The changes in enhance the the
increase in the
Um
National debt.
The
I, I kind of wonder about that
because the 2017 tax changes
were pretty significant. Uh,
they just put them on a uh a
time period shorter than the.
In order to kind of make the
numbers fit.
And so those are already kind of
baked into the economy.
And they'll just continue with
some modest changes standard
deduction, the child tax credit.
Things like that.
Uh, whether the, the new, um,
Tax changes that again are only
on tips, social security, things
like that.
Whether that's, you know,
I think that's somewhere a
billion or 30 billion a year is
enough to like juice.
The economy, and I don't know
how much more we want the
economy that that remains to be
seen, but sure, I mean, these
are estimates that the
performance of the economy and
the response of states and the
systems and, you know, all of
those numbers will be different.
Like Mr. um
Charles, I appreciate that. I,
uh,
I think it's important.
But Representatives in the
decision.
But if you look at the changes
that are being proposed.
We could have some pretty
significant income changes as
well.
And we're gonna have to try to
throw those into the pie and
And figure out what the price of
oil's gonna be, what the price
of, you know, what, what GRT
changes we're gonna feel. I
mean, there's gonna be some
other factors that squeeze us
from a different direction that
we're gonna have to be cognizant
of or are prescribed.
Um, measures to address this are
going to be um
Your comments in generally.
To me.
toward the federal government or
federal government has spent too
much money, incurred too much
debt. We're not much different.
I don't see how, I don't see how
we can address.
The
Issues that we think might be
coming.
Out of general fund money. We
just don't have the capacity to
do it.
So we're gonna have to sooner or
later.
Come to grips with my budgetary
standpoint, I think it would be
beneficial to me.
If someone like you with a deep
understanding of the processes
could give us.
The most logical from a
financial perspective, not
political, not, you know, any of
the other, but from a logical
perspective of what are the
right ways that we should be
considering making adjustments.
And uh I know none of that is
easy, but sooner or later we're
gonna have to make that
decision. We're gonna have to
figure out what kind of change
and the, the 3rd and final thing
is.
You made a comment about uh
The electric utility.
Yeah.
I, I looked him up and I'd
forgotten this, but
That those members of that co op
have been very supportive of
renewables, and they have every
right to do that. I mean, I, I
get that.
But when you look at their
business model today.
Their electrical prices are
about 17.3% higher than the
state average.
So you have, as, as legislators,
we have to consider the fact
That those choices that they're
making.
On the, basically,
Um
Making them significantly on the
backs of those.
Tax incentives.
are also costing their
ratepayers.
And they're costing the
taxpayers of the rest of the
state. So we got to kind of
figure that out, and it's just,
it's part of the process of, of
Lawmakers, but
I, um, I think.
Looking at our spending.
Looking also at our potential
impact and then offering
From your perspective, from a
budget we, that we should look
at impact on our people.
We ought to look at.
Mr. Chair, uh, thank you,
Charles, thank you very much.
Mr. Chair, could I make a couple
of comments just I think it
helps address so.
One thing the committee's been
doing over the past couple of
years, and we've never been in a
position to do it before is
we're doing long term revenue
and spending forecasting.
Focusing more of the spending
forecasting on kind of the
midterm.
And that has informed the, the
committee's decision and what
ultimately, yes, we've got these
big
Booming revenues, primarily
driven by oil and gas. You've
taken a big portion of the
general economy's strength, and
you've already pushed it back
out into the economy.
It's informed decisions to take
some of those revenues and suck
them away for tomorrow and then
the permanent funds.
It's informed.
To, uh,
Her tail spending growth back
down to
But
It see compared to the last
couple of years, a more modest
level of 6%. I tell my
colleagues, you know, in budget
shops around the country that,
you know, are midterm spending
growth target is we can afford
6% and they're like.
Right
So we're in a good spot.
Uh, we've got
The ability to grow the budget.
6%, our revenues are flat to 3%.
So even under that scenario,
you're still kind of like
spinning down the surplus over
time.
But that means that you've got
A non-recurring budget that
takes on a different level of
prominence and size and scope
than we've ever really had
before, you know, under
Years when Representative
Lindstrom was chaired 280
million for non-recurring would
have been like a a big year and
we're into the 2 billion.
You know, setting aside money.
It's also informed the to grow.
Which is
Don't put new programs or
expansion.
Into the base budget.
Without a at least 3 years,
maybe more.
of demonstration that it
actually works for New Mexicans,
and that's setting up a pretty
high bar and the committee's
already started talking about
its next year's budget
guidelines, and we threw out,
well, should we?
subject any backfilling to the
same kind of scrutiny to get
general fund.
And set a high bar, and that
we're not gonna automatically do
that as the state.
Uh, should more spending be
diverted over into that role
recognizing that we don't want
to build up too big of a
liability if that all that money
comes back in, so we've got kind
of a target of less than 1%.
If everything worked and came
back into the base budget. So
that's still even fits into the,
the midterm.
Through most of my career, I
would be worried about the
budget lasting thin, you know,
your fiscal policy has
stabilized like, I was running
revenue scenarios in May of
losing $3 billion.
And I, I wasn't like freaking
out.
Because a bunch of that.
Oil volatility would hit the
permanent funds first and not
the general fund. Uh, a
recession, we need to worry
about, but that's why we've
Uh, as a state, you know,
through stress testing and other
analysis that 30% reserves help
us preserve the need to make.
That's, we're gonna be working
with the committee on sort of,
you know, we've got a playbook.
Um, for how to deal with
solvency and and revenue, but do
you want to kind of formalize
some of the order of operation,
like a state like Utah is done.
I think
Fiscally, we're in the best
shape to be able to handle this.
There's a lot of uncertainty.
You're right, it's still.
would be
Not advisable and we can't
afford to just starting to
inform the framework that, you
know, that framework that we're
working on for you starts with,
well, when does this even go
into?
What do we know about it?
Positive or negative. If it's
something going away, what is
the economic impact. We've got a
new economic model that's going
to allow us to do that kind of
analysis. We've already started.
Figure that out.
These changes kinds of things,
so I feel pretty good that
we're, we're already working on
these things that you're asking
for. These are really great
questions. We should be, and
I'm, I'm pleased that we're in a
position to be able to have
Conversations where we're
looking at what is the next 5
years really look like? Cause
we've most of my career not been
in that position.
So that's a testament. Thank
you.
Thank you, Senator Trujil.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. In regards
to that um I would love to see
how does snap reductioners,
farmers' markets, um, because
snap really is a subsidy for our
farming industry to much extent.
Um, and so, I'd like to see our,
our um economic ecosystem that
could potentially be impacted,
um, and does this, does this
translate in a, in a long run,
and maybe you can't do this to
higher food prices for all of
us. Um, so I'm interested in
that question, you said
something about
We base the on the Medicare
100%.
So are we or just for Medicaid?
So, um, Madam Chair, Senator,
we've anchored.
Um, the rate we pay as a
percent, but we're not paying
anything to.
Um, thank you, uh, Mr. Chair,
that begs the question in my
mind,
um, yesterday we saw from, I
think it was Presbyterian, one
of our presentations that, you
know, there's 37% of our
Population and that's pretty
close to the Medicaid 43 and I
recognize that some of those are
dual enrolled because you could
be a low income Medicare
recipient, but um, does that
mean that those doctors and
hospitals and such that are that
are taking Medicare as an
insurance program are actually
losing them and.
Is that what I'm hearing? Well,
there's concern among some
providers in the Medicare, in
the, in the healthcare, uh,
world, that Medicare does not
even pay enough relative to
their cost, and so that's,
you'll hear.
Discussions about what's called
cost shifting.
Where that's why they want
commercial carriers to pay so
much more, it's because I can't
make.
Enough on Medicare or if I lose
money on Medicare.
Uh, and then certainly when
Medicaid was paying less than
Medicare, um, they would say
that they were uh Mr. Chairman
Charles likes that. I thought
that we were raising Medicare
and not sure what the rationale
as a as a um, Mr. Chairman,
Senator, we don't control
Medicare rates or policy or do
any spending related to, to
Medicare, that's all federal,
and they'll make those
adjustments on an annual basis.
So that's one of the things when
we
married the two.
We kind of said, well, when
Medicare increases their rate,
which
You know, maybe it's $100 for a
doctor's visit to 105.
Well, now that Medicaid rate
needs to go up that 5% too. And
so we've been seeing that pop up
in the budget where it's like,
just to maintain.
Uh, tying to Medicare is costing
Medicaid more money on an annual
basis, so it's not like Medicare
is static and never changing
what they're paying. This is
just a a ratio that we use to
try to
Um, set rates.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr.
Thank you, Representative
Hadera.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and
thanks, Charles, uh.
Always, uh, it's a little
frightening, but appreciate the
news and um
Thanks for, um, working with all
of us, uh, to kind of figure out
this pathway forward. I, I just
want to set the record straight
on the kit Carson hydrogen
plant, just a little bit, um,
you know, 5 years ago, uh, Kit
Carson took a big risk and uh
and they negotiated with Goose,
uh, with Tri-state to pull out
of, you know, carbon emission
energy and uh
And I just wanna say, uh, they
started with the tri-state and I
might not have all the numbers
right, but I'm, I, I'm pretty
much think I'm in the realm, uh,
they were gonna charge him 60,
like over 60 million to uh to
get out of that contract.
And uh they negotiated that down
to about 32 million, uh, Guzman
Energy, uh, backed them, uh,
for, for this uh process, and,
and that's a big deal to find
it, you know, to find a a lender
who's gonna come in and support
this project, they paid that
loan off in um
They, they had a 2 year loan,
they paid it off in 5 years.
They paid that off in 5 years,
and, uh, and I can tell you,
there's, there's a lot of
misconceptions about this
hydrogen project, but if, if we
do this, eventually they'll be
able to sell energy and get on,
you know, so extra energy to uh
PMS. I mean, there's, there's a
lot of moving parts here and I
just, I just want you to know
that the average bill uh for
electricity and towels, and they
had
Total community support, uh, for
a family of 4 is about 60 $65 to
$75 a month.
For energy from solar-based
energy, and I can tell you I
live outside of that district
and my monthly bill for him with
Hemes, which is kind of serves
the same kind of area, you know,
mountainous north, my monthly
bill is 247.
So, um, to Kit Carton has Kit
Carson has done an amazing job
for their for their um for their
service area, and I think
there's more to come and uh I
just, I just wanted to set the
record straight on that because
I hear this all the time that
they're they're, you know, their
customers pay way more in there
and I just want to set the
record straight. That's all, Mr.
Chair. Thank you.
Representative Brown.
Good morning and thank you, Mr.
Chairman. Um, I have just two
quick questions, Charles, and
I'm on page 14 of the slides,
um, and I'm going back to, we've
directed payments and I'm
looking mostly at hospitals and
nursing homes there.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, um, I just
want to clarify that um now
we're already back filling in
some instances because we think
the federal rate is not
sufficient to keep our doctors
here, other providers. Is there
anything in HR one that would
prohibit states.
Going forward from using state
funds to
Uh, maybe the word is not
backfill, but accentuate.
Those uh provider rates or
reimbursements, Mr. Chair.
I don't believe there's anything
that
Prohibits it in the bill.
I think it just comes down to
the fact that
Um
The federal government would pay
and
And the state afford to pay that
full $1 and
Before this, we would say no and
Now, it's like that would be
very difficult.
So, Mr. Chairman and, and
Charles. So it looks like it's a
kind of a state by state
decision as what to do, if
anything, and the states have
liberty to
In the case of New Mexico, kind
of keep doing the same thing if
we choose. OK. Um, Mr. Chairman,
my next question has to do with
Uh, Medicaid and when people
roll off of the Medicaid rolls,
um, they're no longer, I guess,
eligible to be in uh getting uh
Medicaid.
Do we know that person's
economic situation, for example,
a person
Carly a good education and a
good paying job and no longer
needs Medicaid because that
person has not only a good job,
but maybe a private insurance
policy that goes along with it.
Do we in any way track our
success stories.
Mr. Chair,
Mr. Chair, we could probably
work with.
The Healthcare authority to see.
Which clients were deemed
ineligible due to.
Too high of income recertified.
Uh, during the pandemic.
They were doing a good job of.
Uh, using other data sources.
was and we knew during the
pandemic there was between 80
and earning too much to qualify
for.
to keep them on and pay for
them.
And we knew there was a big risk
coming out of that pandemic
during the unwinding that there
would be a significant number
that were already.
Possibly getting employer-based
um insurance.
Uh, that we wouldn't know about
otherwise. We wouldn't know
about uh private um
Commercial insurance, uh, we
wouldn't, we would know if they
moved on to the exchange and
there's, you know.
I roughly say 200 to 25,000 may
have moved from Medicaid for
their current income levels
would be more appropriate and
still a very,
I think what I'm trying to drive
at is that this is a very
dynamic situation. We have a
it's a 1000 piece puzzle or
more. We've got so many things
happening.
If we can um boost our economy
and have more job opportunities.
We're going to see some of these
Medicaid rates go down, and
that's not a bad thing in my
opinion. It just might mean that
we're actually moving into more
of a prosperity phase for more
people and um that takes some
pressure off of
The Federal government and the
state potentially to um to keep
adding in resources where we
maybe don't need to have to keep
a close eye on all of this, and
I hope for good news for many,
many more families.
We've run
Um
Reports in the past, we found a
sizable portion of people.
We've had pretty good
discussions with um.
HSD and now the HCA.
About particularly for whether
the
Whether there was an inducement
for underemployment.
You know, if you're working
At McDonald's for $14 or $15 an
hour for 38 expansion.
So
But that's a big
loss if you don't easily move to
another healthcare coverage.
That the question is, is that
coverage inducing people to like
only work 25 and nobody's like.
Give them a clear off ramp to
affordable health care coverage
that's not through their, their
employer and would
Help them work 35 to 40 hours a
week and I think a lot more work
out of.
Get over that, what's called the
cliff effect.
Um, for often be perceived as a
kind of a ceiling or the kind of
income people want.
Thank you. Uh, we have about
1012 minutes left as far as what
was allocated here. We still
have 3 people, uh, leader
Sapinsky.
Thank you Mr. Chairman. Thank
you. Um, wanted to understand a
little bit more about the impact
on the private sector.
Um, and so with the
Massive increase to the debt
ceiling, national debt, the
deficit.
Um, are we going to experience
what are the projections.
And how do they change on
investment revenue.
From the SIC managed funds, for
example, are we anticipating a
positive effect, a negative, I.
I'm curious if you um have
considered that. Well, I think
Many economists are concerned
about.
You're continuing to dig, uh,
you've seen the worst start and
Years and years of a calendar
year for the dollar.
You've seen the cost of debt.
Buying debt going up.
You know, when you've got stock
market well park money there and
we're having to pay them a lot
more to get them to park money
there.
So those are kind of concerning
for
The mid to long term, uh, of us
getting a, a grapple on this.
That said, that's painful
choices and made more in taxes
and getting less in. Thank you
and um.
I am curious.
Are there any changes in this
legislation that would impact
any projects, particularly in
the clean energy geothermal,
solar wind.
that we're aware of that would
impact.
Revenue coming into the state
from those projects or.
The pilots that many of those
projects do at the Logan
Director.
Uh, it's unclear, a lot of the
projects where it would impact
state revenue would be if
there's the activity to build a
GRT.
But in terms of like,
Revenue from it, like we don't
have a revenue stream from
From it, like, um, so that's,
um, the only big one that I know
about is Kit Carson, that's kind
of in that window to meet it and
still move forward, um, but I, I
personally don't know of other
big projects that were folks
have got capital lined up with
that.
Form of financing to help with
the project if it goes away,
would cause that project. And
um,
Yeah, I don't know, Mr. Chairman
Director, if you've had a chance
to look at this yet, but I, I've
read some varying reports about
potential impact on individuals
and businesses, whether they're
borrowing money for
Purchasing real estate or other
reasons, has there been a
prediction?
Made that's solid on sort of how
this is all.
That it
Boost the economy to the point
that the Fed feels it's too hot
and not to lower them.
That would, would suggest that
through like the end of the
calendar year. I mean, again,
these, you're dealing in 10-year
window, so sometimes it's like
an acceleration of everything
happen, um, and so when these
things is really important.
Um, but I would say there's
other macro.
Um, and my last question was in
terms of
Uh, for New Mexico families, low
and middle income.
We have an analysis look at
that.
At the next meeting on, you
know, how is their tax
liability.
going to be impacted by this? Is
it going to go up? Is it going
to go down?
What's the, what's the general
thought on that? Well, the CBO
when it looks at
The totality of of impact on
both benefits and taxes paid.
Uh, a disproportionate, uh,
negative impact, um, changes to
far outweigh any of the, the
positive modest changes and the,
the top end of the income
spectrum tend to benefit in that
CBO analysis that I.
So given.
Given the long-term historic
issues we've had with income.
Is it fair to say that
New Mexico, New Mexicans will be
just sort of disproportionately
impacted by some of those tax
changes at the family level.
Given that, you know, we have.
40% on Medicaid and potentially
those would fall into that
lowest income level.
Um
I, I am concerned that.
That we are gonna be
Really hurting a lot of.
The majority of the families in
this state.
An unclear whether we're gonna
have
The ability to really support
them through this transition,
understanding.
We all have amazing goals for,
for folks to have great paying
jobs and climb the ladder of
success and bring their kids out
of poverty, um, but it takes
time to do that, and I'm a
little concerned that, that we
are gonna bear um an incredibly
negative brunt of this
legislation more so than, than
some of our neighboring states.
Well, Madam Chair, you're right
that we've got a, a
disproportionately um higher
rates of low income families,
larger participation rates in
the social service safety net.
So to the extent that safety net
is ineffective at helping lift
people up out of poverty, which
frankly, I think.
Uh, it is ineffective in many
respects.
Um, and people are pushed off of
assistance without anything.
Uh, better then that's what, you
know, would, would we'd be
worried about.
Instead of having a, a higher
Um, population and role of our
uninsured rates go up.
That's a, that will be a, if
somehow miraculously, you know,
HCA can turn it around with
social assistance and
self-sufficiency.
The system is not done to this
point.
Then, um, the opposite could be
true. So that's, you know, as we
look at, how does the state work
requirements, is it a hassle
factor or is it like literally
helping people connect that are
on Medicaid with that new pilot
program, uh, certified in an
industry demand, high demand.
I, you know, wage within 3 to 6
months, you know, you're paying
for that. Is there any
connection between what they're
doing over there, and the people
who need it the most.
Right now I don't see any, but,
you know, definitely not.
Temporary assistance for needy
families, if you look at their
scorecard, like virtually
nobody's leaving welfare for
work in an economy where you
don't, I just said, you don't
have to work for elevate
yourself out of this.
I'm really hopeful that that
pilot program. Do you think
there's quite a bit we can do
with the at the state level to
make sure that people don't
complete German.
Thank you, Senator Woods.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, real
quickly.
On page.
On page 3.
We talked about the, uh, you
presented the fact that the
mandatory
Uh, spending alone was gonna
cause a deficit.
spending of 1.9.
Mr. Chairman,
On page 38.
You can see discretionary
outlays accounted for 1.8
trillion.
The annual deficit is 1.9
trillion. So if you got rid of.
All of domestic
Discretionary in defense, you'd
still have.
Uh, deficit.
That's just how big it is.
OK, when, and you said that the,
the quickest.
Uh, increasing is is the
interest on the national debt.
Uh
I just wondered how much debt
does New Mexico owe?
Own of that do we and all our
investments, do we buy a certain
amount of federal.
Bonds that we would imagine we
own some of that debt, I would
imagine, yes, sir.
Yeah.
And is, is a big complaint on
that that there's a lot of
foreign investment into that or
Mr. Chair, Senator, there could
be foreign investment into that,
and if
Foreign investment is drying up,
that could be dry, driving the
dollar down.
Because they would be buying
dollars to buy our things.
So that would be seen as like
the, the concern is, is the
United States a safe place to
put your and seen is not a good
place to put that.
Oh no. Yesterday we was, they
was talked about uh New Mexico
from the heights of the
Medicaid.
During the pandemic.
Till now, we've taken off about
144,000 people.
And out of that about 8000
showed up on the exchange rules.
It's what what we're thinking.
Now
Also,
What I remember,
We have not.
Decreased.
The cost of Medicaid because
we've increased the
The provider rates.
So even though we have 144,000
less people benefiting, we've,
we've kept the cost, even made
the cost rise a little bit.
Yes sir, that was the major
point of contention during the
session, building the Medicaid
budget where LFC's
Budget for
Enrollment projections were for
significantly lower than what
the department's projections
were for.
And
You know, because their
projections were higher, they
were saying they needed more
general fund.
And
We're able to come to an
agreement where, you know, we
probably still overfunded
Medicaid and we'll need to
revisit that.
Um
Given that they keep the
enrollment projected. OK, and
just a quick, Mr. Chair, I know
we're busy.
Uh, on the error rate.
Uh, you know, the
Air raid on page 21.
Uh
We talked about it and what it
would cost.
And
Yesterday in testimony.
They said that we had a
13.45%.
was due to overpay.
And 9.95% was due to underpay.
And
Also said that 58,000 would
lose.
Snap benefits, and I'm assuming
that is because we're overpaying
those benefits to that amount.
So
I guess what I'm getting at.
If this was any other law, the,
the, the, everybody would be in
uproar.
That we wouldn't following the
law.
But with this law, everybody is
saying, well, boo, let's.
We shouldn't have to follow the
law.
Well, the error rate.
Uh, I think is a little bit
different than what we think
will cause the the error rate's
gonna trigger um um pretty
significant
Change in the relationship over
who pays for the benefits with
this basically, last time I
said,
You know
Snap, because it's so federally
funded.
And it gets out of sight, out of
mind.
And I was, you know, saying to
this committee last time.
You've got my attention on the
state needing to get those error
rates down, you know, if we're
going to be administering it,
we've poured money into income
support.
And they used to be about 3 per
second.
So it's not like we can't get
them back down. And so I think
we need to have a hard look at
Maybe it's not money either.
What were the caseloads back
then when we're at 3%, you know,
what was workload per
caseworker.
You know, do we automatically
assume we need a whole bunch
more case workers. We spent tons
on technology.
Uh, you know, are there
technological solutions to help
streamline this for both the
worker as well as the uh person
needing assistance to get uh
more accurate uh distribution.
But isn't it funny, Mr. Chair,
and Charles that
We really don't take much heat
that we're breaking the law
until it actually cost us money.
Well, I mean, we pay attention
to, you know, if they come back
with a an audit that says you
owe the federal government X
amount. We would, we pay
attention to that, that.
that department to say, hey, you
guys got to do this stuff,
right?
Yeah, that's it.
That's what it looks to me.
I just wanted to bring those.
Thank you.
Senator, uh, Representative
Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, Charles from a personal
point of view, I don't think
this bill.
Um, was cut enough.
To relieve us of our debt as a
nation.
From a legislative view, I'm
actually optimistic.
It doesn't sound like it's gonna
be that bad. We're, we're gonna
have some serious uh
ramification. I understand that,
but I think it could have been a
whole lot worse. So, one quick
question.
How does it work requirements
that, you know, TANF and Snap
and everything. Have you seen
anything in there that that's
gonna change as well.
So who's subject to the work
requirements.
Uh, and I haven't seen details
about whether there's changes to
the work requirements for SNAP.
It'll just be like trying to go
back to what the requirements
were.
Best I can tell.
Uh, pandemic, but with the
inclusion of uh parents with
with kids that are at home, uh,
above a certain age threshold.
That's new. That's a new
population that would be subject
to it.
Totally new to subject people to
get healthcare to work
requirements, cash assistance, I
mean, you can trace that.
Those kinds of trade-offs back
to the Elizabethan, um, but
healthcare has been, that's
gonna be new. That's gonna be a
different apparatus. It looks
like then what it is for Snap,
and they're pretty stringent on
the
The tan up side. I don't see.
Thanks, Charles. Thanks, Mr.
Chairman.
Thank you. Uh, one comment and
then a final comment from
co-chair, uh, we're talking
about lots of models and
projections and things, and I
always kind of remember back in
like.
Escapes me right now who said
it, but all models are wrong.
Some are useful.
Uh, you know, so whatever we
think is gonna happen, it won't
be like that, but it helps us in
preparing and planning for the
future. So, uh, coach, uh
Lindstrom, please. Thank you,
Mr. Chairman. I wanted to just
follow up a little bit on what
our majority floor leader was
asking in regard to some of the
economic impact and the way I
look at it.
is if a revenue stream is
disrupted for investment.
Uh, generally, you have the debt
financing, which is then you
have the equity financing where
all the risk is.
So it'd be a fun fact to me to
see whether or not those that
Um, are eligible tax cut
beneficiaries are actually
willing to continue to take
risks.
Because when you take that
revenue source of Medicaid away
from some healthcare facility
that thinks that we're gonna
expand and then and if we have
a, if we have something like
that in New Mexico, I'd like to
see that.
Uh, I don't know if any of our,
certainly not mine, but maybe
some of these bigger healthcare
facilities. We're looking at
that kind of expansion with debt
and equity financing.
Equity financing is where the
risk is.
So if we have something like
that, I'd like to see that
because that is going to be a
very clear picture of an
economic impact.
And how much is the cost has
then risen if they will even do
the equity piece.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, Charles,
very informative and uh I'm sure
you'll be with us just about
monthly as things change and
models change and we'll try and
I always think about it also,
it's kind of like when you're
watching the hurricane, we know
pretty close, you know, hour or
two out, the code of uncertainty
gets bigger the further out that
we look and so thank you. Um,
our next presentation and
development in federal grants,
distributions and transfers,
Mark Miloff, acting State
Controller.
In the next two presentations
are geared to be a bit shorter
and tighter and so
Whenever you're ready, sir.
Morning, Mr. Chair, Madam Chair.
Thank you for inviting me to
present today and and happy new
fiscal year to everybody, it's a
big time in my world these days.
Um, I'm Mark Malhoff and I'm the
acting state controller. I'm
also the director of the
Financial Control Division at
DFA. I have a short presentation
hopefully to front of you all
that looks like this.
I think you all have that. So
starting on slide 2, just as a
quick refresher from the
presentation that Secretary
Props presented a few weeks ago,
Federal funding includes block
grants, competitive or
discretionary grants and
formula-funded grants.
The characteristics of the
grants include detailed
application requirements, cost
sharing requirements and other
requirements that require the
recipient to meet certain
federal conditions. These
characteristics can be found
across most of our state grants
to include the family violence
prevention grant community
facilities disaster repair
grants and highway grants. The
state obviously has a very wide
range of grants across many
agencies that will fall in these
various buckets.
As we move on to slide 3.
There are 4 major flows of
federal funding into New Mexico.
This includes direct payment to
individuals and the state grants
to state and local governments,
procurement of goods and
services by the federal
government and then salaries and
wages paid to military and
civilian employees. The methods
of receiving federal guns are
generally or include
reimbursement of expense as well
as advance payment.
While specific grant guidelines
govern the type of grant and the
method of payment. Most of our
state grants are on a
reimbursement basis, which means
that the recipient agency must
cover the upfront cost of the
expense and then submit a
reimbursement request along with
the required supporting
documentation to the federal
government to justify the cost
before they can receive that
reimbursement back.
Moving on to slide 4, which is
where I'll spend the majority of
my time because it's where a lot
of the work is being done in in
my office these days. Back in
January, we created um what
we're calling a federal fund
working group.
Which has allowed us a DFA
tomorrow and, and the agency to
monitor funding delays,
reductions and and potential
terminations of federal grants.
The group includes CFOs and
grant staff from every agency
across state government that
that receives federal funding.
We initially were tasked with
creating an inventory of every
federal grant that state
agencies have in fiscal year 25,
we were focused on, and that's
across all state agencies, not
locals, but mainly state
agencies, which is what my
office kind of oversees. The
data was also used to compile a
large tracking database that
allows the, the individual
agency as well as DFA to monitor
kind of the daily inflow of of
federal funds.
It also allows my, my, my office
to identify grants that have,
that may see delays or
disruptions to their flow of
reimbursement. On the group is a
pretty large group. There's
anywhere from 60 to 100 folks
involved depending upon um which
agency we're we're working with,
but we stay in very close
contact anytime an agency
receives a letter, a notice, or
some type of updated guidance
from their oversight entity at
the federal government. We, we
share that among the group and
sometimes that helps agencies
understand new and and
additional.
supporting documentation
requirements may be changes to
upload portals, which at times
can help all of the agencies
submit their documentation, get
their reimbursements faster and,
and see less delays. So it's
been a really, um,
Successful working group from,
from some perspectives because
it's allowed us to kind of keep
track of what type of
communication is being received
from the Federal Treasury,
whether it's official or just
kind of emails from the
oversight agencies. Um, we also
meet occasionally and stay in
close contact every day to kind
of just discuss the the federal
funding landscape, share our
experiences, and then I identify
any areas where improvement may
lead to less disruption in the
flow of federal dollars, while
we may not control the decision.
in Washington DC, it does
provide a support system for the
agencies um that are
experiencing changes to the
normal and the status quo.
And then further, we also host a
monthly meeting with Allstate
agency CFOs, which is about 120
across state government where we
offer guidance on best
practices. We discussed federal
funding trends, and at times we
bring in special presentations
from from other, you know,
experts to help agencies
identify what they can do to at
least get their funding moving
quicker.
And then lastly, the data and
the information that's compiled
through this working group is
used to monitor federal funds,
um, assist state agencies and
with managing their budgets and
staff if a grant is terminated
or delayed, my office also works
very closely with the state
budget division and each
impacted state agency to
identify alternative funding
sources in the events of grant
is terminated.
And then moving on to slide 5.
You'll see a list of um those
grants that, that we've
identified that have been
terminated at the state agency
level today, which is about 24.5
million in total. This does not
include higher education
institutions. I don't have that
data specifically, but from a
state agents, and I know there
have been some terminations at
at higher education
institutions, they just don't
report directly to me, so I
don't have that data, um, on
hand, but at the state agency
level, there's been 24.5
million, and you can see the
breakdown there. This hasn't
really changed since Secretary
Prof.
Last update a couple of weeks
ago, it's been fairly
consistent. I will note that
there have been many other
attempts to terminate certain
grants which have been kind of
reversed through court order and
and those most of those funds
have started to flow again.
Slides 6 to 9 are informational
purposes, they haven't changed
since our last update.
So then I will go to slide 10
and just.
Um, finally, DFA is closely
monitoring the legislative
process around the, the
reconciliation bill that
Charles, Charles um did a very
good job of explaining to
everyone, and we will continue
to work with the governor's
office and the legislature as we
move forward on any type of
budgetary activity that we need
to do to adjust accordingly.
And with that, I will, Mr.
Chair, Madam Charles stand for
questions.
Thank you. That was nice and
tight. I very much appreciated
and stuff, so, uh, questions
from committee.
And
Co-chair Lindstrom. Just one,
you may have been here when I've
made the uh request to do the
out out your, will you be the
one that works with LFC on that.
Um, medical, it won't be myself,
but I did make a note and I will
make sure that secretary props
and staff is aware of that, it'd
be great if you guys came in
together and had some kind of a
unified um uh chart for us.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, co-chair. Senator
Woods.
Good to see you again.
It took me a long time to meet
this gentleman.
He he's a, he was a topic a lot
about conversations in the past.
So thank you for coming in
today.
You're not afraid of me yet, and
I'm proud of you.
Uh
So
Right now
In your eyes, the two big deals
is the Medicaid and the SNAP.
But let's talk about higher
education, just a second.
And
Uh
Did you have a mount for higher
ed that we think we're losing
right now.
chair and and Senator Woods, I
do not have that, um.
We do have secretary Rodriguez
and uh that will be some of the
discussion that we have in
Albuquerque.
00, we'll be talking about some
of that, I believe.
I can, I can talk to her
offline.
I'm not afraid of her either.
But, but what I'm getting at is,
is, uh,
How, how
Much backlog is there?
When we start talking about
grants being canceled and
different things like that.
What, what is a normal backlog
on those, I mean, once we've
Met the criteria.
What is a normal backlog on that
and uh what I'm asking is, have
we done a lot of work on these
grants already and we're, we're
expecting to lose them after
you.
Mr. Chair, Senator words.
You know, it, it, it varies by
grants, I think.
When an agency is experiencing a
delay, they have to work really
closely with their federal
oversight and a lot of times
it's just additional supporting
documentation that maybe they
need to resubmit to to get that
kind of flow going. I think in
most cases, other than the
grants that have been canceled,
that flow has started, and I'm
not just referring to higher
education institutions, I think
across state government, you,
you get some delays. We, we saw
some delays with FEMA. We've
seen some delays at DOH and and
in recent months, most things
have sped.
backup. I'm not gonna say they
are back to what they were
before this administration,
before the administration, you
were kind of averaging anywhere
from 3 to a 5 day turnaround
time, if everything was
submitted to the feds correctly.
I think that has extended to
maybe a week or two and then in
some cases maybe 30 days for
additional documentation.
I think at the onset of these
changes, agencies were, were
still learning what the
additional requirements or what
a lot of what they're being
asked to submit now was what you
would generally submit at a
closeout period once the grant
was over, you were closing it
out. The the federal treasury on
a lot of these grants is now
requiring a lot of that
information upfront at every
draw request. So sometimes it
takes the agency a couple extra
days to to compile and get it to
them and then a couple extra
days for the oversight agency to
review and send that fund.
those funds back to us. But in
general, I think it's, it's
mostly back on track, but it is
taking a little bit longer and
there are some pocketed areas
where we've received, hey, we're
going to do another review and
put a pause on these
reimbursements until that review
is done and we just kind of each
agency that has that grant works
really closely with them to try
and speed that of
each agency that has that grant
works really closely with them
to try and speed that
running all that stuff through
all the.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
very much.
Thank you, Senator,
uh, Representative
and thank you for this
presentation. I, I.
I also want a compliment DFA and
the match fund, the federal
match fund, um, I think I I we
were pushing for 200 million, we
got 75 I think is how finally
came out, and I just want to
compliment you because boy, uh,
I had some people got federal
grants in my districts, and I
called your office, well.
Call the office and put a
connection in with your staff
and those things were done like
within a week. I've never seen
such fast movement and so, uh,
you know,
It it was millions of dollars
that came into the north because
of that, because of our federal
maths program, but also it was
the work of DFA and really
turning that around. So I want
to compliment you on that. And
then I also want to say that
We've been monitoring this at a
local level. Uh, I know in
higher ed, they cut back the um
indirect cost rate, it was above
50% for most universities, and
they cut that down to 15%, and
that was a, that's a huge uh
blow to uh to a higher ed uh
Especially our big university,
that's
Probably 100s of millions, if
you're talking animus you and
UNM and, and then I wanna say
that um on a local level.
What we have found because of
the the Dodge cuts.
Uh, cuts in staff at like EPA
and it what it.
There was a lot of money that
was in our district. We've been
holding monthly meetings now
because and and involved all the
leadership of the of both the
feds were local um people like
in, in water districts that got
huge amounts of money and none
of that money is moving.
That's the problem. Um, uh, we
got a lot of money, but they're
not moving and, and it's because
they don't have staff. And
that's a huge problem too, and
I, I'm just gonna add that from
a local level so that uh people
understand these these issues
when you don't, when you fire
staff and half the staff is gone
to EPA.
And uh you have no one left to
do the job, that's been our
You know, we're meeting monthly
on these issues now in our
district, just to kind of see if
we can talk and get this, see
what we can do to move it. So
that's all I have is your chair.
Thank you. Uh, Senator Lopez.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I
appreciate this information and
Mr. Chair, just to ask a
question, um, and I know, OK, on
page 8, you list all of the uh
New Mexico federal budget, of
course, and listed out by state
agency.
And of course, uh, for Health
and Human Services Committee,
you know, we deal with um aging.
CYFD Children New Health.
Um, you know, and, and a sundry
of others as they come up with
us too, but.
On page 9, you've listed um
Some of the federal allocations,
right? So you've listed with
regards to um CYFD, the 86
million protective services
funding.
And then depart an extensive, a
more extensive listing of
exactly what grants are, um,
being
placed on hold, um, with regards
to some of the departments that
I've mentioned.
AL ALT S D CY um and the reason
why I asked that, Mr. Chair,
because I think it's important
for the LHHS interim committee
to so you might be asked to come
as a few others to come to
present in front of our
committee, um, sometime this
interim to update us too,
because I think the more
information we share with some
of the other in that way the
communication is is spread.
Um, but, do you have a more
extensive list on some of the
grants. Senator Lopez, yes, not
here with me today, but we are
kind of monitoring those on a
daily basis, and we do keep
track of that, um, it changes
from day to day cause one day
there's a notice, there's a
delay the next day it's opened
back up off the top of my head
for the agencies that you've
mentioned, I'm not aware of
anything still currently on
hold, there's some taking a
little bit longer, but not
necessarily paused, but.
And I appreciate that, um.
Mr. Chair, Madam co-chair, you
know, the other concern I have
too is, which is also part of
the grant program, um, is, um,
with regards to our federally
qualified healthcare centers
FQHCs, and I know Department of
Health has a stream of little
stream of money that goes to
help in whatever role they can,
but I believe um those grants
had been put on hold. There was
a release because of access to
the portal for the feds. I mean
there's more stuff to talk about
that, but
Um, I know that too, um.
The state doesn't directly fund
FQHCs, but Mr. Chair, there's
still a critical part of the
healthcare.
platform that we have in the
state that I think is also uh
integral for at least for us to
have that as part of our
discussion as to how and where
we end up with the FQHCs.
Thank you, Senator. Any other
questions?
Senator Dobbin
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Uh,
thank you for being here, Mark.
Um, do you have sort of adding
on this, on page 8 where you
have the breakdown of the
federal budget specifically for
New Mexico. Um, do you have a
breakdown of the actual federal
agencies that are funding each
one at the state level.
Um, Mr. Chair, um, Senator Nova,
you know, I'm not 100% sure. I
would assume that we do maybe
within our our budget group, we
will follow up and I can get
back with you on that. That'd be
great. Thank you. OK, you're
welcome.
Was that all, Senator?
Thank you. I, I was in another
conversation. I looked up, it
was quiet. It's like on the
radio when it's quiet,
something's wrong. So thank you
very much. I appreciate the
presentation. Thank you, uh,
team for kind of quick. Senator
Woods, you have one last quick
one what I should explain about
my conversation earlier.
This gentleman is the only guy
in the state of New Mexico that
can write a hot check legally.
I, I don't.
I'm, I'm not sure, yeah, uh,
we'll just let that way.
Thank you, sir. Uh, our last
presentation for today, um, the
LESC got lots of this, but it
was before the final votes on
things, uh, last week when we
were in Roswell, but kind of the
federal education issues update
and we have our uh director John
Senna doing the presentation,
so.
John, go ahead. Good morning,
Mr. Chair. Good morning, Madam
Chair. Uh, I wish I could write
hot checks legally, but can't do
it.
Um, as, as you said, Mr. Chair,
uh, a lot of the presentation
that you're going to see today
is something that you all saw
LESC, uh, last week, but we do
have some, some updates, uh, and
I'm gonna jump right into them
on the, on the first slide.
Uh, we're gonna talk a little
bit about some news that states
got from the US Department of
Education yesterday.
Uh, day before yesterday, Monday
evening. So states got a notice
from the US Department of
Education on Monday evening,
essentially an email saying that
the department was going to
review about $7 billion worth of
funding that had already been
approved when the, when the
president signed the budget in
March.
Um, that this money was
scheduled to flow out July 1, so
yesterday.
They got, they got a notice, the
states got notice on Monday that
the department was going to
review these particular grants.
And hold that money and pound
these funds.
Uh, while they're reviewing
them.
They didn't give states a lot of
indication as to what they're
reviewing or why they're
reviewing them, only that.
That they were going to take a
look at these. I, I will say
that um most of these uh were
already the president was
recommending not funding these,
these federal funds in next
year's budget, in the budget
they're deliberating right now.
So this is sort of in line with
the overall thinking of the
administration, but these were
funds that were already uh
appropriated and were scheduled
to go out yesterday and they're
now holding these while they
review them. So I just wanted to
be clear.
Um, you see the 5 buckets here,
migrant education, uh, Title IC
migrant education, Title 2 A
supporting effective
instruction, that's essentially
professional development for
teachers.
Title 3A is supports for English
language acquisition.
Title 4A Student Support and
Academic enrichment, and Title
IVB, which is 21st century
community learning centers,
those are after school programs,
uh, primarily in low income, uh,
school districts.
Uh, the next slide,
Um, gonna talk a little bit
about the amounts of money that
this means for New Mexico and
some of the potential impacts if
this money doesn't flow out. So,
uh, you'll see the breakdowns
there, Title I see is about a
million dollars, and again,
that's for migrant education in
those two right-hand columns,
you see, this is information we
got from the Department for the
public education department
about the number of federally
funded positions. So in addition
to programming that these
grants.
pay for. Obviously, there are uh
employees both at the department
and uh local education, school
district level that are funded
with federal funds as well. So
Title 1C is migrant education,
uh, they've got a part-time
staff at the department and
statewide, according to the, to
the department about 5.5 FTEs uh
in migrant education.
Title 2A, again, that's the
professional development bucket,
support for teachers. Uh, it's
about $18 million 4.2 FTE at the
department and I'm almost 75
folks across the state, uh, at
the local level.
Title 3A is again supports for
English learners.
Uh, again, uh, part-time staff
of the department as well as a
little over 20 full-time
employees uh across the state at
the local level.
Title 4A, just school
improvement, uh, often targeted
at schools that have been
designated as needing more
rigorous intervention because of
their um
Test scores, and they've been
designated by the state as
needing additional help. This is
federal money that goes to
support them.
And then Title IVB again is that
uh community learning centers
after school programs.
Um
They don't, the department did
not report actual uh positions
with this.
More often than not, this is
money that's used to pay for the
actual supplies, contractors,
stipends for teachers who work
in in after school, so probably
not full-time positions, but
still support staff, um, pay and
other things that go along with
those uh community learning
centers. I did want to point
out, um, specifically Title 3A,
which is in the middle of that,
which is about $5 million of
supports for English learner
English.
Learner language acquisition.
New Mexico has about 18.8% of
its population classified as
English learners. It's the 3rd
highest, um,
The state with the 3rd largest
population of English learners
in the country. And so uh that's
just as context for what that
might mean.
The rest of this, uh, Mr. Chair,
is what you saw, uh, last week
at LESC, um, these are the,
these are the funds that were
impounded just this week.
Other than those, uh, most of
the federal grants that we
normally receive, uh, the
department has received
notification that they will get
um those grants. They haven't
seen huge fluctuations in those
preliminary awards from previous
years, um, and again, as I said
before at the beginning,
these, these funds that have
been impounded, um, are in line
with the, the grants that the,
the president had recommended
for not funding into future
years, so in it's in, in
Budget proposal and I haven't
had a chance honestly to look at
the budget that passed yesterday
to see where all of this shook
out.
Um
A lot of those things were
recommended for no funding into
future fiscal years, so aligned
with the department's prior with
the administration's priorities.
Um, on page slide 5, the ad the
administration released
additional information,
obviously uh about its budget
request.
It includes flat funding for
Title IA in special education,
impact aid, Indian Ed
initiatives, as well as career
and technical education state
grants and talk a little bit
about why there isn't a decrease
in that funding, you may still
see some impacts specifically at
the local level, uh, with
federally funded employees.
Um, and I'm slide 6 is sort of
the biggest change in the way
that money flowing from the
department might happen in the
proposal, which is to
consolidate um
18 grants.
That float as individual grants
to states into one sort of big
block grant.
And would both mean a reduction
of $3.8 billion in total
funding.
Uh, but would also then, you
know, leave it up to states to
decide how they spend whatever
allocation they get. So rather
than standalone grants that were
intended for specific purposes.
This money would be consolidated
into one block grant, and states
would then decide one what to
use it on, and then how to how
to allocate that at the state
level.
slide 7.
Uh, there's some, some
information here about again.
The, the request for special
education as one of those big
grants, including Title One.
Those are flat, uh, a flat
recommendation for next fiscal
year's budget. I will say, and
you probably hear this from your
school districts potentially is
anytime you all make decisions
about salary at the state level,
so you raise minimum teacher
salaries you give folks
percentage increases for those
employees that are funded by
federal grants, maybe you're
paying using special ed, uh,
money to pay a teacher.
Or Title One money to pay an
interventionist.
Local districts usually try to
match those salary increases.
For those federally funded
employees because they are
licensed teachers, either in
special education or otherwise.
And so flat funding, while you
all are raising teacher raise
teacher salaries at the state
level means that um districts
are then using the same amount
of money to pay increased costs,
which might mean they have to
make decisions about what kind
of programming or how many
people that they employ using
federal funds, um, because of
the flat funding.
The Institute of Education
Sciences would be cut by 67% in
that proposal. These are the,
this is the funding that pays
for a lot of research.
Uh, in education, as well as um
assessments. So you've probably
all heard of the national
assessment of Education
Progress, the NAEP, also often
referred to as the nation's
report card. This is the test
that every state administers to
a population of its students,
and it's the test we use to give
state to state comparison across
the country.
The core of that test is math
and reading, and uh the core of
the test which would stay in
place, the reduction in funding
actually gets that staff at um
IES as well as some of the other
supplemental assessments that
NAP has offered in the past and
wouldn't have in the future.
The administration also is
recommending a limiting funding
for TRO, which is a support for
uh low-income college students,
English, again, as I said,
English language acquisition,
adult education and migrants and
migrant student education.
Uh, you've heard plenty about
SNAP and Medicaid, and I'm not
the person to talk about all the
potential changes, um, the, what
I will say is that potential
eligibility changes or work
requirements that might change
who's eligible for SNA or
Medicaid, potentially have the,
uh, have an impact on who
qualifies for free or reduced
lunch.
And so if someone does not
qualify for snapper or, or other
benefits.
They may not be what we call
directly certified as or being
eligible for free or reduced
lunch. And if that's the case,
because you all have decided to
cover the gap between what the
federal government reimburses us
for meals.
And what, who's eligible.
That might mean the state might
have a larger portion, uh,
To cover the cost of meals for
all students since we're doing
that.
Um, last thing, Mr. Chair, I'll
say is, uh, as you all know,
this is all still in flux, uh,
and we're waiting to see what
the House version of the budget
looks like, as well as what some
of these impoundment, um,
Decisions mean for school
districts. We are working with
the department to get uh uh
district by district breakdown
of how this might affect folks.
Again, this just happened in the
last day, and so they're working
on some detail and when we're
we're trying to get that from
them as quickly as possible. Um,
I will say in the case of, uh,
you may have heard and I think
we talked about this at the
first meeting.
The administration had held back
the ability of states to to
spend Esther and ARP money that
was left over, so they had
extended the deadline for
expenditure of those COVID
relief funds.
And then they had notified uh
states that they were no longer
allowed to spend that money,
despite first being told they
had to a certain date to spend
that money.
A number of states sued, uh, in
that, in that instance, and the
court actually said that the
administration could not do
that.
And so only the states involved
in the suit were then allowed to
spend the money until the
original deadline.
Just this week, the
administration did send out or
actually I think it was Friday
evening, the administration sent
out a letter that said that now
all states.
Can can spend that ARPA and
Esser money until that original
deadline because it wasn't fair
that only the states who had
sued them would be allowed to
spend it. Now all states are
allowed to do that. So, I only
bring that up as an example of
one place where the
administration tried to hold
back funds or the ability of
states to spend funds, um, this
empowerment issue might might
run along similar lines. I
haven't heard yet of any
lawsuits, but again, it just
happened in the last day.
Thank you, John. Uh, I've
already heard from my district
because of that ruling is
concerned because districts are
turning in their budgets for
next year and planned on this
federal monies that now aren't
there and do they print those
monies? Is it going to go, you
know, they're, they're very
concerned as to what happens
when they've already set budgets
based on the current funding of
the and Mr. Cher can add one
last thing in regard to that,
and I, and we heard this from,
from uh
Mr. Rounds at our meeting last
week is if districts decide to
say, OK, we have, we had some
federal employees tied up in
these grants, we still want to
have these services and maybe I
find some room in my operational
budget to cover those services,
you get into the supplants
supplement, not supplant issue.
So once they cover the cost of a
federal employee,
There may be some issues as to
whether or not they'd be able to
use federal funds in the future
to pay for that. So there's this
dilemma about whether or not to,
as you said,
cover those costs.
Go through with their services
as planned, but potentially be
dinged on the back end because
now I've covered it with
operational. I'm not allowed to.
Thank you, Senator Townsend.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um
On the
Definitions for on page 3.
Of Title IC through title 4B,
would you send me the
definitions.
For those, I mean, what
You, you broadly described it,
but I'd like to understand how a
child becomes defined in each
one of those categories.
Absolutely, Mr. Chair, so yeah,
on page two is the sort of grant
title associated with those,
but, and, and to your point,
we're also working with the
department to try to get uh more
specific information about how
districts are spending this
money because let's say you have
English learners, you qualify
for some of this money. Not all
districts use it the same way.
So we'll try to get you some
more detail about that as well
at the same time, can you uh
send me the last 5 years of
federal funding by year.
going
So we can see historically
pre-COVID and through COVID,
what the impact was,
Senator.
On, um,
Page 7.
Um, bullet 2.
You talked about
The Institute of Educational
Sciences would be cut by 67%.
Can you tell me what dollar
amount that means. Mr. Chair,
Senator, so this money doesn't
flow to states usually. This is
money that funds the work at the
federal level to both administer
those assessments, the national
assessment of educational
progress, as well as staff that
uses that data and along with
other data systems.
To report back to all of us, uh,
what's happening in school. So
most of this does not flow to
states, it's used as a chair and
Mr. Santa if that's the case,
tell me what impact that means
to New Mexico, and tell me what
67% of X is.
I mean, is it, are we talking
about?
200,000 or 200 million, number
one, and
If those services are now
provided by the federal
government.
And we believe as a, as a group
that there are things that we
should continue to provide. What
do we have to backfield in order
to address that.
Mr. Chair, absolutely I don't
have, yes, it does. I don't have
the exact number, but we can get
it for you. We can get more
concrete information.
Um,
I think that's it for right now.
I got more questions, but
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator, uh, co-chair
Lindstrom.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I
appreciate uh the presenter
saying that you're working with
the department now to identify
by district is federal funds
that have been impounded on page
3.
Can you also provide
The by district, the amount of
Medicaid that has been requested
by each district.
I know it varies, and for
different reasons, but I sure
would like to see what that is,
um, by district. Another
question I had for you, Mr.
Chairman, and presenter.
These, um, allocations that
aren't going to be received.
And you're just your brief
description of, of what they're
for. How many of these were
going to be part of the response
to the Martinez Yaz, because it
sounds like these are uh funds
that are specifically for the
districts that might be in.
Chaos, I think. Yeah, Mr. Chair
and Madam Chair. Um,
So yes, one, we can get you a
district by district breakdown,
uh, again, working with the
department to to get those. I
can send you the most recent
information about what, what
district allocations are for
each of these grants over the
last few years, they do have
that breakdown because they send
it out obviously to districts
for for awards. Um,
Just as a brief reminder for
everyone who's not as steeped in
education or the or the lawsuit
as some of us are the four
subgroups identified in the, in
the, in the lawsuit where
English learners, low income
students, Native Americans,
special education students. And
so, as far as cuts, um,
obviously in Title 3A, which is
directly supporting English
language acquisition speaks
directly to one of those, uh,
one of those subgroups.
never safe to assume, but I will
in this case, uh, that Title IC
in support of migrant education,
and so, you know, obviously
there's some some connection
between uh English learners and
migrants, and so I think that is
another place. Title IIA, which
is professional development for
teachers, um,
does speak to quality
instruction and, and the lawsuit
in addition to the four
subgroups talked about every
student essentially.
Deserves a high quality teacher
in every classroom. And so where
these funds were going to
support uh both teacher
training, um, and I would say
Title 4A student supports and
academic enrichment is about
targeting those schools that are
struggling to support students,
and I would argue just based on
my knowledge of the statistics
that those schools are serving
the subgroups identified in the
in the lawsuit, as well as 21st
century community learning
centers because these are after
school programs where parents
Uh, these are paid for after
school by the federal
government. And so, if you look
through all of them,
Probably all of them.
OK, that's what I thought, Mr.
Chairman, and so.
With that being the case.
Um
I think
We, we're gonna have to work
closely with you and, and the
department on this for me
because at the end of the day,
this committee's supposed to be
making's committees.
So it is more than just all the
health stuff that we're looking
at and, and we'll see even more
as we go on throughout the
interim.
But I would like to see by
district the Medicaid uh that
has gone out to each district.
I'm thinking now on what happens
with these grants that's going
away that we would have used to
help resolve that case.
And um.
The other question I had for
you.
It's on page 6, Mr. Chairman, if
we're going to go to a
simplified funding formula
everything goes into one.
I guess categorical grant.
And can be used for the things
that are listed here, how much?
Does that take away from these
independent controlled.
School District boards.
I mean, yeah,
if I on a school board and all
of a sudden all my money that's
coming to me.
I can only do it for X, Y, and
Z. Does that raise hackles with
them, uh, I'm not close enough
to it, Mr. Chairman, but I, I
think it might, yeah, Mr. Chair,
uh, Madam Chair, um,
It's a good question. I would, I
would argue that there's, that
most of these are coming down
with pretty specific parameters
about how they can spend the
money in the first place. So
districts are applying for these
grants, saying we're going to
provide certain kinds of
services and they have to meet
those grant requirements, and so
I'm not sure there's a ton of
local discretion about how to
use those funds to begin with,
the, the reduction in the amount
though, might mean that the
state is going to have to make
decisions about which of these
to actually support, and then
they made the statement
might decide the department or
you all might decide, here are
the parameters that we'd like to
see to be eligible for these
kinds of things, similar to the
way that you do below the line
funding. So I think Mr.
Chairman, it takes a lot of
control away from them.
If we say these are the only
grants that you can apply for,
and these are the rules for the
grants, we have more discretion,
but you guys know more about
that. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you and and just kind of
my little side comment on that
is in some ways, I appreciate
the flexibility that the money
comes and we get to decide where
the priorities are.
But also it's a huge cut. So
it's like you get some
flexibility but you don't get as
much to do as you had in the
past. So I think it, it cuts
both directions.
Uh, representative for that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
John. Um,
You know,
I think I have the numbers
right, but about 70% of our kids
are Hispanic in this state, and
10% Native American, is that
true?
So 80% Mr. Chair, representative
about that 80% of our kids are
my, you know, in minority uh
categories and uh actually
majority in our state, but um
most of these cuts uh seem to be
affecting, uh, minority
population.
Mr. Chair, I, I suppose you can
make that assumption.
Uh, and when we, uh, when the,
uh,
The lawsuit, uh, that, um.
keep that money uh to the
states, I assume that these
lawsuits were brought about by
the Blue State Attorney
generals, is, is that correct?
So when they went back to, you
know, make that equal to all
states. They really, that was so
that the red states we get that
sort of funding too, is that
true?
Mr. Chair, I, I can confirm that
the that the lawsuit itself was
brought by democratically
controlled uh states. Right.
And, and so the people who were
not involved in that lawsuit
were obviously red controlled
states are um and, and then what
they did is just equalize that,
so, so that really, I mean, I
just wanna, I just want to show
how this is going because I
think it's important to really
understand this. Um, we, so
they've cut funding.
I just wanna, I just wanna get
here.
The, the request for
Total requests for education for
the federal budget is 66
million.
And that's down and that's a $12
billion that's on page 5. That's
a $12 billion reduction. Is
that, is that correct?
26, I'm sorry, yes, Mr. Chair,
um, Representative, that's
right. This is the proposal.
That is now making its way
through Congress. OK.
Uh, how
Do you know how many jobs that
would, Mr. Chair, I'm just
curious how how many cuts are we
going down at the federal level
that really supports programs at
state level.
I'm just curious positions that
Mr. Chair Representative, I
don't have that exact number,
but I can get it for you. OK,
thanks. That's all I have.
Thank you. Representativelata.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thanks,
John. It's always good to see
you. Thank you for the
information. Just really quick,
I had a question regarding
Taiwan A and I noticed that uh
there was flat funding, yeah,
yeah.
Flat funding for Title 1A, but
at the local level,
Good school districts get
creative with Tai1A and perhaps
cover Title 1C.
Uh, and, and, you know, move,
get creative with the budget and
move those money around.
Mr. Chair Representative Lata,
um, I believe there is some
flexibility about how districts
can use their title funding to
support other title programs. I
don't have the specifics in
front of me. I don't know that
you can do that with all of your
title funding because again some
of those grants have sort of
tighter tighter restrictions,
but we can get you the, which
grants are you're able to move
money around you?
Thank you, uh, Mr. Cherry and
John, I would really appreciate
that because I'm curious as to,
you know, I was thinking about
the the plan versus and.
And I'm thinking maybe if if the
school districts can get a
little creative with that Title
1A, then maybe that may may not
be the case, in particular with
Tyler1C because that's, it's so,
it's so small.
OK. Thank, thank you.
Thank you. Representative Brown.
OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
So John, I have a question
about, I guess, legal effect.
Of these impoundments.
Uh, so, Mr. Chairman, we've
been, of course, a lot of
discussions been focused on
rescissions in the federal
budget. Uh, this is mostly about
impoundments. We know that
Congress is soon gonna be
working on forming the federal
budget.
So, whatever happens here with
impoundments, what's the legal
effect? Is it something Congress
can change in the budget
process.
Mr. Chair Representative Brown,
thanks for the question. I, I
think I want to get a little
clarification, you mean, um,
Does Congress have the ability
to say no, we actually do want
this money to flow out, uh, in
their final budget.
Um
Yes, that's what I'm getting at.
Thank you, Mr. Chair
Representative. I believe so. I
mean, again, I think this is
part of at the heart of this
discussion is that when Congress
um appropriates funds that the
funds should flow out, uh, in
this particular case, Congress
has already appropriated these
funds.
And the department is is saying
we're not going to flow them out
because we need to review how
they're being used or whether or
not they align. And I think that
is the sort of legal question as
to
Who has the authority to do
that.
And so, uh, again, until we sort
of see some of this play out and
I, and again I haven't heard of
any uh lawsuits yet, but I
imagine there will be some, um,
that, that may be sort of the
deciding factor.
Thank you, Senator Lopez. Thank
you, Mr. Chair. Um, I appreciate
the, um, presentation, sorry, I
couldn't be there, but there's
conflict with all some of our
other um.
As for assignments, um, but Mr.
Chair, I just wanted to point
out on page 6, and I think this
is important for us just to keep
in mind as we're going through
the words, um, discretionary
budget authority.
And the, the request is for 66.7
billion, right, in new
discretionary budget authority,
so Mr. Chair, I, I, madam
co-chair, caution.
Because discretion means a lot.
In many different places, just,
just to point out is I'm reading
through these where their
discretion is as to where they
want money.
The other on and off. Any other
comments?
It not, Mr. Chair, if I could
very quickly, um, I do have just
uh an update if I, if I could
very quickly, I just wanted to
introduce if you haven't already
met Jessica Hathaway. She's our
deputy director at LESC and
she's been on the, on the
research, uh Mr. uh Mr. Chair,
Senator Townsend, I have some uh
an update for you on the uh
Institute of Education Sciences.
So currently the budget is about
870 million.
For that department, uh, the
proposal is 261 million.
But we can still get further
information about how that might
have. Thank you.
Any other
Thank you, John. Um, a couple of
kind of quick follow-ups, you
know, they, our next meeting is
up in Taski Valley, July 31st,
August 1st, uh, then August 28th
we're at San San Ana Pueblo Star
Center.
Uh, Las Cruces, October 20th the
22nd, and Santa Fe Capital on
Thursday, November 6th, we are
looking at whether we're able to
add an additional day on Friday.
Uh, that's gonna be the time as
budgets are starting to be
crafted and shaped with the
finance committee and this
committee's responsibility to
prepare and provide input, and
so that extra day expect that's
gonna be mostly discussion among
members as to which things do we
really need to do now?
You know, where, where do we
take the information we've
gotten to protect the people of
New Mexico and New and uh
programs around New Mexico,
which ones can we successfully
do that where it's going to be.
And so look at forward to uh
that Friday also back here in
Santa Fe, if we can get that
approved through the ledge
counsel.
Group uh
Any comments, questions. Yes,
please, Kuer.
I just want to remind you all
for the town meeting start 9
o'clock both days, but I am
gonna set up a work session for
us on the 2nd day in the
morning. We'll talk about
Medicaid and really dig into it
and have a better grip on on
what our budget people have to
deal with, um, I look forward to
having you all up there. It'll
be fun.
Thank you. Any other last
comments? Again, I want to thank
the members very engaged, good
questions, you know, thank you
for being here and taking time
and, and care about what's going
on with the future of New
