Just to help level set for
everybody like when you hear
things out of Washington, what
they're talking about.
Um, so how the federal budget
works at a 10,000 ft level where
the revenue is coming from,
where the spending's going, and
then what this budget
reconciliation processes and how
that differs from the annual
appropriations process that
Congress is supposed to go
through.
And then what that budget
reconciliation process might
mean for us here, um, in New
Mexico.
So slide 3.
Right out of the gate. Hopefully
you see.
Uh, big problem.
Uh oh.
This is where the federal
government is basically taking
in
1.9 trillion on an annual basis,
less than its spending.
Through a variety of different
uh programs, so.
Federal spending is broken up
into a couple of different
components. The first are
mandatory spending programs. I
think you're big 3, Social
Security, Medicare, Medicaid,
then there's another series of,
of programs that are basically
kind of set up on autopilot.
Um, for funding, their formula
grants to states for nutrition
programs, um, snap, things like
that.
Then there's your discretionary
budget that's made up of
domestic discretionary spending,
like Head Start.
Your title programs.
The, um, and your domestic and
your defense budget.
Uh, those are discretionary
pieces.
Those are supposed to be done on
an annual annual basis, because
Congress is making decisions,
how much do we want to spend
this year on this particular
program or set of activities, as
opposed to Social Security, it
takes money in and sends it out
based on, uh, who's retired and
what the retirement calculations
are. Same thing with uh
Medicaid.
So just one year, $1.9 trillion.
And you can imagine if that kind
of trend continues, that means
that they've got to borrow that
money in order to spend.
If that continues on an
annualized basis over a period
of time, your debt just piles
up, and that's what we see on
slide 2.
Congress tends to look at their
deficits and debt as a
percentage of their GDP, but
Just looking at the trends, you
know, you can think of all of
the hand wringing during the
during the 1980s over the the
discussion of how much we should
be spending on the defense
budget, where Social Security
was affordable, uh, in our
You know, deficits at that time
were running at about 5% of GDP.
There's a day of reckoning and
hard decisions that were made in
the 1990s to both raise revenue
and reduce spending and lo and
behold, by the end of the
decade, we actually had budget
surpluses in this country. And
then once we had a budget
surplus.
Congress said, happy days are
here again. Let's go ahead and
Cut taxes and increased
spending, and we returned the
deficits, and then we had the
Great Recession.
And then the pandemic, and
that's those are those two big
spikes that you see where there
were big outlays in order to
deal with those bailing out the
banks, bailing out the states.
Um, and then, and then a
rescission of spending coming
back down, but the cumulative
debt over time is about the same
as what our GDP is.
So where's the revenue come
from? slide 5.
The vast majority of revenue
that's coming in for the federal
government is from individual
income taxes.
So anytime you have policy
changes affecting the marginal
tax rates.
The standard deduction.
You're reducing potentially your
largest uh revenue source.
Payroll taxes, uh, come in at
about 1.7 trillion payroll taxes
or Social Security and Medicare.
And once we get into a little
bit more detail, I, I want you
to look at how those line up or
don't line up between, uh, how
much we're bringing in in
payroll taxes versus how much
we're spending on those
particular programs, and if
there's not enough, that means
it's got to come from another
general fund and that general
fund is likely from individual
income taxes.
Corporate income taxes, barely
530 billion, uh, when you talk
about the marginal rates that
are being discussed right now,
uh, this isn't a, a very big
revenue center, the same thing
when you get into customs
duties, tariffs, you could
almost, let's say we doubled it,
it's not going to put a dent in
the overall, uh, national
deficit. So we can see more
detail about where those
revenues come in on slide 6.
With Social Security taxes
coming in at about 1.2 trillion.
Remember this number for
Medicare, 387 billion.
And you can see like customs
duties at 77 billion in
corporate income taxes. So all
those other things kind of pale
in comparison to income tax
policy, and some of the
discussion going on in DC.
And it has been going on for
years, is that, well, if we push
more money back out into the
economy rather than the
government bringing in, then
people would be wealthier and
we'll get even more in income
taxes and kind of a dynamic
scoring proposition that makes
the argument that it basically
will help pay for itself. And
they've built in some of those
assumptions into into the out
years.
Where does that money go?
Slide 7.
Well, the biggest is Social
Security at 1.5 trillion.
Medicare at 865 billion, going
back to what we're bringing in
on income on Medicare, those
payroll taxes aren't paying.
For the full cost of that
program, which means that's got
to come from somewhere else in
order to help pay for, for
Medicare.
Medicaid at 2.1% of GDP or about
$600 billion then it starts
shrinking. This is kind of kind
of like
Our budget in New Mexico when
folks.
Run on the idea of cutting the
fat out of government, but we
don't want to touch education,
we don't want to touch higher
education, don't want to touch
healthcare, and all of a sudden,
definitely don't want to touch
public safety and all of a
sudden that slice of that pie
starts to get really small, and
the dollar figures that people
are wanting to to try to grapple
with, becomes very difficult
again.
The other thing that I want to
point out is the annual interest
payments we're making on our
national debt.
Exceed what we spend on defense.
Almost equal what we spend on
domestic discretionary.
Exceeds what we spend on
Medicare, debt.
There's an opportunity cost to
Paying that much money.
For debt service payments on an
annual basis, almost 1 trillion.
larger than what we pay for the
entire Medicaid program.
But just looking at these pie
graphs, trying to find if you
wanted to balance the budget in
a year, $1.9 trillion.
Just on cuts alone, that side of
the balance sheet.
It's very difficult, especially
when you start taking Social
Security and Medicare off the
table right out of the gate.
And those are the discussions
that are happening in in
Congress right now where they've
taken those two biggest cost
centers.
One of which is less than half
funded by a dedicated revenue
stream off of the table with no
uh projected ways of saving
money versus uh cutting benefits
or other kinds of things. And
again, that net interest is a
huge opportunity cost to being
able to do other things, uh,
within the budget. Slide 8.
This just further illustrates
when you start talking about
some of these domestic
Um, discretionary programs.
And how much money can be saved
from clipping like a Title 1 by
10%. It's just pales in
comparison to being able to, to
do anything to get the numbers
that you need in order to come
close to balancing the budget.
Again, if you take Medicare off
the table and you're left with
Medicaid, those other programs
are pretty small in comparison.
When you consider that the
congressional directions to like
the commerce and uh the
committee were to come up with
cuts of $88 billion a year.
So that's
That's why Medicaid is on the
table. That's why big things
like snap cost shifting are on
the table, um,
You know, think about 88 billion
just for one committee to come
up with, that's more than.
All of the veterans programs for
retirement for military.
72 billion.
So
big challenge, uh, when it comes
to mandatory outlays.
Discretionary outlays.
Even more so, the dollar shrink
even more when you get into the
non-defense portion of this.
Education and training,
employment, you think of like
workforce solutions.
Uh, the title programs at 121
billion, again, if you're
looking for savings.
In the order of 1.9 trillion to
balance the federal government,
federal budget.
It's very difficult to see how
you can, that's more than the
entire discretionary budget for
both non-defense and for the
defense. OK, slide 10.
What is federal budget
reconciliation. So in the early
1970s, Congress decided it
wanted to try to rebalance
power.
With its perceived uh diminished
appropriations power with the
president and take a more active
approach. It created the
Congressional Budget Office, um,
at that time, and it set up
what's called the Congressional
Budget and Empowerment Control
Act.
This allows for expedited
consideration of legislation.
That's for mandatory programs,
things that are in law.
That are kind of on autopilot.
Uh, it allows them to basically
align spending revenue, and the
debt limit.
Within agreed upon targets.
So the process starts.
With each chamber passing a
resolution, basically directing
a variety of different
committees to come up with.
Uh, bills that would meet
spending or tax uh policy change
targets, as well as potentially
changes if they wanted to the
debt ceiling.
So in this example, like
commerce and industry had
instructions to come up with
savings of 880 billion over a
10-year period.
The reconciliation Act works on
making assumptions about changes
to spending over a 10-year
period. What's important is that
CBO each year puts together.
Basically a budget baseline, um,
for each major spending program.
So let's say over a 10-year
period that they assume that
Medicaid's going to grow at a 7%
rate.
That's important because there
could be some changes to how
The, um, the programs that
operate through the legislation
and the reconciliation bill that
would slow that rate of growth
to 6%.
Those would be counted as
savings towards deficit
reduction.
In our minds when we hear budget
cuts, we think you've got a $100
last year and this year, you're
gonna get 90.
In the federal way of thinking
is, you got a $100 this year,
next year, you might get 105,
but instead you're gonna get
104.
It's kind of like for
appropriators, when you hear
agencies come in and say LFC cut
us, they cut our budget.
What they're really saying is
that we didn't give them their
full recommendation. We ask for
a 7% increase and they got a 3%
increase, and they'll present
that to you as a cut. So that's
important for us to
To understand that context for
Kind of what may be coming down
the pike and win.
On, uh, what the implications of
the policy changes are going to
be.
So these resolutions passed by
the House and Senate, which
they've already passed, acting
as instructions to all of those
committees to prepare the
legislation and so the House has
done.
Um, it's pre um preparation of
the reconciliation bill, and now
it's kicked it over to the
Senate.
What are some details about
reconciliation. Congress set out
some rules for itself about when
they can use that and and what
are the advantages for
reconciliation. One, you limit
debate. 2, you have a much more
restrictive amendment process.
You saw, um, probably coverage
of a committee holding a hearing
for like 12 hours through the
middle of the night, voting down
all the minority amendments and
then pushing the bill out. So
you, you have a, you're on a
fast track, you're gonna, you're
not going to have a more
Uh, debatable kind of uh
process.
The biggest is you only need a
simple majority in the Senate,
and you bypass the filibuster.
So you can see where this kind
of the stars only really line up
when one party's in the White
House and in both chambers of
Congress.
There are limitations to how
budget reconciliation can be
used. The biggest is you can't
touch Social Security.
So Congress told itself, we got
to have a supermajority to to
mess with that particular
program, but all the, the second
is
It needs to be limited to
mandatory programs.
So law changes for how a program
that's under mandatory spending
works.
Uh, or increasing the debt limit
or any combination of those.
Technically, annual
discretionary spending like on
education and defense.
Should be excluded.
When we get to the
reconciliation, you'll see where
their Congress is basically
proposing to add to the defense
budget.
$150 billion to their annual,
what would be normally their
annual, um, discretionary budget
through the appropriations
process.
So
Apparently there was probably a
previous reconciliation where a
different party in power slipped
through like annual
appropriations that shouldn't
have been through.
And now the next part is doing
the same thing, so slippery
slope.
On including that, but this way,
now they don't have to get a
super majority when they go
through the appropriations
process to push through $150
billion of additional defense
spending in that particular
annual budget.
The other, you'll hear some of
this is called the bird rule.
For former Senator Byrd.
And basically, it sets up a
complicated process in the
Senate, where you can't add
things to the bill that are
extraneous to the main spending
or revenue items.
Good example of that is, uh,
when Congress was discussing the
build back better under under
Biden, there was a real strong
push to
Amend the reconciliation bill to
increase the federal minimum
wage.
And ultimately it was ruled, I
believe, by the parliamentarian
and that was extraneous, that
wasn't central to what Congress
was trying to do.
So merely incidental.
Um, to the budget goals cannot
be included.
So page 12.
The other thing that's really
important.
About
This budget reconciliation and
what's going on is you'll hear
discussion about deficit
reduction.
But in fact, the package
increases the deficit.
By about 3.3 to 3.8 trillion. I
think there's a new CBO score
over that 10 year budget window.
So that number we went over on
the 3rd slide in terms of like
how much debt we've got, how
much debt we may uh be paying
interest on over time will grow
under this um package.
The budget resolutions had given
energy and commerce, which has
the
Uh, Medicaid in it, the largest
uh 10 year total for savings.
And then you can see.
Some of these increases for
armed services, Homeland
Security, the judiciary.
Those should all be part of the
annual appropriations process,
but they're using this as a
vehicle to push through, uh,
spending that would otherwise
need 2/3 majority support.
Uh, through on a simple majority
vote.
The details of that are
important too, because what I've
seen is they're basically doing
an annual appropriation, but
allowing the spending to to last
over like the next 4 years. So
the Senate
And this one, what's important
is the house was a little
Um
They're a little tougher when it
came to trying to rein in
spending and reducing it.
They want to extend the tax cuts
from 2017 and they want to add
more tax cuts on top of it.
You want to increase the debt
ceiling that would basically buy
us 2 more years of ability to
issue more debt.
The Senate
And they're very transparent
because this budget
reconciliation process
essentially says it's kind of
tilted towards spinning, but for
tax cuts it said.
You can't
Kind of do a budget gimmick, you
know, sometimes folks will file
a bill here.
That won't go into effect until
after the.
FIR table runs out.
So this is a 10 year window
where basically that tax cuts
got to be shown as a tax cut.
And so those tax cuts are set to
expire this year.
Which means current law says
that the tax revenue for next
year and CBO's baseline is
higher, and if you reduce it,
then you got to account for that
reduction.
The Senate, when we get to page.
13 said no current law says
we're already have reduced it.
We're going to ignore needing to
like transparently pay for it.
Again, we don't do the same
thing on the spending side, so
you can argue that this
reconciliation process is kind
of tilted.
But nonetheless, uh, those are
kind of important, important
things because the Senate is
basically saying we don't need
to do all these cuts.
Because we don't have to pay for
the tax cut that's already in
place, even though we're running
at $1.9 trillion annual deficit.
And you can see kind of where
the the big buckets for their
committees and their targets
are. So,
They're not looking at um
The same kind of uh reductions
that the houses, so it will
remain the space that you hear
some rhetoric coming out of, of
certain quarters in the Senate
saying that, you know, the
Senate version needs to cut more
than what the House did.
Uh, but they're budget
instructions did the exact
opposite, where basically they
were signaling the house is
going to do the heavy lift.
Um, and then the Senate will
come in and put its stamp on it.
It's like 14. This just gives
you an some examples of the
Senate approach ignoring kind of
the, the impact of uh that
reduced revenue.
And how much would be for
additional uh tax cuts above
what the uh the expiring ones
would cost.
Again, we're talking.
Um
You know, 150 billion in new
ones, 450 billion in existing
ones.
For a total revenue gap, if you
want to have a balanced budget
of 1.9 trillion.
The enormity of this budget.
Deficit is just
striking to me as a budgeter,
it's like.
Heart stopping.
So
What's been going on? Slide 15,
what did
What have we seen so far?
Uh, we've seen some
Pretty big changes to financial
aid programs in the form of
student loans.
Um, basically a consolidation of
a number of them, and then an
assumption that people weren't
going to be able to get their
loans forgiven at easier levels
than what was available under
the Biden administration.
The hard thing about
And from a cash basis, they're
counting like the repaid loans
as income coming back in.
At present day value as opposed
to like, you know, when it will
actually come in.
It's like 16, give you an
example, you know, what do we
need to spend an extra $150
billion on for armed services.
Shipbuilding
Missile defense are big ones.
Uh, replenishing munitions,
supply chain kinds of things.
New weapons systems.
Nuclear deterrents that could be
beneficial to New Mexico
potentially, uh, with work at
the labs, both at Sandia and
Lano. So there could be some new
spending items that come out of
this reconciliation package,
border security is another
example where we could see
increases in federal revenues
coming in into the state.
Flight 17.
OK, once we take Social
Security, Medicare, and we see
how small all the other
discretionary or mandatory
programs are.
That's why you see they're
centering on Medicaid.
And Medicaid's growing at a
faster rate.
Along with other health care
programs. So if you're looking
at that kind of baseline.
And there's been a number of
different
Cost cutting or cost shifting,
uh, ideas floating around
Congress for a number of years.
CBO puts out pretty regular
reports.
Options for doing X, Y, and Z,
usually most of them are not
politically palatable, including
even through this process. So
some of the things that I was
really worried about at LFC
didn't in fact come to fruition,
and I was a little bit surprised
about that.
But one thing that would like
Uh
These types of things would have
big fiscal impacts to the state,
Changing the FM map, you heard
Eric talk about less than a 1%
change cost us like $70 million.
So say they wanted to bring the
90%.
FAP for the expansion population
down to what it is for the
regular uh portion of the
program at 72%.
Those dollars could add up
pretty big, um, if they were to
equalize those and the whole
reason why they did 90% was to
induce states to
Adopt that particular program to
reduce the number of uninsured
in the country, but at the same
time, if you're looking at it as
a federal appropriator, that's
where you're spending the most
money on Medicaid.
At 90%.
Matching rates.
This one we may have, may or may
not have dodged a bullet on.
Option 2.
Lots of states
Um, use what are called provider
taxes. So basically leverage
Medicaid to reinvest in that
provider community. We do it in
two ways here. One is the new
hospital.
Uh, tax that's allowing us to
basically pay hospitals at
commercial, uh, market levels uh
for their rates. The second is
for nursing homes to enhance
quality as well as stabilize
their, their operations.
The federal government's got
limits on how much you can do
that. And there was some
discussion about, uh, trimming
that back or even just flat out
eliminating it because you see
states aren't putting skin in
the game, in those cases, the
providers are and they're
basically, uh, they don't want
providers holding themselves
harmless or just using as a way
to increase federal outlays, uh,
no discussion about, we're
having discussion here, what is
that buying us, even though
we're not putting general fund
in, are we getting better access
to care?
our hospitals are critical
access hospitals able to stay
open. Does it make sense to
allow 25% to be spent out of
state or sent out as profit, um,
The 3rd option would be to
establish caps.
On federal spending. This would
be a block grant, this is not a
new idea, it's been around since
the 90s, or May would know block
granting Medicaid just like we
did for
Cash assistance in the 1990s
under Tanev, no longer an
entitlement. It's like, here's
how much you're gonna get, you
figure out how to live within
that amount.
Another form of a block grant
are what are called per capita
caps, so, you know, a person on
long term care, we may spend
about
20 to $25,000 on them per year.
They may cap it at 25,000 and
say anything above that on
average, you've got to pick up
the cost for it.
For that particular client. They
could cap, you know, the average
cost of an expansion population
client uh $5000. And so on
average, if we would exceed that
cap then we would have to pick
up the tab.
Eligibility, uh,
Determination changes.
Uh, and we'll talk more about
this, uh, in a minute, but a
tried and true way of decreasing
your eligibility is increasing
the hassle factor for, um, being
able to get benefits. On the one
hand, you can argue that's
program integrity strategies,
um, but on the other hand, if
it's uh not streamlined, you're,
you're just making it very
difficult to sign up for
something and people don't sign
up for it again and they drop
off.
Of the rules.
Other policy changes that were
in the mix work requirements for
Medicaid, even though it's not a
cash assistance program, it's
not like they're drawing cash.
Uh, there's been a push to have
people work.
That's basically they're
targeting the expansion
population, which are
able-bodied adults without kids.
Uh, that's the population we're
looking at work requirements.
Further restrictions on
immigrant enrollment, we'll get
into more detail about this,
some states have used, you know,
um,
Legal immigrants can't get
Medicaid for 5 years after their
status has been established.
Obviously, undocumented
immigrants, we are not allowed
on the program. Some states have
used the Medicaid apparatus.
To enroll undocumented, uh,
individuals, and then, um,
Paid for 100% state funds.
California's a good example.
Illinois dipped their toe in
that.
We've set up a similar program
but not using the Medicaid
apparatus, um, it hasn't started
yet, but they're, we are, we are
concerned at how the feds would
look at that. Basically what
they were saying is, if you have
something like that in your
state.
Then the federal matching rate
would be reduced by
10%.
So pretty big inducement not to
provide health care coverage for
that population in those states.
So slide 18. So what came out?
So these are like a 10 year
window of estimated costs.
In this case, the positive
number or savings.
The negative numbers are
spending.
The big one is work
requirements. I had testified to
LFC basically take that to the
bank and I I think that's gonna
be the case. Take it to the bank
that the expansion population is
gonna have work requirements.
Windows work requirements start
is the next question. And that
was the holdup for the bill, uh,
last week.
The initial proposal was to
basically push those
requirements out until after
this administration leaves
office. And so take the savings
from, you know, years 6 through
10 and say that we're reducing
the deficit.
Because work requirements may
result in people dropping off of
the Medicaid rules because
either they're not complying or
that they don't want to deal
with that hassle factor.
We've run data before, the
majority of people on Medicaid
are working.
Uh, what we're trying to do is
figure out how many are working
uh at the levels that these new
requirements would set.
Um
But to be honest with you, if
you're working
30 hours a week.
At 14 or $15 an hour, you don't
qualify for Medicaid expansion.
You would be above the 180, 38%
of.
Of, uh, the income limit.
So they've said it below that.
So I think at 80 hours over a
two week period is what the the
current provider.
Limiting the provider directed
pay, uh, the provider taxes.
This one
It was really interesting. I
thought for sure that it would.
We'd get dinged on this one. But
essentially what they said is on
a go-forward basis, no new ones.
So again, because
The Medicaid baseline is
growing. This is over a 10 year
period, you know, part of the
baseline growth had CBO assuming
that more states were going to
grow that financing strategy,
and by holding it off, they're
able to reduce the growth rate
of Medicaid, and chalk up those
savings towards the towards the
deficit.
What does that mean for when we
go to get our provider taxes
reauthorized, that's an
outstanding question of whether
they would administratively the
federal government will say no,
this doesn't count, uh, we're
not, uh, renewing it.
So those are some of the big
things that came out of uh the
house. What are the potential
impacts and what are some of our
fiscal estimates on slide 19.
So
We're estimating about 700
million worth of uh reduced
federal, federal spending.
Again, the timing of which is
probably going to be outside of
this next budget that you're
going to be developing. So it's
not something that is
immediately gonna potentially
hit.
Some of these things will just
be a loss in enrollment or a
reduction in enrollment.
So
Maybe less
Need for thinking about
backfilling that, because folks
just don't qualify or don't sign
up anymore.
That said, you'll want to pay
attention to whether they're
getting coverage elsewhere, and
if our uninsured rates get too
high, is what does that do to
our healthcare system if we have
too many people drop off, you
know, we talked about, we've
already dropped 150,000
off the rolls.
It would cost us 200 million if
the Fed said that we started
that new program under the
healthcare affordability Fund,
and they said that's a no no for
Um
This provision that they're
putting into place, we're gonna
reduce your
Your Medicaid match rate by 10%.
Work requirements, um, that
could
Again, drop people off.
Will there be a smooth
transition.
Talked about the, uh, provider
taxes.
There are changes, uh, to the,
the law around how often people
have to sign back up for
Medicaid.
Uh, right now they're allowed to
sign up once a year.
So 12 month continuous
eligibility.
If this would move that back to
6 months.
And we've seen in the past when
states move back and forth
between 6 and 12 months. It has
an impact on how often people
drop off. They'll drop off and
maybe come back on in a couple
of years, so it adds
administrative costs as well.
Um
The FM map changes or per capita
cost uh weren't in the, the
package. So we dodged a bullet
there.
Slide 20
We talked earlier about the snap
matching funds.
Uh, additional
Requirements around uh work, who
needs to work.
Uh, calculations for who gets
what kinds of benefits.
To help pay for deficit
reduction as well as these other
spending increases like on farm
subsidies.
So slide 21 again, federal
budget reconciliation is
something that Congress set up
to fast track legislation within
certain rules on mandatory
spending.
It's a 10 year budget window
that we're talking about, so
when you hear.
Your congressman or US senator
talking about
You know, really big numbers,
those are over a 10 year period.
And I think some of that, you
know, I can remember the
discussion when we're doing,
they were doing the inflation
reduction Act, the bipartisan,
um,
Infrastructure law, they were
using figures that were really
big that everybody thought we're
going to be hitting the street
in the next year, but in fact,
it was like
Increasing the transportation
allotment by 8 to 10% over, you
know, a five-year period until
they went back to reauthorize
it.
We'll take the extra $80 million
but it wasn't like we got a huge
windfall to go and build a loop
around, uh, Albuquerque.
So that's important uh for
discussion with your
constituents as well when people
give you these really big
numbers, the sky is falling.
We want a level set to figure
out is that a 5% reduction over
a 10-year period that starts in
year 6, or is that something we
need to worry about now. So
those those kind of details are
gonna really matter for this
committee's work.
Overall, the package backloads
the spending reductions.
And front loads all of the um
The revenue reductions.
So the federal annual deficits
in the near term will continue
to pile up with those very high
levels, and that presents a long
term risk.
For the country and for us.
Because of our reliance on
federal funds that there's going
to be a day of reckoning.
But too, the payments on the
annual interest of the national
debt.
A huge opportunity cost to be
able to do other things that
society may want and need.
So again, timing is, is gonna be
really critical when we get into
the details of this. My biggest
concern as I sit right here is
the snap, uh, changes. That's a
a radical departure from
Federal welfare policy where
they have owned since the
inception of this program, the
benefit cost.
I get the message on we got to
do a better job if we're gonna
be partners in administering
that.
And I think there's ways to to
focus in on getting better
performance there, but that's a
pretty major, uh, departure that
hasn't had a lot of public
policy discussion, um, in terms
of, uh, that departure. The next
set of slides, and I won't go
through these in detail. These
are kind of take with you. These
are some of the detailed
estimates, you know, they're
putting into place cost sharing
requirements for, you know, the,
the expansion population. It's
not a big huge uh savings.
Um, but you can see line by
line, kind of what our
preliminary analysis is and what
the fiscal impact of that.
Might be.
With that Madam I'm sure I'd be
happy.
Thank you, Charles. Let me just
ask on your preliminary analysis
on your chart, what would be the
total um.
The total that we could possibly
lose. Have you had a chance to
go through that? 700 million on
an annual basis. And that's, and
that's a, a reduction in federal
revenue coming into the state.
But that might not be a
situation that you're set up to
make a decision about
backfilling.
A lot of that's gonna be because
of enrollment declines, where
we're not having to pay the MCOs
for people that aren't on the
program, we'll see modest
savings, uh, to state finances
and the feds will get the bulk
of of those savings. It's a
bigger policy question of
whether folks find other um
health care coverage, uh,
through either the exchange or
their employer because they're
working.
The other thing that's a little
confusing for, at least for me
as I see different effective
dates on these.
That, that's where they're
Kind of pushing the hard
decisions off.
Or when those things would go
into effect.
And quite frankly, they're very
political.
You can see where they where
they where they would hit around
different elections.
Alrighty, let's go to questions
from the committee. I'll start
with Senator Woods. Go ahead.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Charles, when you talk about
Increased debt or selling debt
or the federal.
selling they're dead.
Don't they ever pay any of those
off? I mean, they do, then nurse
in there a savings.
Some time in, in the term of the
deal.
Right, you know, once you pay
off your 10-year treasury.
Then you'll issue another one.
Cause you're, we're underwater
every year.
So, so what you're saying is
they just roll that debt correct
they never.
They never
Terminate the debt, they just
roll the death.
And one of the concerning things
that we're observing right now
is the cost of that debt is
going up.
Which means that people are like
getting shaky about wanting to
buy in.
To our country's debt.
In that dead, Madam Chair, that
debt is held.
Mostly by
US citizens or
With a variety of entities,
including the federal
government's holding some of it.
By taking other revenues for
like social security and.
Those are securities that
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
OK, you're king of the day.
And you can wave your magic
wand. What are the three things
that you believe from a purely
financial.
Perspective, not impacts, not,
not worried about re-election or
all that. If you were just
thinking about the 3 things that
we should do today.
Or we should do first.
What would they be?
Entitlement reform.
More revenue
Figuring out ways to
legitimately slow the growth of
healthcare spending.
That's where the money's at and
Madam Chair
Is that in a, is that in
Based on your
Belief of looking at the records
and I'm not trying to put you on
the spot, but is that in, in an
effort to, should we be thinking
about reducing benefits or
reducing the number of people
that derive a benefit.
Where is the, where's the low
hanging fruit? There's no long
hanging fruit, madam chair.
I think that's why it's
Those decisions are like
automatically off the table,
it's like, do you increase the
retirement age, what kind of
savings do you, do you get from
that?
Nobody's gonna want to reduce
the retirement benefit.
Haven't heard, I've heard
discussion about cutting payroll
taxes, which means you're
cutting the inflow for Social
Security and Medicare kind of
exacerbating the problem.
Very little discussion about
increasing payroll taxes to help
pay for that.
Medicaid, we should have
conversations as a country and
as as a state, even though
we're, we're doing well
financially. We should find
efficiencies, and we shouldn't
shy away from that, in my view.
And if there's ways to make sure
we're ensuring people who
legitimately qualify for the
program, are on it, and those
that don't need to be on a
different program, then we
shouldn't shy away from having
those conversations and figuring
out
If we're going to pay 150% of
Medicare for a bunch of these
services where we've driven up
the unit cost of Medicaid.
Well, what are we getting for
it? Our Medicaid patients able
to get into the doctor faster.
Is it helping stabilize our
healthcare workforce, where, you
know, the physician and TRC is
wanting to go down to Texas
because.
The panel of patients is
disproportionately medicated and
they lose money on Medicaid. Now
they're gonna be doing pretty
good on it. Does that help keep,
you know, our medical uh
providers in the state.
We need to make sure we don't
shy away from asking those
performance questions. Are we
getting what we're paying for?
Yeah, I, I agree with you
wholeheartedly. I don't think
there's any real low hanging
fruit, but I think they're
are definitely first steps.
And
And based on what I've seen
today.
Um, it really doesn't make any
difference whether we want to or
not, we're gonna, we're going to
be.
Forced them to reality here
pretty quick.
Um
I
To Senator Wood a while ago when
I was looking at one of these
charts.
I forget which one it was.
But it reminded me of, and I
don't mean to be political, but
it reminded me of our trying to
impact global
Warming from a New Mexico
perspective. We're such a small
piece.
That trying to affect that
bigger, it's just, I mean, it's,
you can't calculate, you can't
get there from here.
And I think we're, we're, it's
different in that.
This may become reality much
quicker than global warming
might, so.
I, I, we're gonna have to lean
on you pretty hard.
I think, Mame chair to.
Decide what first steps are.
And I don't think they're low
hanging fruit. That was, that
was.
Probably a poor choice of words
on my part, but
There's certainly got to be
first steps that we got to be
taken.
Thank you, Madam Chair. And
Madam Chair, as a country we've
solved this problem in the past.
It was painful politically.
We didn't maintain it. So it's
gonna be even more painful to go
back.
Getting more in a line, and I
think part of the discussion
certainly starting in the 2000s.
Right around the turn of the
century was
Well, deficits are OK as long as
they're not too much.
Of the GDP.
And, you know, the benefits of
the spending.
Outweigh the cost of the debt,
but I just, I look at these
numbers and I'm like, I don't
see how that's sustainable over
the.
Continuing to be sustainable.
Just from where I sit, having to
put together for you all.
We have a um proposed work
program I'd like to talk about
first.
And we'll have uh.
Clinton go through it just
briefly high level and then you
can ask questions as we're going
through it.
Yeah.
Thank you,
Chairman Lindstrom, um.
So
you'll be getting a, a very
brief uh work plan and the
initially uh proposed work dates
that um
are um director and director for
drafting has tried to get dates
that do not conflict with LFC,
LESC, some of the other um NCSL
meetings, um.
And
Looking at this.
The
written work plan in front of
you is rather high level, um, as
you've heard a lot today, this
is a rapidly evolving.
Federal picture that we're
looking at. So, um, we can add
some things as we move forward
and as we fill up, but the this.
Subcommittee was created by
council service just for an
initially for one year. Um, and
when they voted on it when they
did, it was to create an
inventory of federal funds and
provide recommendations with
regard to recurring and
non-recurring funds. That was
the kind of simple broad mandate
that um
Um, our co-chairs were handed,
and as they said, it's a, it's
a, it's a big elephant to, to
start chewing on, so the, the
brief items were to review how
the federal funds have
historically fit into New
Mexico's budget and how those
funds are currently
appropriated. We've started to
get a good feel for that today.
Um, identify the amounts,
timing, structure of the major
major reoccurring federal
funding streams, delving in.
into Medicaid and the Title One,
all the other education grants,
assess the impact and risk of
any of the large one time
appropriations that we've
already seen that maybe um uh
having some changes to it
through ARPA or the um in in in
infrastructure investment and
Jobs Act or um chips, um, some
of the previous acts, um, to,
you know,
a very close eye as things might
be changing of monitoring any
federal executive orders, any
other actions like we've heard
from DFA as their, their ears to
the ground with their agencies
on any grant allocations flowing
out that might disrupt the
previously approved budgeted
federal funding.
Receive updates on any state
federal litigation that will
As impacts on our federal
funding, and then closely follow
the progress of the federal
budget bills as they move
through the House of
Representatives and Senate and
the reconciliation and even the
signing process.
Um, and then drill down on, um,
any number of very high impact
areas. We've looked at as what
we'll maybe go down to Las
Cruces on the borderplex region,
um, for some of the research
funding for and um
And also the FHWA um both the
apportionment that comes in and
the discretionary grants, the
other specific transportation
funding that has a
disproportionate impact on the
state.
All righty, let's go to
questions that the committee,
uh, go ahead, go it.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
couple of things is I hope that
this stays pretty dynamic
because there are going to be
things come up that we haven't
thought about, uh, for instance,
we're getting into fire season
and lots of the fire response
often comes from the federal
government that's somewhat more
in question now, is the state
going to be responsible to
uphold all of those. You know,
that could be a major budget
area. Uh, there are a number of
our nonprofits around the state
that do a whole lot of the
social services and building um
The power of society that rely
on at least partially federal
funding and grants. And if that
money goes away for them, are
those areas we ought to be
picking up as a state. Um,
they're also, I think, are areas
where already we're seeing some
of our small businesses because
of tariffs are closing down,
pulling back, uh, have lower
amounts and stuff, which means
that's less revenue coming in on
the state level as those
businesses close or have to lay
off workers.
or things of that sort. And so I
don't know we need to add those
specifically to the overall
plan, but that we keep it a bit
fluid and flexible as some of
those come up so that we have
those as part of our
discussions.
OK, very good. Um, do we have
anybody else, uh, Senator Munoz
Thank you, Madam Chair.
And Charles, when do you think
that, let me ask you this, when
do you think this uh Senate
reconciliation is gonna happen
cause
I'm getting worried that, that
we should follow Ron Johnson and
Josh Hawley. They're going to be
the lead negotiators in the
Senate in in Hawley is calling
for less Medicaid cuts.
And Johnson is calling for more
of a balanced deficit, and
they're telling me those are
gonna be the lead negotiating.
Negotiators in the Senate
reconciliation and it's gonna
come out at a higher level.
We think those.
When do we, when's your best
guess that we might see a Senate
reconciliation. I mean, I heard
the 4th of July on the radio
this morning coming in, but I
don't know if it will happen
that.
Madam Chair, that's the same uh
target that's been publicly
announced.
Um,
The Senate moving that fast,
that would be pretty, pretty
fast. Um.
I think, you know, the Treasury
has been signaling that they're
going to run out of
Dead authority towards the
middle of August.
That would be another kind of
stopgap thing that I would be
looking towards if July 4th.
They can't resolve those those
issues. They're gonna have to
resolve.
Getting the votes in the Senate.
And is that gonna upset the
apple cart with being able to
get the house on board when the
bill goes back, you know, to,
for conference.
Well Treasury, if they, if those
deadlines slip into mid August,
suddenly find other resources to
be able to
Keep issuing debt, possibly.
But those are the, the kind of
the two timelines that I'm
thinking of sitting here today.
Yeah, I'm just looking at our
timeline on our calendar and I
mean this is gonna be a good
building scenario to grow from,
right? And then did we include
any of the, any of the labs or
military bases that if they do
start getting into a lot of
federal cuts.
What they're
Madam Chair, Senator, that's
where we may see increases
actually coming into our state.
Through, uh, part of that.
National defense spending,
that's usually part of the
appropriations process annually
that they're slipping into the
reconciliation. Same thing with
border security.
OK. And, and then Madam chair,
I, I think.
You know, it's everything's on
the table until it's not on the
table anymore, right, and, and
that's how you're gonna have to
reconcile this, I think, right?
As soon as they move off from
one subject matter to the next
and and left that one behind,
uh, how we're gonna target that,
I think Snap is gonna be the
number one issue we're gonna
have to.
Really get a hold of the 14%
rate really concerns me and I
don't know what the timeline if
they're not gonna extend that
out to the 26 or even further
that.
If we can get that number down
by a certain timeline, I mean,
could we have them maybe come
and present why they numbers are
so high at the next meeting and
what timeline it would take to
reconcile that number to get
that.
down because that's an automatic
350 million to us. Madam Chair,
senator, and that provision in
the current House version kicks
in and and.
Federal fiscal year 28. So it'd
be a, a partial.
State fiscal year 28.
Um, hit when it would go into
effect. So that's what's
important about all of these
different provisions, it's when
do they go into effect and what
does that do for potential
budget development when we start
doing that on September 1st
versus we better be prepared.
For something coming down the
pike.
28
29 and even 30.
Um, and what that could look
like and
Who knows change again.
Madam Chair, and, and those
reconciliation just for snap and
that's run through.
The healthcare authority or is
that that just go through the
healthcare authority.
I mean, if we can reconcile
those numbers and get us, I
don't know if we're ever gonna
get to, to 8 or 6, right? Or I
don't think anybody in any
state's gonna get to the 5%, but
if we can reconcile those within
a 2 year timeline or 1.5 year
timeline in the savings to the
state is just gonna be so great,
and um until the rest of it, I,
I think we're in flux to watch a
lot of things happen and a lot
of.
Fog and
Until the comes out at the other
end and in the timelines are
delayed, we'll have this
committee may have to meet even
next year to see what those
timelines are gonna look like
and what the.
Where the targeted cuts are
coming from, we don't have
enough money to fill every
college that got cut from a
federal grant or program that
they have. I mean, you gotta
worry about our own snap program
feeding people, uh, Medicaid,
the healthcare rules, the rural
hospitals, um, maybe a targeted
list of what.
We think with the reconciliation
that we know Snap would be the
first one, the rural hospital
stuff would be the, the second
one.
Um
That if Medicaid does get cut,
and I can't remember Johnson is
the one or no Holly is pushing
is the one pushing back on, on
the Medicaid cuts.
And so if he gets his way, we
may not see that big of a
Medicaid hit.
In in Johnson is pushing on the
on the federal deficit and and
no telling where that one could
go. But if we can get those.
Those targeted in and start
getting agencies to get there.
Efficiencies in line on snap and
and.
Move forward from there, that
most that the savings there will
be so great that we'll, the
savings that we're gonna save if
we get our stuff in line.
Will help us.
Determine what number we're
gonna backfill.
And that's a really good point,
Senator.
Under any scenario, we should be
thinking about when somebody is
working and no longer qualifies
for Medicaid.
How do we make sure systems are
in place that they continue
continuity of, of getting access
to healthcare, whether that's
through the exchange or through
their their private.
Um, employer.
And we shouldn't wait for budget
reconciliation to have
conversations about what happens
to folks when they no longer
qualify for Medicaid. But in
that scenario, Madam Chair
Charles, we have employees that
are on both.
And they may
Dropped their healthcare to go
to Medicaid, but there are some
that want both and, and so they
may have Medicaid and healthcare
in that system. There could be
program integrity issues that we
need to pay attention to as
well, if somebody got onto
private insurance or the
exchange.
But they're on continuous
eligibility enrollment for
another 8 months that we're
paying the managed care company
for, but they've got care
elsewhere. That's an opportunity
under any scenario for improving
program integrity and saving
money. But, but I don't think
that's illegal.
Mm
If you're eligible for Medicaid
and you insure with private
insurance. I don't think that's
illegal, I think that's just
upping your insurance.
That could be a policy uh
discussion if it's not um
improper under federal law.
OK.
I, I think
It's a guessing game in, in
Some of the things we need to
target, I think are still to
come, but.
I think if we can get some of
those agencies and say how are
you gonna create efficiencies.
So when this does come, and it
does happen, that we get hit the
least, and I think that's for
me, the number one thing is to,
to get ahead of those.
Um, so we're not at 14% or maybe
at 8 or 10.
And get those, those numbers
down. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Don't see anybody else on the
list, but I like that idea. I
like the idea of where we come
into our committee, we've got
that global presentation.
And we then are focusing on that
agency or program that's at
highest risk at this point at
Snap.
And then, what are our options
and if it's bringing in the
agency or the person that's
responsible for that to talk
about this, because at the end
of the day, we're supposed to
come up with some
recommendations.
And that could be it. But if we
start out with the global
perspective.
And then get into and and that's
what I mean by kind of a systems
approach, so we're not just
doing a shotgun, um.
When we're taking on these
different high risk, uh,
components.
A couple of other things that I
think we need to look at as
well.
I um I sure want to see that
chart of all federal funds so we
know what we're actually have
for our state.
But we, um, need to take a peek
at some of these tax policies
also.
Um
You know, if we're gonna be
concerned as a state ourselves
about revenue at some point.
What is it that's happening in
our tax policy.
That affects that. I think a
whole lot. I mean, you and I had
a discussion right before this
meeting on what has been passed
in the last few years, and you
told me it was over a billion
dollars and that that's a lot.
That's a lot for just a few
years. I think we need to look
at that, and what is it
effective and what's the
outcome, what's the return on
all of that and have a and have
some sense of it, uh, as we're
going forward so we know how
much money we might have.
Uh, available to us.
Um
But is there, is there any other
questions and and I like the
idea of keeping this fluid
because things bubble up as we
start talking, um, and things
that we wanna look at maybe at
the next meeting and certainly,
you know, the members are
welcome to put that forth.
You know, and, uh, we can look
at it then at the next meeting,
we just need to know what it is.
So is there any other questions
on the work program that the OK,
let's look at the dates that
have been and as uh Clinton has
told me we can't.
Change these, I mean, it's like
an act of Congress. I'm gonna
try to change a date for
anything looks like the whole
calendar, which you all should
have a copy of now.
Yes.
Is, uh, is it?
cemented now and we can't make
any changes. We're close to
being.
Madam Chair, nothing is official
until the Legislative council,
um, gives their blessing to it
and.
OK, I think when we get to the
point that we're passing it out
in writing, it's probably pretty
official at at that point.
So, uh, for the next meeting,
we've got that on July 1 and 2,
which uh Senator Souls will be
chairing. He's got that in Santa
Fe, if you wanna keep it in
Santa Fe.
Uh, the following is July 31
through August 1st and I wanna
Ask for some suggestions on that
location. I, I like Santa Fe,
but I'll tell you this is an
awful expensive place for hotel
rooms, if you're having to stay
up here, it gets pretty wild,
especially if you're got other
things going on up here,
community events. Senator.
Uh, I would suggest, uh,
Either Taos or Red River.
On that July 31st August 1st.
Well, how about Red River?
We'd better check the room
rates.
OK, well, let's see a show of
hands. I may want to go to uh
Riodos so raise your hand.
Red River, raise your hand.
OK.
Why don't we, um,
Can can you check on that and
see where we can get an actual
location and cause I mean, we're
kind of late in the game, aren't
we? Just try to get those
locations now.
Let's let's have him look at it.
It'll either be Red River or
Riodoso for that 3rd meeting,
and did you want to stay in
Santa?
I'm happy here or other places,
it doesn't matter to me.
It's your.
Meetings.
Well we're doing Las Cruces then
in October October will be a
little cooler in the just
say. And then we've got uh
August 28th, uh, that one has
been uh slated for Albuquerque
and I let you all know that
Santa Anna uh a star has asked
if, you know, we're interested,
they'd host us there.
Then October is the 20th through
the 22nd, that'll be down in Las
Cruces.
And then November 6th will be
back up here.
So.
Um
Any questions or? OK, can we
have a motion to approve both
the work program and our
calendar, please.
motion by Senator Townsend,
seconded by Senator Munoz.
Any opposition seeing none.
We're gonna, this, this has been
approved, and I anticipate we
may have a couple more, um,
advisory members for our next
meeting.
I know that they're probably be
2 more from the house that will
be joining us as advisory.
So with that being said, I'm
looking forward to this
committee. It looks like we have
a good group here, very serious,
hardworking group with lots to,
lots to add to this issue, big
task for us, but look forward to
it and thank you everybody for
today.
Thank you.
Thank you.
