this morning, I'd like to ask
the committee to please
introduce yourselves. Boy,
that's.
Good morning, Madam Chair.
Um, my name is Jim Townsend, uh,
served in the Senate District
34.
Eddie and Otero Counties, um,
I think we have some interesting
conversations in the next few
weeks as we go through this, and
I look forward to it. Thank you
very much.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
good morning, everyone. Uh, Mark
Duncan, I represent, uh, part of
San Juan County, Northwest New
Mexico.
Good morning, everyone.
Buenosia, Cindy Nova, state
senator for New Mexico Senate
District 9, representing
Sandoval and Bernalillo
counties. It's great to meet
you, be here with you all.
Good morning, Madam Chair. I'm
Catherine Brown. I represent in
the House of Representatives,
uh, a good portion of
southeastern New Mexico and um
very um
Expecting to learn a lot on this
committee. Thank you.
Good morning, everyone. My name
is Ridata, I was in House
District 34 in Southern Indiana
County, and I'm just here to see
what, uh, what updates are
coming our way, and I look
forward to the information and
uh and I look forward to working
with everyone. Thank you, man.
Thank you. I'm Bill Souls, state
senator from the Losusetts area,
beautiful Oregon mountain desert
peaks national monument down in
that area, uh, was very honored
to be named as one of the
co-chairs for this. I think this
is gonna be incredibly important
as we're setting up budgets for
next year and how New Mexico
responds to things that are
happening at the federal level.
Um, my hope is that we stay
focused on how this affects and
how we're going to manage in New
Mexico, uh, and
is not a committee to debate
whether the policy at federal
level is right or wrong or
anything like that. We're here
for New Mexico, our federal
delegation is gonna be fighting
that fight. This really is gonna
be about how do we respond? How
do we, uh, determine to use the
cash reserves that we have, uh,
to, to backfill areas to look at
which things are important for
New Mexico. And where are all
those areas? Um, I think similar
to the chair will mention I've
gotten
lots of emails and conversations
with people, where they're
already seeing the, the cuts in
different things. And so, you
know, this committee is going to
be really to get a handle on
what those things are and how as
New Mexico, we're very fortunate
that we are a very wealthy
state.
But that doesn't mean we have
unlimited wealth and how are we
going to manage to keep New
Mexico, uh, prosperous. Thank
you.
Thank you, Senator, and I'm
Representative Patty Landstrom.
I represent House District 9,
which is uh Gallup McKinley
County.
Uh, been in the legislature a
long time and my background is
budget and finance, uh, for the
state of New Mexico.
And what this whole federal
discussion reminds me of is uh
in 2017 when uh oil prices
plummeted here in the state and
I remember then our, our former
LFC director and former HAFC uh
chair came to me and said, we
have trouble in River City here,
and I said, what's that? He
says, we're, the term they used
is we're kiting checks, and I
said, what does that mean? And
they said, we've got, we're
spending more than what we've
got.
And so I said, well, we need to
shore this up.
And we need to make sure that
we're focused on what the
priorities are for the state of
New Mexico.
And I think that's what we're
gonna do here, um, O chair and I
agree that we're gonna focus on
what's best for the state of New
Mexico, and I certainly agree
that that the federal delegation
do their work and in the manner
that they want to do it.
But we're gonna look at a lot of
different things, uh, during
this interim for this committee.
Some of the things I um would
like to look at. We'll have our
work program.
And it's gonna be things just
like tax cuts that have been uh
done this last couple of years
and how much that affects our
budget.
Whether or not we've got staff
that is working on out your
forecasts. I want to see out
your forecasts. I want to know
what we're gonna be doing or
what they propose the spending
patterns will look like.
3 to 5 years from now, we need
to be able to look at things
like that.
I want to make sure that we're
doing some stress testing on
these different programs. I
introduced stress testing to the
LFC a few years ago and it's
worked well, and I want to
continue that with this program.
Um, I want to understand what
the multiplier effects are.
When we have um reduction in
Medicaid dollars into rural
communities, what is that
multiplier look like?
So we're gonna be looking at
things more than just
presentations of numbers, we'll
be looking a little deeper.
Those who know me well and have
worked with me for a long time.
No, I have a common uh common
statement, what a success looked
like.
And that's more than just
looking at spreadsheets.
So I'd like to go ahead and ask
the first uh panel to come on
up, but before we do that, let's
have Clinton and his staff
introduce themselves, please. Go
ahead.
Thank you, Madam co-chair, and
thank you, co-chair Souls on
Clinton Turner, um, I'm the
staff with this interim for this
subcommittee. I'm happy to
serve, um, all.
You gainer and.
The other comment I need to um
make sure everybody understands
is that because neither the
senator and I have ever been
co-chairs before we've either
been the top dog or no dog on
the committees. What we want to
do is switch back and forth by
meeting dates instead of uh
going back and forth inside of
an agenda, so today I have the
honor of um chairing and then
next time for the next meeting,
it'll be senator and and back
and forth, but we'll work that
out, but we will
I think that'll be the easiest
way to do this. So next meeting,
our chair will be Senator Souls.
So with that being said, if we
could, Wayne, you're up first.
And the presentation looks like
this.
Go ahead.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the subcommittee. My
name is Wayne Props. I'm with
the Department of Finance and
Administration.
Uh, thank you very much for
inviting us to your inaugural
meeting, uh,
My position as DFA secretary, I
was very happy to hear that the
constitute the subcommittee, to
say the least, it's very timely.
And look forward to working with
you and your staff throughout
the interim to provide you
whatever information you need.
Uh, we've already been working
quite collaboratively with our
friends and colleagues at the
Legislative Finance Committee. I
look forward to doing the same
with Mr. Commit as well. Miss,
uh, Madam Chair, last, uh, fall,
I think it was, I was preparing
to present to the legislative
Finance Committee on the state
of
The state's budget, um, and I
told the committee at that time.
Uh, that I was, I was driving
into work that morning, uh, I
said to myself, I had picked a
pretty good time to be DFA
secretary. We've had record
revenue growth over the last 3
years.
And even though that revenue
growth is slowing. Uh, we are
still projecting moderate
revenue growth well into the
future.
Uh, we have near record
reserves.
You have provided uh tax
reductions, uh.
across the board for many New
Mexicans, tax rebates.
The rating agencies have
improved the state's outlook
from stable to positive.
Uh, with the potential for an
actual increase in our bond
rating later on.
Uh, this year.
Uh, and, uh, Madam Chair and
members of the subcommittee, um,
we've been able to fund most of
Capital Outlay through General
Fund, which is something we
haven't been able to do in the
past.
Uh, less borrowing for the state
as a result of that.
Uh, and also, Madam Chair and
members of the subcommittee as a
result of the work of the
legislature and the executive.
Most agency budgets are doing
quite well.
Uh, so I picked a good time with
the DFA secretary.
Sitting here before you today,
Madam Chair, members of the
subcommittee.
I may need to rethink that, uh,
a little bit, given some of the
challenges that we'll be talking
about.
Uh, but overall, Madam Chair, I,
I do want to say that even
though we are facing some
challenges that we're going to
talk about, and you're going to
get much more in depth.
Over the next few weeks on.
Uh, the state of the state's
budget.
Um, is still strong.
Uh, and we do have options,
Madam Chair, that perhaps we
didn't have in 2017, and some of
the other lean times uh that I
remember as well.
I'm gonna provide a very high
level uh presentation today, uh,
Madam Chair, you have, uh,
subject matter experts sitting
with me today and, and others on
your agenda, uh, for the rest of
the morning and afternoon, that
you'll be hearing from people
with much more experience in
Medicaid.
Uh, snap, uh, and other areas of
the state's budget, um, and also
a more familiar with what is
happening at the federal level,
then perhaps I am, but I want to
give a high level overview of
What comes into the state? What
federal money comes to New
Mexico, how it flows into the
state.
Talk a little bit about um what
we are hearing uh as a result of
the House of Representatives'
actions on House Bill 2, a
couple of weeks ago.
I will say, Madam Chair, and
this will come as no surprise to
you. This is an extremely, we
are in the 1st quarter of the
game.
The House has acted, and the
Senate will need to act.
And the, perhaps there'll be a
conference committee, uh,
between the two.
Uh, and then of course, the
president will have his input as
well, so we are tracking this on
a daily basis, I'm gonna talk a
little bit more about what we've
been doing over the last several
months to track what we think we
know, um, but it is, as I said,
a very fluid situation.
So Madam Chair, I'll, uh, turn
to slide 2. This is actually
based on a presentation that we
made to the House Judiciary
Committee in January. So we've
been talking to the legislature
about this for, for some time.
This isn't our first
conversation with you.
And again, hope to have many,
many more.
But the types of federal funding
coming into New Mexico generally
are blocks block grants, uh,
that provide fixed funds for
broad purposes.
Uh, competitive grants.
Uh formula grants that are
allocated based on criteria set
by the Congress.
Um, and in terms of the
characteristics of certain block
grants and competitive formula
grants. There's funding for
specific projects with detailed
application requirements.
Uh, for grants, there can be
grants that require state,
tribal, local cost sharing.
Uh, and there's potential, uh,
Madam Chair and members of the
subcommittee funding that
requires a recipient to meet
certain federal conditions such
as DOT, highway funding, uh tied
to a minimum drinking age of 21.
So that's a broad overview of
the types of federal funds that
we see coming into the state of
New Mexico.
On slide 3, you'll see how they
actually make it into the
state's coffers.
We have direct payments to
individuals and the states such
as Social Security.
Federal retirement, Medicaid,
Medicare, SNAP, etc.
Uh, we have, uh, grants such as,
uh, Medicaid and and highway
programs.
Uh, we have procurements that uh
for federal purchases of goods
and services.
Uh, we also have, of course,
salaries and wages that are paid
to our federal military
personnel and federal civilian
employees.
We received these funds in two
primary ways. One is
reimbursement, we're paid back,
um, but in some cases, we also
uh receive advance payments for
the federal funds that come into
the state of New Mexico.
On slide
4, Madam Chair, members of the
subcommittee.
Um, a very recent report that
was published by the Federal
Funds Information for states.
It's the state policy report May
of 2025.
It's based on uh FY23 data,
which is the most recent data uh
that the study relies on, uh,
but the study confirmed that New
Mexico is number one.
In terms of federal funding
coming into the state.
For every $1 in taxes that we
send to the federal government,
we receive approximately $3.21.
That includes those direct
payments, but it also includes,
uh, of course, our, the funding
for our military bases, our
national labs, uh and other uh
items that the committee
subcommittee is familiar with.
Um, so, overall, our total state
budget $33.16 billion.
And the total federal funding
portion of that is 14.44
billion.
Or roughly 44%.
You'll see on slide 5, I'm not
gonna go through each and every
one of these, uh, you're very
familiar with them and as you,
as a result of your work during
the interim on uh House
Appropriations finance and a
finance committee, uh, etc.
um, house uh LFC, but you'll see
the uh reliance that some of our
agencies have or the amount of
federal funding that they rely
on for their budgets, you see,
Department of Homeland Security,
for example, uh 61% of their
budget is.
federal funding.
Energy, minerals, natural
resources department, 57% of
their budget.
Uh, the environment department
41%.
Uh, and public education, uh,
roughly 50%.
So, Madam Chair and members of
the subcommittee telling you
what you already know, uh, New
Mexico has a a.
Great reliance on federal
funding to fund the services
that we provide to the citizens
of the state of New Mexico.
On slide 5.
Uh, a little bit more uh detail,
um, some notable federal
allocations for the FY 26
budget, uh, which was just
passed during the last session
and signed by the governor.
The Healthcare authority is
expected to receive, uh,
When it was passed, it was
expected to receive 8.8 billion
Medicaid funding, 1.4 billion uh
for income support,
uh, Department of Workforce
Solutions was expected to
receive $26 million for
employment services.
Madam Chair, in terms of, as you
are well aware, um, a number of
state.
positions uh employees are
funded through federal funds.
Wanted to give you an idea of uh
how many of those are funded
with federal funds.
Of a total of as of May 2025, a
total of 22,0479 total positions
in state government.
Uh, we, our best estimate is
2015 of those employees are 100%
funded by federal funds.
Uh, an initial, an additional
3830 positions are at least
partially so not only are our
agencies themselves are reliant
on federal funding, but the
employees that carry out the
programs that you have
authorized, uh, agencies to
carry out, uh, many of them are
also funded through federal.
On slide 6.
I just want to talk a little
bit. I, I mentioned it in my
opening remarks about what we
are doing at the Department of
Finance Administration.
To be as prepared as possible,
uh, for reductions in federal
funding coming into New Mexico,
and a number of staff behind me,
uh, Madam Chair and members of
the subcommittee, I'm not going
to introduce them all, but I do
wanna acknowledge Mark Melhoff,
who is the director of our
financial control division at
DFA.
He is our lead on tracking, uh,
reductions in federal funding.
Uh, he is our lead in
communicating uh with agencies,
not just executive agencies, but
all agencies.
Gathering information from them,
uh, and, uh,
Ultimately providing it to you,
uh, as policy makers, um, as
that information becomes
available. We have a federal
funds.
Tracking working group that we
established in January of this
year.
Uh, I'm not gonna go through,
um, every item on the slide, uh,
but you'll see that we are
trying to do the best job we can
to again gather the information.
Which is often incomplete and
contradictory. We've seen a
number, we've had a number of
agencies reach out, it's sort of
slowing down now, but
particularly in the beginning,
January, February, and March, we
have uh agency reach out saying
that such and such a grant had
been canceled, they hadn't
received the money. Uh, we
worked with them, uh, worked
with our federal delegation who
worked with the governor's DC
office, uh, and after a few
actually was restored and came
through. So,
It's an imperfect information
gathering process, but I do
think that over the last few
months we've been able to refine
that.
Uh, Mark holds regular meetings
with agency CFOs, which is very
important.
Believe it or not, he has 2 to 3
halls, so we do have a, I think
a decent uh outreach effort to
uh agencies to get information
from them, uh, synthesize that,
uh.
See what's uh really happening
coordinate with the legislative
Finance Committee and others
that's trying to verify that uh
and ultimately, as I said, Madam
Chair, members of the
subcommittee to present that in
a way that is of use to the
governor as policy makers.
One slide
Um
7.
Uh, this is what we've been
seeing. Uh, we've been seeing
delays.
Uh, we've been seeing
cancellations, uh
We've also been seeing uh
reductions.
We received notice last week
that 4 Department of Workforce
solution grants totaling about
$8 million.
were terminated.
Uh, we received information this
morning that the Department of
Information and Technology had
been notified that one of its
grants for about $8 million.
Had been canceled, uh, those are
the types of things we don't
expect to come back. Uh, we
think when they get a
cancellation letter, that means
it's overall, uh, to date, uh,
Madam Chair, members of the
subcommittee in terms of
outright cancellations of grants
in particular, we
Uh, I will say though, Madam
Chair, that again at the
beginning uh in January,
February and March.
As I said, we saw a lot of this
is happening and then.
And
It was pulled back.
Uh, it's starting to see, you
know, um, Madam Chair, that, uh,
starting starting to come
through and it's clear that the
The money from the
slide 8.
And uh I
9, I'm not gonna spend a lot of
time on these because again, I
know you have a panel on this
this afternoon.
Uh, I'm sure at some point and
uh hopefully not too distant
future, you'll want to have uh
Secretary de Blasi and other
subject matter expertise come in
and talk to you, particularly
about Medicaid, uh, and snap.
Uh, but based on the latest
information we have on after
passage of House Bill 1, we are
seeing a potential for cost
sharing.
a couple days, um, community
engagement requirements.
Eligibility to determinations,
uh provider taxes, um,
retroactive coverage uh related
to uh Medicaid.
Uh, and then
Regard to
SNAP program.
Uh, we are, um, seeing the
potential for
Uh, overall reduction in the SAP
program of almost $300 billion.
Um
And um,
the next 10 years, uh, which
represents a 30% uh
Reduction
Programmatic and programmatic
cost shares, uh.
Administrative cost shares and
work requirements, uh, if those
are
To you, uh, through the
legislative process at the
federal level, uh, and are
eventually signed into law, uh,
that those changes will have a
significant impact on the
revenue. Somewhat hesitant to
put a number on some of these
things, Madam Chair.
Because again, as I said, this
situation and the information
changes on a daily, sometimes
hourly basis, they all are.
Well aware of the lobbying
process. There's a lot of
jockeying going on there.
Certainly will be changes, uh,
when the bill is considered by
the Senate, um, and before that,
but
Um
Even uh with some changes, I
think it's fair to say that we
anticipate significance uh
impact to the state of New
Mexico as a result.
Also, Madam Chair, on uh slide,
I think it's slide 10, um.
too contains a reduction in the
federal.
On shore royalty rates.
Um, that rated at about 12%
since, uh
Uh, 1920.
Um, but in, uh, 20022.
Uh, the minimum royalty rate for
new teen% from that 12.5%.
Uh house Bill 2 proposes
lowering that back to 12.5%.
Uh, not surprisingly, Madam
Chair remembers a subcommittee,
uh, this will almost certainly
also have an impact on revenues
coming into the state.
Um
We're working closely with the
state land office, um.
Natural resources.
To try to quantify what that
potential loss that could be.
Um, the best number we have
right now, and I realized a few
weeks be able to provide a
little bit more uh detail um and
specificity.
Uh, but we estimate that that
could be a loss to this data of
between 600 million to 1.3
billion over it. So that is uh
something uh that we are also
Watching a very closely, um,
And
here, um,
That's what I'm gonna cover
today, um.
I'll wrap up by saying, um,
Uh, that I do, do you still
think it's a good time to be DFA
secretary, uh, despite the I say
that because I've worked with
many of you over the years.
You've been through this before.
Now.
You got the finance committee
who will also be working uh
on these issues.
Uh, I think we need to continue
to strengthen our information
gathering as we move forward.
And our information sharing with
you, and I fully commit to
sharing whatever we have uh with
you, Madam Chair and member of
this, it's in everybody's
interest to.
To do so.
Uh, I do think, um, Madam Chair,
that we need to begin to
prioritize.
gaps, uh, will need to be filled
and that we can fill.
In the upcoming legislative
session.
I think the, the events at the
federal level.
Uh, we'll probably lead uh
agency.
Um
to how they're developed and
lesson, I think you have no
doubt that you will have
heightened scrutiny.
On agency budget requests for FY
27, but I assure you that the
executive will.
as well.
And that goes for not only
recurring.
Increases
Uh non-recurring expenditures
because we
Last revenue, consensus revenue
forecasts indicated that we
might have anywhere from 2 2.5
to $3.3 billion in
non-recurring.
Money available in FY 27.
That's obviously in the bucket
that we may need to go to, uh,
to fill they become.
More evident going forward.
I would also say I'm out of a
chair and members of the
subcommittee, uh, that that
would also apply to capital
outlay, 27.
Uh, but in the end, uh, Madam
Jared, I, I appreciate, uh,
noting that it's not just about
the numbers.
Quick story, uh, it was very uh
ills signing process we're
meeting a few of us, we're
meeting with the governor.
We're going over a house bill
too at the time.
It was in the evening in a trash
pickup of Santa Fe.
And she told a story about a
young man that she met.
who was trying to get into the
shelter.
Um, she, of course, being the
governor had to talk to him.
and find out his story, which he
did.
a young man, she was surprised
that he was actually from Santa
Fe.
She doesn't actually need a lot
of homeless people in Santa Fe
who are actually from Santa Fe.
Uh, but
estranged from his family, uh,
substance.
A
The man didn't know who, and so
she got this story from him, he
had a medical medical condition
and ever since, but he didn't
know who he went away, um.
Somebody approached the young
man and said the governor said
she saw this person kind of
walked behind.
Structure
And a few minutes later come
out.
To the
Even with the challenges that he
was facing.
Different way.
That's the humanity that we're
dealing with, uh, the decisions
that are being made at the
federal level.
Uh, as you said, uh, Mr.
Co-chair.
Um, but we do control what uh we
do here in New Mexico going
forward, and working through the
issues that will be.
Uh, so, Madam Chair, uh, thank
you again for the opportunity to
be here, uh, again that.
Uh, to ensure that New Mexico
continues to thrive, which we
think we have enough.
Money, uh, both coming in, I
that we can weather better.
Thank you, Wayne. I, I'd like to
go through all the presentations
before we go to questions from
the committee, but there is one
note I'd like you to, to take uh
Wayne is as you're participating
with us throughout the interim,
could you also keep us informed
of any potential litigation. I
know we've released contracts.
Money may not be there, and we
need to know.
So, Charles.
They came out of the chair, I'm
gonna make a couple of opening
comments and then turn over the
presentation to Mr. Shinye,
who's our point person on
federal funds, um, for this, for
this interim.
So
This past session, you passed
House Bill 2, which for
recurring spending included over
$33 billion.
In total funds. There's a little
bit of double counting in that
between transfers, but
You know, federal funds
constituted a much larger share
of that total then what we
normally focus on, but
10.6 billion federal funds over
12 billion.
As
Secretary Props talked about.
There's a lot of uncertainty out
there right now.
And they're what feels like in
our chairs, like two types of
chaos. That's that's coming at
us.
The first is
Through what we'll discuss later
this afternoon, and that's the
federal budget reconciliation
process.
Where they're looking at making.
Uh, changes in a significant way
to mandates code.
But then there's the daily
things that you're actually
hearing from your constituents,
probably on of what's actually
related to budget and that's the
new administration coming in and
scrutinizing.
The
Spending increases that occurred
under the last administration
and trying to um.
Cancel
stall.
Hold up those federal grants in
an effort to offer up savings
for part of budget
reconciliation.
So, I kind of think I'm
predicting that that level of
like, you know, the
Broadband office gets their
digital equity grant.
You know, plan
Grant canceled.
That's gonna go away like secret
prop said, that's gonna be.
Likely offered up as part of the
budget reconciliation through a
process called impoundment where
basically agencies legally are.
Authorized to not spend money
that's been appropriated by
Congress, but Congress can't
come back.
And say, we don't want to
appropriate that money anymore,
we want to direct it to
someplace else, so that's kind
of what you're seeing with those
grant programs as part of the
other thing you're going to be
hearing from constituents on
Is the president's um
Normal budget recommendation.
I see presidents regardless of
party, budget, recommendations
to Congress, largely as
political documents that
Congress really drives the train
when it comes to annual spending
decisions. So it's easy for a
president to come in to say
we're going to cancel the entire
Head Start program, or we're
going to dramatically increase
the spending on a social
domestic.
Uh, welfare program.
And did not come to fruition. We
shouldn't discount it in its
totality, it's signaling, you
know, the executive branch, um.
But radical changes are gonna be
hard in the current uh political
landscape. So that's kind of
like a a side a side issue that
we'll need to monitor. But the
main things that you'll want to.
Be paying attention to or the
budget reconciliation process
and any cancellation of uh
projects that have already been
authorized. The other thing that
you'll want to pay attention to
is you're gonna hear numbers
like.
You know, a university.
Uh, New Mexico State got $25
million of research grants
canceled. You're gonna want to
know is that $25 million an
annual number, or is that over a
five-year period.
Very different.
Kind of number of what you're
dealing with.
What is it for?
What do we know about its
effectiveness?
Is that part of our
prioritization in terms of, is
that something the state should
be in the business of funding.
Or not
You know, so hopefully, through
this interim, I know LFC will be
very focused on developing a
framework.
for
Uh, understanding these federal
funding changes and setting up a
prioritization process very
focused on.
At the end of the day, what are
the results of federal funding
and is that something that
should get the same kind of
scrutiny for backfilling as a
new program coming in asking for
uh general fund.
The types of federal funds is
secretary props talked about it
are very important.
We tend to pay more attention to
federal funds where we're having
to put up a match.
Medicaid is, is a good example
of that, or where there's been a
historical clear.
Uh, delineation for the
legislature to play a role in
appropriating those federal
funds, temporary assistance for
needy families is a good example
of that, where you basically
appropriate every nickel.
of that block grant. Uh, you
control it.
I'll come back to that issue in
in a second.
Uh, cause there's other block
grants out there.
There's other grants where the
executive is applying to the
federal government for what are
called discretionary grant
opportunities. Sometimes those
come in the middle of the year,
sometimes we know about it
through the budget process and
put it in the, the, the budget.
Uh, House Bill 2, and then
there's a myriad of federal
funding that's coming outside of
our entire ap is a good example
of that, uh, where it's not even
built into House Bill 2, but
those are kind of been
historically seen as direct
payments to beneficiaries. We
pay for the administrative costs
and account for that.
Head start totally bypasses
state government and goes
directly from the federal
government, local entities that
provide the services, there
could be other local governments
getting, um, federal funds
outside of the normal budget
process as well through.
I think the intent of this
morning's hearings is to kind of
level set.
To help the committee understand
the lay of the land.
For
Which agencies are getting how
much federal funds and kind of
where should you pay attention?
Um,
Primarily in Medicaid, we would
recommend as well as with snap.
Um, but basically set the
foundation for the current what
I call the current situation,
and then this afternoon we'll
get into more detail about what
kinds of policy changes we could
be facing, um, and, and what the
implication.
Historically, the legislature's
role in appropriating federal
funds has been limited. Up
until, uh, a Supreme Court
ruling.
Um, regarding the ARPA.
Um, state and local, uh,
basically a block grant that we
got during the court ruling came
out and basically said, if
there's a discretionary aspect
to federal funds.
That gives you an option even to
spend within like a band.
That the legislature has the
appropriate outside of that ARPA
appropriations, you've not
exercised that for some of
these, um, other programs. So
you'll hear Mr. Senna talk about
Title one as an example, where
there's a myriad of federal
grants that come in, and there
is a set aside for what are
usually called statewide
activities.
The agencies have historically
exercised broad discretion over
how to allocate those within the
the program's, uh, parameters.
That's something that you may
want to look at as a committee
on whether the legislature
should start exercising, uh,
that power that the Supreme
Court says you have.
As part of an exercise for
dealing with federal funds.
Like I said, LFC will be um
looking and developing and
working on kind of a framework
for how to analyze federal
funds.
At a prioritized.
What should New Mexico pay for
if something goes away should
New Mexico backfill $8 million
for.
Um, a grant for broadband
digital.
Or is that a priority for that
$8 million better spent on a
public safety facility and a.
Uh, community impacted by crime.
You know, you've got to come to
some agreement on how you're
going to prioritize those types
of day at the end of the day, I
would encourage you to
prioritize things, bang for your
buck.
Um, and if you've got a, a
federal program that's been in
operation for a period of time
that can't demonstrate those
results. I would question
whether they should be getting
lost federal funds. So let me
turn it over to Eric to get into
some of the more uh nuanced
details of of where those
federal funds are and how.
Good morning, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. My
name is Eric Shenya, I'm the LFC
analyst. I cover mostly HCA, but
as you heard, I'm also um I've
been.
selected as the point person for
LFC on uh federal funds, so.
I'll be probably working with
you guys quite a bit and I'm
pleased to be here, to be on
your first panel.
Um
Before I get started, I want to
mention the uh LFC staff are
tracking all of the movements
and federal funds, um, as far as
the reconciliation bill that
passed, uh.
Uh, last week, out of the House
of Representatives and any other
federal changes that might have
um
uh all of our analysts have, um,
federal funds included in their
work plans, um, so we'll be
looking at that, um, as a
committee, uh, pretty closely.
I also wanted to mention that
I'll be presenting kind of at a
high level working down and kind
of zooming in, uh, to more of
the, the stuff on here. I was
wondering, can I actually get
the presentation on the screen.
Um,
And I'll, I'll be kind of
zooming in.
Uh
closer
Uh
Then I will present later on on
Medicaid 10 1 and get into some
of the specifics of how uh
federal funds kind of interact
with Medicaid and then also snap
on that. Then later in the
afternoon, Charles will be going
into um.
The kind of bigger picture, he's
gonna be getting into the
details.
Of reconciliation or the bill
that they're calling the one big
beautiful bill act now, um.
And he'll be getting into that
in more detail.
Also want to mention that almost
uh not as we've already said,
almost nothing is set in stone
right now. It's a complete
moving target, um, you know, the
House passed their
reconciliation bill. The Senate
still has to get a word in, um.
And
But we are tracking all these
things as they're moving
through, uh,
Pretty care. First of all, I
just wanted to start off on
slide one in your presentation.
Um
Going to give a big picture
overview of where the state is
most at risk in terms of federal
funds.
Uh, I give you a table there.
Uh, it's broken out by policy
area as it appears in House Bill
2 by funding.
As you can see, of all the main
policy areas within the state
budgets, health and human
services has the largest share
of federal funds at about 11.8
billion.
Higher education institutions
come in 2nd, and you can see
them all the way on the right
hand side there.
Um, education in public schools
have about 614 million in
transportation of about 580
million.
On the public school thing, as
Charles said, some of that
money.
Um
Moving on to slide 3.
Zooming in a little bit further.
To the HHS blocks of agencies.
It is clear that the health care
authority contains most of the
federal revenue received by
state agencies at about 11.1
billion. However, given the
scale of federal funds in HCA it
is easy to overlook that the
Department of Health includes
about 189.5 million, um, in
early childhood education.
Uh, million in in there. And
also, if you look at um some of
these other agencies like, say,
Workforce Solutions department,
you know, if there were to be a
um economic downturn or
recession, you would see that
federal.
Moving on to the next slide,
slide 4.
Zooming in a little further, you
can see that nearly all of the
federal revenue in the
healthcare authority.
Um, and this is broken out by
program within the healthcare
authority, uh, nearly all of the
federal revenue is contained
within the medical assistance
program or Medicaid.
However, one significant area
that we have considerable
exposure to, um, Zin the income
support program, and that's for
your supplemental nutrition
assistance program or your SNAP
program.
Um, and that's, that's been, uh.
That's a pretty big piece of
this reconciliation bill that I
think is gonna affect the state,
um, pretty significantly and
we'll get into some of the
specific details on that, uh, on
my neck, um, and then also I
wanted to mention, you know,
another significant piece of the
reconciliation bill.
Is the Medicaid piece and
Charles will get into some of
the specifics on uh Medicaid
when he gets into his uh
presentation as far as
Uh, moving on to slide 5.
Uh, so early childhood education
funding, um, within child.
Within early childhood, the
state has done a lot to insulate
itself from the threat of
federal funds.
Reductions with the creation of
the ECECD fund.
Which has a projected balance of
about 9.6 billion, uh, in FY 26.
However, there are exposed areas
within the department, including
the federally supported family
infant and toddler program, and
federal revenues for childcare
assistance.
Additionally, and earlier
version of the president's
budget, which has since been
pulled back at a, um,
Uh, was contemplating possibly
pulling back on uh Head Start
fund, moving on to slide 6,
another area of significant
exposures within uh higher
education.
Um, much of the revenue, much of
the other state funds revenue,
11 thing I wanted to point out
on this slide is you'll see at
UNM.
Uh, there's a significant amount
of other state funds revenue. A
lot of that money is actually
coming from Medicaid and so
that's an area that we'll need a
kind of uh keep an eye on, uh,
going forward as some of these
Medicaid reductions, uh, come
into place.
As of May, UNM reported losing
about $36 million from grants
NMSU 27.2, and then I tech about
2.5 million in federal grant
revenue. And we'll have, we're
having our analysts kind of dig
into these numbers, little tells
on some of this stuff.
Um, and additionally the federal
government proposed to reduce
the uh the indirect portion of
grants, uh, from 50% to 15%.
Which that covers all of the
overhead costs of the
universities, and that sort of
thing. And so, if they reduce
that 50% to 15%, that.
Pay a lot of attention to.
Moving on to slide 7.
Department of Transportation.
Uh, NMDOT's operating budget
includes federal formula
allocations for highway
construction and transit as of
earlier this year and I'm DOT
reported formula funding had not
been impacted with the exception
of agreements to build out
electric vehicle charging
stations.
The budget blueprint from the
White House did not include cuts
to formula grants, uh, NMDOT
indicates it has been told
future obligation, some
discretionary grant funding has
been placed on hold by the
Federal Highway Administration.
Um, and the state has some
discretionary grants, including
for the replace the Interstate
25 bridge over Noel Canyon and
for the new uh.
Highway near the Santa tree
supportive entry.
Uh, moving on to slide 8.
Department of Health revenue
sources, most federal revenues
and DOH are in the public health
and epidemiology and response
programs.
GOH has received some federal
communications council and
grants, however, the additional
federal.
additional federal guidance is
forthcoming. I think this is
another one of those cases where
we've seen some grants get um
cut and there's been some other
federal action that has occurred
that has pulled it back, um, or
has given it back, um, and so
that's kind of a moving target
there. One piece I do want to
mention, um, here within the
facilities management. This is
sort of like, uh, UNM facilities
management, uh, in the other.
State funds revenue, um.
Uh, portion
does get Medicaid revenue and so
there is a significant amount of
federal Medicaid revenue
facilities management program.
All right, so on the, I believe
this is my last slide, slide 9.
Um
Biden er legislation.
So some of the
Actions within the.
Oh, I guess we're calling it, or
the reconciliation package.
Um, affects grants from the
inflation reduction Act,
rescinding an obligated uh grant
amounts listed to the right.
The bill does not rescind grants
awarded to the state from the
infrastructure investment and
Jobs Act or the creating helpful
incentives to produce.
Uh, semiconductors Act, that's
the CHIPS Act, um, according to
LC analysis of federal funds
information for states data.
However, the president's budget
proposal would rescind um the
unobligated bounces from the
National Electric vehicle.
Formula program, of which the
state receives about 8.2 million
per year.
Um
The federal GOT also ended that
program too, so that's that's
something that's kind of on the
radar.
Um, and you can see some of the
grants from the uh
Inflation reduction Act in that
table on the right.
So, uh, that first one there,
the state-based home energy
efficiency contractor training
grants.
Those grants went to Emner, um,
and we're still working on
getting uh more of a status on
how much of that has actually
been spent.
Um, the climate pollution
reduction grants, planning and
implementation that 4 million
there.
That's gone to the environment
department and we spent about 2
million of the 4 million on
that.
So there's another 2 million
that's an obligated and might
get pulled back because of
reconciliation.
Um
Let me see here.
And then there's the, if you go
down to the 2nd to the last one,
the greenhouse gas reduction
fund, zero emission technology
that went to Mnerd, um.
Much of it has been spent, um,
on the solar for all project.
And then that very last one
there, the methane emissions
reduction program that also went
to M nerd and much of that has
already been in the state. With
that, all, uh.
Pass it off for.
Further comment from Mr. Senna.
Subcommittee, John Senna, your
staff director, LESC. I'm gonna
probably do a little bit more
detail in terms of a particular
topic than than you've heard up
to now, because we're going to
focus primarily on K-12
education and the kinds of
federal funds that we receive as
a state, uh, talk a little bit
about how some of those funds
are used, staff is currently
thinking about and how we're
tracking you with good
information as as you're faced
with some of these decisions.
slide 12, and you should be
looking at this page at this
point, great.
You'll see uh a chart there
demonstrating, representing the
amount of federal funds that the
state has received for K-12
education, obviously that tan
through 24 represents um
Esser funds, so COVID-related
funds. Those funds have now
expired, and so you'll start to
see uh in FY 25 and beyond.
On page 13.
Um, you'll see a list of federal
funds and grants that the state
receives, this list is not all
inclusive, but we did want to
highlight some of the larger
buckets that the state receives,
and I'm gonna go through, um,
about 6 of them very quickly
just so because they're the
largest uh federal funds that we
receive. So Title IA at the top
is um
Supports for low income
students, the state, the federal
government has a formula by
which we determine the amount of
uh low-income students, and that
money flows through uh to
districts.
Title 2A professional learning,
that's uh money that the state
and districts can use for
professional development for
educators.
title 4A student supports that
of $10 million.
That's funding that goes uh to
school districts and that the
state uses for academic
improvement, so efforts to
improve academic achievement,
uh, in school districts.
Uh, another one of the largest
chunks is idea B. This is your
special education grants that uh
the department and um uses for
to support special education
students, and much of this flows
directly to school districts,
uh, to meet the requirements of
the federal special education
laws.
School meals and federal
reimbursements, you'll see here
it's $202 million. I'll have a
slide that talks a little bit
more about the details of that,
obviously, the state has taken
on a portion of funding to not.
Uh, received, where the state
does not receive reimbursement
for the.
And then lastly, uh, impact
data.
And that money flows directly to
school.
The 633 million uh that you're
seeing down here represents
about 14%.
Of the about $4.5 billion that
you're flowing directly to
schools through the state SEG
through the state equalization
formula. So just as a
As a point of context there,
it's about 14%.
On page 14, uh, there's some,
some bullets here about again,
as everyone else has have before
me has said some of the ideas
that are being floated uh in the
uh, the administration's budget
proposal.
These are all just proposals,
uh, as a director Sali
mentioned, sort of have to take
them with a grain of salt at
this point. These are, uh, what
we know about those. I won't go
through all of them, uh, right
now on slide 15, I want to talk
a little bit about, again, those
sort of big 3 grants that we get
from the federal government
again, we get a number of
grants, uh, from the federal
government, but these represent
the bulk.
Of funding that and most of it
flows directly to schools, and
so I wanted to talk a little bit
about what schools
How they can and how they again
Title 1, part A is for
distribution.
For schools that serve low
income students.
And you'll see some of the
allowable expenses there.
This is also a um.
A place where school districts
use Title One to fund reading
interventionists or math
interventionists, so they're in
addition to credit recovery,
counseling, instructional
materials. There are also staff
that are funded with Title One.
We're not hearing so far, at
least, anything about a
reduction to Title One funding.
What we are hearing in regard to
education as a whole, and you've
heard about the elimination of
the Department of Education and
and they've scaled back staff at
that level already is more about
the administration of these
funds and whether or not these
might come to the states as a
block grant.
And then make it necessary for
you all or the state as a whole
to make decisions about how to
how to distribute those funds.
And we have, we have tools to do
that already, uh, but that's a
decision you might have to on
slide 16.
Title 2
Again, this is a professional
development.
Both the state at the PED level
and school districts get
allocation Title II allocations,
and they're able to use that for
teacher training, um,
Recruitment, retention, and
heightening areas, and some
materials and supplies.
Again, some folks do use these
to hire individuals, so some
districts are using Title II to
hire instructional coaches, just
to make the distinction. I said
interventionist for Title One.
Those are individuals who are
serving students.
These folks paid from Title 2
are usually individuals who are
supporting other adults. So
coaching teachers and supporting
other educators in a building.
Um, Title 3 is the um
funds that flow directly to
support English learners.
And uh
The department has, I mean, I'm
sorry, the administration has
announced that it has
recommended terminating the
Office of English Language
acquisition and has recommended
terminating this grant funding.
Again, that hasn't happened yet,
but these are um both from an
administration perspective,
folks who support uh English
learners and obviously funds
that flow directly to our state,
uh, to do that at the local
level.
On title, I'm sorry, on slide.
18
Again, these are some of the
other supports that that were in
that list at the beginning, the
biggest one here that I'll just
touch on briefly is impact aid.
Again, this is money, as most of
you probably know, that flows
directly to school districts,
primarily to those serving
tribal students.
Those who who live on tribal
lands.
The state, uh, the federal
government provides essentially
a payment in lieu of taxes to
those school districts because
status. And again, it's a big
chunk of uh funds that flows
primarily to, to 3 or 4
districts, a a number of other
districts do receive uh impact
a, but at much smaller.
On slide 19.
This is uh
Our special education funding
that flows uh from
Federal government.
And again, uh, is used both by
the department, much of their
special education staff. You've
heard of the Office of Special
Education at PED much of their
staff is paid.
From this uh federal funding,
and then there are
The funding that flows directly
to school districts to support
students with disabilities and
salaries for personnel.
Contracts, we're talking about
diagnosticians and those kinds
of folks who come into districts
often paid and then training for
the, there has been some
recommendations to consolidate
some of this programming. Uh,
this is also, there's also been
some conversation about moving
this um special education
supports from US ad from the
Department of Education to the
Health and Human Services
department. And again, that
raises questions not so much
about funding yet.
But more about administration.
There are federal laws that
govern how we are supposed to
serve uh students with
disabilities, those laws are not
gonna meeting those demands, but
how those funds are
administered, whether or not the
the level of federal oversight
that exists currently or
previously will continue or that
and may be more sort of
administrative and programmatic
decisions on slide 20.
Um, again, school meals, state
receives about $200 million in
reimbursement.
For school meals.
You all have uh appropriated $48
million in state funds to
support uh meals for all
students, so even for those who
are not.
do not qualify for free and
reduced lunch based on income
primarily, uh, you all are
paying for all breakfast and
lunch at every school. So some
changes, uh, statutory
regulatory changes.
the CEP, the community
eligibility provision or
revisions to snap and mitigate
eligibility might require some
more backfilling. So part of
this CEP I mentioned is
Currently
If you have at least 25% of your
students who qualify for free
and reduced lunch.
Your entire school eats for free
and receives some reimbursement
from the federal government for
that.
If the, if the um
Federal government changes those
rates, that may change the
amount of reimbursements that we
receive, therefore,
change in the amount that you
might have to put in as a.
On, uh, slide 21.
Some things that we do know have
already happened.
Uh, the first piece is the uh
those EU funds that I talked
about at the very beginning,
these are COVID-related funds,
The administration had attempted
to essentially prohibit states
from spending any of the unspent
funds there was a there was a
portion, um, they had an
extension to spend some of these
funds.
The administration said no, you
can't spend it anymore. That
went to litigation.
The court said
Not that the administration
couldn't do that, but that if
they were going to, they had to
give states.
Um
More notice. So you can't just
say stop spending today, you had
to give them enough notice in
order to do that. Um, I'm gonna
forget the the number of states
that actually sued for this, the
court said what the court said,
but it only applies to those
states that were party to the
suit in New Mexico was one of
them.
So we're still waiting to hear
what the administration decides,
the ability to spend this money.
It's a pretty small amount,
$12.3 million relative to the
over $1 billion to schools.
Or for education.
Uh, teacher quality partnership
programs, um, these are, uh,
apprenticeship and other
residency programs that, and
then the last piece here, the $5
million for school-based mental
health services only affected a
couple of entities. One was
silver schools, they had a a
grant for school-based health
centers, as well as the central
regional education cooperative.
That was using these funds to
support a number of school
districts with these
school-based health initiatives,
um.
I've heard from both silver and
the REC they're going through
some sort of appeal process
right now. Uh.
I did want to highlight just
just one thing that, um, well,
Some action that you all took
during the recent legislative
session that
Doesn't mitigate the potential
losses here, but gets at some of
the same issues uh that the
federal government currently
assists with this past session
you all funded $4.5 billion
including House Bill 63, which
which includes uh a revision to
how we fund at-risk students. I
mentioned earlier that we have
some tools to identify poverty
and if we were to get some of
these block grants, we already,
we're doing that now with state
money flowing money to school.
districts based on the
percentage of of low income
students, and so we do have some
tools.
Um, that we've been using for
grant programs at the state
level that we've now
incorporated into the funding
formula and could be used to to
think through um how how we as a
state might distribute federal
funding if the government.
Um, we also included in hospital
63, um.
A specific standalone factor for
English learners, along with
some guidance for how to serve
English learners in the, in the
budget. And so again, if that
sort of guidance and funding
goes away at the federal level.
We do have some infrastructure
at the state to sort of.
Um, and the other point here is
that data sovereignty will be
critical in in tracking student
performance at the, at the
education level at the US
Department of Education, you've
probably heard of some cuts to a
lot of research and other
organizations that gather.
Data from states.
Aggregate that data and then put
it back out in reports that we
all use to track whether it's
the Office of Civil rights or
some of these other
organizations that are providing
us education data.
It's important to remember that
we own all of that data.
How we use it may be different
than what the federal government
does with it currently, it may
require more additional capacity
at the state level to think.
I won't go on page slide 23, I
won't talk too much about this,
um, a lot of this is what you've
already heard.
How do you prioritize
Um
What's working
What's necessary versus um what
what is what was nice to have
and that we might be able to do
without.
And so that's something that we
as staff will continue to look
at uh track whether or not we
actually see cuts to education
funding.
And then lastly, uh, on slide
24, again, some of this is
mostly about assuming we don't
see some of these cuts cuts to
some of these larger programs,
has more to do with
The
Our function as a state in
distributing this money and how
we oversee those funds, and then
State level accountability.
So
Some of how we use this money
has to do with our proficiency
rates, how our schools are
designated, how we prioritize
which school districts need
additional funds.
We have state infrastructure, uh
our support and accountability
Act, for instance, in in state
statute is aligned to federal
accountability standards. And so
we do have state models by which
we can continue to to track
performance, as well as use that
information to distribute funds.
That might mean, though, that as
a state we take a larger role or
a clearer role in identical.
And with that, Madame Chernow,
stand for questions.
Get your name on here and go
ahead, sir. Thank you, Madam
Chair, um.
Good information, lots of ideas,
at least it appears to be where
we have exposure in different
places, but lots of it hasn't
happened yet.
Uh, and so it's important that
we're aware, as we all follow
and track what's going on at the
federal level. There are several
areas where we're already seeing
things and there wasn't a lot of
discussion about, for instance,
I think between uh UNM NMSU, and
tech, we've had something like
$60 million of grants canceled
that were NIH NSF.
Uh, various other federal
grants.
One of you talk about that
direct impact to budgets of the
of higher education, uh, because
it's not just the direct grant
money, it's faculty salaries,
it's uh GRT of equipment being
there, it's graduate students,
it's, uh, top-notch researchers
that are gonna go other places
because the research is being
canceled. I mean, there's a
whole lot of other spinoffs
besides just the direct things
and I don't know whether that's
something right now.
Very few grants get that 50%.
Um, you know, when you get like
a USDA or an education one,
those amounts tend to be a lot
lower. Some of the NIH grants
can be as high as that, but
those are all negotiated.
and institutions based on the
cost. Thank you, Madam chair and
Charles and so can you tell me
or uh tell the committee and the
audience, um.
How much would it take for um
and, and I realized this could
change as well. How much would
it take for UNM or NMU or San
Juan College to uh if they got a
grant, how much would it take
for the administrative costs.
The administrative costs.
Alone, uh, it would depend on
the institution.
And it wouldn't just be the
administrative costs, there
would be other cost related
potentially negotiated as part
of the that calculation.
So I think it's been
Um
problem for the universities and
how they couch what this charge
is, uh, and that it's actually
much larger than if we were to
think about straightative cost,
you gotta have, you know, the
accountant's process the
payments and things like that.
Uh, it's funding more than, more
than that, but it
The terms that have been used
haven't been very accurate.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thanks,
Charles.
Um, let's go to rips, or excuse
me, Senator Townsend.
Remember the day when I used to
your representative
and Jim still works really good.
Thank you. Um, Madam Chair, and
thank you guys for your
presentation this morning. I was
sitting here thinking,
I'm glad if, if you can't be
glad, I'm glad we're going
through this now instead of in
2017 when we didn't have
anything to go back to.
So
I mean
If we're going to go through
this.
The stresses of doing it today
versus several years ago.
Could have been.
would have been huge. Um, and
that goes without saying.
There's a couple of things that
I think the committee
To consider, um,
At the beginning of this.
Session
We went into a definition change
of new money and
And
That's gonna have an impact on
our ability.
To make changes. Am I wrong or?
So, Madam Chair, Senator,
Earlier this month, as we're
preparing for LFC, I was running
revenue scenarios of us losing
3.
And I wasn't having like a
meltdown because our financial
position.
is so strong, but what would
cause that loss?
That would be, you know, federal
funds at the time what we were
looking at potentially losing
and assuming that you would
back.
A recession, oil prices that
were $10 off.
What the forecast was, natural
gas that was a buck off.
You know, those things all
compounded to like over $3.5
billion.
With that new money calculation
allows us to do.
It still allows us to go in to
say, all right, how much we
still know the recurring budgets
10.6 billion, but on an annual
basis, you've been spending some
of the surplus.
On non-recurring items.
Either putting money into a fund
to save for, you know, another
day or spending on multi-year
pilot projects.
Holding down spending on
recurring or your normal.
You know, non-recurring budget
or cash financing capital
outlay.
So
That's your initial cushion that
if revenues dropped 3.5.
billion dollars you're having to
backfill federal funds, do you
say, maybe this year we don't
cash finance capital outlay, and
we take a closer look at if we
even, even need to do capital
outlay depending on.
How bad the situation is.
So
We can still know where we're at
financially with that new money
calculation, the new money
calculation.
Allows us to say how much above
and beyond are recurring and
non-recurring budgets.
Well I
thank you for that. Um,
I
I still have many, I still have
several questions about that
decision, but that's one
interesting topic was the Yazi
Martinez lawsuit and the
implications of that. I think
Senator Sos brought it up.
If my memory's right, there's no
clear goalpost.
In the Yazi.
Martin's lawsuit. I mean,
I still don't know when enough
is enough and
Do we have a better definition
today?
So
The court made a causal link
between the educational
outcomes.
And the educational inputs. It
said basically,
The outcomes are dismal, but
didn't define what not dismal is
in terms of like student
proficiency, high school
graduation.
So that performance aspect still
needs to be our true north.
But they said
They're dismal because you're
not putting enough money in and
you're not spending it on the
right stuff, you're not spending
it on a longer school year, not
spending it on making sure you
got high quality teachers,
you're not steering more
resources for at-risk students.
Frankly, you've done that.
You know, you've increased the
school budget over 70%.
Since that ruling.
Now the question is, are the
local school districts.
Taking those resources and
funding things that actually
work and using it to get better
results.
We've seen mixed to those and,
and like you said, the court
didn't say.
50% proficient, adequate, 45% is
80% graduation proficient.
You know, we're kind of locked
into this perpetual unknown.
Um, without having that clear
bar, and now we're gonna be
locked into essentially a
consent decree focusing on
managing in a very detailed
level, potentially the inputs.
Whether we're doing
That right at the state versus
telling the locals to do it, and
the locals saying, well, we're
not gonna do it. I don't know.
It's pretty frustrating, Madam
Chair and senator, there's,
there's been an interesting sort
of wrinkle in the case just
recently. Last fall, the
plaintiffs actually filed an
additional motion, um, calling
for a, for a remedial action
plan. They were, they were
disappointed or or upset that up
to now there's been no concrete
plan about how to get to
wherever we're supposed to go.
Um, that was, that was the, the
department's task and they have
not been satisfied the
plaintiffs had not been
satisfied with with the progress
on that plan itself.
And so in September, the
plaintiffs filed a motion that
actually asked LESC and its
staff.
To, to lead a planning process.
To to get to that plan, over the
last few months, they've the,
the plaintiffs and the and the
PED primarily have played that
out, and the court just ruled a
couple of weeks ago that um
Rather than LESC doing this
process, it should be PED and
gave them very specific dates
about
Uh, identifying an outside
consultant by July 1 to lead
this planning process by
November 1, presenting this plan
to the court and then having
about a month to go back and
forth between the between the
plaintiffs and the defendants to
iron out the details and, and
the, the court went as far as to
say that when that, if that plan
meets sort of satis
satisfactory, that would be the
conclusion of the case.
And so it's been an interesting
turn of events, and we're going
to actually have a formal update
to our committee, LESC meets
tomorrow and Friday morning, uh,
about that, about that motion,
uh, but to director Calli's
point, we have been sort of
struggling with with the
goalposts and who's responsible
for what, um, the contents of
that plan.
I think are still kind of up in
the air, the, the ruling from
the court was pretty broad.
And so you still might end up
with these kinds of questions as
PED and and other folks worked
to the development of this plan,
um, but it does seem, according
to what the, the court ruled
recently, there may be some end
to that particular case, um, and
we'll see how it goes after
that.
Well, I appreciate it, Madam
Chair. Thank you and thank you
for your answers.
Right, let's go to uh
representative Brown.
Thank you, madam chair. Um,
well, thank you very much for
all the presentations this
morning, um.
I'm just curious to know if at
some point in time, we're going
to see a high level spreadsheet
of all the federal funds that
come into New Mexico. Uh, we're
familiar with House Bill 2 here
in the state legislature, uh,
there we get a really good
bird's eye view of where money's
being spent. We track.
Uh, where it's declining
spending or increasing spending.
Uh, so with, I know there are a
lot of moving parts here, but
our, you know, our.
General fund budgets about $10.8
billion. The federal amount that
comes into New Mexico, I believe
it is, and correct me if I'm
wrong, Madam Chair and panel,
about 30 billion, is that
correct?
The amounts flowing through uh
House Bill 2 or more than 12
billion.
Uh, yeah, thank you, Madam Chair
and Mr. Sali, my question is,
In some total, how much federal
funding does New Mexico receive,
say in the last year for which
you have.
We would need to research like
how much is coming into the
state outside of the state
budget, for example, money
flowing to Sandia and Lano, the
bases, Social Security taxes,
Medicare, it's significant
amounts flow into the state.
outside. Thank you for that,
Madam Chair, I, um, I, I've
heard figures in the past, I
want to say in the $30 billion
range is federal funding coming
into to our state. But I think
it really would be helpful as we
start really we we've seen
snippets here and there in these
presentations of where federal
money is currently being spent
or received at least, I would
like to see, and I know it would
be a huge project of federal
spreadsheet that gives us
everything in 11 glance, um.
I just think it'd be helpful and
then is, you know, as things
come into focus in the next uh
few months at least, we would at
least see where the trends are
or changes, so that, that would
be one thing. Um, Madam Chair,
and, and to the panel, I, I know
that there are some situations
in which uh we're required to
have maintenance of effort.
Could you give us a little bit
of information of um
You think that might change on
the federal level in some
instances where we uh tied into
that. I'm not seeing proposed
changes for.
But places where we want to pay
attention to it are in areas
like special education.
In public schools.
Where we're putting in.
Like 400.
5 $500 million in the SCG and
the feds are putting up less
than 100 million, but they're
telling us we can't reduce that
amount because we've got fewer
Special ed kits or fewer
ancillary FTE. It's kind of like
the tail wagging the dog.
Um, there's maintenance of
effort for temporary assistance
for needy families that we meet
through the tax code.
Um, but there's
There's like, those are the two
big ones that we pay the most
attention to.
Thank you. And um
Madam Chair, I think I, I'm
getting phone calls from
constituents, I think we
probably, we all are concerned
about programs going away, for
example, I'm hearing about Head
Start.
I think it's really important
that we are very precise.
is actually going to be
happening. Uh, for example,
people saying, oh, this program
will be cut. Well, the way we do
budgeting, and this is my
understanding, the way the
federal government does it,
they're different. And so
there's a baseline of funding.
Um, and then we have kind of
over time projections of
increased spending from, from
that baseline.
Uh, and so if
The increase is less than
projected or anticipated. People
are calling that a cut.
In fact, it's not really a cut
as we would use English language
on that one, so I just like to
make sure that we are precise in
everything we do.
And um I, I, the last thing I
wanna do is uh stir up a lot of
panic where that's probably um
misplaced.
But the language we use really
matters and we'll go over, um,
that aspect of the federal
budget process this afternoon,
as well as, you know, on the
budget reconciliation, they're
working on a 10 year window.
So you can imagine if you're
gonna.
Reduce the rate of spending
growth.
When is it most palatable.
Politically to do that. When is
that most politically palatable.
To deliver on your campaign
premises.
In a 10 year window, and we'll
see kind of like how that.
plays out this afternoon where
essentially a bunch of the, the
harder decisions have been
kicked out.
Uh, outside of a 4 year.
For your window, whereas other
decisions, and the senator
Munoz's point.
What that means for us as a
country when it comes to our
national debt and our ability to
Ultimately afford other types of
things on domestic discretionary
spending or even defense
spending.
Uh, cause there's big buckets.
Of the federal budget.
That they're dealing with
through budget with Head Start
is through the annual
appropriations process.
And again,
That could be a reduction year
over year.
But eliminating a long-standing
program like that with the, the
kind of margins that you see in
Congress is unlikely.
Um
But we shouldn't discount the
signaling of a desire to at
least. And then finally Madam
Chairman, um,
I, I agree with Senator Munoz
that we have a huge problem, and
that is this, um,
deficit and um the borrowing of
money, of course, devalues what
we have in our wallets right
now. Um, it's my understanding
the federal deficit is somewhere
around 37 trillion. Someone
could confirm that or is that
close?
I'm sure.
We'll get those, uh, details to
you this afternoon, but it's
bigger than our entire Thank
you.
Sander Nova, and then, and then
I'll ask some questions. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you
experts for joining us. Um, I
understand that the analysis
that you've done is in
correlation to the
reconciliation bill, um, but
what other federal funding are
you foreseeing being held up and
I'm specifically looking for
housing, um.
But I could not find anything
specific to that.
So housing is another area where
you'll get a lot of federal
funds going directly from the
federal government to a local
housing authorities at the, at
the local level bypassing what
we do here in the roundhouse.
I would say that if there's
something that we haven't heard
about.
Yet
I'm guessing that the, the
likelihood of, of something
happening with that will happen
through the annual
appropriation.
Set up to even start.
Even though the budget will um.
I would put on the our radar.
That anything that was new under
the last administration as an
increase would be subject to
budget scrutiny.
rolling back.
Anything that was
I didn't see a lot of housing
through any of those big um
bipartisan or democratic budget
reconciliation.
Um, around housing.
Um, so it's, it hasn't stuck out
to me on, on my radar where I'm
sitting.
Right now, but that's, if I were
to look, that's what I would
look for first. Where did they
get increases under the for the
the past 4 years and what were
those types of things in there?
Are they in alignment with the
current political views of of
Congress and, and the president
or not, they're not in
alignment, they're at risk.
Thank you, and I would just
second um representative
Brown's, uh, comment on getting
an overview of all of the
federal funding coming into the
state. I think it's in our best
interest to understand that in
order to break down the
appropriations that we have the
ability to make to support any
cuts that may come through.
Thank you.
I did have a couple of
questions, um, first let me
thank you all for your
presentations this morning. I'd
like to start first with, with
Wayne. I'm looking at your page
4 on the New Mexico, um.
Federal budget and looking at
the percentage of federal
budget. I just wanted to ask.
I, um, can we assume the highest
level of risk is equivalent to
the largest percentages.
And what I mean is I'm looking
at, you know, uh, DHS EM uh E M
N R.
These agencies that have.
The highest level of budget that
comes from the feds, can we
assume that then that would be
our highest risk.
Madam Chair and members of the
subcommittee, I certainly would
uh want those to stay on a high
watch list, um, I think as, as
Charles mentioned, we're
probably, even though by
percentage maybe looking well,
healthcare authority is pretty
high percentage, but I, you
know, the, the.
Dollar amounts that I think
we're most concerned about is
those areas, Medicaid and SNAP
that we've um
Talked about, but there's no
question that, uh, yes, for
example, New Mexico Environment
Department is highly uh.
Reliant on federal funding, so I
would certainly consider uh the,
the bigger numbers to be
agencies that you'd want to pay
particular attention to and, and
perhaps get some feedback
directly from them as well as
what they think reductions would
mean for them.
Oh, I have the same question, uh
Eric walked away, but Charles on
page 3, we talk about in your
presentation, where's the state
most at risk for federal
reduction. Obviously, it's the
healthcare authority department.
Um
on your chart here on page 3.
And the reason I'm asking this
is because we've got an elephant
committee and we got to figure
out what bite we're gonna take
first.
And how we're going to approach
it. I mean, we're gonna get all
kinds of information from this
staff.
But we have to have a way to get
our arms around some of these
things and what I'm gonna
suggest is that we look at those
agencies.
first that uh are at most risk.
And impact to the people of the
state of New Mexico.
And we have some a lot of
correlation here, obviously
between the two.
Um, and I wanted to ask Wayne,
your working group where you'd
mentioned you have between 200
and 300. Um, does that include
local governments and tribals,
tribal reps and special use
districts, or is that primarily
just state agencies.
I, I'm sorry, sir, I forgot your
name and could you please come
up and, and answer that
question.
Madam Chair, Mark Malhoff, State
Comptroller, um, to answer your
question, it's just state
agencies currently. OK. OK, so
my question around that is since
these local governments are
instrumentalities of the state.
And what we do directly impacts
them. I don't want to lose sight
of that at some level. I just
don't want to lose sight of
these other groups that are out
there, I call them kind of a
tier 2 group. Our job here is to
work with state programs and the
state uh budget process, uh,
there are, as I, as I believe, a
multiplier effect.
Uh, even with them. At the end
of the day, if Albuquerque has a
big loss as an example of some
kind of federal resource. What
does that mean to their budget
and everybody else then. I think
we just, we just can't be
unaware of it.
Uh, I also wanted to ask, does
the state of New Mexico have an
indirect cost rate formula.
Does anyone know?
Yes, DFA comes up with a a
calculation for an indirect
cost.
Or federal grants for
Things like their overhead state
auditor, things like that in a
former life I had to, I had the
opportunity to.
Apply for an indirect cost rate
for the agency that I that I.
I worked with
And it was interesting because
it was by federal grant program.
It wasn't just this is, you
know.
USA kind of thing.
So what I'd be curious about,
every federal grant program
probably has a different
indurate indirect cost rate.
Um, because when I heard you say
it goes between 15 and 50%, a
50% shocks me.
I'm not sure exactly what it's
for.
So I would like to see that. I'd
like to see some breakdown on
those indirect cost rates
because if an agency can go to 4
different federal funding
sources and have 4 different
indirect cost rates. Yes, we
understand some of it pays for
salary, but it also pays for
things like paper clips, desks,
uh, computers, I mean, how much
of that is duplicate.
And what my hope is, is that as
we're going through this process
this summer and we're
responsible for making
recommendations, those groups
are also going to be making
recommendations. I mean, I
don't, I hope they're not just
sitting on the sideline, hoping
that uh they can either agree or
disagree with what we come up
with, but we're gonna expect
them to come up with
recommendations also. I mean, if
a group has an indirect cost
rate at 50% on every federal
program they have.
We're gonna expect to see
something different.
We're gonna want that kind of
input, um.
Because it's, we're all in this
together. I mean, as a state and
as recipients of federal funds
were all in this together, so we
need to have that kind of
cooperation.
From the various groups, um,
Also, I agree with having a
spreadsheet that shows all
federal programs, all federal
funds that come into the state.
I'm also interested on that
spreadsheet. What are those
performance measures? I mean.
Are there anything I know when
we do our budget, we ask for
some performance measures. We
want to know, is this a
successful program or not.
Because it would be hard for
this group to determine whether
something is successful unless
we know what that evaluation
mechanism is.
Um, there's a lot of federal
funds that come into the state
that I would have zero knowledge
of say things that go into uh
national parks as an example.
How do I know if it's successful
or not?
Uh, as a state legislator, we
probably wouldn't know that, so
we need to understand what are
they measured by? why is it
being cut? Is it just seen as
unnecessary or or what, what is
going on there, but we need to
see a little of that information
also.
I um
Certainly like the way this has
been laid out. It's, it's easy
for us to get a hold of, but we
do have an elephant that we're
gonna be taking bites out of, I
guess that's the right animal,
or is it a camel or is it a
donkey or what is it that we're
gonna be taking our bites out of
to try to grip, get a grip on
this.
But, um,
These instrumentalities are
going to have a direct effect
also.
Local governments, especially
use districts, I'm sure even
tribes are gonna come forward
and say, wait a minute, when the
state passes a law that we're
gonna have to pay for, and we
don't have the federal funds to
pay for it.
It's not uh I mean, it's just
something that we need to think
about.
Again, our first responsibility
is the state budget. It's our
state responsibilities that that
will be prioritizing.
Is there any other questions
that the committee has. Go
ahead, uh, senator.
Thank you, ma'am. Sure, I have
one other question. There was a
comment earlier, I think.
I don't remember who said it,
but
So that we have contracts that
were totally dependent upon
federal funds that you know
maybe now the federal funds in
question.
Do we have contract language
typically that says that we're.
When
that we have that out, I mean,
do, do we have that out and so
have, have we, have we sheltered
our liability with contract
language or, or not.
And I'm sure that's boilerplate
language that if they're.
But, but on that Charles, does
that mean that work stops him.
So if we are contracting for uh
services.
A hospital services as an
example.
And we don't have sufficient
funds, obviously. That's also
where there have been lawsuits.
About cutting off the federal
funding that's already been.
Unauthorized under contract and
entities saying you can't.
Where the federal government has
been successful at impounding
resources has been unobligated
uh resources. So a good example
of that is the federal
government and a new program to
pay for electric vehicle
charging stations through a
grant program.
They had issued a bunch of RFPs
and contracts to start.
Setting these up in communities
across the state.
Those are going to go forward.
They hadn't gotten to another
pot of money about 8 to 16
million, if I remember
correctly.
That has not been put under
contract yet. Those funds have
been frozen, and likely will be
in Congress to say we don't want
to appropriate.
Those unobligated expenses and.
In terms of the other question I
had was on these managed care
organizations.
I know that those are negotiated
for a certain level of of
support.
Um
What happens if it's not there?
I mean, do we have to go back to
the table and, and the uh
administration uh
Negotiate those or what happens?
Madam Chair, we've not seen
anything uh through the budget
reconciliation thus far that
would affect.
That contractual arrangement.
We'll get into some of the
policy details in Eric's next
presentation as well as
Um, the one this afternoon that
would involve changes to how
many people are enrolled in Medi
and how they're determined to be
eligible for Medicaid and how
that will, those changes are
purported to save.
Uh, money in the out years, uh,
relative to the baseline that
CBO's very good. Uh, we are
gonna move right into Eric's and
Charles's presentation here, and
I, what I forgot to mention to
the committee, if you don't
think you can run over to a
restaurant and eat within an
hour. We do have um some
sandwiches that are coming in
for the committee if you just
wanna have lunch here in, in, in
this area, that'll work for us
so we can fire back up right at
one.
I wanted to make that comment,
so Eric, you're standing between
us and sandwiches. But uh we
want to, we, we, we need to have
a clear understanding of this.
So, go ahead.
All right, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, I also have uh
Allegra, Doctor Allegra
Hernandez sitting with me and
she's she'll um.
Present a little bit on this uh
slide deck too.
And I'll just make a quick
comment to the numbers, you
should have in front of you a
deck that looks very similar
with us like change here if you
don't have that, and that's also
posted online for anybody
following along, um, should say
Medicaid 101 on there.
Um, get this up.
I don't. I was, I was under the
impression that
Um, we had sent it last night
and that they would get it up.
OK, um because we really want
that, uh, for our presentation
so everybody can see what we're
looking at and have a sense from
the web audience we're talking
about. OK, go ahead.
Hm
All right, madam chair, um,
members of the committee. I know
there's uh some of you members
out there that um.
are pretty experienced already
in Medicaid, and you could
probably teach me if a thing or
two about Medicaid, um, and
there's others of you that are
pretty new to this, and so I'm
trying to
Walk that line of not not um
getting too in detailed, too
detailed, um, but also.
Uh, keep this pretty simple for
the entire group here. So,
Medicaid, it's a joint federal
state healthcare program with
certain national standards and
wide latitude for state policy
differences through what we call
Medicaid waivers, and we'll talk
a little bit about those
Medicaid waivers.
Uh, in New Mexico, Medicaid
covers low-income individuals,
including the elderly, disabled
families and children, pregnant
women, and very low income
adults without.
So what is a uh moving on to
slide 3, sorry about that. So
what is a managed care
organization that's already kind
of come up in the conversation
here.
It's a commercial insurance
company that state governments
contract with to manage the
benefits of um individuals and
um it manages utilization, cost
and quality. Uh, most Medicaid
funding, and you'll see, uh,
later on in the slides, most of
the Medicaid funding goes to
these MCOs, or at least through
these MCOs to manage the care of
um people to get care.
Um, in New Mexico, the program
is called turquoise Care um and
that replaced several years ago,
you might have heard the
terminology centennial care, now
we're on turquoise care for our
managed care.
Program.
for service. This is a direct,
it, it kind of gets around the
um MCO.
Uh, system, and this is where
the state directly pays for
services, uh,
Um
And doesn't go through the
estate plan. What is a state
plan? Each state develops its
own Medicaid program within
federal guideline guidelines
outlining services covered
eligibility criteria and
administrative processes.
What is a waiver. Waiver is a
special permission granted by
the government.
to the states to deviate from
standard Medicaid rules for
experimental or innovative
programs.
So every few years we have to
renew um our state plan, anytime
we want, um, and we have to put
it in an application to do that
and uh
That's a part of that state
plan. Any time we want to make a
change to the state plan, um, we
have to put in an application,
and go through a whole process
with the federal government to
make a change to that state
plan. So that's, that's kind of
an important piece there.
Anytime we want to change rates,
we have to um
Go through the federal
government and administrative
process.
All right. On the next slide,
uh, slide you see a a big chart
there.
Um, this gives all of the
revenue sources for Medicaid,
not all of them, most of them in
there, um, and then also your
Medicaid, uh, enrollment.
You'll see that
Back in FY 14, um, we had about
616,000.
Enrollees in Medicaid, and that
jumped up to about 902,000 after
the ACA or the Affordable Care
Act was passed, and expanded
Medicaid.
Um
But we'll be talking about
later, we'll we'll get into this
thing called, um, you know,
Charles might talk about later
about work requirements in
Medicaid coming down from the
federal government, right? Um,
most of those work requirements,
most, a lot of those new um
requirements that are gonna come
down to this reconciliation
process.
Uh, we're going to affect that
population of people, that
expansion population. So that's
when we talk about expansion,
when we talk about um.
Affordable Care Act folks, when
we talk about
Um
Uh
You know, Obamacare, whatever,
it's that group of people that
were added on back in in uh
after after FY 14, um.
You'll see on this graph, you'll
see, we peeked out back in FY
23, um, during the pandemic, we
reached almost half of the
population back then during the
pandemic, and then now it's come
down quite a bit to about
822,000, um, enrollees as of
last month, uh, in Medicaid.
And then you'll see that that
big blue area in the chart,
that's 80% federal funds, 80% of
our.
Um, Medicaid program is funded
by about 80% of our.
Program is funded by federal
revenue. Um, and the rest of
that down at the bottom, the
green and the um pink area,
that's, that's your state
revenues. Um, so the green is
your general fund, and so you
can see there's a, there's a big
uh
Every dollar we spend on
Medicaid, we bring in a lot of
federal funding.
All right, moving on to slide 5.
Uh
So what are the key cost
drivers, uh, within Medicaid.
Enrollment is basically our
number one. And if, uh, it's it,
you know, anytime we're off on
our Medicaid projections in
terms of how many enrollees we
think we're gonna have in
Medicaid, it can have a huge
difference between um.
What we actually experience, uh,
as far as spending goes and what
we were projecting as far as
spending goes, and that's what
that, um,
That chart on the right hand
side kind of gets at, you can
see that, uh,
Back in January of 2024, there
was about a $40 million
difference between.
On a monthly basis between what
the department was projecting
and what the actual um
enrollment there was, right? And
so there's there's a big gulf
there between uh.
Enrollment and um
Actual expenditures.
MCO rates are another big key
cost driver, uh, healthcare
prices and inflation, uh, you
know.
Uh, that goes, you know, health
care inflation goes up every
year. It's usually about 3%, um,
the rates that the MCOs pay to
healthcare providers. Um, I'll
get into that, those in a little
bit more detail some of the
recent rate increases that we've
seen, but, um, you might be
looking at the uh previous chart
that I was showing and you, you,
you might be noticing that
The enrollment has gone down,
but the prices are that the
costs have continued to
increase, and there's kind of a
Across there, a lot of that is
being driven by recent rate
increases that we've um
implemented over the last few
years. And so that's, that's
something to keep an eye on. And
then your other big cost
drivers, your federal medical
assistance percentage, and I'll
get into that on slide 6 here
now.
Um
So what is your, your federal
medical assistance percentage is
the rate that um federal
government reimburses the state,
uh,
Um, or matches the state for
federal revenue. The rate is
dependent on the population
served with differ differing
rates for children, income
levels, adult expansion, and
other groups.
Um, there's, and you can see
here on the table on the right
hand side, the different rates
that we get for each group of
folks. So you have your
traditional base, which is
matched at 71%. And then you
have your adult expansion group,
which is matched at 90%. That's
that ACA group that Affordable
Care Act group.
Um
For FR 25, so like a tiny little
change in that rate, um, can
actually cause a pretty big
impact on the budget, so for in
FY 25.
Or FAP decreased by 0.91% and
that ended up costing us, um,
almost $70 million that year,
and so, uh, as that fluctuates,
sometimes that can um.
costs us a lot of money.
Um
But that is tied to how well the
state does economically as
compared to all the other
states, um, so if we're doing
better economically.
Our rate goes down. Um, if we're
doing, where's economically, our
rate will go up. So,
You know, there are states like
New York, um, that have a rate,
you know, the wealthier states
have a rate of about 50%. So,
uh,
We're up, we're up there as, as
far as the higher rates go, and
then there's the last thing, the
blended rate, that basically
takes all these rates you see
here.
buys them and weights them as
far as how big the population
that are in each of those
categories, goes and gives you
gives you kind of your overall.
Uh
FMAP, which is 77.71% right now.
OK, Medicaid enrollment, um.
As I said, uh, right now there's
actually about in as of April,
there's about 822,000 enrolled.
Um, there's about 278,000
enrolled in the expansion, other
adult group.
About 475,000 in the
Medicaid-based population, about
370,000 children, and then
there's uh other groups with the
partial benefit. Um, and then on
the right hand side here in this
table, this chart, I just wanted
to point out that, you know, um,
Different groups cost uh
different amounts to provide
services to you, so you're, uh,
adults and children aren't that
expensive, but your, uh,
long-term services and support,
you know, we have quite a few.
Quite a bit fewer enrollees in
the long-term services and
support, uh, but more, um, we're
expending quite a bit more on
that group of people.
Key financing components, um,
I'm not gonna spend too much
time on this slide, you know,
we've got general fund federal
funds. We also have the county
supported Medicaid revenue, uh,
which was about 63.7 million
tobacco settlement revenue, UNM
has a transfer for the hospital
that goes from UNM.
To Medicaid, it gets matched and
then sent back to uh Medicaid in
a directed payment down there at
the bottom and Allegra will get
into more detail on this. Now we
have the healthcare delivery and
Access Act that uh passed a
couple of years ago, so that's
kind of a similar situation
where
Hospitals are paying a surcharge
that surcharge.
Goes to our Medicaid program,
the Medicaid program matches it
with that federal revenue and
sends it back to the hospitals,
and that brings in, um,
Higher, uh,
Uh, amount of revenue for those
hospitals.
Uh, moving on to slide 9.
Medicaid spending has grown from
just over 5.6 billion in FY 17.
Um, you can see here, and I'm
kind of, I'm kind of doing the
funnel thing here.
Big picture, uh, total spending,
um, in Medicaid.
Managed care was about 7 billion
um fee for service was about 1
billion, and then your different
waivers, uh, for people with
developmental disabilities and
others. We spent about 717
million.
Um, if you break out that that
big chunk of uh
Spending on the left hand side
there, the managed care amount.
You can kind of zoom in.
On the right hand side and see
that broken out for physical
health, um, long term care and
others.
Uh, for Medicaid managed care,
I'm moving on to slide 10, um,
spending on services, this
breaks it down even further. You
can see uh those kind of bigger
buckets of where we spend
funding um.
Within managed care for the
hospital services,
transportation.
And then you can also see uh our
spending in long term care for
nursing facilities and.
Uh, the community benefit, um,
and this isn't all inclusive of
everything, it's just to give
you an idea of where the big
buckets of spending are within
the within the budget.
So, uh, recently we've had um
Rate increases, uh, moving on to
slide 11.
Um
Significant rate increases were
allocated in the last 2 years,
so
Uh, you can see on the chart or
the table on the right hand
side, maternal and child health
and primary care.
Over the past 3 years, we've
increased rates for those
services, uh, by about a total
of 432 million.
Um, if you see, look at the
second item down that hospital
rates. We've increased rates to
hospitals by about 1.5 billion
over the last uh few years, and
that one, that one really big
increase, the 1.3, that's tied
back to that healthcare delivery
and Access Act that we passed.
So the hospitals are receiving
a, a, a
Um
A lot more money than they had
in the past, uh, from Medicaid.
Um, if you go down to a little
further towards the bottom in
behavioral health, we've
increased behavioral health
rates by, uh, about $90 million.
And then we've also done uh
other rate increases.
Um, for
program for all-inclusive care,
assisted living and nursing
facility rebasing. Like I said
earlier,
As we do these rate increases.
That those rate increases
increase our costs overall, and
so that's, that is part, not all
of part of why you're seeing the
continued projected increase in
spending in the Medicaid
program, even though the
enrollment has been down.
Um, and with that, I'll pass it
over to Allegra. She's gonna do
a couple slides and then she's
gonna pass it back to me for a
couple slides on Snap.
And then we'll stand for
questions.
Um,
Madam Chair, members of the
subcommittee. So I, I will be
focusing specifically on the
healthcare delivery and Access
Act. So you all as the
legislature have made as Eric
alluded to significant
investments in hospitals in the
past 5 years. Uh, if you look on
slide 12 at the graph.
You will see the top line is
total revenue, and you'll see
that as an aggregate, hospitals
are having more revenue than
they have in the past 5 years.
However, once you break that
down and dig a little bit
deeper, what you'll see is that
there are some hospitals that
are struggling and financially
insolvent. And so because of
that, you all as the legislature
chose to pass the healthcare
delivery and Access Act during
the 2024 legislative session.
The HDAA will infuse $1.3
billion into New Mexico
hospitals over the next 5 years
and how this works is that it
takes advantage of a CMS rule,
which allows for direct payments
to hospitals.
So what happens is that
hospitals admit send 1/4 of the
$1.3 billion to CMS CMS then
sends 3 times that amount plus
the original back and the
healthcare authority determines
how much each hospital gets
based on Medicaid utilization
rates. So if you have high
Medicaid utilization, meaning
that you have a high number of
patients who are on Medicaid,
then you will receive a higher
amount of the HDAA if you have
lower utilization, you'll
receive a.
lower amount. LFC research has
shown that the HDA has uneven
financial impacts while most hos
while all hospitals should be
financially solvent following
the past following the first
year of the HGAA, there's still
some hospitals that will be on
uncertain ground in the next few
years and may need additional
help if that's what the
legislature chooses.
So how does the HDAA work if you
go to slide 13, you will see
that 40% of the funds, which is
amount to $520 million are based
on performance. So performance
is measured by the healthcare
authority and the New Mexico
Hospital Association as these 8
measures on the right hand side,
these 8 measures are
specifically focused on uh.
Patient safety, excuse me.
And they are not to increasing
access for patients. Uh, so how
this will work is that for the
first year hospitals simply have
to submit their data, and then
most hospitals for the next 4
years will have to uh
demonstrate that they are
improving in these 8 measures in
order to get the a portion of
the 40%.
Lastly, the 75% of 75% of the
1.3 billion, which amounts to
$975 million must be spent in
state. LFC is currently working
with the healthcare authority in
the New Mexico Hospital
Association to develop standards
and guidelines for how this
money should be spent, uh, with
the goal that it improves access
for patients in New Mexico. And
with that, I'll hand it back to
Eric for proposed snap changes.
Thank you.
Uh, thanks, Doctor Hernandez,
and that 11 other thing I wanted
to, Madam Chair, uh, mentioned
before we go on to the snap
changes.
Um, and just kind of make the
connection between this
presentation and then the the
next presentation after this.
Um, there are some proposed
changes to uh direct payments
within the reconciliation bill.
Um, they're looking at
grandfathering those in, but
some of the language within.
Um
Within the reconciliation bill.
Uh, leave some question as far
as what the federal
administration if the bill were
to pass the current way that it
is.
Um, would they be able to
essentially, uh, when it comes
time for renewal of those
directed payments, would they
essentially be able to pull
those back. We don't have a
clear answer on that right now,
but that's, that's something
that we're looking at to, um, as
far as reconciliation.
OK, moving on to slide 14, let's
talk about snap um.
So I have this table here on the
right-hand side, projected cost
of snap, reconciliation changes.
In current law right now, um, as
far as the actual benefits that
uh gets to individuals not
talking about the administrative
portion of it right now.
There's, uh, the federal
government pays 100% of the
cost.
Um, what they're talking about
doing in the reconciliation
bill.
is requiring states to pay at
least a minimum of 5% match
rate.
Uh, for snap.
So I worked out a few different
um scenarios here in that table.
Basically, what it shows is um
What, what, basically what
they're gonna do is they're
gonna base the amount that the
state has to pay for SNAP.
On the state's payment error
rate.
Our current payment error rate
is at 14.4%.
Um, in terms of
The amount of errors that we
make when we're paying.
Um, you know, sometimes we do
overpayments, sometimes we do
underpayments uh to to snap
recipients or for snap
recipients.
So, um, if you look at the, at
the graph there, if the state's
error rate is
Equal to or less than 6%.
Uh, then the state is required
to match the federal government
at 5%.
That would cost us about $57
million. That's if we could get
our, our payment error rate
down.
To about 5%.
Right? Um, if the payment error
rate is 6 to 8%.
Then we would have to pay, it
jumps up to 15% then.
So then the, the federal
government's um share decreases
quite a bit.
And the state would end up
having to pay about 173 million
uh in that scenario.
All the way up to where, um, and
I'm gonna skip to the last, the
last columns there, that 10%
error rate, if we're at the
greater than 10% error rate,
then our state costs are going
to be about $290 million.
Um, and so that's, that's, uh,
Just, and that's just for the
benefits.
Side of things that's not
talking about administrative.
Um, moving on to the next slide.
So then with their another piece
of this is that the federal
government reconciliation bill
as it's written right now.
Will decrease the current
administrative matching rate.
Right now, it's 50/50.
The uh proposal is to drop it to
um 50, 2 or 75, 25.
Right, so the state would pick
up 75% of the cost of of
administering and the federal
government would pick up 25% of
the cost of of administering
SNAP.
So
That would take us from paying
about $37 million where we're at
right now, $38 million where
we're at right now, to having to
pay about 56 million $57 million
for SNAP administration
expenses. So that's um
big shift from the federal
government, uh, onto the states,
um.
And
Oh, a few other changes that
they're looking at within SNAP2
that we, we need to keep an eye
on our they're eliminating um
funding for SNAP nutrition
education.
Um, changing the current work
requirements by increasing the
age of able-bodied adults
without dependents from 54 years
to 64 years, so we do expect
that there would be a roll off
of enrollment, um, off of
Medicaid because of that.
Um, I, I'm sorry, I snap because
of that, uh, changed the
definition of dependent, uh,
child within those work
requirements, um, from under 18
years of age to under 7 years of
age, um, and that it requires
counties to have a 10%
unemployment rate in order to
receive um
Any kind of an exemption from
the work requirements. So if you
have a 10% or higher
unemployment rate than, uh, your
folks don't have to meet the
work requirements, but if it's
below that.
Uh, the federal government would
no longer be allowed to provide,
um, kind of one off.
Um
Um, exemptions from the work
requirement.
And with that, Mr. Chair, or,
uh, yeah, Mr. Chair, uh, I'll,
uh, stand for questions.
Thank you.
Yes, Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, thank you for that
presentation, um, just a quick
question for you, um, can you
talk a little bit more about the
air. So we're at 14% error on
our snap, and we're paying, I
think you said 230 million more.
That correct?
So Mr. Chairman and
Representative right now under
current law, we don't, um, as
far as the benefits go, it's
100% federal, right? So under
that but under the
reconciliation bill as it
currently stands, passed by the
House, we would have
Yeah, we would have a um 25%
match rate.
OK. Thank you. So that's 200 and
Roughly 230 million, 280, 290
million 290 million, OK.
With that in mind then, um,
One, why is our rate of error so
high?
And 2, how many employees would
it take to hire to get our rate
down to less than 6% or. That is
a great question because, and I,
I think we're going to have to,
as this bill moves forward,
we're gonna have to dig into
this a lot more, um, I know that
there's, uh,
You know, we've got a lot of
overpayments. We've got a lot of
uh underpayments.
Um
They tracked us quite a bit at
their level, the the um
HCA does, but I do think this is
something that as we move
forward, we're gonna have to
really work with the department
quite a bit to dig into and get
a better understanding of.
What are the causes of, of this
high rate and how can we uh
bring it down.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam
Chair, um, I mean, it, it would
appear to me that there, there's
a solution.
And we've just got to figure out
what the solution if this goes
forward, and we've got to figure
out what that solution is before
it goes forward, so that we're
not stuck with with this bill. I
mean, obviously it'd save us
hundreds of millions of dollars
if we do that, so.
representative.
What's the department has
struggled to administer this
program as well as Medicaid
benefits.
For decades.
It's been under a federal
consent decree going back to
1988.
Of the plaintiffs arguing that
they're not processing.
Determinations fast enough that
they're too slow, so we've got
this tension with we want to be
fast and accurate, and we're
slow and inaccurate and and had
been under this litigation or,
like I said, decades.
And
You can kind of understand where
Congress is coming from.
On this standpoint, they're
saying we're paying 100% of the
cost of the benefit.
And there's too many states
making too many errors to the
good or to the bad.
For us to be on the hook to
afford that.
And we're gonna get folks'
attention and they got my
attention, and I think they got
your attention that this needs
to be looked at on a performance
standpoint, much closer, and
what is that error rate really
mean?
Is it
$1
$50. How much money are we
talking about and how that
calculation, is it giving
benefits to people that
shouldn't have gotten benefits.
Uh, either fraudulently or
inappropriately or is it the
over and underpayment? I think
there's more work for us to be
digging in to get you more
information about this and then
working with the department,
which has expanded its staffing.
To administer all of these
programs and its income support
division over the past couple of
years to try to get at.
Um, this very issue of being
able to handle the workload.
And what would that take to get
Handle the workload as well as
do it accurately and fast.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Charles for that night. I
look forward as we, as we, as
you guys dig into that, I look
forward to figuring out what
that is and and find a solution.
go to uh Senator Munoz.
Thank you. uh, thanks to chat
GBT we're not the highest.
California has the highest air
rates then followed by
Louisiana, Texas, Oregon, and
Alabama.
And so those are the highest
states with the highest air and
snap.
Doesn't say what percentage
they're at yet.
Um, but I mean, 290 million.
How, how quickly is is the
agency responded to this? Have
you asked the agency?
How they, how quickly they can
respond to the air rate that why
we're so high, is there any
anomalies in the air rate.
Any way to look at that
adjustment rate or is that done
federally through the.
Whoever, USDA or I don't know
who USD runs the SNAP program,
right?
Uh, that
Madam Chair, Mr. uh.
George Senator
I know he is, Mr. Chairman, so
that's, that's the, yeah,
um, Senator.
Um, yeah, USDA, it's run by
USDA, um,
And it falls under the farm
bill, that's all snap. Yes, I, I
do believe there are some states
that are higher than us. Um, I
think the average is at around
11%, um, of the states, and so
Uh, bringing our rate down to
5%, could be a
It, it could be a challenge, um,
I don't know, but I do think
that we're gonna be working with
the department quite a bit or
the authority quite a bit, um,
moving forward to kind of get
at.
Get at this, um, it's, it's they
have, they haven't specified how
long it would take them to get a
better rate. We'll, we'll, Madam
Chair, will the agenties give us
the air rates whether they
overpaid, underpaid.
Will they give, will they will
be able to see whether their
errors are happening so that we
can calculate what's gonna
happen because I mean, we look
at this and we're above the 10%,
so that's an automatic $290
million. We're not gonna get
below 10% in one year.
So we can already just imagine
the accounting for that 200.
And then plus the 56% of
additional costs, right?
That's roughly 30046 million.
And so that's 346 million of
costs that we know right now, I
don't think the Senate's gonna
take that out of the
reconciliation.
As they change the aerator error
rate.
So I mean, that's, that's 346
million in total.
Uh, I, I'm just hoping that the
department can come back and
say, well, our air raid is
actually.
Once we've really looked at it
and sent it to the feds and see
where if we do have those airs.
We can get it to 9%.
Which helps us by about $60
million which is all real money.
That's what I want to see, and
then the other thing on the
Medicaid portion that I think
we're not looking at as people
drop off of Medicaid, right?
And the Medicaid numbers are not
so high, the the especially
rural hospitals, right?
We're gonna say my my patient
load is not gonna be that high,
so I don't need to retain the
doctors and the nurses.
And the employee losses could
be.
More costly than what the
Medicaid losses are gonna be, I
mean, are we factoring that into
the to the.
There's a two part question
there.
We haven't calculated that
secondary effect of having a
larger uninsured population and
what that would mean for the,
the health care system, but
that's something that.
Madam Chas has asked us to work
on this interim, and, and we'll
do that. Yeah, and for like, I'm
just gonna use my hospital, for
example, we just barely got them
out of.
Bankruptcy, I'll call it to
ground zero, and they're barely
coming off level and then with.
The two payments that are coming
in, the healthcare premium.
Great costs, right? And the
other one and then the reduction
in Medicaid cause we're Medicaid
dependent hospital.
Those, those job positions that
they need to hire may be a lot
less factoring in saying we're
gonna drop.
These are just numbers.
Just shooting for, I'm not
saying they're true or in any
way, shape, we're gonna drop.
10,000 patients in McKinley
County. So what is our, what is
our staffing workload gonna look
like if 10 in and so I think
that's something else we need to
factor maybe with you and him
too, I mean.
With how many did we lose before
Charles, I think the last LFC
meeting said 150, 100 and 100
and something in general, the
Medicaid rolls have dropped
about 150,000 and we've not seen
an uptick in folks on the
exchange. We don't know if they
moved on to the private market
through their employer based
services, but we've not heard a
lot of.
Issues with having
150,000 more New Mexicans going
uninsured and, and having an
impact on the system as of yet,
but if you add another.
80 to 100.
You know, now we're starting to
talk.
Even bigger numbers, um, kind of
rivaling the number of people
that are.
On the uh expansion population
in maybe man Eric, maybe you can
break down a rural hospitals,
how much of their income is for
Medicaid.
So we can start looking at those
numbers and how many people are
in those counties that are on
Medicaid.
So we can see and use McKinley
County for an example, I think
Sierra is another one Santa Rosa
fun Frances was another one is
those number of people on
Medicaid and what that reduction
is gonna be and reach out to
some of them and see what the
real cost is gonna be because if
we lose doctors and we lose
nurses and we lose providers in
rural New Mexico War hit twice
as hard. We're gonna lose that
world provider, a doctor, and he
had 7000 patients in the system.
And he's moving to different
state.
A number of reasons.
Um, but you look at that one
provider, 7000 people that he
And in his system at one point.
And, and what happens when that
provider leaves and then
dropping off Medicaid in that,
and then the air rates I'd like
to know what the air rates, they
can be adjusted, that looks
like, cause that's a 346
million.
Arty out of reoccurring that.
We'll have to look at it LFC, so
thank you, man.
Madam,
Oh, I was just gonna say Matam
Chair and Senator, you know, I
do think that it's, we're gonna
end up.
Um, you know, if, if this goes
through, it's all ifs right now,
right, but.
Uh
We will end up having to look at
uncompensated care, quite a bit
more like we did prior to the
ACA, um, you know.
And we're gonna have to look at
things kind of from that lens, I
think, looking at how, how do we
support those safety net
hospitals which are
uncompensated care, because
people are still going to be
coming into the emergency rooms.
People are still gonna have to
be served, and so, uh,
That's kind of the lens that I
think going forward we have to.
Sort of take a look at it from,
so
it mean since you brought that
up. So ingen car is there's no,
that's all funded through the
county level and through the
mills, correct, indigent care.
There's no federal funding
attached to that. There is um
local revenue that's then sent
to the state.
To match for hospital
supplemental payments and so
there's, there's certain
Medicaid payments that go out to
help with kind of the
foundational operating cost.
Of the hospital independent of
their patient volume.
Um, for that very reason that
you talked about those small
world ones, they may, they may
not.
Having enough volume to really
see an increase, um.
Because it's so small, but you
gotta have something in Santa
Rosa, and so what's it cost to
keep that open? Federal
government helps share in that
cost through Medicare, as well
as this, um,
This new program that you all
passed uh is designed to further
shore up those types of.
Mm, OK. Make sure we, uh.
Get that in the washer
somewhere.
Right. Thank you, man.
co-chair. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I think a bunch of us
picked up on the error rate and,
you know, regardless of whether,
you know, this is a proposed
change either way, 14% seems way
too high and, and how come and
how do we get that down? We
ought to be doing that
regardless of whether this
changes in in federal funding
and whether it's underpayments,
overpayments, you know, we ought
to be doing it right, and if
it's staffing, we need to make
sure we staff that appropriately
to get that. I think a bunch of
us kind of perked up like, how
come?
Uh, I just had one very quick
question on the HDAA
performance, 75% of the funds
have to be spent in state. What
funds would be spent out of
state.
Uh, Madam Chair, I senator
souls, so the way that the bill
is written is that 25% can go to
home offices and to, um, so
that's where the 25% is going to
support the home offices, and it
doesn't necessarily mean that
every hospital will spend 25%
going to home offices, but that
is the way that the bill was
written.
So, Madam Chair, by home
offices, this is like the
corporate headquarters in
Tennessee can take 25% of the
money we allocate for their
administrative costs, that is
correct.
OK, uh, this kind of gets back
to the other stuff we're talking
about, about, you know, what are
the, the grant amounts when
they're trying to change from
50% down to 15%, you know, we're
in the medical area already
sending money out of state
that's not providing direct
medical support, so I just
picked up on it, wondering, you
know, what that meant when we're
not spending the money inside
New Mexico to provide actual
health care. Thank you, Madam
Chair. All right.
Let's go to Senator Townsend.
I think from my chair. um.
Are you aware of any document or
any historical
Studies that have been
Do that look at the error rate
and say,
This is our biggest exposure.
It's because of
This or that, or, you know, we
could all come up with a 100
reasons, but I mean,
Has there been studies done that
you're aware of?
Uh
Uh, Madam Chair and Senator.
Not as far as the actual study,
but the, the department, the
healthcare authority actually.
Uh, reports on a quarterly
basis, maybe even more
frequently than that to the
federal government, a series of
performance measures, um, and a
lot of those performance
measures kind of feed into that
error rate. We just honestly, we
just need to dig in uh more into
what
is actually causing the error
rate and um
And, and figure out, like, what
can we do as a state to kind of
bring that down more.
There is a lot of data reported
on that, yes.
And Madam Chair and Eric, has
that been shared with the
legislature, you know?
Uh
Madam Chair and Senator, it,
it's, it's, it is posted on the
internet, you can find it, um,
and we can always uh get that to
you if you need it. Would you
please?
Thank you.
Uh thank you, Madam Chair. Just
to, um, a question with regards
to FQHCs.
Um, whereabouts does this fall
when we're talking about
contracts, um, MCOs, because I
know they were like a
combination.
In, in my, from my point of
view, right, they provide
services.
Or residents in the community,
so most of those residents may
be um part of Turk race care,
whichever it may be, right, in
their community, um, and I asked
this, Madam Chair, because when
the access to grants happened
earlier on in the year.
The FQHC in my community, um,
they draw down about 625,000 a
month.
Um, you know, from RISA and all
of the other entities.
Of where they were going to be
short.
And we look at
Multiplying that, Madam Chair,
looking at other communities
here in Santa Fe, Las Cruces,
and other areas. I think we have
about 200 FQHCs in the state.
So where does it fall within
this as we talk more, Madam
Chair, because of those monies
are, that's another part of the
safety net that we have in the
state.
Um, we were in Portales last
year for health and human
services and what they provide
there is phenomenal, but they're
also what I call that safety
net.
Just a question as to where do
they fall.
Um, with regards to some of the
uh listings that I wrote down.
Uh, Madam Chair and uh senator,
so that
They do receive a lot of
Medicaid funding. They do risk,
but they do provide a lot of
funding to in a lot of indigent
care, that sort of thing.
Um
They receive funding from the
Department of Health.
Um, they receive funding, uh,
and I do believe that they
received some funding from the
federal government directly, uh,
as far as grants and that sort
of thing. Um, I don't have
anything specific in here that
lists them, but uh there is,
there are provisions.
Um, within the reconciliation
bill.
Um, that might end up affecting
the FQHCs.
And I asked this Madam Cheracuse
in talking with Secretary de
Blasi earlier in the session,
when I became aware of the cut,
um,
That the lack of access to the
money, um, you know, some of the
FUHCs utilize those dollars.
That's their, that's what they
run on.
Um, because of uncompensated
care and some of the other uh
contractual opportunities they
have. I say that lightly with um
some of the MCOs so if we could
also keep that in mind as we're
moving forward.
Because I know there are cuts in
the Department of Health, you
know, basis and talking with
Secretary de Blasi and some of
those other.
Uh, lack of dollars coming in,
so it's, it's just part of that
safety net, Madam Chair, that
I'd like some more information.
Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair, thank
you, um, presenters, you know,
I, I'm looking at page 15 and
and looking at the other
proposed snap changes.
And we're really concerns me is
the changes of the definition of
dependent child from under 18 of
age to under 7.
So, do we have an idea or or an
an idea or
Or or a clue as to how many
People, how many Mexicans are
gonna be impacted by this, if,
if it were to.
We'll need to get with. Thank
you for that, you know, the
reason I'm asking is I, I want,
I, I want whoever's listening
to, to realize that this is
going to be impact to real New
Mexicans, to real people, to, to
people who really depend on this
and need it. And so with, with
that, you know, I'm thinking,
you know,
The nutrition education is going
away of proposed to go away. I,
I know people who who work with
this program. I know the good
work that they do. They go out
to the schools, they educate
parents on on healthy meals on
how to prevent diabetes, a lot
of preventative care.
Go into these programs. And I'm
really, really concerned as to
these going away.
More people are gonna be uh
subjected to unhealthy food will
be, have to go to the Dollar
Generals and, and the dollar
stores of New Mexico and
purchase, you know, sodas and
chips and things that are more
cheaper.
Hamburgers at McDonald's or
whatever it is.
And what really, really bothers
me is the impact on the healthy
eating and the fruits and
vegetables.
And the, the, the, the meats
that are gonna be sacrificed
when people have to cut back on
their budgets.
Uh, proposed cuts. So that's why
I just wanted to know that I'm
sure really quick if there was
any idea of how many people, how
many Mexicans were actually
gonna be impacted by these
proposals.
That's part of our charge.
This interim is to dig into
areas that.
Appear like they're gonna be
moving.
And
Prioritize the kind of detailed
data work that you need,
including, like, what do we know
about the effectiveness of that
particular.
Program, uh, in New Mexico and
national maybe federal
discussions.
Um, and bring that back to you
as you figure to deal with
something that maybe.
Let's go to Senator Woods. One
question, Madam Chair. Uh, when
we start talking about on page
14 on this error rate. Who will
determine that error rate.
Is that a state?
Chargers at a federal.
Madam Chair, there'll be,
there's a federal definition for
how to calculate it, and then
the department's responsible
for.
Uh, making that calculation and
submitting it for.
approval of that calculation to
the federal government.
Many times we've seen that those
are also subject to audits from
the federal government to make
good, so I didn't we, we already
collecting the information to do
this.
Correct.
The states are collecting this,
that's how we know that
potentially California and Texas
might be on the same hook for.
25%, which is a.
Big sea change for, that's real
money.
Thank you.
I had a question, uh Charles and
Eric, um, as we were talking
about earlier, this committee's
got a big job and we're taking,
trying to figure out what bit of
the elephant we're gonna take
first.
I want you to give me some ideas
or give the committee some
ideas.
On a systems model.
For us, especially when we're
looking at medical assistance
because that's the one that
apparently has the most risk for
federal reduction.
You know, I like those things. I
like to see what all those
inputs are that goes into a
model.
And how they're affected. So do
you have some recommendations
now that we could that we could
consider.
As we're taking each one of
these pieces because it's a lot
of information.
And it can be all over. Do you
have a recommendation on that
starting Madam Char, I would
recommend starting with
narrowing the field.
What we know is that potentially
play.
And that will help you focus in
on, and then the prioritization
from like the dollar amounts.
When something is going to kick
in, you know, like I said, that
they pushed off some of the
harder decisions, and this was
the fight at the very end in the
house between.
Was that a lot of like the more
what we're seeing is a bigger
cost savings were pushed out as
this current administration.
And there was a concern that
they needed to be brought in.
Sooner to help with deficit
reduction. So there's that
tension that's going on uh
within Congress as well. So if
something is slated to go into
effect 4 years from now.
Be more worried about what's on
the radar like the food stamp
cuts in 2 years, then maybe
Medicaid work requirements that
might be, um, so that will help
you further narrow the field on
what's the most immediate.
That's where we'll need to get
into some of the details with
our natural resources agencies
because basically there's a
rollback of a lot of stuff that
was related to climate change
situation in the inflation
reduction Act.
And that could be everything
from
Administering certain types of
tax credits or signing off on
them, um, versus we got extra
money for clean drinking water.
Well, if the clean drinking
water is not on the table for
us, but
You know, some energy efficiency
or EV charging station thing is,
then that helps you make
decisions over.
Is that worth backfilling?
When we talked this afternoon.
About this 10 year window.
There's some programs they're
putting into place or some
things that are delayed. There's
some things that are going to be
temporary from, that's gonna be
more in the, the tax area, um.
But the timing of these things
is going to be just as important
about whether or not it's in
play, and I think the
combination of those things
helps you narrow down of your
task and what we need to worry
about.
I would say
Don't worry
Too much about the annual
appropriations process. We know
kind of what's in play. We can
talk to our congressional
delegation, like, what's
What's real
You know, they haven't
passed a budget on time and
maybe twice in the last 20
years, so it's hard to see what
might shake out, so chasing down
rabbit holes of, of are we going
to need to backfill head start.
But
I would not recommend you to do
that yet.
I think we're able to put
together a systems chart for
each one of these key elements
they medicate is obviously we'll
have to snap.
Uh, possibly some of these
things in education, then we
need to
be able to track it also.
And I'd like to be able to have
some tracking mechanism coming.
Um
I've got some ideas on how the
model could look, Senator Souls
on that and how we might be able
to do it.
That it is one system.
And when we start bringing in,
oh my gosh, you know, even
counties put and what have you,
we need to know that. We need to
understand where those, all
those inputs are coming from, so
then you can, you can do a very
accurate multiplier.
At the end, because, of course,
we'll have this meeting and a
lot of people have been
listening. There's been a lot of
interest in and we'll have a lot
of um questions when we get
home.
How are you this hospital issue
that the senators brought up.
Um, when the present
presentation was made about we
still have hospitals that are
going to be in flux even after
that, that work had been done by
the New Mexico legislature,
which hospitals and why and do
we need to start pushing the
panic button.
Uh, you'd made a, a comment like
that, so we want to see that, we
want to understand it. And if
it's, you know, if it's McKinley
County, of course, we're going
to be all over that, wanting to
know what the, what's going on
and um.
But I think this has been a good
start this morning. I think it's
been a lot of good information
for this committee.
We look forward to our one
o'clock presentations and 2
o'clock and certainly
everybody's welcome to come back
and listen. And as I've
mentioned before for the
committee, if you just want to
grab a sandwich and hang out
here in the building, that's OK
too, because it's hard to go
someplace and get back within an
hour, uh, and one of the things
that uh at least for myself, I'm
a stickler about staying to the
calendar and what the schedule
says for that day.
So, we're gonna be back at one
and I want to thank you again
for being here.
