OK.
Good morning, Act A.
Here we are at Santa Ana Star
Casino. Hello to those online
joining us.
And we will start with our first
agenda, our, our 5th agenda
item, we are, we were in recess
we're reconvening here yesterday
we were at Zia Pueblo with the
great day there and great
turnout in uh
NQC
and today we are here at Santa
Ana with the governor Armijo.
Who will be
Welcoming us and thank you to
our legislators. I believe we
have.
represent rob Caballero, who has
not introduced herself yet, but
the rest of our representatives
and senators here were also here
yesterday. So Representative
Roybal Caballero, would you like
to introduce yourself?
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee,
members of the audience and
those viewing. My name is
Patricia Royal Caballero and I
represent House District 13,
which is the far southwest
quadrant of, uh, Albuquerque and
I love being on this committee.
I've been on this committee
since I, uh, all my tenure, and
I look forward to a fruitful
meeting today, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Thank you. And just, uh, remind
the members about having one
microphone at a time and um.
And you can begin with you're
ready, governor.
OK, ready?
Good morning everybody.
It's good to see all of you this
morning. Um, I'm Governor Myron
Armijo for the Pueblo Santa Ana
and governor for calendar year
2024 and uh we're running into
our last three months of the,
the administration, so I'm
looking forward to uh this, oh,
goodness gracious, here's my
lieutenant governor. Yes, way to
go. All right, Madam Chair, um,
we'd like to say welcome to all
of you this morning and I'll
have um Lieutenant Governor say
a few words here as well.
So um we're going to tag team
this um, this issues here, but,
uh, gosh, welcome again for
coming to Santa Ana and thinking
about us, we're we're we're just
happy to, uh, host all of you,
not only at the, the Hyatt, but
here at the Santa Ana Star. So,
um, it's been a, it's been a
very good year and I'm pretty
sure it's been a great year for
all of you. And, um, uh, I'm
just, uh, looking forward to the
next legislative session, 60-day
session, and see how that all
pans.
Out, but, um, uh, I wanna
welcome you and if I could just
say a quick prayer for all of
you for a good day today. Um, if
you would stand.
