Our meeting here on the campus
of the American Indian Arts
Center for Lifelong Education.
So with that, we will begin with
agenda item number one, which is
a welcome and status update from
the IAIA Mr. Larry Marabba, vice
president of operations, IAIA
and Mr. Felipe Colin, Provost of
IAIA.
Thank you.
What you doing?
Before you begin your
presentation, I will go ahead
and ask my colleagues to uh
introduce ourselves, um.
And I'll start with you,
Representative Allison, thank
you.
You had to have been
a deer. I am Anthony Ellison. I
represent San Juan County, and
that's in the northwest corner
of New Mexico. You don't get no,
no further northwest than I do.
It's good to be here. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chairman,
everybody. Good to see you, John
Blockhouse District 51 in Otero
County. Uh, it's a little
strange. Yesterday, it was like
almost 90 degrees back where I'm
from in Alamogordo, and I come
here and it's like in the 40s.
So it's fall up here, guys. It's
great to be here. Thanks, Madam
Chair.
Gozehoer.
Good morning, everyone. I'm so
glad to be here this morning.
I'm Charlotte Little. I come
from the publics of San Felipe
and Taos, and I represent House
District 68, which is in the
northwest corner of Albuquerque.
Thank you. Good to be here.
Good morning, everyone. I'm
Patty Lundstrom. I represent
House District 9, that is half
the city of Gallup and I
represent 7 Navajo chapters.
I've served on this committee
for 24 years, both voting and
non-voting, but today I get to
be voting for a day, so I'm
happy about that. But, uh, I'd
like to thank the group for
hosting us today.
Uh, good morning everybody.
I am representative
I represent parts of uh Sibula
in McKinley County and my
district I have, excuse me, 12,
uh, Navajo chapters and the
whole Pueblauni.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Good morning to everyone. My
name is Nancy, Senator Nancy
Rodriguez. I'm from Santa Fe and
my district is just over to the
other side of the IAIA and I
always want to grab this area
when we're doing redistricting,
it just doesn't work.
So I just love it here. It's
been a while since I've been to
the, uh, Institute of American
Indian Arts. It's still as
beautiful as always. Thank you
for hosting us.
Good morning. It's great to be
here again. I think this is our
2nd time being to the school
here. I'm, um, Senator Shannon
Pinto. I represent District 3,
which is the northwest corner of
the state, all the way up to the
four corners and half of Gallup,
uh, almost, almost all for 91,
but, you know, it's been, uh,
Really interesting interim this
year
and this is our last meeting, so
thank you for our members that
are here today and, uh, those
that have joined us and thank
you to our host. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you. Good
morning, everyone. I'm
representative Doreen Wanda
Johnson. I represent House
District 5.
McKinley in San Juan Counties. I
represent 15 Navajo Nation
chapters and East Gallop, and
this is my 5th term, my 10th
year, and, uh, really enjoy
sharing this committee. I want
to thank my colleagues this
morning and the staff and
welcome the guests and
presenters and so pleased, and
it's a privilege to be hosting
this meeting on this campus. We
appreciate it and it's just.
so beautiful, and we're proud of
this, uh, college. Thank you. So
with that, um, you may begin.
Wonderful. Good morning, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee. My name is Larry
Mirabal, and I'm the vice
president of operations here at
the Institute of American Indian
Arts.
Doctor Martin sends his regards.
He's currently traveling to
Chicago for HLC meetings. So
today you've got a stunt double.
Welcome to the Institute of
American Indian Arts, where our
mission is to empower creativity
and leadership in indigenous
arts and cultures through higher
education, lifelong learning,
and community outreach,
community engagement, excuse me.
Want to begin by thanking the
New Mexico legislature for your
continued support of tribal
colleges, specifically your
support of our capital outlay
requests, inclusion in the New
Mexico Lottery program and
ongoing dual credit support.
We want to extend a very special
thank you especially to
Representative Allison.
Who's been a steadfast supporter
of all the TCUs in New Mexico.
Thank you, Representative
Allison.
IIA was established in 1962.
And it's the birthplace of
contemporary native arts.
We are also in 1994 land grant
institution.
We're one of 37 tribal colleges
in the United States.
And we're accredited by the
Higher Learning Commission.
Our student body represents 94
tribes and 38 states.
IIA's collection of over 9500
contemporary native artworks is
the largest collection of its
kind in the world.
This collection is maintained by
the IAIA Museum of Contemporary
Native Arts.
It's located downtown just
across the street from the
cathedral, and we invite you to
visit our museum to see all that
they have to offer.
IIA offers 4 certificate
programs.
6 undergraduate programs and 3
master's programs.
Our provost Felipe Colon will be
talking about these in more
depth in just a moment.
We hope you enjoy your time on
our campus, and we want you to
consider IAIA as a resource in
whatever capacity we can assist
with the work that you do.
Thank you for joining us today.
We're so pleased that you could
be here.
Gujopa
and uh that way to, uh, Madam
Chairman, thank you so much for,
uh, gracing us with this, uh,
meeting today here on our
campus, um, as Larry mentioned,
we're an institution that's been
in existence for a little over
60 years now, and in that time
we've evolved, um, quite, uh,
quite quickly. We've gone from
essentially a high school, uh,
program, uh, of course, to
undergrad associate's programs
to baccalaureate programs, and
as Larry mentioned now into
graduate programs, um, and we've
about doubled our
student population even in the
last decade, um, as mentioned,
we have 94 total tribal nations
represented in our student body,
um, and that's fairly average
for us. We generally have in the
high 90s to even over 100
different tribal nations
represented and even amongst
that group, we have 18 New
Mexico tribes represented.
Including 15 of the 19 pueblos
within our current student body,
but I would say we've had
students from every tribe across
the state of New Mexico and our
student body at any given time,
uh, over our years. uh, as
mentioned, we have 6
undergraduate programs, of
course, as our name suggests,
our largest undergraduate
program, uh, is our studio arts
program, um, which of course
focuses both on what we might
call sort of some of the
traditional arts, but more
specifically on the contemporary
arts or those arts in particular
that have evolved within
indigenous communities.
over the last half century, of
course, for us, there is no
necessary delineation between
artistic traditions, but what we
encourage in our students is the
contemporary expression of their
existence through their work,
um, and oftentimes that is done
through mediums that were maybe
unfamiliar to our ancestors but
are very much a part of our
contemporary existence, um, and
in doing that we've been
incredibly successful. Of
course, our students have gone
on to become well regarded, well
known artists, of course, all of
you who visit Indian market
every year.
Probably see our flags, our
penances on many, many booths
across Indian market, uh, but in
addition, we have a lot of our
students who have gone on to
form, uh, nonprofit and
entrepreneurial business
ventures with uh colleagues,
with peers within their
community.
And we have many more who have
also gone on to become
administrators for art, not just
within our institutions here in
the New Mexico area, but really
across the country and across
the world. In addition to that
program, we also have really is
our 2nd largest program, our
cinematic arts program, which of
course is a very contemporary
art, uh, but one that we're very
proud to continually champion
amongst our students, one of the
tenants really of all of our
programs, undergraduate and
graduate is about expressing and
sharing indigenous, uh,
contemporary stories and of
course cinematic arts.
is one of the greatest mediums
for that in the contemporary
era, so we're very appreciative,
not only, of course, of much of
the state and private support
that we've received, um, in
growing our cinematic arts
program, but what that has
really meant for our students
and our alumni, many of whom are
actors, writers, producers,
technical experts on many of the
TV programs and films that are
in particular featuring
indigenous storylines,
indigenous media today. Uh, we
also have programs in museum
studies, um, which deal with the
contextualization of
contemporary.
indigenous art and culture and
again many graduates from those
programs are now working at
institutions across the state,
across the nation across the
world. Um, and that's something
that we, uh, have really done
since our start, but we recently
grew into a graduate program as
well, our MFA and cultural
administration, which is
designed to create the next
generation.
Not just a curators and
collections managers, but really
administrators leading the
institutions both for their own
indigenous communities and for
the world, spreading indigenous
knowledge and value to the
places where it's potentially
most significant in sharing our
history and our people with the
world. We have our creative
writing program, which again has
both an undergrad and graduate
uh component, a graduate program
in particular is, uh,
particularly celebrated
recently. We have a number of,
uh, graduates from that program
and mentors in that program who
have now received national
awards and.
including Pulitzers and, and
other awards, including folks
like Tommy Orange, um, probably
most famously this year
receiving a number of
nominations and awards. Uh, we
also have then some of our
smaller but no less important
programs, including our
indigenous liberal studies
program, um, which really
underpins the curriculum of all
of our programs here teaching
indigenous history,
anthropology, um, and in ways
that again are derived really
from indigenous perspectives on
those topics, something you
generally don't see in many
other places in the world.
We have our performing arts
program, which is actually one
of our original programs. We've
just revived it in the last
decade.
Of course, is working quite a
bit hand in hand with our
cinematic arts program and
producing the next generation of
those actors and those
performers who work on stage, on
screen, big screen even, um, and
then we also have within sort of
the auspices of our institution,
a number of certificate
programs, including in business
and entrepreneurship, including
in things like Native American
art history, although we're in
the process now of growing that
into a full baccalaureate
program, um, and our recent most
recent program, which we're
going to be going to HLC for
accreditation here in the.
coming semester is our first,
uh, baccalaureate in science,
which will be a computer science
program focused on, um, arts
media and so how technologies
are evolving and helping uh
indigenous people to express
their art, their culture, their
history through technology. Uh,
we've just hired on our first
what's gonna be our founding
chair for the program and again
going through our accreditation
process. We're also looking in
the near future at the potential
of a PhD program in particular
grown from our indigenous
liberal studies program.
it will have a lot of
interdisciplinary aspects of
culture and art embedded within
there as well.
Um, some other exciting
developments, some of you may
know, we sent, uh, a very large
group, about 42 indigenous
students to Venice this summer,
uh, to participate in the
Jeffrey Gibson Biennale, um, of
course, this was the very first
time in the history of the
country that a solo indigenous
artist was selected to represent
the United States of America at
the Venice Biennale, which's
largely regarded the most
important art event, uh, every
other year in the world, um, so
very excited to have our
students participate in that and
looking forward to more
opportunities to send our
students.
around the world. Um, one of the
things that we have done as an
institution again over our years
has grown and one of the latest
growths is to look at indigenous
arts, uh, and champion in
indigenous arts globally, um,
that is something that our
students are really taking up
and uh really embodying again as
part of that leadership mission
as well. Um, we also have here
on campus, and I invite you all
to, to wander through the
building, although we're under
construction now, uh, a brand
new research center for
contemporary native art. We've
always had research, uh, a
mainstay of our institution and
our curriculum.
And now in the last few years
we've been able to move very
deliberately into actually
creating within the auspices of
our institution, a specific
research wing.
I mean this is something that's
been supported through federal,
through state, uh, through
private funding. We're actually
hoping to have our grand opening
pending a few more renovation
changes, uh, in the spring, so
we invite you all back for that,
of course, it's gonna be a
fantastic asset for undergrad
and grad students, but we hope,
uh, and it certainly is our
design that it will also be an
asset for those that are
interested in studying
indigenous art and culture and
history, utilizing our fantastic
physical collection using our
fantastic archival collections,
um, to really help, uh,
contextualize and spread.
Uh, really authentic information
about indigenous people and to
create a place where that
research can be conducted, can
be published, uh, can become a
part of the scholarly and
academic world even more than
our, uh, existing programs have
done so, so that's just a brief
overview of, of who we are and
what we're doing, um, yeah,
we'll mention too that we hit a
milestone in the last few years.
Um, we are now at a headcount of
total students over 1000. Uh, we
also hit a major milestone of
having a retention rate of over
60%.
Which is, uh, several magnitudes
over what we see at many other
tribal colleges, and we think
this really speaks not only to,
of course, the amazing work that
we do, our faculty, our staff
do, but the amazing commitment
of those students who are coming
from really international.
Uh 94 tribal nations across the,
across the country. Many also
from even outside of the
country. Um, we are in many ways
an international school. We're
bringing together the future
leaders of indigenous America
together to learn from each
other to build those connections
and to hopefully lead their
communities in the future in
ways that benefit all of us as
indigenous people, uh, as the
country and as the world, so
thank you again.
Wow, that is absolutely amazing.
Committee members.
Uh, Senator Pinto. Thank you,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee and thank you for the
work you do here, especially for
our Native American students.
How do you, do you track your
graduates?
Yeah, so we actually, we track
our graduates and what we call
sort of the grassroots way,
which is basically to continue
those connections, um, very much
in an indigenous way, you know,
when you come here to II
oftentimes you consider
yourself, and we certainly
consider you part of the larger
family. The mentorships, the
peer relationships, the faculty,
the staff relationships you form
here oftentimes carry through
the entirety of, of really your
career, your life as as
indigenous artists as indigenous
professionals, so, you know, we
track that oftentimes through
our alumni association, they're
constantly getting stories.
about the successes, uh, track
that through things like our,
uh, internal systems of, you
know, keeping contact via email,
phone, but we also participate
in a number of national um uh
really clearing houses where we
can actually keep track of our
graduates and their achievement,
um, and compare those to also
other institutions and their
graduates and their
achievements. So again, we have
sort of our formal and our
informal processes of those.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I'm thinking more
along the lines of what careers
they've, you know, have you
turned out teachers or where are
we leaning or is it I'm pretty
sure it's gonna be really mixed
because, uh, students are hard
at work. Yeah, I know, it is
definitely a mixed group, you
know, again, being the largest
of our departments, most of our
students go on to be
professional artists, uh, and
work within the arts field. Um,
however, uh, again, our
curriculum is diverse. We offer
a lot of opportunities for our
students within their dis
discipline within their degree
plan, of course, to specialize,
but also to take courses that
help support them in other
endeavors that they might be
interested in, including
business and entrepreneurship.
We have a lot of students who go
in and start again their own
arts consortium, start their own
arts businesses, go to work for
galleries, cultural centers,
museums, both at, you know,
introductory levels maybe as
curators, as educators, but also
as administrators. We've also
seen a rather large uptick in
our graduates and it has been
something we've seen over the
years, but, uh, there's been a
number of recently who've gone
also into tribal.
governance, um
Elected or appointed by their
tribal communities to be
leaders, and not just within the
areas of arts or preservation or
culture, but even within uh
areas of governance. Um, so
we've seen an uptick in that,
um, and then, of course, you
know, within the various
industries that support, you
know, both the state and, you
know, the national industries,
uh, within cinematic arts within
preservation, within
environmental, of course, having
a USDA office here in school. We
have a lot of students who get
very interested in traditional
agriculture, animal husbandry,
things.
That they go into as well, so
it's incredibly diverse. Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
and where can we see this data?
Actually, the best place to look
at that would be in the SNAP
report, um, and forgive me, I
forget what Snap exactly stands
for, but it is actually a
national report that is done
with a number of institutions,
and we can certainly provide a
link to that snap data. It is
publicly available though, uh,
for anybody who would like, I'd
have to look it up and send it
on, but, uh, I believe if you
just Googled Snap higher ed,
you'll probably find the primary
site and then of course, all the
colleges that participate,
including ours, are listed, you
know, alphabetically within the
glossary.
Yeah, you know, I don't know if
we have a link to it yet. They
just released the report this
last year, so most of our data,
you know, we pull into our own
systems and then report on, but
we'll have to see if we have a
snap link there as well.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, and you mentioned
about business entrepreneurship.
So they leave here with their
education. Um, are they able to
come back and have funding or do
you guys go another step beyond
that, especially since their
alumni.
Yeah, so there's there's a
couple, of course, uh, you know,
being indigenous majority
population, um, we generally
have over 50% of our students
that qualify for Pell, um, and
so many receive funding in their
undergrad for PE, which of
course lasts a total of
potentially 5 years. I mean more
in the sense of them starting
their being artists.
Um, them starting their, their
road or their career. OK, so
like seed money for for small
business, you know, we, we
don't, as a, as a college at
least we don't provide sort of a
an alumni, um, funding source
when it comes to starting small
business, but certainly a major
part of our curriculum is
experiential learning, where
they build the connections with
the kind of, uh, companies,
industries that can provide that
kind of funding. So you don't
direct them to resources, or you
don't have like a resource
center or any kind of.
business incubator. We certainly
direct them to resources and it
would include business
incubators, including ones like
we have, for instance, at the
Indian Pueblo Cultural Center in
Albuquerque, um, but no, we
don't have one on campus, a
small business incubator now.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, do you have the
Secondary education students
come through.
I mean what schools are bringing
students through here for tours,
um, before they get to college.
Yes, yeah, so we, we have a
robust outreach program to a lot
of the, the high schools and,
and secondary schools across,
um, the state, uh, we actually
just had an event last Thursday,
um, where we had roughly sort of
300 students that came, of
course, we always send our, our
invitations to to a lot of our
other public events, our
powwows, our open houses, things
like that. So the schools bring
them or you just send an invite
telling them you're having.
Opening and they come on their
own. We kind of have a mix of
both, so we have an outreach and
recruitment wing that they
actually go to the schools and
then when we do have major
events, we send the invite and
generally the high schools will
bring the students directly to
us for those events. Oh gosh,
I'd have to look across our
list, but, you know, of course,
a lot of them from, from the,
the northern part of the state,
um, and a lot of the Pueblo
charter schools as well tend to
attend that as well as major
schools like SFIS and, and Madam
Chair, member of the committee,
I think.
I don't say kind of automatic
that we would see them come
here, but you know, a lot of our
students too are not on the
reservation, um, especially when
we talk about Albuquerque Public
schools and just being right
there that there's actually, you
know, some that they don't go
into this culture shock,
thinking that there's only you
and them there that you guys
really exist too, um, and
transportation seems to be an
issue of us trying to get
funding for students too.
Kind of do some field trips. I
mean, I've been here. I've been,
um, went to all the museums and
got to do all the colleges up
even southern New Mexico, uh,
when I was in high school with a
bunch of other schools, and I
don't really, when I went into
teaching, I didn't see that
opportunity for my students
again. So it, it's important,
um, that they, they're able to
have those experiences off the
reservation.
And
You know, uh, I have family
members went to school here,
photography, artists singing,
um, it's a really good, so I
think it allows our students to
really have that open mind that
they don't really have to decide
on a career field, uh,
especially when you talk about
expressing yourselves, um, with
our, our cultural aspects, but
thank you for all you do and if
there's anything else anymore,
um, we can help you with, but I
think we really like to see the
The data in that sense of, of
how we can maybe have some ideas
to help you. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
And if I can add it there, 11
other thing that we do and we've
grown again exponentially. In
fact, we have over 550 students
involved in it this year, uh, is
our dual credit program, um,
which we have with over a dozen
schools, including some in the
Albuquerque area, um, that
allows students at least to get
an exposure to our curriculum,
um, part of the courses offered
through that are co-taught, so
we have a member of our faculty
teamed up with a member of the
faculty at that high school.
Um,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, the
So we have like photography.
The student taking photography
in APS.
And then the teacher gets
pulled. So I'm like, how can we
fill that gap so that we still
have arts and culture in the
schools, um, so it's filled by
full-time substitute right now,
but I think someone more
specialized, um,
It would be nice, especially if
it was from the school, but, um,
thank you.
Thank you
Senator Rodriguez.
Thank you, Madam Chairman. Um,
I, uh, I'm just, um, elated to
hear you speak and see the many
great things happening at this
school. uh, it's uniqueness is
really very, very great. Um, let
me just mention that the Santa
Fe Community College does have a
very nice um business incubator,
small business program that
works there. I'm wondering if
maybe you can collaborate with
them, uh, to help students here
who may have an idea about a
business and sometimes.
What happens is that they think
about establishing a business
and then when they see all the
intricacies of getting us
started they back off and you
can't blame them. It's not an
easy process, but if you have
some support, a system that, uh,
truly supports them not only
from its inception, but as an
incubator to help them move on
and and stay with them, support
them, even with funding,
whatever else they need until
that business gets going, um,
and sometimes even past that to
ensure.
It stays in place, uh, and so I
just thought I'd bring that up
just, uh, you may already have a
relationship with the community
college. I don't know, but just
wanted to bring that up. And
Madam Chairman, I just had, um,
one, maybe a couple of small
short questions, is that, um, on
your degree programs you
mentioned, um, Larry and Felipe
about the um
Uh, the fact that they, a lot of
the students go on to be
artists, you know, in the
community. You know what I find
and it's, I, I marvel at this is
that a lot of the students that
I have seen or talked to are
already great artists, my
goodness, they come in and dowed
with a skill that I could never
achieve if I worked all my life
for it. And so, um, it's just
amazing to see that, but that
being said,
Um, art is in a very big
integral part of healing for a
lot of people.
And so I'm wondering if you, uh,
as Senator Pinto here, or chair,
co-chair asked um if, if you
track that to see how many of
the students that major in art,
some form of art out here,
bachelor's degree in that, go on
to work in areas of healthcare,
um, and so I don't know, and do
you, do you have a program for
like healthcare, um.
And I wrote it down here, um, I
guess it would be just a
healthcare program having to do
with art or not at this point.
Trying to visualize what you
have. Right. Yeah, I mean, we,
we definitely acknowledge, of
course, as you said, that, you
know, art is an integral part of
of really healing and what we'd
call in general to be sort of
indigenous wellness, you know,
that connection with, uh,
history, that connection with um
the art and even the process of
creating art is in and of
itself, you know, a therapeutic
and, and a, and a wellness um
practice. We don't have a
program specifically in art
therapy or um or, you know, what
we might consider to be sort of
classic, uh, program for, for
our therapy or well.
this. However, we do have
courses in particular within our
indigenous liberal studies
program that do focus in
particular on holistic wellness.
Um, and so there are students
who do choose to utilize their
art for those particular
purposes. Uh, I know in my
experience even being at the
school now for a little over 12
years, I've had a few students
who have taken that up as their
particular interest either for
their.
Uh, thesis work or potentially
even for career track, um, I'd
have to look at the data to see
if we have any students who have
specifically reported going into
a wellness or healthcare field.
Uh, I wouldn't expect we'd have
many, if, if any, that chose
that as a specific career, um,
but again within an indigenous
context, going into their
communities, becoming those
artists in their communities.
They're doing that oftentimes
in, in more of a, an integrative
way than, um, you know, might be
reflected in something like a
survey of their work, I'm sure.
that they're working with youth,
they're working with elders,
they're working with communities
who, of course, are suffering
and dealing with issues and
utilizing their art to support
that, but may not necessarily be
reporting that um as a
healthcare related activity.
Thank you for that, and I'm
thinking that maybe perhaps uh
if these students or some of the
students may want to open up a
business that even healthcare
business that it could be a
focus on our art being a very
integral part of that business
too. So there's several ways of
course to do it, but I thank you
for having an open mind. And my
final question, promise, Madam
Chairman, is, is this school,
um, only for natives or can a
person who is non-native, come
to.
the school also and do they get
the same?
Um, benefits, the same
opportunities. Yes, yeah,
definitely we, um, we're one of
actually only a handful of the,
of the, uh, tribal colleges in
the country that are, that are
open to, to everyone. Um, we are
the only of the tribal colleges
that is, uh, congressionally
chartered and as a part of that,
um, we actually have a mandate
to be open to everyone and we
embrace that very much. Um,
we've got students who are
non-native both from this
country and really from all over
the world to come and study with
us. Also, a number of our
programs, uh, not our
baccalaureate.
Programs, but our certificate
programs are also available
online, um, and so that's an
opportunity for those again,
non-native who might not be in
New Mexico, who might not
necessarily have a connection to
learn from our curriculum, um,
no matter where they are, so
yes, thank you very much for
that and Madam Chairman, that's
all I have.
Thank you, Senator.
Representative Alison Shanaya.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you for the good
presentation.
It's always a good feeling when
you're mentioned as a part of a
success story.
I guess uh my success with IAIA
was in signing off on some of
the capital outlay projects.
And it's very easy to sign off
on requests when you know that
the entities are going to spend
the money as soon as possible.
Not
like some of my other chapters
where we have to wait and keep
bugging him and then find out
that they're going to revert at
the end of the 2 years. So I'm
very glad that I was able to
work with IEIA in that way.
But I think uh the biggest
credit I think would come from
my fight for dual credit.
When I was a member of uh the
HAFC under Madam Chair
Lundstrom. She taught me that if
you believe in something so much
you have to fight for it and you
have to keep fighting for it
until you win it. So I owe
credit to Madam Lindstrom, my
chair to teach me how to fight
for something that you know is
worth fighting for. And in my
case was the dual credit. There
was times that other people had
come into our HAF.
meetings wanting to reduce the
dual credit, sometimes even cut
it in half, but we had to fight
for it to put it back to the
original amounts, and I know
that really helped IAIA and then
College and NTU. So, thank you
for the mention and I appreciate
working with you. Uh, I hope.
Uh, my colleagues continue to
help you and support you. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Shanna,
Representative Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
thank you so much for your
presentation. I have a
Question following, um, the
question that was raised earlier
on outreach. I was curious, can
you tell me what the composition
percentage wise would be fine of
the of New Mexico students,
students from New Mexico versus
those that are outside.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Yeah, so we, we, that tends to
fluctuate year to year, but we
generally have about a 50/50
split, so roughly 50% of our
headcount is generally from New
Mexico, including those 18, uh,
New Mexico tribes that are
represented. Thank you very
much, Madam Chair. My other
questions were asked and
responded to, so that's it.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Little. Thank you, colleagues. I
would like to just say thank you
for uh the great presentation
and information and hosting us
and thank you for a coffee and
all that it entails. I do have
one curiosity about your work
with um or if you do have a
relationship with the the
Smithsonian Institute in
Washington DC and how that works
with your students.
Yeah, so we actually have a, a
long standing relationship with
NMAI, uh, made even more so by
the fact that one of our former
board members, Doctor Cynthia
Chavez Lamar, is now the
director there. So we have an
annual internship program that
we run where we send students
both to the NMAI in DC and also
in New York, uh, to work with
curatorial staff and also to the
CRC, the Cultural Resource
Center in Suitland, Maryland,
uh, to work with the collection
staff. And in fact, one of our
alumni, uh, Tazba Ghassan, um,
who came through our undergrad
program is now working in our
grad program.
Actually inning this summer in
our collection. Uh, she is now
assistant to, uh, Doctor Lamar
at NMAI, so continuing to kind
of build those relationships
with uh with that organization
as well.
Very well, awesome. I used to
live in Washington DC and really
enjoyed the experience at
Smithsonian Institute, so.
Thank you for your presentation
again, and we will heed uh
Representative Allison's advice
and continue to fight for your
work here and our students on
this campus.
Thank you. Thank you so much.
OK. Before we move on to agenda
item number 2. I'd like to ask
my colleagues, Madam Floor
leader Chay and Senator Lopez to
introduce yourselves.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm
happy to be here. I'm sorry I'm
late. I had a little trouble
finding it. I, but I'm gonna be
able to visit the committee in
the next 2 days at the Capitol,
I'll be doing two committees,
but thank you for your
hospitality. I do apologize for
my tardiness.
And thank you, Madam Chair and
good morning everyone. I'm Linda
Lopez, state senator, District
11, which is the Southwest
quadrant of Bernalillo County,
and I too was tardy. I have an
automatic pilot on my car that
goes to the roundhouse, so I
drove to the roundhouse. I got
down, went up and everything.
I'm like, oh, what happened? So
that's my excuse, but it's real.
OK, but oh, thank you.
Thank you, colleagues, I think
we all did the same thing.
Thank you so much. All right,
let's go ahead and bring up the
Office of the State Engineer.
And
Here a status of the Indian
water rights settlements and the
Indian water rights Settlement
Fund. Please come forward and I
will uh let you introduce
yourselves. Tell us who you are
and your positions and then you
All right, can you hear me OK?
Great. Well, thank you, um,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for having
us here. Um, my name is
Elizabeth Anderson. I am the new
state engineer designate for New
Mexico. So I wanted to just take
a quick minute to introduce
myself and thank you for
inviting our, our agency here to
present to you today, um, I'm
looking forward to getting to
know, um, I've, I know some of
you, but not all of you, and I'm
looking forward to getting to
know all of you better, um, so.
With that, I wanted to say, um,
that our agency has, and our
staff have been extremely busy
with Indian water rights
settlements, um, for the past,
you know, years and years, but,
um, it's been very productive
and we now have 6 settlements
moving their way through
Congress, um, so that's exciting
and, um, I wanted to give credit
to Governor Michelle Lujan
Gresham for all the work that
has happened under her 10.
here as governor and all the
work yet to be done, um, but I
think that the support for the
settlements is really truly
notable and it's, um, historic
that we have so many settlements
going through right now, um, and
a lot of support for those as
well. So it's critical that
those go through and it's
critical that we continue to
make progress on our Indian
water rights settlements, and I
wanted to make sure you all know
how important I feel that is as
well.
So you have my full support in
getting those settlements, um,
completed and approved, um, all
the rest of the settlements that
we need to get done are also
extremely high priority for me,
um, and for our governor and our
staff. So, um, with that, I
wanted to pass it over to, um,
our tribal liaison for the
agency, Myron Armijo, who is
also the governor of Santa Apub.
Oh.
Certainly, um, yes, can we have
everybody introduce themselves.
OK, uh,
Members of the committee here.
I'm glad to be here this morning
and so we, we saw one another
here a short time ago, but, um,
I am myron ormijo tribal liaison
for the agency, uh, for both OSC
and ISC and have been here for,
uh, just over 20 years now, and,
uh, so it's good to see all of
you.
May.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I am
Nat Charis. I'm the general
counsel to the state engineer,
and, uh, it's an honor to be
here today to present on, on the
settlement work. Um, I oversee
the, the negotiation teams that,
that conduct those negotiations
and then, um, I, I'm also
involved in the implementation
side, uh, along with, with my
colleague Hannah Risley White
and the state engineer. I, I'd
also want to, uh, give a warm
thank you, uh, to IAIA for.
hosting this committee, uh, this
has been a great institution in
Santa Fe. I'm a Santa Fe native
for my entire life, and, uh, we,
we have a real gem right in our
midst, so I wanted to, uh,
extend that. Thank you as well.
Good morning, everyone. My name
is Hannah Risley White. I'm the
director of the New Mexico
Interstate Stream Commission.
It's such a pleasure to be with
you all here and I, I, I also
want to just take a moment to
recognize the other staff from
the agency that's here. We have
Tanya Trujillo who's the deputy
state engineer. We also have
Nicky Greenspan and Thomas
Stockton, who are part of the
Bureau for Pueblo's Tribes and
nations at the Office of the
State Engineer and Ann Mauer,
who's in our shop, Interstate
Stream Commission is our Indian
water rights settlement's
technical lead. We have a
great team at OSC and ISC
working in advancing these
efforts and we're pleased to be
with you to share some more
information this morning. Thank
you.
Uh, Madam Chair, and, uh,
committee. I also would like to,
um, uh, introduce, uh, Amanda
Nezzi. Oh, sorry,
no worries, no worries.
Thank you.
Yes, so with that, um, we're
going to, I, I also just, um,
Thank you to everybody for kind
of wrapping everything up, and I
wanted to say one more thing. I
really appreciated the previous
presentation and it's exciting
to hear about everything that's
happening here on campus and,
um, and the, the thoughts about
what could be done in addition
to what's happening here, and I
just a warm thank you, um, to be
here on this beautiful campus.
So, um, so with that, our
presentation today is to, to
talk and give you some updates
on the Indian water rights
settlements.
And they had litigation. So, um,
I'm gonna go ahead and pass that
to Nat Checkers and he'll, he'll
give you our update.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. I will
be following the slide deck that
was, that was distributed. I'll
do my best to be pointing to be
speaking, uh, slide numbers. So
folks who are listening in
remotely can follow along, um,
by statute, we also are required
to report to this committee
every year on the status of
Indian water rights settlements.
We have submitted that report.
That's the other 18-page
document that was distributed,
that's for people who want to
drill into the details, um, but
we
The, the slide deck has the high
level information and of course,
we're, uh, anticipating
questions and looking forward to
digging into whatever issues
committee members may want to,
um, on slide 2, we have uh just
a, a, a long list of the steps
to reaching a final settlement
agreement regarding a pueblos or
tribe's water rights. And this
is just a reminder, it's a very
long many year long process, and
a lot of the reasons for those
many long years are completely
out of our hands.
And out of the pueblos and
tribe's hands. The federal
government is the primary funder
of these settlements and it has
a lot of processes, including
that every single settlement
must be approved by Congress.
And so first before the federal
government even wants to start
negotiating. They created
assessment team to assess
whether they can negotiate. And
then they appoint a negotiation
team and then the negotiations
occurred, uh, and usually we
first do, uh, negotiations just
with the federal government, the
state government, and the Pueblo
or tribe, um.
And then there's negotiations
that were expanded to include
local entities, municipalities,
assekias, other interested, uh,
neighbors who, who we want to
bring into the settlement tent
so that they can benefit from it
and be part of, be part of the
settlement. And then, you know,
if we reach the settlement with
those, we still have
A lot of work to do at the
federal level. We have to
drafted legislation. We have to
get it through Congress, um, we
have to convince the Department
of Interior leadership to, to uh
support it because even though
we, um, we had a federal
negotiation team appointed, the
negotiation team tells us they
have no power to bind the
federal government, which is,
which is a challenge. And then
once it's passed by Congress, it
comes back. Sometimes Congress
tells us we need to change
things in the settlement. So as
we call that we can form the
settlements after, after.
Um, the congressional approval
and then we have to, uh, we work
with the legislature on, uh,
whatever legislation is needed
at the state level. There's
going to be a funding element.
There's often going to be other
legislation, uh, regarding,
regarding settlements. So it is
a long multi-year process and
then we start implementing the
settlements on the ground. So
we've learned a lot uh through
the settlements that we've,
we've done previously and if we
go to to slide 3.
Um
This is just a reminder of the
completed settlements that we
have that are still in the
implementation phase and we'll,
we'll talk a little bit about
the status of those later. um,
but there's, there's a
settlement with the Hickoryia
Apache tribe in the 1990s, and
then, uh, Taos Pueblo, uh,
sometimes called the abeta
settlement. Uh, we reached that
in the, in the arts in the, in
the 2000s, as well as the
settlement with the Navajo
nation on the water rights on
the San Juan River, that is not
all of the Navajo water rates in
the US state of New Mexic.
Mexico or in the US and there's
some other really important
Navajo-related settlements both
in New Mexico and Arizona that
I'll, I'll touch on a little
later. And then there's the
Emmet settlement, which was for
Pueblo's Nambe Pawake Tesuke and
San Altifonso. So those were all
completed settlements. They're
all at various stages of
implementation, um, now where
the projects that that the
settlements are built to mound
are being, are being built out
and then we had one tribal water
right claim.
where we were, uh, we, we didn't
settle it. It would end up being
litigated. That was the
Mescalero Apache tribe. Um, I
think that was a pretty
unsatisfactory result for
everybody involved, and it's
really, uh, driven us to, to the
belief that settlement is the
better path, that litigating
these claims is expensive and
doesn't, doesn't lead with,
doesn't lead to uh remedies and
resolutions that really meet the
needs, uh, regardless of what
the outcome of what a judge can
order are. So if we go into
slide 4, I
It's just like to, to echo what,
uh, the state engineer said. We
under this administration have
made a great deal of progress in
reaching local settlement
agreements. We've done more than
in any other administration in,
in, in New Mexico history, um,
on the Rio San Jose stream
system. We've reached
settlements with Acama Pueblo,
Laguna Pueblo, and the Navajo
Nation, um, and the, so that's,
you know, the Rio San Jose
systems obviously the, uh, areas
around Acama, Laguna, Grants,
Milan, um,
A really important set of
settlements in a really water
stressed water challenged
region, uh, then the Hemez River
stream system, uh, we've reached
settlements with both Zia and
Jamez Pueblos, uh, Santa Ana is
the other pueblo in that stream
system. We've been unable to
date to, to get to a settlement
with them. We're hoping we can
get there, but right now our
claims with them are still in
litigation. And then on the Rio
Chama, we've reached settlement
with the, uh, with Oke Owenge
and, uh, with Zoom.
Pueblo on their stream system
and so all of those settlements
have been completed in the past
several years. They're all now
pending congressional action,
and I'll talk about specifically
where we are in Congress, uh,
when we get, I think, uh, slide
14 is the, is the status of
those, but, but we're
We just had some congressional
hearings this year on both the
House and the Senate side, which
could lead to those settlements
being passed in a lame duck
session as soon as this year.
Uh, this, this congressional
session, there's a lot that is
uncertain about that, not least
of which is next Tuesday's
election, but we were, we are,
are doing everything we can
that's within our power to try
to get these, uh, get these
through Congress.
I'd like to go back to slide 5
now. I'm just gonna give, uh,
we've given some of this
information in, in years past,
but I, I, I want to remind folks
of what, what, what the benefits
are for the New Mexi for New
Mexico from these settlements.
So the first is Rio San Jose
settlement, um, and the parties,
I'm really proud in, in almost
all of these settlements, we've
brought the parties in all of
the major other water users in
these basins have benefits that
accrue to them. So, so they're
acknowledging in many cases with
the pueblos.
seniors, the senior most water
right for the pueblos, which is
a big thing. We're not going to
be fighting over that anymore,
but in exchange, everybody is
recognizing each other's
infrastructure needs. They're
all supporting each other's asks
for infrastructure, and they're
working out agreed upon rules
about how water shortages are
going to be administered. And
they're different in every, in
every settlement, but this means
that down the road, if with
climate change, we have real,
real water shortages, which
we're already starting to
experience, we're going to not
have
litigation over that, but we're
going to have an agreed
understanding about how water
use is going to be curtailed,
and people can plan around that
right now with the
infrastructure they're building
and with the, uh, administration
tools that they're putting in
place. So, so on the Rio San
Jose, it's, it's again, we have
Acama Pueblo, Laguna Pueblo,
Navajo Nation. Then we have the
city of Grants, the village of
Milan, 9 individual asseass and
community ditches, as well as an
association of community ditches
of the Rio San Jose, 850 federal
dollars.
would be coming to, to, um,
supply water supply for, uh, the
pueblos of Akima and Laguna.
They are looking at potentially
needing to go to some deep
aquifers that are disconnected
from the Rio San Jose system to
get them the water they need.
That's very expensive. There's,
there's a lot of infrastructure
that's required for that. And
then Navajo Nation similar,
they're, they're, uh
portion of federal funding would
be $245 million. These are very
big dollar amounts. These will
be spent in New Mexico by
contractors that, you know, are
going to be, are gonna be, you
know, employing New Mexicans and
so we're really hoping to get
that federal money as soon as we
can. On the state side, uh, we,
if the settlement were approved,
would be uh looking at about $39
million of state funding, which
is still a, a fairly significant
amount of infrastructure funding
that would meet, um, the, the,
the largest, the majority of
that would be
meeting some very much needed,
uh, water projects for grants in
Milan, but also significant
amounts of money for water
projects for areas as well as a
mitigation fund for, uh, any,
any water rights owners who may
be impacted by by wells from
Pueblos or the Navajo Nation,
uh, we've structured the
settlements so we don't think
any, uh, non-tribal water users
will be adversely affected, but
in the event we were wrong,
we're still putting in a
backstop, so there's a
mitigation fund to
assist those folks.
Uh, the next settlement on slide
6 that I just wanted to talk
about is the Hamas. Um, again,
the parties Jame Pueblo Zia
Pueblo, the state of New Mexico,
the Jemez River basin Water
Users Coalition, which is a
number of Ezekis all up and down
the Hemes from San Ysidro up,
uh, up the Hemez River, um.
Pass him in Springs in and
includingly this, the city of
Rio Rancho, which is not within
that stream system, which is
close to it. And, um, that would
involve $490 million for a
mutual benefit water supply
project that would benefit both
the pueblos and the Esequias on
the Jemez River, and that's a,
it's a really interesting uh
project that's been set up and
we're, we're hoping we can get
the federal funding for it. That
would also tap into deep
aquifer.
forces that would be additional
new supply for the Pueblos that
would not, uh, that they're not
currently able to tap, that
would not be taking stream water
away from any other users. And
then once that enters the
system, then the asseass would
benefit from that water being in
the system as well. Uh, the
state funding would be $20
million for, for needed
infrastructure and ditch
improvements, as well as a
mitigation fund for non-Pueblo
users. I mentioned earlier,
Santa Ana Pueblo is not
currently
Part of the settlement, um,
we're hoping we can, we can get
settled with them. We think we
have a better, um,
We, we have, we have a better
path forward through settlement
and through litigation, but, um,
we'll see, we'll see if we can
get there.
Um, I'd like to move on to slide
7 now, and this is OK Owenge.
This is up on the Rio Chama, so
I think a number of you, uh, may
have gone to a water leaders
workshop in, uh, Ghost Ranch, I
think in May. And one of the,
one of the goals of that
workshop was to highlight the
water needs and challenges of
the Rio Chama and what we're
doing to, to meet those and this
settlement is a big part of
that, um, so, OK, Winge has,
has, you know, a large water
right claim there.
they're, uh,
Traditional uses of both their
land and their water were also
significantly adversely affected
by the construction of Abike
Dam. And so they also have had
claims against the federal
government for uh various injury
to, uh, tribal, uh, tribal
interests from the construction
of Abike Dam. This settlement
would resolve that as well. And
so some of the federal funding
would, would, would be, uh, a
remedy for that, um.
The other parties, this has the
most other parties, I think of
any of our, any of our
settlements. We have the city of
Espinola. We also have
approximately we have over 80
esseass, uh, and they're sort of
in three different groups. We
have the Aicus Nortenas
deriorriba, um, which are, which
are, as the name implies, the
sort of northernmost further
upstream on the, on the Rio
Chama. Then we have the Rio
Chama Aseki Association, the
RCAA. These are the most senior
asseass, uh, of Spanish.
origin in New Mexico. They have
priority dates earlier than 1600
and they have been suffering
from, uh, from shortages from
junior upstream uses, uh, to
them for a long time. And then
we also have, uh, a, a, a number
of AIAs in the El Rito and Ojo
Caliente areas and so the, the
state funding associated for
this one is about 131 million.
That's larger than any of the
other settlements, and the big
reason for that is we have EDs
that
looking at giving them a benefit
of the settlement. Again,
they're all acknowledging, OK,
Owenge's senior right to the
river and they have real water
needs and what we're trying to
do is, is set up a, a system to
meet their infrastructure needs
as well as give them the means
to hopefully acquire some, some
San Juan Chama water to help,
uh, to help increase again the
supply for the use in this
basin. And that, that would be
available for at least from
other San Juan trauma
contractors. And
we also have a fair amount of
the money going to the city of
Espanola, the city of Espanola
has real water challenges.
There's water contamination
issues there, and they've also
got pueblos on, on both sides
that they are senior to them.
And so with the city of Espanola
is doing is they're agreeing to
locate their wells away from
where there might be impacts to
pueblos, which is great. We're
moving forward towards resolving
some, some easement,
long-standing easement issues,
um.
And so, so that's, that's where
a lot of the state funding would
go on the Oke Oenge settlement.
And the, the next one I'd like
to talk about is the Zuni Indian
tribe settlement. So, so this
one, the only parties to this
are the the Zuni tribe and the
state of New Mexico along with
the federal government once,
once Congress acts. They also
have a very, very
acute water challenges. They
have some reservoirs that were
constructed in the early 20th
century to help serve them.
Those have not been able to be
maintained and not been able to
be, to be served by water. They
have some long-standing issues
with, with, um, with the Rama
community, uh, of, of the, um.
The non, not the Navajo Rema
chapter, but the, uh, the
Rama Land and Irrigation
Company, I believe. Well the,
while Rima has not agreed to be
a party to the settlement. They
don't need to be. They didn't
ask for any funding. They have
agreed to not challenge this
settlement. They, they, they
believe this is a, a, a win
that's gonna enable the Zuni
Indian tribe to, to obtain
again, a lot of their uh new
water needs from deep
groundwater sources, which will,
um, you know, lessen the stress
between those two, those two
parties. So again, we have sort
of
Helping resolve some
long-standing regional regional
tensions there. But again, when
we're talking about tapping into
this deep water when we're
talking about rehabilitating
reservoirs, the infrastructure
costs are immense. um.
The state funding, we're very,
very small amount comparative of
state funding for this one
because we're not supporting
infrastructure projects for
non-tribal parties, um, but we
are assisting in the development
of a groundwater monitoring
program in the area and to
assess impacts to the Zuni Salt
Lake. So as many of you know,
there's Uni Salt Lake is a
sacred resource, uh, sacred to
not just the Zuni tribe, but,
but, um,
Perhaps all of New Mexico's
Pueblos tribes and nations and
what we've done in the
settlement is agreed to protect
that as a resource sort of
beyond which we would normally
do for any other body of water.
And so we're going to be, we've
we've already instituted a a
state engineer order protecting
that resource from anybody being
able to, to, to impact it from
groundwater use, and we're going
to be spending some money to
develop a groundwater monitoring
program to ensure that that that
that salt lake is protected.
So those are the settlements
that we've reached during this
current administration, the new
settlements, and we're again
proud of that record. We think
that we have a chance of getting
this all passed through Congress
this year. If we don't, we'll
keep pushing next year. I think
the words of Representative
Allison channeling, uh, a
representative Lundstrom. We're,
we're, uh, exactly the, the
right ethos. It's worth fighting
for and we'll, we'll fight as
long as it takes.
Um
Along those lines, I'm, I'm
moving to, to slide 9 about
existing legislation on, on
previously passed settlements.
So, um,
The Navajo Gallup water supply
project was part of the
Navajo-San Juan settlement, and
this is critical to serve not
just, uh, chapters of the Navajo
Nation that have never enjoyed,
uh, reliable freshwater, you
know, through a, through a
utility system, but also the,
the city of Gallup and that has,
that, that project is under
construction, it's underway, um,
we are, as the engineering is
going, as the designing has
gotten, uh, more, more refined.
understanding some changes need
to be, to be done to the
project. Some of them need some
congressional authorization to
do, and so that's one of our
very highest priorities is get
that, get those changes.
There's, there's no controversy
about it. There's no, um,
there's no opposition. It needs
to happen, um, in the meantime,
we have provided about $8
million to the city of Gallup to
drill some additional
groundwater wells to help carry
them forward because of some
delays that, that it's going to
take to get the pipeline.
all the way to Gallup.
The next bill that I wanted to
talk about on slide 9,
Is, uh, there's, there's a
technical corrections to both
the Taos Settlement Act and the
Ammett Settlement Act. So when
the federal government set aside
the funding for those two
settlements, um, we believe
erroneously it was not put that
funding was not put into
interest bearing accounts for
the benefit of those, of those
settlement parties. This bill
would fix that and it would, it
would, it would provide the
funding that, that should have
been accruing based on interest
being borne on those accounts.
And it's, it's, it's in the
millions of dollars at this
point. It's a, it's a
significant amount of money, um,
so we're again hoping that that
that that can go through the
federal government doesn't
doesn't oppose this. They, they,
um, they, they support it. So
we're, uh, working with the,
with our Pueblo partners to, to
see if that can get, can get
through. And then, um, I just
wanted on slide 10, we have this
is all the information in really
small fonts in one place. So if
you want to just look at
What are the details? How much
money for any of these
settlements, uh, that's, that's
where it is. And we keep this,
this sort of uh slide sort of
updated continually and if any
of you are interested in where
we are at any point in time, uh,
we can get you the most up
to-date version of that.
Uh, on slide 11, we are
currently negotiating with, uh,
with a number of pueblos and
tribes in other areas, so I'd
say the one that's farthest
along is the Santa Cruz Truches
uh stream system. Those are two
adjudications on, on tributaries
of the, of the Rio Grande in
the, in the, um, vicinity of
Espanola, and OK, Winge has
claims in in both of those
adjudications in Santa Clara
Pueblo as well does the polo.
of Saint Alfonso and Amba also
have some, some portions of
their grant lands that touching
the areas of those
adjudications, but really this
is primarily the the claims of
Okewingge and Santa Clara
Pueblo. Again, this is a
challenge. There's, there's very
senior, um, in the Santa Cruz
Irrigation District and on, on
the ruches and there's, there's
groundwater challenges with the
city of Espinola, but we think
we have uh a pretty good, um,
chance of, of getting a
settlement wrapped up with, with
these parties that
would meet everybody's needs.
The big one, probably we've been
told by the federal government
this would be the most
complicated, uh, Indian water
rights settlement they've ever
concluded, which, which is
surprised me given what I'm
going to talk about with Navajo,
Arizona in a second, but it
would be the middle Rio Grande,
um, pueblos so this is all 6
middle Rigano pueblos from
Cocini all the way down to
Usleda. They would like to, to,
uh, negotiate a resolution of
their water rights claims. They
put a lot of time and effort
into it, and the federal
government.
has, has said, um,
They will give us a decision on
whether a federal negotiation
team, uh, is, is going to be
appointed imminently, so they,
their, their goal was to do it
before Tuesday, before the
election, we will see if that
happens. Um, they don't have a
whole lot of working days before
then, but, uh, we're, we're
geared up to meet that
challenge. It is going to be a
very large and complex
negotiation, including a number
of parties, the MRGCD, the
Middle Rio Grande Conservancy
District, Albuquerque, Burnley
Water Utility Authority,
Rio Rancho and others. Um, that
one is not going to go fast, but
we have a lot of parties who
are, who, who want to roll up
their sleeves and jump in and,
and get to work on it. Um, it's
also an area where we don't have
new water that's easily
available. And so we're going to
have to put our heads together
about that.
The other, the other current
negotiations I'd like to, to
mention, uh, the Ute Mountain
Ute tribe, uh, has reservation
land in the far northwest part
of New Mexico. They don't have
any, uh, uh, as of, as of right
now, uh, part of the tribal
population living on their
reservation in New Mexico, but
they do have that reservation
land under federal law that that
would entitle them to, uh, some,
some water rights claims we're
working with the Ute Mountain
Utes to try to, to try to figure
out, uh, uh.
A solution to their, to their,
uh, claims, it would not be for
sort of irrigation in New Mexico
or some of these other types of
things we don't think, but we
think that that hopefully could
bring some more federal money to
address some of North
Northwestern New Mexico's water
challenges.
And then, and then, um, the last
I'd like to mention, I talked
about the Zuni, uh, Indian
tribes, uh, resolution of their
water rights claims on the Zuni
River. I mentioned briefly the
REMA chapter of, of the Navajo
Nation, uh, we're working with,
with uh Navajo Nation also to,
um, resolve the, the Rama water
rights claims.
So, I'd like to, um,
Say, uh, just speak really
quickly about something that's
not in the slides as, as yet. I
alluded to the Navajo Northeast
Arizona Water rights settlement.
So there is Navajo Nation this
past year reached a settlement
with Arizona about their water
rights claims on the Colorado
River in Arizona, which is the
largest by far outstanding sort
of unresolved claim to water on
the Colorado River. The Hopi
tribe, there's, there's, there's
additional, um, um.
Uh, tribes, uh, getting, getting
their water rights claims
resolved as well, including the
Hopi. It's a huge breakthrough,
especially given the heartbreak
from a couple of years ago where
the Supreme Court rejected a
Navajo lawsuit regarding the
assessment of their water rights
claims on the Colorado River to
be able to come around and get
this, this settlement, uh,
agreed to with Arizona is a big
deal. It has implications for
New Mexico and um there's part
of that is just the engineering,
some of the Arizona chapters.
would be better served by having
their water diverted in New
Mexico as opposed to trying to
take it across a long terrain
from, from Lake Powell or
somewhere else.
We, we need to make sure that
that doesn't negatively affect
anyone in New Mexico. And so
we've been working very closely
with the Navajo Nation, with the
state of Arizona, and with the
effect, you know, water users
who are concerned about effects
in New Mexico to make sure that
that settlement, uh, protects
New Mexico users, um, other,
other Colorado River, um,
Compact states, so there's 7
states total that are a part of
the Colorado River Compact are
also interested because some of
these chapters that are served
in Arizona are technically part
of the lower basin on the
Colorado River. So, you know,
we're all concerned collectively
about upper Basin Colorado River
water being sent to the lower
basin. You know, I think it was
the Rosser talked about a giant
sucking sound, you know, back in
the day. We do not want Phoenix
to suck all the water out of the
upper basin. Um, and so we're
working very
closely again with the Navajo
Nation. We, we're really
enthusiastically supporting the
idea of, of these chapters
getting water and the Hopi tribe
having their water uh rights
claims resolved. We just need to
make sure that it's structured
in a way that's not going to
hurt anybody in New Mexico who
relies on the San Juan River,
and we think we can do that, um,
but that, that's taken a lot of
work from a lot of folks, um,
and so we're, that's, that's,
that's in process, um.
I'd like to move now to slide
12, um, and that is, uh, the
status of implementing existing
settlements and um
unfortunately, there's a common
theme in in several of these,
and that is the large projects
that were the centerpieces of
these settlements, um.
cost more than was originally
anticipated, and um on the Taus
Ibita settlement, uh, that's,
that's become apparent. The,
we're still in in discussions
with the federal Department of
Interior about federal
government coming up with more
money to support the mutual
benefit projects that were, that
were part of that settlement. I
think those are, those are
absolutely critical. The basic
idea behind that settlement was
that, uh, the town of Taos and
El Prado water and sanitation
District.
Would, would not pump their
groundwater wells near, um, the
buffalo pasture for Taos Pueblo.
They'd move their water rights,
water pumping away from there to
places where it would be more
expensive to pump for
groundwater, so that the buffalo
pasture would be protected for,
for the senior right right
holder, Taos Pueblo. And in
order to ensure that that there
wouldn't be impacts from the
town of Taos in El Prado on area
Asseass on the tributaries in
the areas, they also would get
some groundwater wells.
to augment their supply. All of
these wells are, are proving to
be more expensive than
anticipated, but they're all
necessary to effectuate what
we're trying to do for this
settlement. So, um, the state
would support, um, assuming we
can kind of go back and get a
settlement, uh, the state
negotiators, uh OSE would
support um putting in additional
state funding for, for this to
the tune of approximately $43
million as long as the federal
government would, would put in.
3 times that. So the, the
original cost share was 7525. We
think that should, that should
stay, um, so we're, we're
working with, with Congress on
that. We don't have a specific
ask. This year, we don't have a
settlement agreement, you know,
a modified settlement agreement
to talk about, but that's,
that's happening. It's
unfortunate, um, we've already
identified other sources of
money to, to do what we can for
those, for those non-Pueblo
parties for their wells, uh, to
the tune of over $10 million in
either water trust board
funding, other.
funding. So we think that's,
that's a good thing, but that's
that's an unfortunate
development. And the same thing
with the Emmett settlement
agreement, there's a large water
supply project that's the
centerpiece of that settlement,
and it's we're Department of I'm
sorry, Department of Interior is
giving ominous reports about,
about cost overruns and, and
we're trying to work on what,
what those might be with them,
um, but that's, that's, that's
what we know for now, um, Navajo
is
the only one where we don't,
we'd already asked for more
money. We're not looking for
more money right now. Uh, we
think that that that that that's
been fully funded. Uh, I mean,
all of these have been legally
fully funded. We just, you know,
in terms of getting the projects
built out. The challenges with
all these existing settlements,
we think we need to see them
through. We think we need to
fight for them. Um, but the
challenges of, of these
settlements has really
given us the, the perspective
that on the new settlements we
have, we're not building them
around.
A project that the Bureau of
Reclamation is going to build
and then surprises surprises
have have have cost overruns.
All of the settlements we've
negotiated are just for a price
tag for projects as as available
under that price tag. So, so
we're not looking, if we, if, if
we get the exist the new
settlements passed, these
problems with implementing
projects, we, we don't think
we'll be the same.
The same problems where we'd be
having to come back and ask for
more money because it's just,
you know what, here's the money
and then the, the uh non-tribal
parties or the tribes are gonna
figure out what projects they
can use that money with, and
then
When the money's gone, it's gone
and that's, and that's really
the conclusion of those
settlements. So, uh, you know,
it's, it's, it's never fun to
come back and ask for more
money. It's probably the least
fun thing we do, but, um, we
think that the new settlements
are going to, we've minimized
the risk of that, um, and then
the uh slides 13 and 14. I, I've
talked about all of these bills
already. This is just, I, I
mentioned that we had
congressional hearings on all of
these, and, and that they really
are moving in.
and that's, that's sort of where
exactly they are again, the sort
of the the instantaneous update.
So, so that's the status of our,
of our settlements. We think by
and large it's, it's a good
picture, although we're, we are
disappointed in the, in the
federal cost overruns, but, um,
that, that, that, that's what
that is. I wanted to spend a
little bit of time because these
things are so in uh inextricably
intertwined to uh have Hannah
Riley White with the Interstate
Stream Commission, uh, say a few
words about.
or
initiative on regional water
planning and how that, how that
ties into what we're doing with
these settlements, so with your
permission, Madam Chair, I'll
hand it over to her.
Thank you, Nat. Um, and thank
you again to the committee for
your time and attention to this
issue, as you all know, water
touches everything that we do in
New Mexico and it's so critical.
Interstate stream commission,
amongst other things, as you
know, we're, you know, tasked
with supporting New Mexico and
complying with interstate
compacts, um, in addition to
administering the Indian waters
Settlements Fund. We're also
tasked by statute with planning,
water planning both statewide
planning and regional water
planning and there's some major
effort.
underfoot related to regional
water planning that I wanted to
highlight for you, um, and just
emphasize, maybe to begin with
the incredible commitment from
this administration and Michelle
Lujan Grisham and advancing
these settlements, all of the
work that Mr. Chares just
presented on his huge, and I
think the state has pushed the
needle on these settlements in
the last couple of years in a
way that we haven't, um, for a
very long time. And I think
that's incredibly exciting and
beneficial for all New Mexicans.
Uh, Governor Lujan Grisham has
also really focused us in on
climate change and the impacts
of climate change, as you know,
her 50 year water plan was
released in January. And so
we're, we're really looking at
how these things all intersect.
It is very hard to plan around
water in New Mexico's water
future with unsettled Indian
water rights claims. And so
that's particularly why this
effort is important. You'll see
on this next slide, which is
slide 15.
Just a brief, uh, overview of
where we're at with the planning
effort, um, in the 2023
legislative session, the
legislature you all passed
unanimously what's called the
water security Planning Act. It
was essentially a rewrite of New
Mexico's regional water planning
statute. The original statute
passed in 1987 and was largely
considered to have met its
purpose. And in light of climate
change and the challenges that
we're facing, there was broad
consensus amongst
Decision makers and water
leaders across the state that we
needed to sort of revamp that
statute. Interstate stream
commission is currently in the
process of collecting input.
We've dedicated almost all of
this year, 2024, um, to
collecting input from the public
and specifically from tribes
about what the future of
regional water planning needs to
look like. Uh, one of the things
that's really remarkable in that
statute is that it called on us
to work in consultation with
Indian Affairs department.
To convene what's called a water
security tribal advisory
council, um, that council is
intended to work a long term
with the state and ensure that
tribal sovereignty, tribal water
rights, and the tribal water
needs of communities, tribal
communities across the state are
included in the in the planning,
future planning process, um, as
part of that effort, and you'll
see on the, the little flow
chart here, um, this year we
convened what we called an
interim committee with
representatives from tribal
leadership, but also technical
and legal staff from tribal
communities across the state to
help us think through on the
front end what that council
needed to look like with their
input and guidance, we put
forward a sort of slate of
options to tribal leaders across
the state earlier this year in
terms of the structure of that
council, and I'm pleased to say
we convened the first of those
council meetings in October. We
have another council meeting
coming up.
November were very excited to
have that group helping us think
through how we ensure that this
new regional water planning
process really brings to bear
the interests of, of tribal
communities. That is
inextricably linked to these
settlements and the
implementation of these
settlements. So how that
planning process evolves, will
incorporate the work associated
with implementing these
settlements, and I also want to
highlight the comments from Mr.
Chagris about the state is
Looking at resolving these
claims in the context of the
basins in which these
communities exist. And being
able to resolve all of the
potential needs within those
basins is huge in terms of
preparing us for the impacts of
climate change. Um, also
implementing these settlements
and you saw on that slide 10
with a table where Nat said
everything you need to know is
here, um, have the potential to
bring significant federal
funding to New Mexico, the total
on that table is almost 3.
billion dollars in federal
funding for tribal communities
for water related projects we
see um advancing those
settlements in Congress and
securing that funding is a
critical component in planning
and preparing for the impacts of
climate change. Our plans
looking forward is in 2025, we
will be releasing draft rules
and guidelines related to the
future regional water planning
process, um, including how this
tribal council will work long
term.
looking for you all and
everybody's input on those draft
rules and guidelines, we're
hoping to pin those down in 2025
so that we can then work to
start standing up those regions.
And I should also say the
statute called on us to revisit
the delineation of the regions
themselves. So everything is
under discussion in this
process. The state sees that
potential in this regional water
planning process to really help
us get a handle on how we're
preparing.
Um, for increasing water
scarcity and ensuring sort of
economic viability of our
communities across the state.
And so by the end of next year,
and then looking into 2026, or,
um, have more clarity in terms
of the regions themselves and
how that planning process will
work, um, I'm gonna point you
all to, and I'll leave with
staff here, some cards that have
a QR code, uh, for you all, we
have a website associated with
this planning work. It's, um,
mainstream nm.org, so
Mainstream andm.org, uh, I
encourage everyone listening and
you all to check out that
website for more information,
um, and to see both the
governor's 50-year water action
plan, then you.
new statute, all of our planning
work, there's links to that
through that website. It's a
really great resource. Um, and
I'll, well, you know, we're here
to take questions as well. In
the last slide, there's a
contact information. I encourage
you if you have questions about
the planning work, to please
feel free to reach out to me
directly, um, and before, uh,
handing it off to questions,
I'll see if state engineer
Anderson or any of my colleagues
have other comments that you'd
like to make.
In
Yeah.
Yes, thank you, if I may, uh,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, I, I think in
close out, I think that was an
excellent summary. Thank you,
um, both, and I wanted to just
highlight the importance of the,
um, the state contributing the
funding towards those Indian
water rights settlements, um,
as, as director Wiley Wright
said, you know, we're, we're
close to 3.2 billion in federal
funding that we can recruit
through those settlements.
But it does require the state to
contribute as well. And so, um,
with this, with the table that
you'll find on, on tables on
page 10, you see a total of, uh,
you know, on the order of $2034
million that the state needs to
be able to contribute over time.
It doesn't have to be this year,
and it doesn't mean that we
won't get those settlements
through by not having it in
place, but it does mean that we
need to be accumulating that
funding, and it takes time to
get that.
kind of funding in place, so
your support for the from the
legislature to to accumulate
that funding is, is critical.
Um, and the office of the State
Engineer does have an ask in for
this legislative session. So we
would appreciate the support
from, from all of you and, um.
In that funding request. Thank
you. And we'll stand for any
questions.
OK, Representative Lindstrom.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'd like
to thank the presenters today.
This is very informative, very
thorough, and I'd like to, uh,
if I could, Madam Chair, I want
to look at the more detailed
document. I'm focusing on page 3
and 4.
I need to say that, um, it's
encouraging to hear the positive
comments from the staff, but I'm
not so sure I, I completely
agree with that when it comes to
the Navajo Gallup water supply
project, particularly in light
of a lame duck Congress that
we're faced with. I wanna.
Draw your attention to the last
paragraph where it talks about
the construction of the San Juan
lateral is about 50% complete.
Uh, there's about a billion
dollars underground right now
with pipeline and work and
everything else that's gone into
that project. So has your
economist looked at that yet and
what that means in terms of a
stranded investment if we don't
get money now to finish this
project.
Madam Chair, Representative
Lundstrom, thank you for that
question. Um, I think.
Would you like to take that one
or?
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative,
no, we have not, uh, had an
economist look at the at the at
the effects of that. We, this is
not something where we would,
you know, want to tolerate
failure on the, on the part of,
of that being a stranded
investment. This is so, so we're
Our understanding is, is, is
that those, um, I, I did say
that the Navajo is not, is not
in the, uh, budget situation,
uh, that Emmett and Taos are
now, uh, we do think that
there's additional engineering
design work that, that we can do
regarding that. And whatever,
whatever additional federal
funds that need to come forward,
we're're going to keep on
pushing to make sure that comes
forward. The state part has
already been fully funded and,
and we are going to do
everything we can to see through
the federal part.
Madam Chair, I'm, I'm really
aware of how the state funding
works. I know how the money got
into the Indian water rights
bill, but what my concern is, is
when we talk about an excess of
$600 million in shortfall and
we're able to garner, uh, just a
small amount, 164 million, uh,
through the, um, Indian water
rights completion fund that
tells me that we do have a
stranded investment because
we've got lots of pipe in the
ground now.
don't have a strategy for
getting the money to finish it
and we're asking for an
extension. So those of us who
worked pretty closely in capital
outlay, and we follow capital
outlay projects, and we know the
longer that they take, the more
expensive they become, and we've
already seen that happen with
the feds when we look at, uh,
engineering costs that have
doubled over the last 10 years
for this project alone. Um, I
think we're, we have some issues
here. I think we have some
issues when we're
a pittance of money into, into
this project and we know it's
already been
it is. What does
Have so many people that can pay
the tax, so at the end of the
day you're looking at, do we put
money into new wells.
Or do we put money into the new
system we think is coming
because we've been taxing
ourselves for it.
So I, I think you're gonna see
that again because, and I would
imagine other communities are
going to be in the same boat. If
these, if these water supply
projects are delayed and
communities are waiting for that
water. They're going to have to
have another source, and it's
probably going to be
groundwater, so I would imagine
you paid for what, 2 wells?
They need 8.
And is that going to continue
on? And that's what I mean by an
economist review. What is it
really going to cost at the end
of the day if this project is
delayed.
Um
If there's a continuation of any
kind recognizecognizing what
those infrastructure escalation
costs are going to be at the end
of the day, what is this project
going to cost?
And what's it going to cost,
particularly the Navajo people
in opportunity.
Um, if you don't live in a
community where, uh, you, you
know, you're used to having
running water. My district isn't
used to that.
We need running water. We need
running water, and we need it as
soon as we can get it, um.
I'm just concerned that there's
been a rosy picture painted for
this project.
I think there's much deeper.
There's many more concerns
associated with this project,
particularly when it comes to
the way funding is done. And,
and your liaison can tell you,
I've spent a long time on this
project. There's probably not
another legislator on the planet
that knows this project like I
do.
So I'm telling you now, I'll be
looking at this very carefully.
I'm planning on doing some
visits myself after the election
to see where we can start moving
this again.
Because we need to, we need this
moved.
Or we do have what's called a
tragic, uh, stranded investment
of all that pipeline that's
currently under the ground now.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative Lundstrom for
that question and commentary. I
think it is, it's incredibly
important to get that project in
place and you're, you're right,
we need to be making every
effort that we can in every way
that we can to make sure it
happens. And I appreciate your
support.
Well, I think what it's going to
take is we, we just have to have
a strategy here. We have to have
a federal strategy. These are,
this is a federal water rights
agreement here. Um, so we, we
can talk about what we're gonna
do with the state that we're not
gonna use BOR standards or
whatever, but at the end of the
day, the feds are going to set
this.
They're gonna set those
standards for us, for every one
of these.
Because the relationship is
between the tribes and pueblos
is to DC. It's not to the state
of New Mexico.
Thank you.
Um, Madam Chair, Vice Chair,
members of the committee and the
colleagues here, um, I first
met, uh, Representative
Lundstrom in 2004 when I first
came on board and, uh, John
D'Antonio was a state engineer
and his first task for me was to
um go to a, um, a, um,
Uh, tour of Navajo Resources,
um, back in the day, and I was
totally shocked. I was shocked
what I saw in Gallup, my, uh,
Native relations.
Coming to gallop in the middle
of the town, putting in a
quarter for 35 gallons in a
plastic container sitting in the
back of a truck.
And um,
My goal since has been to try to
get um that Navajo Gal pipeline.
Complete it.
As
Much as we can, um, water is
there, but we're not quite
there.
The goal for me was to try to
bring water to the community
members to their homes, to their
kitchens. If it was even
possible.
But I think the Feds sometimes
fall short.
They fall short in their um um.
Their uh engineering and, and
then we have to come back to get
more money. We have to come back
and get more money.
I personally saw, um,
I'll call her a young lady, uh,
west of Crown Point.
We went to go see her house and
uh she lived down in a, uh, a
little uh ravine near valley, I
guess if you will. She lived by
herself.
She lived by herself.
And uh
Probably uh
70ish Ford pickup.
With the plastic container in
the back, she had sheep and
goats.
In her corral, she lived by
herself.
Now, how does uh um Ashima.
During winter time, go get water
for herself and her uh animals.
So
With, with the OSC ISC, all the
work that we've done, it's, it's
I, I can't say enough about the
agency to where we're at, but we
all have to work together here
as much as we can with the feds
to try to get this project done,
um, and, and get water to where
it needs to be, um, my, uh, I,
and last thing uh I'll say here
is,
We go to other countries and
provide infrastructure for
For the people out there and
that's, that's not, that's good.
I, I, I, um,
We're happy to help anybody that
we can, however, we put the
infrastructure in, they have
water and we come up and blow up
those pipelines.
For what?
That's my, uh, that's my
concern, so I'll just leave it
right there, but if we can work
together continuously and, and,
um, Representative Lindstrom, I
so appreciate all the work
you've been done that you've
done, you've been a stalwart
for, uh, not only Gallup but for
the Navajo Nation.
Thank you
Thank you, Senator Rodriguez.
Thank you, Madam Chairman. Um,
sobering actually to, to sit
here. I've been here 29 years
and ever since I started and
even before that, I would hear
about the Amont settlement about
the water, Indian water rights
settlement, and that settlement
took approximately 60 years.
To get signed and
And proceed and just when we
thought that the settlement was
done.
Um, especially the AA we're
looking at the towels and others
here too, but I'm referring to
the AMA.
Um
I look now on page 12, if I
could see it, and there's more
money needed.
And um, and so I recall the
discussions I've been in the
Senate Finance Committee all
these 29 years that I can
recall, and I recall the
discussions every time.
About how much money is needed
for the water settlement. State
engineers coming and he's got
requests and, and, um, on and
on, and it's always a heap, but
I'm happy to see you, Elizabeth.
Because forever truly it was a
state engineer, um.
person. um, now the
The question here is, I guess,
and it may have been answered by
our state engineer. Thank you,
that the money that is necessary
to accomplish all these things
is in fact not there yet other
than the small amount that is
still sitting in the fund that
we, you mentioned in one of
these pages, but the other, if I
remember correctly, 238 million,
if I got it correctly, um, is
still pending.
Allocation from the state, uh,
at some point when and when,
when and if it happens, but let
me just mention this, that.
When I saw the list and thank
you for, for this nice
presentation and in the summary,
very nicely put together and,
and you have done a lot of work.
It is obvious, uh, a lot of
negotiations and then to keep
that communication going among
so many different parties and
finally get an agreement. I, I
can't even imagine it, but you
do get a lot done. I thank you
for that. More to be done as as
representative Longstrom
mentioned. But let me tell you
what, I, as soon as you started
talking.
And I think it may, I don't know
if it was you, state engineer or
Nat here who first started
bringing up the pages to this
presentation and on page 2 was
one of the first pages, if not
page 2, but it's when it starts
explaining, and I saw at least
12 steps there on those bullets
at least that need to be.
Done
and in finalized before anything
else gets done, and each one of
these, I was looking down and I
thought, oh my God, each one of
these can take years.
We literally can take some can
take months if you're, we're
very lucky in communication goes
the way we expect it to, but not
all of them. A majority, in
fact, if you look at this, um,
there was something here about
the regular court adjudication
process that in itself is a huge
endeavor, can take a long time,
but
One of the things that crossed
my mind that.
Clearly inhibits our ability to
proceed as, as we intend and as
planned here is not only the
money that is still needed to
fulfill these obligations, but
it's the political process in
the change that happens with the
administrations just if a
project takes long as
Representative Longstrom's
indicated, just say 10 years, 5
years, even any amount of time
and we know they do. What
happens is.
officials change. You have
different people in Congress,
you have sometimes different
people in the US Senate, um,
even a new president here in the
state, you have different
elected officials, so what
happens is that well, a lot of
the time you either lose support
because they're not familiar
with what's been going on for
years, or, um, it delays the
process.
By the time you initial, you
eventually get that support. So
all of these factors inhibit our
ability to, to proceed as
planned, so it's just a
difficult situation, but on page
5 where you mention all about
the, the Rio Grande, I'm gonna
use it just as an example.
There's the real San Jose
settlement on that and the
amounts you mentioned, 850
million, 245 million, and so on,
and then you, you mentioned the
state funding, um, it says in
here there's settlements, but if
the funding
is not there. How could they be
settled, I guess, I think what
you meant to say in in please
correct me if I'm wrong, but
what you meant to say is,
There are, they're they're the
potential settlements, I guess,
in that or or settlements
pending the obligations, the
financial obligations because
what happens now is that we see
things like these, like from a
financial perspective, me being
in the finance stuff, you know,
I immediately look at the budget
in my eyes, and I'm here
thinking, oh, Rio Grande
Settlements. Oh my goodness,
they have federal funding, 850
million and 4249 or 45 for Navo
and I but
I, but then I looked at the
state funding.
On and off, so to me that's part
of this page.
It's already there because we're
getting this federal funding
supposedly and then supposedly
someday we may, we may get the
state funding, so it kind of
appears like it's there, so I
just wanted to mention, you may
want to say pending, uh,
financial support from the
state. This is what we need.
Something like that.
You know, just for, for those
that don't see it every day like
I do. And, um, Madam Chairman,
I'm gonna move on so others can
speak, but I wanted just to to
go to page and I think it was
page 12 that I had made my, my
notes. Oh my goodness, there's,
yeah, there we go, and I'm gonna
keep this because I really like
your, your summary here.
But yes, on the AAT settlement,
um, it's, it's really the amount
is truly up in the air because
if you look at it now and um um
and staff here and and engineer.
We, we have the reclamation
alerted the Bureau of
Reclamation, I would think oh
has alerted parties. They had
just alerted us, everyone. They
said, wait a minute, there's a
flag here. There's likely going
to be significant cost
increases.
But what could that be? We don't
have an amount.
We don't know, so we thought we
were done with the a and at one
point, pretty much. And, uh, and
here we have a flag racing,
being raced out there that
there's more coming, more costs,
but we don't know how much, so
it says updates are likely
coming, and thank you for that.
um, but I guess.
When you go to the LFC.
The legislative Finance
Committee, and I know you
mentioned state engineer, you
were looking at going to the uh
to the LFC or to the finance
committees to request funding,
um, are you looking at
requesting the, I think you said
48 million in here someplace now
43 million that you need for the
taua Beta and then you need for
the AA we don't know and are you
looking at requesting the full
amount or partial or have you
amortized it over a period of
time, you believe may be needed.
Tell me a little bit and.
And briefly, Mr. Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, Representative
Senator Rodriguez, uh, this is
what we're asking for this year
is a portion of funding to, to
be allocated and distributed
between between. but because
realizing it's a really it's a
large, large sum, approximately
$240 million and you're right,
Ama is still an unknown. There
are still unknowns out there,
um, that, but, but maybe I'll
pass this to Nat for a little
bit more detail.
I interject, Madam Chairman on
that before we move on so I
don't confuse anything in that
in your request, um, when you
do, I'm going to suggest that
you put, you, you define what's
called indexing. I saw the word
indexing here for a lot of
people, they don't know what
indexing is in this huge, huge
document and millions and
millions of dollars requested so
for members to know what you
mean by indexing, please clarify
it, but one other thing is that
on the amounts that you ask,
break it.
down index it, so, you know, and
I'm gonna call it breakdown or
whatever to to indicate exactly
where that amount is going to
say if you ask for 43 million.
Where is that gonna be? Break it
down so we can see because what
happens is that if we don't know
what it's for, you know, we just
see a big title there and
Who knows where it's going to
go? It's, it's a little, it can
be delayed or, or you can get
less funding, you know, so
anyway, Madam Chairman, and now
I'll let you speak, uh, if you
allow me. So you were gonna say
something.
Matt, yeah, Madam chairs, um,
Senator Rodriguez, thank you for
that. I will go ahead and pass
that to, um, General Counsel
Checkris for that.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and of
course you're right about all
the, all the, all the comments.
There's the way that the
settlements are done is, is the
local parties agree they sign a
local settlement agreement
first, saying if Congress
approves this and funds it, then
the state will sign a subsequent
settlement, assuming the
legislature passes, you know, so
there's a lot of conditions
built in there, and, and we
simplified it so that that
didn't, that didn't come
through. But, but some of the
have some early funding that was
requested so that some of the
assekiass involved could do some
assessments of what their needs
were. They didn't even have the
funds to be able to get
engineers to do preliminary
assessments.
We've, we've spelled that out a
little bit, um, in terms of
breaking down what the what the
asks are. Last year we, uh,
received a $20 million special
appropriation, so the, the
roughly $240 million.20 million
dollars of that, we, we was
funded last year and that's
gonna cover, and we can provide
a more detailed breakdown, the
early funding needs in some of
these various settlements, um,
the 40 million, I'm sorry, the
next, this year, what we've put
in is our execu
of request is $40 million. The,
I'm sorry, the agency request.
The executive still has to do
the overall executive budget,
um, and there's a lot of
different requests as you, as
you've seen and heard, uh, all
the agencies are asking for more
new money than there is new
money, so, so the, the
governor's office gets to
coordinate all of that, um, and
so the 40 million agency
requests made.
We'll, we'll see what the what
the what the final number is in
the, in the proposed executive
budget and then you, of course,
LFC will come out with its
initial, uh, request, um, we
would, uh, what we're, that
there aren't any additional sort
of early funding needs that that
would cover. So, um, we can, we
can work on and think about
itemizing that a little bit
better. I
I don't want to, you know,
create any tension among the
various parties we've settled
with we really every all of them
have been really working
together hand in hand, um, to
get all of the funding they
would like us to be asking even
more. We're sort of mindful of
the, of the, of the various
budget demands and, and
realistically what can get out
in the next couple of years, um,
so, so that's, that's, thank you
for that suggestion.
Madam Chairman, I mean, the rest
I'm going to defer for now
because of time, but I will
reach out to you individually.
And when I do, just remind me
that it were questions I had had
to do with that negotiation team
that, you know, for an
assessment yet, they first
start, it all starts with this
negotiation team, an assessment
to whether a negotiation team
has to be put together, and then
if it is that another assessment
team and it's a bureaucracy that
is something else. No wonder we
take so long to get things done.
That's all I have, Madam
Chairman.
Thank you. Thank you,
colleagues. We are running
behind schedule and our uh
presenters for item number 3
have a 2 p.m. deadline, so after
I call on Senator Lopez and
Representative Little, we will,
um, go into a working lunch. So
thank you, uh, Senator Lopez.
Oh, thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you very much for the
information shared and thank
you, Senator Rodriguez. It
always adds much more to the uh.
Oh, the conversation, um, I just
had one question and I'll, I'll
just pinpoint this, Madam Chair,
and this was on page 12, where
you were talking about the
Toussa Beta settlement
agreement. You were mentioning,
of course, um, what the
communities who were drilling
for wells had to do in placing
them further away from Taos
Pueblo and etc. um, I didn't
hear anything mentioned about
Towski Valley, and I know Towsky
Valley has had some issues on
water.
And of course it's been, you
know, there are concerns that
were raised through the, some of
our meetings with the land grant
community, um, when we were
meeting up there, um.
A couple, was it last year, I
forget now, Madam Chair, but
anyway, they were talking about
the water, um, I guess for
Watowski Valley has been doing
for their development and how
it's affecting, of course, those
downstream, which is there in
the valley, so I didn't hear it
mentioned, but were they part
and parcel in any of the
discussions, uh, with the
settlement, Madam Chair, no,
they, there are a whole set of
water issues there, um, that is
not part of the this, the
settlement, no, they're they're
a separate set of issues, but
they're
Um, they're not part of the
settlement, nor was uh moving
their water, uh, their wells,
part of, part of what we're, uh,
doing in this.
OK, no thank you, Madam Chair.
Just some clarification because
I know there's a lot of issues
within the community from uphill
and then of course for those
down in the valley. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator.
Representative Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you all for your presentation
this morning, um, I'll ask one
question, and it has to do with,
uh, your slide 7, page 7
regarding the Okeowinge Rio
trauma settlement. I am coming
into this new, um, and so, uh,
my question has to do with the,
uh, state funding that would be
requested for uh $32 million for
the city.
Espanola for development and in
this whole area though, they are
impacted by Los Alamos
laboratories. So my question,
which may have been asked prior,
um, regarding
The, the
Price tag for it, the funds that
are being requested for it. Can
you describe for me briefly how
Los Alamos Laboratories or the
Department of Energy, what role
they have in also, uh,
contributing to um improving,
improving the water system.
Uh, Madam, Madam Chair, uh, uh,
Representative, they're, they're
not directly responsible as part
of this settlement for, for
contributing. They have a lot
going on with, with sort of
folks on the on the enaltafonso
side where where they're they're
are real concerns about impacts,
uh, to their water supply, but
they're not, uh,
Part of, part of the, the groups
that are, that are contributing
funds towards the city of
Espinola's, uh, water system.
Um, and, uh, then it.
My next question, Madam Chair,
would be, why not? Because it is
not a direct.
Uh, input into water systems,
but everything that contributes
to water settling in that area
in and around that area. So, um,
And perhaps this is a
conversation that I
That might need more discussion
and education on later, but if
there's, uh,
Somewhat quick response. I'd
like to hear that as well as my
colleagues. Thank you very much
Madam Chair, I just think, I
think a quick response is, I
think that's a great
conversation to have and, and,
and I, I mean, it's, yeah, it's
a, it's, it's something that we
should, uh, be working on
together more.
Thank you, Representative.
Uh, Vice Chair Pinto. Thank you,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee and thank you for
bringing everybody together. I
think that shows a lot of good
neighborliness happening,
especially with the water rights
settlement.
Um, and I just want to make a
comment, especially to those
online and our, our leaders that
are here. It's my understanding
is we don't really have a
hydrogen policy or guideline,
within our state, so make sure
that's considered as we move
forward. But with that and, you
guys' request that I would like
to make a motion, um, to the
chair and the committee to have
a support letter drafted to our
finance committee to fully fund,
um,
Very strongly, especially with
the timeliness, um, of this
changeover of administration,
even to the people that have
worked on it, um, that
involvement and time is crucial
because the time to re-educate
someone else coming in,
especially how long this took
is, um,
It's invaluable. So, um, Madam
Chair, if that would be
considered.
Thank you, um, Madam Vice Chair,
um, I have a motion and I have a
second.
And by representative uh
Lindstrom.
And we will have the staff draft
the language. Uh, do I have any
opposition to the motion?
Seeing none, we'll go ahead and
move forward with that support
letter.
Thank you very much for that.
That's very, very much
appreciated. Thank you.
And thank you for your
presentation. Thank you for your
work. Water is life, and we look
forward to our continued work.
We have a lot of work. It seems
like, and um.
I appreciate you. I appreciate
Representative Lindstrom's
remarks and comments as I
represent House District 5 as
well.
So thank you. That information.
Just, just want to let you all
know, uh, Madam Chair, Vice
Chair and members of the
committee, um, this, the last
two state engineers, Mike
Hammond and now, um, Elizabeth
Anderson, who's taking the helm,
um, I just want to say that, um,
we, we put together a bureau for
uh Pueblo's tribes and nations,
and I want to acknowledge, um,
Nicole Greenspan and the rest of
the team here, these 7
settlements that have been put
into place, um, the ones in
Congress as well, unprecedented
for
our agency.
Uh, I want to thank all of them,
and I want to thank you for all
your support, um, since we've
done, uh, these water
settlements. So thank you very
much. OK. I know it's not a
rose, I don't wanna paint a rosy
picture, but we've done a whole
lot of work at the office of the
state engineer and Interstate
stream Commission. Thank you so
much, Madam Chair, Vice Chair.
Thank you. We usually don't
applaud, but we'll go ahead and
fill out.
Thank you. Thank you for your
work.
All righty, let's move on to
agenda item number 3, while you
get settled to present
colleagues, uh, let's go ahead
and get our lunch so that we
can, uh, do a working lunch.
Guests in the audience and
presenters, please help
yourself. There's plenty of
lunch. Please help yourself to
lunch.
Mr. Secretary.
I met with Shania.
It's part of our
body and.
OK, colleagues, if you're about
ready, let's go ahead and
reconvene after you get your
lunch. Thank you.
Yeah
Talk to the governor.
All righty.
Let's go ahead and reconvene our
meeting. I agenda item number 3.
Update on the Yazi Martinez
lawsuit and outcomes. Please
introduce yourselves and begin.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. My
name is Sonny Lou. I'm the
public schools analyst for LFC
and I'm joined today by interim
director of LESC, John Senna,
uh, just first wanna thank the
chair for working through your
lunch to to help us make our
meetings on time. I really
appreciate that. Uh, we'll be
starting on this slide deck.
Uh
With both of our logos on it. I
know for some of you, this is
your 2nd or 3rd time hearing
this, so we'll be very quick so
you can get the questions, um,
and then I'll turn over to John
halfway through.
So just to give you a brief
update starting on page 2. This
is a
5-year lawsuit since the ruling,
and it's been 10 years since the
plaintiffs have filed. It's
really based on the premise on
the constitutional requirement
that we have to provide a
uniform and sufficient
education. And I placed here on
slide 2 some of the language
that Judge Singleton used in
writing her final order.
On slide 3.
The basic premise of the lawsuit
was that
School inputs like funding and
program were found to be
inadequate from testimony from
districts.
Student outcomes or the outputs
were very dismal, and the court
made a connection saying that
because these two inputs and
outputs are poor, more funding
and oversight needs to be placed
on the education system in New
Mexico.
The court also made a order in
2020 during the pandemic saying
that access to IT was also a
crucial to ensure that students
received that sufficient and
uniform education. We just
recently had a motion filed by
the plaintiffs and John will go
over that in his presentation.
On slide 4, this is just a list
of the inputs that the court
found to be inadequate in their
600 page findings of fact and
conclusion, we've sort of put
them in large buckets for you to
look at, but this is not an
exhaustive list.
On slide 51 of the injunction
relief items was for the state
to come up with a comprehensive
plan to and timetable to
Remedy some of the deficiencies.
The court also noted that these
deficiencies should be focused
on the 4 at-risk student groups,
which were English learners,
Native American students,
economically disadvantaged
students and students with
disabilities.
On slide 6, we've talked a
little bit about how in this
context, we should be thinking
about our role as the
legislature, what we can do as
far as funding and
appropriations and oversight.
What the department's role
should be in monitoring and
ensuring that schools are
spending their budgets
appropriately, but ultimately
the delivery of the remedy has
to come from schools who are
those teachers and principals
who are in schools every day
instructing students.
On slides 7 through
Well
You'll see a list of some of the
major findings that the court
found were deficiencies within
the system, we've sort of
categorize these into buckets
once again on what legislative
actions you've taken, what
actions the executive has taken
and what some of the local
outcomes have been since the
ruling in 2019 as an example in
the very 1st 11 of the findings
was just just that overall
funding was insufficient, uh, to
give you a comparison point back
in fiscal year 19 on the
legislative action side, the
public school support budget was
$2.8 billion. Today.
it's 4.4 billion, which is a 58%
increase from that point. Uh,
we've seen.
Increases in land grant
permanent fund distributions as
a result of executive actions
and pushing for that. Uh, we've
also seen on the local side some
mixed receptions were some of
the funding that has been
appropriate has reverted. We've
seen an increase in operational
cash balances. There's a lot
buried underneath there with the
pandemic and federal aid also
coming in, so I won't go into
too much detail.
Let's go ahead and move on to
slide 8, something that was
pretty key in the court's
finding was that the state had
not met provisions of the Indian
Education Act, you as a
legislature have increased
funding tenfold for the Indian
education fund. You've removed
the impact a credit from the
funding formula to
Flow more funding to schools
that have historically been
impacted by Indian students and
you've increased pay equity for
Native American language
certificate holders as well.
Um,
I won't go into a whole lot of
detail on this.
these slides, but I will touch
upon just maybe 2 more items if
you turn with me to page.
Uh, 10.
There was a concern about
at-risk students lacking high
quality teachers.
You as a state have invested
heavily in teacher pay, raising
the average pay from about
47,000 to 63,000 for teachers
statewide. That's increased our
rank from number 49th in the
nation to number 22 and the
nation, and that was in fiscal
year 23, which is two years ago,
so we've since maintained
momentum on that, um, but as you
can see on the local outcomes,
we still have about
737 teacher vacancies, which
really begs the question on, you
know, are we, are we really
closing some of that those
turnover issues that are
happening within schools on a
regular basis.
To move us along, I'm gonna go
ahead and move us to slide 13.
Talking about the outputs was
the courts.
biggest concern, which is it's
important to improve the system
inputs like increasing pay and
providing more funding for
programming, but at the end of
the day, what
Is really going to get us across
the finish line is if student
outcomes have improved, and the
court really looked at, you
know, can we close a gaps
between these at-risk groups and
their peers, and can we raise
overall performance for all
students as sort of the, the
rule of thumb on whether the
state had met constitutional,
um, adequacy.
As you can see, we changed tests
between the time the court did
its ruling and where we are
today, and yet we still see
these gaps between student
performances.
Between all students and the
at-risk students outlined in the
court case, even though the test
has changed, those gaps are
relatively similar even today.
And as we know from the national
rankings, we still remain at the
bottom, as far as NAEP scores.
In the US on page 14.
Other outputs that we've been
looking at, um,
Including chronic absenteeism
rates are improving, but the
gaps are still pretty wide
between these student groups.
One thing that it may be a
particular interest for this
committee is that, uh, what's
been promising is that the
Proficiency rates for Native
American students and reading
has improved more than their
peers in recent years and that
gap is closing. One thing that
is particularly concerning
though is that your high income
students are seeing a decrease
in their performance, so part of
that gap might be because you're
High income students and your
low income students is narrowing
becau and the high income
student gap is decreasing, which
is unfortunate.
On slide 15, we also see
improvements in high school
graduation rates.
Uh, particularly for these
at-risk groups, but once again,
similarly, it's, it's becoming a
result of our high income
students lowering their, their
rates as well.
Well maybe a potential
improvement is that
The number of high school
graduates that we would need.
To graduate to reach the
national averages well within
striking distance. I mean,
that's close to about 10
graduates for most high schools
in our state, so some of these
problems, although they may seem
daunting, are in reality quite
achievable if we are very
focused on providing those
targeted interventions.
With that, I'll turn it over to
John to finish the rest of this
presentation.
Thank you, Sonny.
Sorry. Uh, thank you, Sonny. uh,
thank you, Madam Chair, uh,
Madam Vice Chair, members of the
committee, just wanted to say
again, uh, thanks for having us
today. Um, um, I love our
committee at LESC, but it's
always nice to see, to sit in
front of another committee and,
and see some new faces. So thank
you for having us. Um.
I'll pick up on slide, um.
16 and talk a little bit about
funding, uh, funding levels in
general. So the larger funding
level. So when the state asked
the American Institutes of
Research in 2008 to conduct a
funding formula study. It
actually created.
Proposed a number of funding
number that would adequately
fund schools, uh, since, since
that, uh, report, the state, if
you look at that blue line
starting in FY 22, FY 23 has
exceeded, uh, that benchmark and
inflation adjusted a number
based on that original finding.
And so while that's a the court
didn't use AIRS if you fund
this, you've done your jobs, but
we use it as a, as a good
benchmark for whether or not
we're providing.
sufficient funding to schools,
um, so while we have sur
surpassed that amount, which is
a good thing. I also wanted to
point out sort of that gap. If
you look at the, the gap between
the blue line and the red line,
starting in FYOA, you don't
start to see state funding uh
past that line until FY 22.
I point that out because
If in fact that number is a good
benchmark for us in terms of
sufficiency. You're also dealing
with the impacts of um
Compounding effects of
underfunding, right? So you
might be funding enough now, but
if the system hasn't been
receiving enough funding for
potentially 1015, 20 years,
maybe even more. It's not an
issue of you fund at a certain
level for 2 or 3 years and see
the results that you want. It
may take longer for those, for
that funding level to actually
impact outcomes.
On starting on page 17, we're we
have a, uh, a timeline of a lot
of the legislative action as as
it relates to the Martinez Yazi,
uh, lawsuit. I'm not gonna go
through the whole thing. I did,
I did want to point out a few
things, um.
Primarily the, your commitment
to teachers. And even in moments
of difficult budgets, uh, you
all have continued to raise
teachers' salaries and so.
1415, 16, the legislature raised
teachers' salary minimums, uh,
during those years. At the same
time, I do think it's important
on page 17, the right-hand
column Senate Bill 9. You did
raise teachers' salaries again
because of budget concerns, you
were asked, you, you did decide
to reduce the unit value and,
and reduce uh appropriations for
transportation and instructional
materials.
On page 18, uh, this is where
things start to get much rosier,
as you all know, because, uh,
starting in 2018, 19, the state
had, um,
A lot more money to spend and
you decided to start investing a
lot of that money in education.
So 2019, 2020 is you see a big
increase from $2.8 billion for
education to $3.2 billion
including additional salary
increases, raising teacher
minimums, um.
That trend continued into
202021, even with the pandemic,
um, I did want to point out
something that isn't on this
slide, but I'm going to talk a
little bit about, um,
potentially a little bit later
is you also all passed the
family income index, which
provides targeted funding to our
poorest schools across New
Mexico and I'm gonna mention
that in a in a little bit. So I
wanted to point that out in 20.
202021.
On page 19, uh, as Sonny
mentioned, I think this was a,
uh, an important, um,
Event, House Bill 6 in the 2021,
uh, session again removed
federal impact data and local
mill levy credits so that uh
school districts receiving
federal impact aid received
their impact aid but were also
not penalized when it came to
their state equalization
guarantee. So in other words,
they were, they always received
federal funds, but the state
would take credit for their
state funding, uh, for a portion
of those federal funds. You all
did away with that.
And so those school districts
now receive their full state
equalization guarantee, uh,
allocation in addition to the
federal funds that they receive.
Again, I just wanted to point
out here that the continued
commitment to educators, salary
increases, minimum increases,
uh, I will say 2023, 2024.
You all increased instructional
hours.
Right, that we have not talked a
lot about K3+.
5 + an instructional hours, but
during that 2023 session, you
all passed a bill that increased
instructional hours for all
school districts, uh, and, and
had, um, additional funding for
K-12 plus for those districts
that chose to do more school
days in addition to the required
hours.
You also raised the risk index
to 0.33 and fine arts 20.0555,
uh, providing additional
resources for schools.
One thing I want to mention on
this slide that isn't that isn't
here, but because it hasn't
happened yet, but I want to flag
it for you all because you'll
see something from our
committee, uh, potentially
during the session.
Is, uh, we as staff in our
committee as along with a
working group have been working
on a state equalization
guarantee revision, so this is
your state funding formula and
we've been working through for
the last 22 interims of funding
formula revision, and you'll see
a proposal from us potentially
from our committee that, um,
uses that family income index
mechanism, and I'm happy to
answer questions about that
later or or independently if you
have them.
To identify poverty by school
and more accurately identify
poverty by at the district
level, um.
That's gonna mean that resources
are directed, uh, better at
schools that are serving low
income students. We're also
proposing as part of this larger
SCG revision in an English
learner factor, which does not
currently exist as a standalone
factor in the funding formula.
So that factor would allow
school districts serving English
learners to receive explicit
units generating funding in the
funding formula, and that would
impact obviously English
learners across the state and
In New Mexico, we often think of
English learners as those
speaking Spanish and learning
English on our tribal
communities.
We have plenty of English
learners on our tribal
communities as well and so this
would actually support
districts, uh, serving uh tribal
students who's who are also
English learners.
Lastly, as part of that revision
is a potential, uh, increase to
the secondary factor, uh, the
legislature as a whole has
talked a lot about career
technical education and it's
importance. We have, uh, you all
have funded career technical
education primarily through
below the line initiatives, so,
uh, grants that PED provides to
school districts and charter
schools, this would, uh,
potentially mean additional
funding for secondary schools
through the formula.
And then the last slide, uh,
page 20 is, um, again, just as
we've talked through all of
these things, these are the
inadequate inputs that were
identified by the court. um.
And as we've talked about in the
presentation, you all have
attempted to address a lot of
these issues, um, and I think
I'll transition.
Right into this brief.
That you should also have.
And, uh, for those of you who
attend LESC meetings or at LFC
last week. This is your 3rd
time, uh, hearing this brief.
Third time's the charms is what
we always say.
And the reason we'll go straight
to this is because while the
legislature, uh, and the
executive have worked to address
the lawsuit over the last 6
years.
The plaintiffs in the case, um,
have asked the court to take an
additional step because they
feel that the state has still
not adequately or sufficiently
addressed all the deficiencies,
uh, that were found originally.
And so, uh, I won't go through
the entire briefing in too much
detail, but I'll try to
highlight the main points here.
The biggest one obviously is
that on September 4th of this
year, the plaintiffs filed a
motion in district court asking
that um
A comprehensive plan be uh
Established, developed to
address the deficiencies.
You all have probably heard over
the last few years that this has
been a consistent call that
we've had that we have a
comprehensive plan that the
state has a comprehensive plan.
That has primarily fallen on the
public education department to
develop, and while they've
developed iterations of a plan,
a final version has never been
put forth, um, and so the
plaintiffs here are asking.
That the state have a
comprehensive plan and more
specifically it's asking LESC
and its staff to lead the
development of that plan.
in calling for the staff to lead
the planning process, the motion
sites, high rates of turnover in
leadership at PED continued poor
outcomes for at-risk students
and defendants refusal to work
collaboratively on a remedial
plan, as some of the reasons for
that motion.
The motion also argues that the
LESC staff is the appropriate
body because it is essential
that the legislature be involved
in the development of a
comprehensive plan. Up to this
point, the legislature, as well
as LESC has have put forward
proposals to address the
lawsuit, uh, as LESC staff,
we've actually put together a
roadmap on Martinez Martinez
Yazi roadmap for our committee
to sort of uh guide their
thinking in, in their uh
recommendations to the larger
legislature, but the legislature
has not.
a formal role in developing a
comprehensive plan for the
state.
On page 2, something that we, we
feel are are proud of, but are
also um recognize that our role
at LESC staff is is an
interesting one in that we serve
our members and that we serve
you as a legislature as a whole.
So we're proud of our expertise
that the um
That the plaintiffs call out in
their motion. I do want to
highlight.
Um, if you haven't read it yet,
you're almost a year behind.
This is our, this is our annual
report for, for um last
legislative session, we'll have
a new one for you come January.
You all receive a copy of this,
uh, something again that we're
very proud of is LESC staff that
outlines the work of the
committee over the interim and
includes any, uh, LESC proposals
for the upcoming session and
we're in the middle of preparing
for our next one.
Want to talk a little bit about
the timeline that the motion
calls for. So in its current
version, uh, the motion calls
for LESC staff to submit to both
the plaintiffs and defendants, a
draft plan by November 1st of
2025.
By July 1st of 2025, the state
would present, uh,
To the court that plan to see
if, uh,
Well, if the court accepts that
plan, and again, this is all
based on, on the motion the
court has not ruled on any of
this. I should have said that to
begin with.
Um
I won't go through all of these,
uh, components, but you'll see
under that red bar, the summary
of plan components, the motion
itself.
Has broad categories about what
they would expect to see in that
plan and there those are those
are broken out by those bullets.
Um, I do think it's important to
point out here that the motion
is very specific that the staff,
if asked to do this, would
collaborate from representatives
from all the states 23 Indian
nations, tribes and pueblos in
developing that plan.
Um, one thing I've said to, to
the other two committees that
we've presented this to is that,
you know, this is the work that
LESC does, LESC staff,
especially this, you know, we're
one of your two full-time staffs
at the legislature, um, we, we
devote ourselves pretty much
year round to studying education
and working with education
stakeholders presenting
information to our committee
about what's happening in
education.
And so, um,
We feel like we can do this. We
do want to point out here that
based on the work that we
normally do, given the cycles of
the legislature that if asked to
do this, it might, it might
require additional resources for
staff, um, to be able to, to
comply with the order if that's
what the court decides.
Um, I won't say too much more
other than
The, the last section of our
brief kind of talks a little bit
about the work that LESC already
does. We've outlined for you
here the broad categories that
we've we've sort of divided our
work up into uh educator
ecosystem, which of course has
to do with uh the recruitment
retention support of educators
as a whole.
Academic design, um, you all
know and have heard probably a
lot about structured literacy is
a huge initiative across the
state.
How we teach kids to read has to
be done the right way, and
that's part of that academic
design, um, math.
Secondary and middle school
redesign is all part of that
process as well amongst other
things in that category.
We talk about whole child
education, which is sort of an
education jargon term for how do
you support students outside of
academics, social workers,
counselors, behavioral health
support, all of those things are
um as well as other out of
school time supports, tutoring,
fine and performing arts,
extracurricular kinds of things
that you might, uh, think about.
And then lastly, those
overarching systems, um.
We collect a lot of data in New
Mexico around education, both
academic and otherwise.
The systems in New Mexico aren't
always set up for us to use that
information very well to make
decisions and both at the local
level and for the legislature
and so that's something else
that we've been focused on over
the last couple of years at
LESC. And again, I, I point
those out in relation to the
motion in that you'll see,
you'll see some overlap between
some of what the plan calls for
and some of what LESC staff and
its members already focus on.
Um, we're actually presenting to
our committee in a couple of
weeks, um.
Sort of a more in depth
discussion about long term
planning for the legislature.
And so, um, I'll just close in
saying that regardless of how
the motion plays out and what
the court decides, right?
We as staff have been, um,
Working to to support our
members in thinking through what
learnt long term planning looks
like for education in New
Mexico, at least from the
legislative perspective up to
this point.
You all know that this is
generational work.
Right? We didn't get here.
In 5 years and we're not going
to solve all the problems in 5
years.
Right, this is decades if not
centuries in the making.
And uh we've been working to
help our committee work through
what does it look like to create
generational progress, having
that sort of planning and the
patience that should go along
with that planning and
understanding what funding is
necessary or programs are
necessary. What it looks like,
uh, and I said this to the LFC
last week to mean that we've
actually made progress and I use
the example last week if, if I
asked any one of you to say,
When did we make progress? You
might all have different answers
for what that might look like,
that might be graduation rates,
it might mean.
Academic assessment scores.
It might mean
Uh, absenteeism.
For our tribal communities
especially, it might mean
language acquisition and that
uh.
Culture and language is
sustained.
And preserved and sustained.
Uh, and so how the state decides
what progress should look like
is something that we haven't
done comprehensively or
collaboratively, we've tasked
the PED to do that and, uh, you
know, at least according to the
plaintiffs in the motion that
hasn't happened just yet. So
with that, uh, Madam Chair,
Madam Vice Chair, uh, I think we
stand for questions.
Thank you, Representative
Lindstrom.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
appreciate the presentation
today. It's been a while since
I've heard Sonny. I'm glad to
hear you again today. I do have
a question though, um,
Mr. Santa, how long have you
been with the
Legislative education Study
Committee.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
Lindstrom, I've been with LESC
2.5 years. I've served as, um,
deputy director for most of that
time, I was named interim
director about 6 weeks ago, um,
just brief for those of you who
don't know, I was also the
policy director at the public
education department for 3 years
prior to that, and, uh, was
actually at LESC for 6 months
right before that. So a little
bit of work around policy for
about the last 6 years. I
remember you when I was the
chairman of appropriations and
you'd come in with
The Department. So it's
interesting that, um, the
plaintiffs have made a comment
about needing a plan, a
comprehensive plan that's done
because of the Department of
Education's high turnover when I
personally have seen the same
thing with LESC in the last few
years. Lots of high turnover
with leadership. So I don't know
that that's particularly a fair
statement when it comes to long
range comprehensive planning,
but I'm not one of the
plaintiffs, so it's not for me
to say.
But I do have some specific
questions for you. How does, how
does the funding formula
proposed changes meet the
Martinez Yazi lawsuit.
Specifically, Madam Chair,
Representative Lunstrom, thanks
for the question. So, and I
don't have the, the findings of
fact and conclusions of law in
front of me, but one of the, the
key pieces um that we've, that
the, the court called for was
increasing uh additional funds
for
at-risk students. So without
getting too far into the weeds
in the technical aspects, at
risk currently in New Mexico,
the factor for funding formula
is.
Low income students, it's a
combination of low-income
students.
English learners.
And what we call highly mobile
students and it's, that has to
do with students sort of
enrolling and disenrolling from
schools. You take a 3 year
average of each of those in each
district, and you multiply that
to your times your, um, at-risk
factor.
And that gives you a factor for
each district, and Madam Chair,
who sets that factor? Isn't that
done locally by the district,
Madam Chair, Representative
Lustrom, that's a statutory
factor right now. I'm asking
though, Madam Chair, at the
district level, isn't it the,
the school district that
determines which students inside
their district are considered at
risk.
Madam Chair Representative, um,
they don't consider which, uh,
they don't determine which
students are considered at risk.
They do determine because of the
discretionary factor of the
formula, how to spend that
money. I think that may be what
you're alluding to. So,
Their factor is what their
factor is based on the
demographics of their students.
The formula distributes money to
them based on that factor in
that particular district, but
the SCG in general is a
discretionary factor, and once
it gets to the local level
regardless of how the money was
generated, districts make local
decisions about how to spend it.
Madam Chair, that's the point.
What happens when we make
changes to that factors inside
the funding formula, how do you
as an LESC or Department of, uh,
Public education, whoever the
regulator.
would be on this ensures that
that's how it's being spent,
Madam Chair Representative,
that's a great question. It's,
it's part of the reason that we
brought the recommendation
again, the, the law doesn't
require school districts
suspended in any particular way,
but by having a specific
standalone poverty indicator,
for instance, which is what
we're suggesting.
Right now you have those 3
components and it's hard to
argue that any one of those
populations of students should
receive a certain proportion of
funding because they're all
lumped together.
By breaking that factor that
factor apart, having a
standalone poverty indicator,
for instance, you're able to
better track how much of that
money is being spent to support
low-income students. As an
example, the same thing is true
for English learners. Right now,
districts cannot, I, I, you
know, I don't want, I wouldn't
want to put any of them on the
spot, but I would doubt that any
superintendent would be able to
tell you exactly how much money
is generated by their English
learners currently by the fact
by the formula.
By having a standalone English
learner factor.
You will at least be able to say
as a legislature, a staff, and
PED that this much money was
generated by English learners?
Are you using that money to
support English learners and
activities that would support
them at the local level. It gets
back then to that long standing
issue that the New Mexico
legislature has had when it
comes to independent school
districts, what do you do about
it if they don't? Are you gonna
say we're gonna cut your budget
because that won't ever happen.
So my, so my question is, is
that, um.
How do we, and maybe this is
done in the budget process,
ensure that that amount of
funding goes to that district
ahead of time instead of waiting
to 80 day report or 130 day
report or any of that kind of
stuff. We actually doing it
ahead of time because what, what
my concern would be when you're
looking at poverty indicators
only, poverty changes.
Uh, you lose a major
manufacturer in your community.
Guess what happens to your tax
base. Guess what happens to
school bond issues when you
can't pay for it. Uh, there's a
whole bunch of things that
change inside communities that
affect that poverty factor, and
I don't know what that you're
gonna be using to set up what,
what, uh, demonstrates poverty,
but I think that'll be important
to be able to explain to the
legislature.
How are we defining poverty?
And is it some federal standard,
uh, or whatever it's going to
be, that'd be important to know.
The other thing I want to say,
Madam Chair, and then I'll, I'll
I'll, uh.
Turn over the mic to somebody
else.
I don't agree with the statement
that leg legislators have not
had a formal role.
When it comes to what happens
with school planning. And the
reason I say that is because in
the budget process, we have.
In that process, a, uh,
requirement for performance
measures.
And every budget requires a
performance measure.
Those are negotiated with the
staffs, with the DFA and LFC and
you guys and everybody else and.
If the legislature doesn't agree
with that, they don't vote for
it.
So I wouldn't say that the New
Mexico legislature doesn't have
some formal role because they
absolutely do.
It's just that I think part of
our issue has been
Is that it, it goes into a
political arena then when the
session starts. I mean,
everybody's pretty stalwart up
until the time when the session
actually starts and then all of
a sudden you have these outlying
factors, uh, districts that
can't do 4 days or have to have
4 day schools as an example.
Or adding more time to a school
day, and a district doesn't want
to do that, you know, then
you've got this beautiful
formula that looks great on
paper, and then you have all of
a sudden these school districts
that are coming forward during
this legislative hearings saying
we don't like that anymore.
We want to change our graduation
requirements. We don't want to
take algebra one anymore.
You don't want that in there,
whatever the issues are. I've
seen it, I've seen it for 24
years, you know, it just changes
all the time.
So I'm hoping that the reason
that we
Look at changing the formula
actually does tie to the
compliance of this lawsuit.
And that you have a good way to
track it.
And that you can provide
valuable information throughout
the interim to the various
committees so they can see it,
because what is happening in my
district now.
is a lot of my constituents are
asking what happened to that
that impact aid money. They're
supposed to be coming to our
district. I carried that bill
with Speaker E Goff.
And it was a lot of more money
that comes into our school
district, and I don't ever get a
good answer on that.
And I asked the school staff, I
asked the district staff because
they should know they have the
control over that.
The state does not have control
over that.
You get, you get reports after
the fact, so I, I guess that's,
um.
You need to know that. I mean,
the constituents and my and my
district is the one that's most
highly profiled in all these
lawsuits and everything.
I just hope that you have a good
way to track it. People are
super clear on what you're gonna
be measuring.
And that you have a good way of
defining what success looks like
in, in getting this lawsuit off
our back. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Representative
colleagues I have Representative
Little, Representative Allison,
Senator Lopez, and Vice Chair
Pinto and these gentlemen have
to leave at 1:30. So
Representative Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um, I've
got a list of questions, but I
think one of the
Priority pieces, Madam Chair,
would be to ask.
Um,
How if you are aware how PED
will hold.
School districts accountable. We
were describing that just a bit
ago, um.
For consulting and collaborating
with the tribes.
Um
Madam Chair, Representative.
I think this might go to your
question and also representative
Flenstrom's question.
We as a state have not
Drawing a line and said, at this
point, this is when the state
takes more control over how a
district or charter.
Um
Changes its programming or runs
its its operations we've
Largely relied on state tests to
determine performance in the
past to determine, you know,
these are low performing
schools, and this is when we
will actually intervene. But
during the pandemic, there was a
hiatus from testing, so there
was actually no data at that
point.
For better or for worse, to
understand whether or not the
state should take action. We've
just gotten to a point, and I'm
not trying to make any excuses,
so we've had 3 years of data to
actually see a trend, and I
think
Part of the, the sort of
elephant in the room is, now
that we know where schools are
at and what direction they're
heading.
When, as the state will we
finally say, OK, if you've been,
you know, at 10% proficiency
rate for 3 years.
We actually need to go in and
actually direct and look at your
spending and look at your
practices to see if there's any
improvements you can make. We, I
don't think we have as a state
have articulated that yet.
And colleagues, uh, we will hear
from PED tomorrow, so perhaps we
can ask the PED questions
tomorrow. Madam Chair
Representative, if I could, I
think what I heard you asking if
you're referring to this
specific, the brief about, uh,
collaborating with, with tribes
and, and um pues and nations has
to do with what the court is
asking LESC, I'm, I'm sorry, not
the court. The plaintiffs are
asking in the motion that LESC
staff would do. And so, um, one,
we're sort of in this holding
pattern at LESC right now
because we don't know what the
court will decide and and it
could be a while before we find
out. There haven't been any, um,
hearings scheduled, um.
But that means, that doesn't
mean we haven't been thinking
about it. And I, and I will say
that as that as staff, we've
worked really hard over the last
couple of years, uh, to
collaborate with a number of
stakeholder groups, and I'll,
and I'll point to our special
ed, uh, special education
working group that met last
summer to come up with some
recommendations where we get
where we traveled around the
state. The LASC staff, and I'm
going to forget the number, but
I, I would, I would say it was
between 8 and 10 sort of
stakeholder engagement, uh,
opportunities for.
school districts, families,
students, staff to talk a little
bit about those issues and how
we might address them.
And so, uh, whether that's uh
tribes and pueblos or other
constituents who might be
involved in the education
process, I would envision that
if asked to do so, staff would
do something very similar to
ensure that we're that we're
capturing as much feedback and
input from from constituent
groups as possible.
Thank you very much. So my next
question then would be to
regarding the LESC, um.
I'm curious as to the
composition. Are there Native
Americans that are also part of
this, uh, LESC.
So, uh, Madam Chair and, and,
uh, Representative Little. So
this is your, your legislative
education study committee
chaired by, uh, Representative
Romero, vice chaired by Senator
Souls. I could get the whole
list out for you.
Yeah.
There are
advisory members OK, thank you.
And so I'm wondering about the
staff.
Oh, well, actually, Madam Chair,
of Representative Little, we do
have uh um one of our, our
policy analysts who actually
works on tribal issues. Her name
is Natasha Davalos. She's
Mescalero and um been very,
she's been with us for about a
year, uh.
She's, she's, I, I wouldn't, I
wouldn't disclose it if it was
an HR issue, but she's very
proud of her heritage and, and
is actually very committed to
that particular work, yeah.
Yeah.
I'm sorry.
You
Well, as it relates to this
subject matter, I think it's
pretty relevant to have the
input of those from the voices
of the communities as part of
those that are going to be
either, uh, recommending
decisions, but absolutely making
decisions. So that's, that was
the rationale for me asking, and
at the decision level,
Where are, who are those
individuals?
Thank you.
Appreciate that.
Madam Chair Representative, can
you clarify, uh, when you talk
about the decision making level,
who, who are you referring to?
The recommendations are being
made and put forward, um, uh.
Is that are.
Uh, on, uh,
At the level decisions are being
made to, to, uh,
Implement.
Uh, these, these, uh,
To implement these, uh, um,
recommend, uh, the actions that
have been set forth, um.
Are there people who are able,
who are native, who are in that
process. Thank you. Sorry for
the, that's OK, madam. I think
Madam Chair Representative, I
think I understand what you're
saying. So, um, just, you know,
I'll, I'll just sort of do, most
of you are aware of this, but
I'll just for clarification's
sake, we're staffed to you all.
As as LESC staff, we work for
the legislature and when it
comes to and currently I'm, I'm
serving as interim director. I
make decisions about how our
staff does work for you, uh, at
the, at the staff level. We
don't make decisions, we bring
recommendations to our
committee. We bring
recommendations to LESC who, you
know, for instance, we'll have
proposed endorse legislation
just like your staff does for
you here at IAC, um, and it's
it's ultimately.
up to the committee.
And then the larger legislature
to make those decisions about
whether or not to implement
those statutes or or approve
those budgets. We don't, we
don't make those decisions. I
will say as it regards to the
plan,
If, if the court, um,
Rules that we should as LESC and
LESC staff be, be part of the
plan making.
As staff, we would follow the
direction of our of our bosses,
right? That's, that's you all
and specifically our chair,
chair and vice chair.
Thank you very much, um, I, uh,
I'm having to, uh, trying to
formulate my questions more
succinctly, uh, to get to a
specific piece, um, I think I
will hold the rest of my
questions for tomorrow, but, um,
uh, and seek you out to get some
specific information. Thank you
very much.
Madam Chair Representative, we
have, uh, our next scheduled
meeting is November 13th through
15th. That's at the Capitol, and
then I believe we meet in
December and I'm going to forget
the dates. 2019, 20th, something
like that.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Allison.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
My question might be partially
answered already.
Oh
The your last answer indicated
that the court order was
directing the legislators to
provide the fix.
For the judges, uh,
determination, is that what I'm
hearing?
Madam Chair, Representative
Allison, know the, the, the
motion calls for LESC and LESC
staffed to lead the development
of a comprehensive plan to
address the to address the
deficiencies the court found
originally, and it calls
specifically.
That that staff, uh, and the,
and the committee bring together
education stakeholders from
across the state. So it is, it
is not just that the legislature
would decide what to do or
that's certainly not a staff
that we would decide what to do,
but that we would lead in the
development of that plan and
include uh
I would imagine a broad swath of
education stakeholders from
across the state in doing so,
and again, including our 23
tribes, nations and publics.
OK, thank you for that, Madam
Chair. Um,
I'm relieved to hear that it was
not my responsibility to um
be in accordance with the court
order.
In the early, well, I've been a,
a member of the House
Appropriations Committee since
2018.
And your graphs 1819, 20, all
indicate that whenever we found
a problem, the legislative took
answer, threw some money at it
to solve the problem.
We've been doing that every
year.
Why didn't we develop a plan?
When the court order was first
ordered, why didn't we develop a
plan saying, OK, this is what
we're gonna do this year and
then after this, we'll do this,
we'll do this. Instead of every
year throw in some more money at
it to try to solve the problem.
My, the graphs that you showed
me indicates that all we're
doing to solve the problem is
throw more money at it and see
if it uh solves itself.
In my recollection, in the early
goings after the Yazi Martinez
determination.
There was a group that got
together called and they
established the tribal remedy
framework.
Those were from the community,
the people that were directly
involved and they come up with a
plan as to how to uh address
the uh findings of the court
order, was any of that ever
followed by the LESC or the LFC.
It seems that we did not follow
any of the recommendations that
anybody made to us. Instead, we
just took more money and tried
to solve it by throwing more
money at it and hoping that it
solved itself.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair Representative,
those are very good questions,
um, to, to go to your first
question, if you could turn with
me to page 6.
Part of, once again, the role of
the legislature is the
appropriators and I would say,
You have done your role, which
is increasing appropriations and
including legislation to improve
the equity of how that funding
is flowing to the system.
Unfortunately, to your point,
there wasn't exactly an
executive plan in place at the
time we were mostly focused as a
lesser excuse me.
As a legislature on.
Closing the input.
Right, looking at the
deficiencies, the court said to
close those gaps.
As far as the tribal remedy
framework.
There was discussion, um, in
multiple years as the framework
was being presented.
To increase funding for travel
ed departments. That was one of
the components of that
framework.
Increasing in Indian education
fund to provide services.
However, as you have noted, some
of the ask, including some of
the capital outlay components,
the higher education piece, a
funding formula for Native
American students, a tribal
education trust fund. Some of
those proposals did not make it
through the session.
But that was, that was also
reviewed during the LFC process.
OK, Madam Chair, thank you for
that, Sonny, and I'm gonna refer
back to the slide that you just
uh showed slide 6.
OK, the proposed remedies in
2018.
It says legislature should
PED should schools should.
I'd like to see a report card
before I give you any more
money, where it says legislative
have
PED have and the schools have
that way I would know that
progress has been made according
to the findings of the court
order before I give you any more
money. I think that's only fair
to say, make that statement.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
Senator Lopez.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. We
need so much more time to have
this discussion, right?
But what I just wanted to
mention is that we have to
remember back in um there was
another administration who was
with us when
Um, the court just made their
decision with regards under
Governor Martinez, we weren't
going to get nowhere. I'm
speaking just
In proper English, I know. There
was a slight movement from the
legislature and such, but when
we began to go back and look as
to what didn't happen, what was
not going to happen based as to
the secretaries of pet at the
time while secretary, um, there
was, it was just, it was that we
were at war.
In a whole different context
with Governor Martinez and
Scandera and the whole list. I
know because I did my job and
trying to do some stuff on the
Senate side.
But when we move forward, Madam
Chair, um, there's, there's
movement that has made grateful
for the community who's come,
um, you know, with the, the, uh,
And I forget what, uh,
representative just mentioned
about the, the tribal remedies
group and such. I know Regis is
here with us, Governor Pecos is
here with us and others who've
done some stalwart work in
organizing moving forward where
we have um at the different
pueblos at the LESC has gone to
visit as well as this committee
to see where our young children
are learning their language,
right? It's preservation of
language and that to me is still
something goes back to the
Constitution.
Its preservation of language at
the time we say Spanish, but it
is for our, our communities for
preservation of who we are
culturally. And Madam Chair,
there's just so much when we
talk about a plan.
As I was going through um some
of these, the list up here under
substantive issues on the bottom
of page 3, I've been working on
a task force with CYFD.
And I'll tell you the same list
is here if you just change a few
um like words in here, it's the
same thing about recruitment of
staff, training, investment,
recognition and culturally
appropriate. It's the same
thing.
Um, it's like,
You can just lift and put and
Madam Chair, it, it's a matter
of frustration, yes, but I think
um the legislature has a role,
and it's not just as
appropriators, but I think we
have another role in the fact
that we live in our communities
and to be engaged in our
communities and really.
Deep dive down into that. Our
school districts, when you look
at that, I'm not, and I'm sorry,
Representative Lundstrom isn't
here. Pett has had changes in
administration. I mean, every
department has, and so have our
superintendents.
So when Superintendents come in,
and I'll say this tomorrow, when
superintendents come in front of
us and say they don't want, they
don't want. Well, they can't
even keep their own line, um,
consistent either. I mean,
there's been like a turnover of
a high rate and you know, you
know this too, Mr. Senna, from
the information we received at
the LESC, but I also believe,
Madam Chair, it's the sign of
the times we're in. It's not a
consistency, it's a different
workforce and a different
system.
Environment that we're in at
this point, and when we're
trying to put forward a business
model or whatever it may be onto
this new whatever, I don't have
a name for it yet. We're gonna
have conflict and we won't have
that continuity for whatever. So
I think even as us, madam, Madam
Chair, legislators, we got to
figure how to do our business a
little different too, because
this is not gonna work for this
next generation that's coming
in, and the children,
How we try, I mean, I have a 12
year old. Lord have mercy, I'm
learning at the middle school
level. There's so many things
that we're trying to keep up.
So I just wanted just to say
that um tomorrow officers
Need depending on what that
final ruling could be and um
Me, who did our fight, our
Before we do our final budget
that there's something there
existing that LFC understands
we, we want to move this.
There's a time issue here that
we don't have another another
year of delay, um, to move this
forward, and I believe that that
this funding too is also our
input on making it a priority.
Um
So that's the motion I have.
Yes, sir.
Representative discussion on the
motion. Thank you, Madam Chair.
I just question, are, are, is
your motion regarding funding to
the LESC for proper response in
the lawsuit or is it it's to LFC
to make sure we, there's a heads
up that dirt, if the motion
comes through before we kind of
finalize our budget that there's
something put forward.
OK, got it. you don't even know
what the, how much the
appropriation to would be and
where to put it because they're
existing, there are committee.
And then PED is the whole
department.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair,
that's all I wanted to know.
Appreciate that.
Madam Chair, I'll second the
motion.
OK, we have a, a motion by
Senator Vice Chair Pinto in a
second and we'll have the staff
develop the language. Do we have
any opposition to the motion,
seeing none we'll go ahead and
work on that. And, uh,
Just wanna thank the my
colleagues for uh entertaining
questions. Thank you for your
work. Thank you for your
presentation and um we, we need
to continue to work, obviously.
Thank you.
Thank
Thank you, Madam Chairman, just
quickly, I, I just want to
really thank our staff for doing
this and staff from LDSC Sonny,
we heard this presentation at
LFC and you know, that the staff
does an enormous amount of work
for us and I just want you to
know we appreciate you. Thank
you.
You know, thank you.
OK, let's move on to agenda item
number 4, Board of Education of
the Zuni Public School District.
Are you here? Please come
forward.
Introduce yourself, Ellen, and
uh.
You may begin.
Good afternoon.
Chair, vice chair, members of
the committee. My name is Ellen
Venegas. I'm from the Department
of Justice, formerly known as
the New Mexico Attorney
General's office, and I'll be
providing an update on, um, on a
long-standing lawsuit, the, uh,
the Zuni case.
There's a handout that I'll be,
uh, structuring the presentation
around, um, so I'll just be
going through that. This case,
uh, concerns state funding to
public schools for capital
outlay. So, um, well it does
have some similar parallels to
the Yazi Martinez case. It's
different in that this
litigation is, uh, only focused
on capital outlay, so funding
for buildings and things like
that.
And I know some of you may have
seen, um, me give this a similar
presentation a couple of weeks
back at the, uh, Pescudiff
meeting and, uh, there has been
a couple of changes since that
time, um, but if you were there,
this may sound a little familiar
to you.
And, uh, before I get into this
overview, I just want to let
everyone know I'll talk in more
detail about this, but where the
case is at right now, it's
currently pending before the New
Mexico Supreme Court. So it's on
appeal pending before that
court.
So, uh, first I just want to
give a big picture overview,
some, some main um concepts of
what this case is about. The
plaintiffs are two school
districts appearing through
their boards of education, the
ZUNY Public School District and
the Gallup McKinley School
District.
And the defendants of the state
of New Mexico as well as its,
uh, public school capital Outlay
Council.
The main issue in the case
concerns whether New Mexico's
scheme for public school capital
outlay funding violates the New
Mexico Constitution's education
clause, um, and that clause, uh,
you likely will be familiar with
the language from your prior
presentation, but it requires a
uniform system of free public
schools, sufficient for the
education of an open to all
children of school age in the
state.
So, um, this case has been going
on for quite some time. It was
actually initiated in 1998. Um,
I'm gonna focus on some of the
more recent events, but, um, the
reason the lawsuit was brought
was because, uh, the school
districts who filed the case
alleged that the way that
property wealth or, um, local
taxation for schools. The 3rd
districts were not able to raise
as much funds through property
taxation due, uh, enlarge part
two.
Indian lands within the
districts. And so, um, the, the
property taxes are a little
different there than, than other
districts, um, and so that was
the main, um, reason for
bringing the case in the first
place. Since the late 90s when
this case was first brought, um,
the school's capital outlay
funding system has really
expanded, um, the iteration that
we currently see today was first
developed in the early 2000s.
And uh that involves a system of
oversight by the, um, the escuda
as well as the public school
capital outlay Council and the
public school facilities
Authority who does a lot of the
day to day work, um, to fund
school buildings in our state.
So, um, what is being appealed
right now is the district
court's ruling, which held that
the, the state's current public
school capital outlay funding
system violates the New Mexico
Constitution because it's
neither uniform nor sufficient,
um, and in that ruling, the
district court out of um.
Um,
McKinley County, I believe it
is, uh, ruled that the public
school Capital Outlay Act, as
well as the public school
capital Improvements Act are
unconstitutional. So turning to
the case history slide, um, I've
got a a timeline of some of the
major events in the case, as I
mentioned, um, this case is
quite old. It dates back to the
late 90s, um, after the initial
complaint was filed, there was a
ruling that the the.
system that was in place at the
time was unconstitutional, and
so from there, the legislature
really developed. Um, what we
have in place today, which
provides funding for schools
based on need, uh, and being
guided by adequacy standards,
uh, that consider whether the
buildings um in each particular
school district are well suited
to the needs of, of the children
in the schools there.
So, um, on that timeline,
there's a few, uh, dates.
Starting in 2020s, which, uh,
are in a different color there,
and so I'm gonna go into a bit
more detail on those items
that's everything that's
happened in the last couple of
years and so most relevant to
where we're at with this case
today.
You'll see a timeline I'm gonna
talk about, uh, some of these
events in a bit more detailed.
This is just a snapshot to show,
uh, where we are with this
appeal and how things have
proceeded, uh, from the district
court to where we are now before
the New Mexico Supreme Court.
So starting off with the
district court or the trial
court, um, as I said, the, the
court did declare that the the
PSCOA and PSCIA, uh, statutes
are unconstitutional.
And the court's ruling really
focused on a, um, conclusion
that the way the state funding
is, is structured, is itself
causing substantial disparity
among different school
districts. Um, this is something
that the state has argued
against uh throughout the case
and continues to argue now, um,
in our position has been that
rather than the state funding
causing the disparities, the
state funding actually seeks to
remedy.
any discrepancies in ability to
raise funds among the school
districts. So for instance, um,
Capital Outlay funding under the
PSCOA has a local match
component and school districts
that are not able to raise as
much funds locally through
taxation, have a lower local
match, um, that goes all the way
down to 0% local match for the
ZUNY school district.
Um, so that would be 100% funded
by the state.
So, uh, after this ruling from
the district court, the, the
state filed a motion to
reconsider, uh, that argued the
district court's order didn't
really provide sufficient
explanation of why it viewed the
statutes at issue as
unconstitutional. It didn't
provide much direction for how
to remedy, uh, what the court
saw as unconstitutional statute,
and something else that we
really highlighted and we
continue to highlight to
whatever court this case.
in, um, is that major changes in
these capital outlay funding
statutes throughout the years
have significantly changed, um,
the case, a lot of uh
plaintiffs' initial claims have
actually been remedied, uh, such
as, uh, the legislature a few
years ago, passing statutes,
changing the way that impact aid
was treated, where the funds go
directly to the school districts
instead of the state taking a
large portion. And so one of our
arguments has been that due to
All of these significant
changes, um, we.
We need to go back and, uh, you
know, look at the evidence again
and bring this back to the trial
court and the Supreme Court, who
now has the case, we argue they
don't, there's no public
interest in assessing the
constitutionality of a system
that's now doesn't exist anymore
because of these significant
changes.
So the trial court did deny that
motion to reconsider, which, um,
after that, we appealed to the
New Mexico Court of Appeals, um,
and because we were appealing
from the district court's ruling
the statute a couple of statutes
were unlawful, um,
By another statute, procedural
statute, uh, the district court
ruling is stayed pending
appeals. So while this appeal is
going on, even though the trial
court did say that the statutes
were unconstitutional, they
continue to be in effect and um
the capital outlay funding
entities within the state can
continue to do their year-round
work of making these funding
awards.
So then now we're in the court
of appeals, um, we had submitted
full briefing to the Court of
Appeals, um, the case was
assigned to a panel of judges.
This was about a year and a half
ago in July 2023. And after
that, the plaintiffs, the school
districts filed a motion to
certify the matter to the
Supreme Court, um, and
certification is when the
Supreme Court will decide a case
or an issue in a case, and it's
appropriate if there's a
significant question of law
under the
Constitution of the state, um,
or an issue of substantial
public interest that should be
determined by the Supreme Court.
So when the plaintiffs filed
that motion, we actually opposed
it. Um, we argue that the
specific issues raised in our
briefing didn't require the
court to address some of these,
um, unclear or novel
constitutional questions at the
time, especially given all the
significant changes in the law,
um, that we had pointed out, um,
but nevertheless, the court of
app.
appeals determined it was
appropriate to certify the
matter to the Supreme Court. So
then the case was transferred to
the Supreme Court, who ordered
us to submit new briefs, um, and
so we did that we, uh, briefed
the same arguments that we had
before the Court of Appeals, and
we also expanded a bit on, uh,
the constitutional issues, um,
in the event that the court
wanted to
To uh provide any, any guidance
on what the terms of the
education clause mean like what
does sufficient education mean?
What is a uniform system and how
does that relate to capital
outlay, things like that. So our
briefing was quite expansive,
um, we also had an amicus brief
in the case from another school
district, the Central
Consolidated School District and
they, uh, filed a brief in
support of the plaintiffs. Um,
and then just last week, uh,
this is the most recent update
in the case, the
Court, uh, vacated the oral
argument that had previously
been set for November 7th, um,
and so the case is now submitted
on the briefs, and we are
awaiting a decision from the
Supreme Court.
Um, and so I know that's a lot,
uh, there's been a lot going on
in this case, a lot of movement,
a lot of different courts, and
so I'm happy to provide any more
detail on, on anything about,
uh, where the case is at, um,
and, you know, for now we're
just waiting and I think it
would probably not be helpful
for me to guess what the Supreme
Court is going to do, but I will
say that regardless of how they
rule, um, the Department of
Justice stands ready to take
the, the next whatever next
steps are.
appropriate in moving this
lawsuit forward.
So with that I'll be happy to
answer any questions.
Thank you. Thank you for your
presentation. I'm not a lawyer.
I'm happy to provide additional
details. I think after today.
So, um, when you say the
vacating the oral argument that
just means you just don't go to
court and
See that.
Yes, um, I apologize. I think my
microphone was off, um, oh, OK,
thank you.
Got it, got it. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Um, yes, so vacated means
they issued an order canceling
it several months ago, they had
um scheduled us for an oral
argument, which was going to be
on November 7th, and so we were
preparing for that, um, and then
it was just a week ago today, I
believe the court vacated, so
canceled the argument. We don't.
have to go to court that day and
they, um, also in the order
included language that the case
will be submitted on the briefs,
which, um, it can happen fairly
often in appellate cases. Uh,
I've done several uh appeals in
different cases that have been
resolved completely on briefing
alone and without the need for
oral arguments. So it's not
uncommon, um, and as far as what
it means, the only thing we can
really ascertain is that the
court looked
at the briefs and decided that
it had enough information from
the briefs alone to resolve the
case in the manner that it sees
fit.
And
so the
Would you say that we'll move
forward.
Um, because I know one of the
issues we have is a little bit
of enforcement.
Um, to making sure there's
compliance.
Is that entailed in this or is
it like a fine or how do
How does that, um, move forward,
or is it just that they
will tell us what we need to do.
Uh, Madam Chair, um, it
I'm not entirely sure, uh, the
Supreme Court has a lot of
discretion to resolve the issues
as it sees fit. And one of the
things that we um realized in
briefing this case is there are
a lot of different paths the
court could take, um, because
this was
Procedurally, it went to the
Supreme Court through the
certification process. It's
possible that the Supreme Court
could decide some issues in the
case, but then send it back to
the court of appeals to decide
any remaining issues. Um, it's
also possible that the case
could end back up in trial court
again, so, uh, I'm, I'm really
not sure, but speaking to the
compliance issue, if the Supreme
Court came out and said, um,
The state, these statutes are
unconstitutional and, um,
And that's not OK. At that
point, we would
Um
You know, assess what, what we
would need to do, whether that
would be to provide advice to,
to legislative committees about
some suggestions to implement
whatever the court's ruling is,
um, that would be one option,
whether it's, we need to go back
to the trial court and hear some
more evidence that would be
something else. Um, but
regardless of how the court
rules, um, we're definitely
interested in, you know,
complying with any
constitutional directives from
the court, um, as
you know, I'm at the Department
of Justice, so we're lawyers for
the entire state and so, you
know, we don't have an end goal
of mind of just let's get this
case over and done with. We want
to ensure that we really are,
um, adhering to the directors
from the court, helping, um, the
legislature and the other public
school capital outlay bodies,
understand what the law is and
how to comply, uh, and so.
Whatever happens, it's, I, like
I said, there's many paths, the
court could take. It's, I'm not
sure what they're going to do,
but whatever it is, um, we stand
ready to assist with whether
that be compliance or, you know,
next steps to get this
litigation resolved, um, we're
ready to do that.
Thank you, thank you solicitor,
Assistant Solicitor General and
the compliance,
I'm going to assume that if
there was a
Deniability or that we denied
SUNY public schools,
capital outlay funding or any
kind of infra infrastructure
funding that would not reflect
favorably upon us as far as
complying with
With what's been done.
Are put forward so far.
Uh, Madam Chair, um, so the way
that the court ruled, it wasn't,
um, it didn't look at specific
funding and said, you know,
this, this amount is not OK. You
need to fund up to this level
instead of focusing on dollar
amounts or specific funding
requests. It looked at the
language of the statutes and
sort of like a structural
assessment of on a whole, how do
these statutes work, um, and,
and so as far as any
individual funding requests that
would likely be resolved, um,
with like the public school
facilities Authority and working
within that process, um, but if
there was something that the
court comes out and says, you
know, that was unfair or
unlawful towards a specific
school district, we would
definitely take steps to address
that.
And
Thank you.
And just, I guess more of a
comment that, especially to this
committee, you know, caution
moving forward, especially
because this is still in
litigation.
That support or did you need
public schools still needs to be
um considered as a priority
until this is, I guess, coming,
so
I guess after this, then we
would assume the case is final.
Or just, it would still continue
though.
If it comes back. Um, Madam
Chair, I think again, that
depends on whatever ruling we
get from the court. However, um,
As with Yasi Martinez and as is
common with other states as
well, these, uh, education,
constitutional education clause
lawsuits don't tend to just go
away. They tend to be more, um,
long standing efforts. And of
course, um, as I noted, the law
keeps changing this whole time,
so even if we get, um, some
clarification from the court on
like a constitutional standard
we're shooting for, there could
always be arguments that, oh,
this new piece of the law
doesn't follow that, or so I, I,
I don't want to say.
that it's just going to be
wrapped up and over, but I am
cognizant of how long this
litigation has been going on,
and we don't want to be, you
know, in court or fighting with
each other just for the sake of
going to court. So, um, we are
considering, you know, what the
best
Whatever ruling we get from the
court, we would consider, you
know, how to, how to, um, what
the best outcomes for the state
would be and how to move
everybody forward and
Uh, remain, you know, ensure
that the school districts are
getting the funding they needed
because this funding does, uh,
happen on like a a year round
basis where there's different
dates for applications for
funding and things like that.
So, um, you know, we're thinking
about all these things possible
disruptions to how the system
works and following all the
rules. And so it's, it's
something we're thinking about
and um, I can't say for sure
when the case would finally be
resolved, but that is the goal
to have everybody.
an agreement that the state's
following the constitution and
everybody's getting the funding
they need.
Thank you. Thank you, Assistant
Solicitor General and
I, I sure hope it doesn't go on
to 10 years or.
Beyond that, but looking at our
water settlements and other
cases that were in litigation
with, with the state. Um, thank
you for the work you do on this.
Um.
And that's all I have a check.
Thank you, Madam Vice Chair,
committee members, uh, Shanna,
Representative Allison.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
With this lawsuit from Zuni
Public School, saying a portion
of the policy was
unconstitutional.
So when the
When it's remedied.
Does that mean that it's going
to be constitutionally accepted
in all the area Indian schools,
native schools.
Or does it just affect Zuni by
itself. If it's unconstitutional
in Zuni, why isn't it?
Not constitutional in
Tohatchiehiprock, other Gallup
McKinley County schools or the
Central Consolidated.
On the year's last slide I saw
an Amicus brief that was uh
filed by Central Consolidated.
So I'm glad to see that they
agreed with uh what was
unconstitutional and actions to
correct it.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, Madam Chair, Representative
Allison, um, something that I
should explain is that although
we only had the two plaintiff
school districts in this case,
and then the one, Amicus brief,
um, out of all the many school
districts, the trial court's
ruling about the
unconstitutionality of the
statutes was, um, it's called a
face facial invalidation of the
statutes, which means that as
the trial court saw these
statutes are unconstitutional in
all.
ations across the board. So it's
not just as applied to SUNY
School District, um, or another
school district, the court saw
major problems that were
affecting on a, a broad scale
structural issue, uh, basis how
these statutes worked, um, and
And then with the, with the
school there's within the school
districts we're just talking
about the, the public schools
and the charter schools, um,
this wouldn't apply to like
tribal schools or BIE schools or
anything like that.
OK, thank you for that. And if I
wanted to find out what was on
unconstitutional. Where would I
go to find it?
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative,
um,
All of the briefing in this case
is accessible through, um,
I, I believe the program, the
website's called Research New
Mexico, where you can type in a
case and have access to all the
briefs. So I think a good place
to start would be in, with the
most recent briefing, um, so we
have the state's briefs and also
the brief from the plaintiffs,
um, who
Who set forth their um, their
arguments for the
unconstitutionality of the
statute. We also have the
district court order that this
appeal originated from, which is
another helpful, um, document
and that would be, you could
also find that from that same
website, um, I, I think that
would be the easiest place to
find it.
Um, I, I'm just thinking if
there, if there's a more,
there's so many case documents
in this case. It's been going on
for so long that it can be a
little overwhelming with all the
different documents and like the
flood of information that I, um,
I wouldn't want you to get
overwhelmed, so I'm happy to
provide the committee with
copies of the briefs too, which
I think would be a helpful
starting point, um, if, if
that's an easier route.
OK, thank you for that. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Shannai
Representative Allison.
Any questions, ladies?
Questions, concerns,
representative block.
All righty, seeing no, thank you
for your presentation and uh we
look forward to our continued
work together. Thank you for
your hard work. This is a really
important, um, litigation as
capital outweighs one of the
easiest ways to fund our
schools, so thank you very much.
Now that we are ahead of time,
let's go ahead and approve
minutes and then we have some
house housekeeping
announcements.
I
So we have a motion by
Representative Block to
Move our minutes
Do I have a second, uh, by
Representative Allison.
Any opposition?
Uh, Madam Cherry, I, uh,
Not sure that it's opposition
yet, but I'm missing page two.
Did the other skip page two. I
missed that one.
2 and
We don't see 2 on page 4.
Yes,
so it got photocopied
incorrectly, but we have those
pages. Can we send them out
maybe?
OK, so we'll revisit our
Photocopy.
Oh, sure, OK, thank you. Uh, we
will visit our motion to approve
minutes, revisit tomorrow.
I, I did not see that we were
missing pages.
Is it online?
We can't post them until they're
approved.
We could possibly email them to
the entire committee though,
couldn't we?
You should have it.
OK,
So we'll revisit our motion to
approve minutes, um, committee
announcements.
We have a dinner invitation, I
believe.
This evening from 6 to 9 at Amea
Ameya in the Hotel Santa Fe.
And we are hosted by.
The Kenyan sea the Kenyan Seto
Navajo
health center.
Right
Um, I was announcing our dinner
invitation.
Oh yes. By you all, so.
6 o'clock Hotel Santa Fe.
And we will see you there. We
appreciate your, um,
hospitality.
We can just
take a, let's go ahead and take
a short break, 15 minutes.
And we will reconvene.
