Where's it.
a very, very
I already did.
Testing 1212, test 12.
Test 122 Testing 121.
12.
OK
OK.
Yeah
No, I don't know we should have
just canceled for I'll I'll try
to email her later next week.
Thank you for all of your
efforts. I know it's a pain in
the ass.
OK, so, OK
Test 12.
Hello? Hello?
Testing 12.
So.
Mhm.
Yeah.
OK.
So we're gonna move on to our
next agenda item which is update
on uh from the
from you, but before we move on,
there are some minutes in the
folder.
For the last committee meeting
July 31st, August 1st, and
August 2nd, if you would take a
minute to look those over and
make sure your name is in there
counted as being present.
Madam President, Madam Chairman,
I do recall that and I have had
some time to review, so I'm
going to make a motion for a due
pass unless someone else OK and
is there any objections to
adopting the
if there are no objections and
the minutes are adopted.
And we will so what will happen
did have technical difficulties
with um having Stacy Peterson's
presentation over Zoom. I think
we had the same situation with
um.
Health and Human Services with
the presentation so I think we
need some IT tweaking on our, on
our part, new equipment
equipment.
Yes
Um, uh, but our next presenter
is here, in that city interim
director, and she's going to
give us an update from the
Indian Resources Development
Program Mexico State University
and let's see, I think that
Madam Chair is here hunter down,
but if you are ready to begin,
uh, please remember to have your
mic only one microphone on as we
move forward and thank you for
joining us.
Thank you, Madam Vice Chair for
this opportunity and thank you
members of the affairs
committee,
um,
so I just introduced myself um
with my plans first, but some of
you may recognize me the last
time I had um came before you, I
was a specialist
And Claudia Drew True Blood was
serving as director and so she
left, she took a job with the
New Mexico Environmental
department and I have been, I
served as interim director until
July where I accepted the
position of director so I am now
director for a full 2 months, so
I'm pretty excited
So let me go through. So I, I,
I, I did the handout, so I had
the very first part has my I
attended school, my
undergraduate in Oklahoma
Panhandle State University and I
got my degree in biology and
chemistry, and then I obtained
my master's degree from West
Texas A&N in environmental
science,
um, so when I first introduced
myself, I introduced myself with
my clans. So growing up it was
very normal for me to identify
this. I was told that was really
important and my
My grandma told me it's really
important because I had to, she
said that when I got old enough
and I every time I would come to
the dating age, I'd have to say,
make sure I got those correctly.
She says it's really important,
so I, I listened to her and I
made sure that I knew my plans
for that time. But
professionally, I had the
opportunity to work with
different um tribal
organizations, nationally and
regionally. And what I came
across consistently is that
We um we identify ourselves on
our connection to the land a lot
of times it would come across as
names. It would be from the
different organizations within
our tribe and so that's how I
came to see that every time we
would always talk about the land
and I had in there I had also
broken down my my clients into
their English names, the one who
walks around Red Street bottom
that took a while was actually
the medicine that you put on
your cheeks here that was
supposed to be.
For healing, I learned that that
that's what that was for and I
also found out that I also have
some lineage in Zooty and also
talus, which is where I
currently live right now.
Um, um, so that was the second,
so I have the 3rd page it says
IRD.
So I had first heard about IRD
when I was taking an
entrepreneurship class and I was
really impressed with how um IRD
seemed to have a land
management. It wasn't a very
like a column like where
everything was just like this is
this and this, they seem IRD
seem to mesh very well
together and I liked that it
The land management and most
importantly the economic
development goals for
sustainability. So if you didn't
know, IRD was established in
1978 and that is New Mexico
statue chapter 21, Article 10
and it was to have the mission
here which is the same as the
statue and professional
development opportunities.
So one of the first, and I found
it very important that economic
development because my
background is in science. So
when I graduated, I, I had my
first job, my professional job,
and I was really gung ho to do
the insurance for the um the
research and to provide those
those environmental justice as
I'm gonna do the work I had so
many things planned and then
when I got there, they said, oh,
like you need to apply for
funding because you know you
have to get paid, you have to
you have to make sure you have.
I need to do your program, you
have the testing supplies, the
equipment, everything that costs
money. And I said, no, no, no,
no, like, like I like I'm really
like I'm a smart scientist. I
don't need to do that. I just
want to do the research and they
said no, that's not how it
works. You have to get the
funding and so up to that point
I had not taken any accounting,
any finance classes. I was
strictly science and math at
that point. I had taken one
economics course online but that
didn't really.
That didn't help me at all. And
so I began to see that that need
of the economic development
where I didn't want to look at
it myself.
And that's kind of where IRD
comes in. There's, there's a
list of um the very bottom part
has a page of slide 3 the
development goals and.
Resources engineering, energy,
business, workforce development
and education. So that is, that
is a lot to cover and that is a
lot to focus on and sometimes
you can just seem to get
overwhelmed with that amount of
goals that we're trying to
reach. So how IRD manages this
is the IRD serves as a connector
and we don't most of the time
the wheels are already going
with maybe a different
organization, what the.
at a school, not just because
NMSU is a statewide program. We
also work with the different
colleges, with SIP, with IAIA
Highlands, um CNM, um, San Juan
College into you we work with
Dona Anna College. We work with
all the different colleges,
Eastern and we try to fit what's
best. We listen to what the what
the stakeholders have to say,
the students, the parents, and
then we try to connect them with
what's going on and what
what
So one of the things that when I
came here that was um Tianna
was experiential learning and
that is basically saying um
it's, it's a, it's an
opportunity to learn by doing,
which is more how students will
get involved with what's going
on, especially the land
management natural resources, a
lot of time to students who
aren't familiar with these
opportunities when you say
agronomy or rangeland science
students.
They're like tune out. I was
like, no, honey. They they tuned
out at that point, but that kind
of how IRD works if you go on to
the next page, page 6,
we have how IRD connects with
colleges and universities. It's
uh uh a graphic
and let's see, I feel like I
I I'm missing a page.
So if you, I jumped over, um,
page 4.
Um, there's economic
development.
Um, economic developments of
tribal nations in New Mexico.
And we have the pictures and one
of the things is our student, he
designed the pictures and he is
from Laguna Pueblo and I told
him the different images. I told
him this is what IRD focus is
and I asked for his input and
how he wanted to design them
what he thought of that would be
more tribally focused in these
areas and I like how he did the
business. He did the more
traditional clothing.
With energy he used lightning
with the agriculture corn,
natural resources. He, he was
trying to figure out how to get
water in their heat and that's
and I found that interesting,
the graduation is very much how
that becomes a part of who we
are.
And so with that, we're creating
opportunities for students just
like I asked them to do this.
It's helping them to be
strategic and technical
knowledge we have plenty of
operational jobs, but I'm with
IRD we're wanting the students
to become more strategic.
And so what this is going to do
is to help to develop future
leaders. I really like going
through definitions of things
because sometimes we just take
for granted a word and we're
like, we know what that means.
Indian resources development.
But if going into resources, the
definition of resources is a,
a supply of money, materials,
staff or other assets that can
be drawn on by a person
organization in order to
function effectively.
La.
So with this one the the
research in this case would be
the students or the young people
that we're working with in these
areas that's who we're trying to
develop to be these leaders and
it makes sense for it makes
sense in the area of natural
resources because that's how we
identify that we're connecting.
That's how we connect things
together.
Um, and so I get a connector and
then so now we can, we can jump
back over here to slide 6. I'm
sorry for jumping around. I
stapled mine but so when I come
across and I'm meeting with
students, one of the concerns
they have, especially in tribal
schools, is they afraid that
when they go to school and they
come back that maybe there won't
be a job for them on their
tribal nation that they might
they're that's the biggest
concern and one of the things I
usually tell them is that
It's OK because I worked, I am
Navajo and I worked with all
pueblos since my professional
career and that has been
beneficial because I've made
friends. I've been able to do
all these things and I'm able to
share my knowledge and my
culture. In addition, I tell
them that a quarter of New
Mexico is federal land. There
are 19 national parks, 35 state
parks, 10 national conservation
lands and with that comes
The management of it too. It's
just not that this is not just
apply to tribal students, pretty
much all, all students that
there are all these jobs and
these natural resources sector
and a lot of them on board on
tribal communities, and it
really helps and I tell them
it's very beneficial to have
them working in the cities. We
have a lot of students that are
living in Farmington or Albert
Santafe having them in those
capacities with the state and
the federal government also.
And I continue to maintain
relationships and to build
capacity with these
organizations also, so although
we are working with the students
we're also building and we're
learning what programs are
offered, how to offer, what's
the best approach for the
students. And when I say
students, it's just not, we, we
try to work primarily with high
school students, but we are also
working with them now at maybe
the middle school level so
they're understanding college at
this point. We're also working
with college students.
To keep them in college how to
how to providing that support
for them that maybe they need to
see the end of the picture. They
need to see the last part of it
and that's also what we're
working on.
Um, so if you move on to slide 7
as I already examples
and there's different ways, um,
and Claudia had left I continued
to promote and to to do these
types of activities, um, which
is having internships, career
exploration and entrepreneurial
initiatives, trainings,
workshops, but in addition, one
of the things that had changed
through COVID was that a lot of
the larger
Camps that students would attend
where they could gain this
information and knowledge that
they were no longer attending
them. There are some of them
where they would just cancel the
entire camp because they only
had like 2 students that that
were going in. So I was trying
to figure out what's going on,
why are the students going to
these camps anymore. This is
where they would learn. This is
what would happen, and I found
out that a lot of the
communities are having their own
summer camps. They're having day
camps, so the students were just
going there in the day, they're
coming home at night.
There was not over any there's
not any overnight um type of
activities and it made a lot and
they would last longer and so I
was able to connect some of them
with um the, the extension
agents are also ag in the
classrooms these different
organizations bring in STEM with
UNM, they're Native American um
engineering program to bring
these types of opportunities to
the tribal community so I would,
it was hard coordinating.
Because all the camps were
happening at different times.
One of them was in the workforce
development. The other one was
maybe in a fitness program
they're having these camps, but
universally they were very
accepting, they were very happy
to have these programs because a
lot of our partners we work
with, they already have their
curriculum, they already have
their funding. It's not an added
expenditure, especially for IRD
we're not adding more to their
plate. So in a lot of because I
worked with the tribes, I know
that a lot of the time your
plate is full, you can't.
You don't have that additional
resources, you don't have the
additional time, but a lot of
times these organizations may
have them and it makes a lot of
sense and it provides the
students the opportunity to meet
with professionals and to learn
more about these types of jobs.
And I know that this works
because that's how I'm here
today was an extension agent
taking care of sheep and cattle,
hearses and everything and um
one day there was a, I seen a
flyer out for uh for she for
record keeping for your sheep.
And I said, oh, I want to go and
I went, and the lady that was
presenting, she didn't know a
whole lot about sheep, and I was
kind of frustrated because I was
like, I know more about sheep
than she.
How is she like the I was a
little bit mad but then after a
while it got me thinking and I
was talking to her and I was
like, this is your job you
brought these cheap record to me
this is your job for you to come
out here. You drove out here,
you did, and she said, yeah, so
I became more fascinated with
her profession and that's what
she said, well, this is called
natural resource management, you
know, this is what they have to
have different opportunities of
range and she went through and I
was like, oh, I can do that
because at that point I had.
a career that I wanted to pursue
and I said this makes sense.
This is what I know. This is
what I understand because prior
to that, and when I was growing
up, academically, I did not do
well at all in school it just
didn't translate, but later on I
learned it was because I was
being taught holistically I was
taught when we were out with the
sheep, it wasn't just the sheep,
it was what time of the year it
was if it was spring.
Cheering it was, you know, the
frost it was this plant comes up
at this time, the soil is here.
We moved here, this is there's
flash flooding so it's never
just about one item. I learned
how to take everything in
everything into account and that
didn't translate well when I got
to school and we're learning
about planets didn't didn't,
there's not that connection and
when I got to college when after
I learned from her, I was able
to learn a little bit more and
say, OK, well this is the end
goal.
And then once I started graduate
school and one of the classes
they gave us a a handout like
this and it was um Navas
painting and I was like, Oh,
this is what I grew up with and
they said, well, this is called
we're gonna learn about systems
we're gonna learn about holistic
approach, and that's when I
said, well, that's what I
learned as a young child. That
didn't make sense to me all
through high school going
through and surprisingly I
graduated.
deficiencies in science and when
you look at the front, it makes
sense to see all the, all the
science I had in my degrees, but
when I graduated and I went to
college, they said, well you
have before you take any
classes, you need to complete
all your science courses and I
was like, no, this is really
difficult. I never did it and I
failed all those all those
science courses when I first
went to college, so I took a
break and later on after I met
with the extension agent, I kind
of learned about it.
I went back and I started doing
well and to the point where I
majored in science where I
became then eventually I got to
teach at West Texas A&M and then
I got to teach math at UNMs and
those are something growing up,
if you had told me in high
school that's not something I
would have thought I was
capable. So as I go about with
IRD I think about these students
who may not know they have these
gifts in them that they may have
that connection and that is one
of the one of the things that
drives.
to do this work with IRD why it
makes so much sense the first
time I met him when I met with
Claudia and all the work we are
doing.
So if you go to the next slide
on slide 8, it has a program
impact and because because I'm
starting this past year I took
no observed and try to take
everything in in this next year,
um, we're, we're really happy
with we're to do more 2 + 2.
That means we're going to
community colleges and helping
students to pursue a bachelor's
degree that's what we call 2 + 2
and the purpose is that we're
trying to
I were trying to serve as a
bridge for our tribal youth to
reach their goals in advance
their economic development and
tribal communities we're also
providing internships sometimes
it's funding or it's connecting
somebody who may want an
internship with a certain
organization that we could
approach them and get kind of
work out those kinks. We're
trying to host workshops for
students and tribal
professionals in these areas how
to incorporate more more natural
resources. A lot of time the
educators may not have those
experts.
It helps to bring in somebody
who could tell them how to do
it, how they can incorporate it,
or even bringing in the
extension agents using 4H FFA to
to promote those goals,
especially in areas of science
or business.
We are facilitating network
opportunities between people and
we're also trying to promote
cross-cultural experiences that
we, even though we're all in the
state and we think we know
everything about it, sometimes
we don't, so we're trying to
crisscross the different areas
we're trying to facilitate
campus visits so that students
can meet with professionals.
They can see the campus, they'll
know how to apply and so that
was, so that's kind of the
things we're looking forward to
this next year and also
promoting the summer camps.
And making those um just
bringing these resources to the
tribal communities or meeting
with all of the I'm meeting with
a different chapters actually
going into the chapter houses
and going into the tribal
communities, their community
centers, what they're doing
because a lot of times they
don't post it online. It's with
the kids, so they, they keep
that information in the
community, so we're going out
there and we're finding for to
make the best impact.
So staffing wise because I was
hired as director. We have
posted, um, the, the position
for the specialist, which will
be in Albuquerque. We're also
looking to hire a person in the
Farmington area which would be
the coordinator.
And that is that is where that
stands for the staffing so some
of the things you're waiting
because we just don't have the
capacity, um, right now we did
have a coordinator and he left
IRD because he is pursuing his
graduate degree and he wanted to
focus solely on that so it
leaves myself and the
coordinator. I mean the student
worker and so if you look on
page 9, his pictures right there
and that was the trip we took to
the BLM office to learn about
the different.
Programs they have.
Some of the areas because it's a
large area, some of the areas of
focus for IRD is, um, areas of
agribusiness, and one of the
reasons we need to make sure
that we have funding that as
tribes go and try to promote the
areas of, um, like the farming,
the ranching to make sure it can
be continued long term that it
is sound financially that we can
continue them and a lot of these
would also be the traditional
foods and more of the regional.
Type of vegetation, which makes
sense here. Another one is
rangeland management, um, it's
also called range Science or
arid land management, most of
New Mexico is considered range
land, so that's something that
we are also promoting to help
the students, um, learn how to
conserve and and have a
sustainable management and the
next one is agronomy because we
oftentimes we see all the
different agricultural
opportunities, but we have to
make sure the land can support
Which would be so agronomy is
the study between plants and
soil.
Um, so, and I think that would
be, yeah, then it goes on to
last slide where I have my name
and my email. I also have a
phone number if you wanna, you
had any resources and I I always
like the connections that people
can make or into the communities
if there's something uh you
wanted to share, I can give you
my business card and you can
reach out to me. Um, so at this
point I'm open to any questions
you may have.
Thank you for your presentation
before I call on colleagues to
ask questions. I would like to
say good afternoon. I'm
representative Wanda Johnson and
I represent House District 5,
Northwest New Mexico, McKinley
County, San Juan Counties. I'm
glad to be here and uh we'd like
to ask our senator to introduce
yourself.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chair. I'm Nancy, Senator Nancy
Rodriguez, and I've listened
intently, uh, whenever the chair
recognized me or recognizes me,
I should say, for speaking I
just had a question and that's
when you're ready, Madam Chair,
there may be others on the list.
had with your question, Senator.
Thank you very much, Madam
Chairman. Um, first, I want to
say thank you for your
presentation and for your work,
you know, that, um, in your
first name was uh Sherilyn,
right? Yeah, thank you,
Sherilyn. Um, one thing that
resonated with me at least one
of what you said is that, um,
you didn't see your setbacks, I
will call them setbacks when you
were not doing well is in your
words, uh, in your classes.
Initially for your science
majors and so on, or your majors
in general, because at that time
it didn't seem like you knew
exactly what you were going to
major on, but I guess one of the
things that, that resonated with
me there is that you, you
mentioned that you had failed
your classes and I know before
you went on, but you know what,
you're a perfect example of
someone who didn't fail. They
were setbacks instead of
failures and so as a result of
seeing the
Setbacks and you went back and
then you decided, oh, not only
will I go back and do well, you
made your mind up, but I will
major actually, I'll conquer
this. I'll major in science,
which was huge, considering how
you had done prior to that and
so I guess it's a real big
lesson for.
For our students and for all of
us that sometimes we, we don't,
we have setbacks in our life in
general, but it doesn't mean
that we failed. It just means
that we go back and we, we try
again, right? Um, things aren't
perfect. No one is perfect, um,
in, in humanity here, but I can
tell you that we have a way to
work it and and then go back and
look at you, you, as I said,
you've been an example, but one,
Madam Chairman, one thing I
Wanted to to mentor in addition
to that is that it seems from an
educational perspective that
what you really needed was a
comprehensive system, a system
like a holistic system that
incorporated this all these
things that really got you
interested and and told you,
yes, I can, yes, I can learn. I
like this. I can actually be a
have a major in science, and so,
um, sometimes what happens is
that we don't in univers
Cities and, uh, legislation that
we do, um, we tend to think very
narrowly, and I think that we
need to think out of this box
that we're in and open it up to
this comprehensive system that
I'm talking about, and so, and
even at the end when you spoke,
you mentioned that you, you
needed to, or you were working
on the land and soil of research
together and so on, so it's that
broadness that I liked about all
that you do. So, um, I just want
To say thank you for that and
thank you for being an example
to students that, um, again, if
they don't do well in a class or
two doesn't mean that they
failed, but they in fact just
had a setback in life and they
can pick themselves up and go
and do it and conquer it.
Thank you so much, Madam
Chairman. Thank you. Thank you,
Senator.
Representative Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I have
several questions. Thank you for
your presentation.
Can, um, I'm curious, uh, you're
presenting today, uh, can you, I
might have missed it, and
forgive me if I did, uh, I'd
like, I'm interested in where
funds are currently coming from,
uh, how you're funded and uh
whether you plan to ask for
additional funds during the 2025
session.
Thank you, Representative
Little, um, at this time we IRD
receives funding from um the
from the state.
Not sure the exact terminology,
but it is from the state. We
also seek additional funding
through grants. Right now we
have a grant with USDA with for,
for tribal students, so it is a
1 to 1 match, so dollar for
dollar, um, that we are
spending, so we, we are doing
that and additionally I seek
additional. I did not want to
apply for additional grants
right now until I was able to
work through the grants that
Claudia had, um, had initiated
Make sure they come through, so
this next year I will be
applying for additional funding
through the grants, and we are
also um Claudia True Blood did
an amazing job and to set up for
perhaps an endowment fund that
we can continue these and I
will, I that is one of the, one
of the key areas is seeking for
funding because we very much
need that to promote this for
the students.
Thank you. Uh, thank you for
that response. Um, the second
set of questions I have, um, is,
uh, Madam Chair of the, I'm
wondering about the number of
students you're currently
serving, and in the future, what
number you would like to serve.
How do you see this playing out
in the future. Thank you.
Thank you. So with in terms of
internships because some were
already coming.
We have interned for a certain
amount of time, so some of them
were completing that I was not
fully aware that Claudia had set
up. We had about 25 interns, and
that was through San Juan
College that was with MSU
Central New Mexico College, and
I don't have the exact numbers
between each one. I was trying
to get that together for this
presentation. In addition, we
also have, um, what the student
camps that we had, they
In Taos, I think there's about
30 we had uh we had a STEM
person going out to Laguna also
that was, I think another 30. We
tried to work with with Zi, but
we weren't able to get um any
students from there. In
addition, we do outreach
activities which averages maybe
about 100, um, but up to that
point we also.
Try to think about the um.
And yeah, a lot of outreach
opportunities, but we're hoping
to this this year to actually
get more, more, more figure out
how to do the numbers because
sometimes it's hard, especially
when, so for instance, tomorrow
I'm gonna be on a panel for for
businesses for trying to
establish a business on tribal
lands with under 5 if you have 5
acres or less, so sometimes it's
hard to capture those numbers
and I've been trying to figure
out a way to figure out how the
the
Breach of IRD because sometimes
it's not really so which was
going into the workshops to say
specifically these are the
number of people that signed up
because the problems that I
think Claudia was having up to
that point was that, that all
the in-person, how we would
count our impacts in like
People, it was not happening
exactly the same way, so we were
trying to struggle how to get
that together, how to get
websites or how to, how to
distract that, that number going
across. So I'm hoping by this
next year we have it set up now
that I can actually track those
a lot better, but coming into
the year after Claudia left, I
did not have those, I didn't
have that set up.
OK, thank you, thank you very
much.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Roel Caballero.
Thank you Madam Chair and thank
you for your presentation. This
was, um, this is.
Obviously very needed and.
Um, one that we want to keep
going. So thank you very much.
So along the same lines as
Representative Little, I wanted
to see if you have, um, thank
you for the number of
internships that's one of the
questions.
Um, that I was gonna ask. I
wanted to know if you have a
breakdown by tribe of tribal
participation of um the students
that's one question and then um
if you have a breakdown of those
that have
Participated and benefited and
by a category of their uh
interest, for example, what you
were saying about
The non-traditional ways or
pathways, right, that we, our
students go. They, we try to fit
them systemically into certain
boxes, but that doesn't fit in
the real world, and that's why I
appreciate your experiential,
um, approach because that is
what life is all about, right?
So we have to serve our
communities, so I just wanted to
to see how that matched.
Uh, how their interests matched
with um how they've benefited
and benefited their communities
or even if you're gathering, if
you don't have that yet, are you
in the process of gathering that
information? Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Keer Roy Caballero Caviero, the
double L, always like a Yellow.
Oh, thank you. And um we, we are
currently, we do have.
If, if it's, it's kind of hard
because sometimes the outreach
are not maybe an inner tribal
event, and that is where I am
waiting for assistance from a
specialist that were able to
help me to break it down and
exactly because all the tribes
are a little bit different.
And so it's really hard to just
make a spreadsheet that would be
universally across and but we
are this next year I am getting
that set up to where we can have
that we can have that. So one of
the things would be in short
staff without the director was I
did not want to get in over our
heads. I didn't want to be to to
lead people on that I could do
things and not follow through
because I don't want to lose
credibility. So I try to be very
broad in my approach when I was
meeting with
With tribes and trying to
provide these opportunities and
when it because.
A lot of places there's that
turnover, so sometimes the
people that we may have met are
no longer there, and I try to
reach out, so sometimes it's a
hit and miss, it's beating with
a tribe and sometimes they say,
well, we'll get back to you.
They never do and I try to get
back. Sometimes it doesn't work,
so that's where we're trying to
go through where I said we're
trying to get into the
communities and find out exactly
where it's going to be effective
for us to be there. It may not
be always the same areas and it
may not always be with the same
um
Organization that might their
education, um, the education
programs and a lot of tribes are
usually very full, but if you
went to, uh, but if we wanted to
like the youth program, they
have a youth club, they might be
more receptive, so that's kind
of where we're trying to go in
and find out where we can where
we can help, and I noticed that
the more rural communities, the
more rural tribes, they always
are excited for the help, you
know, excited for um that
opportunity for me to come in
and I'm getting ready.
To me was some schools and
schools are a little bit
different than a tribal program
because with the schools there's
a lot more um.
There's some more protection for
the students, so sometimes like
you really have to have the
everything set up and
backgrounds and everything to
get into them, so basically I
don't have those numbers yet, a
breakdown by the tribes, but
that is something that we are
working on this next year.
Thank you, that's really
important because we'd like to
increase the participation and
increase the funding and
increase the support across the
board. So with any program
that's um uh
successful and any program that
works directly linking
connecting with our communities
is important, so I appreciate
you taking on this task and
congratulations and look forward
to the results. More good
results. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Rodriguez, thank you. I
will be quick, Madam Chairman,
thank you. Um, Cherilyn, I just
wanted to elaborate a little bit
on the funding that you
mentioned for the budget, and,
um, just to mention that it
sounds like your funding would
be what's called an RPSP and
it's a it's a pro project and
program at New Mexico State
University and it is in house
Bill 2, but just wanted to.
Mention that to you that you may
want to go look at the funding
that is being appropriated
because that gets renewed every
year and, um, you may want to
see if in fact it's getting
discussed to become a part of
next year's budget. And so, um,
just wanted to mention where to
find it and it would be under
the research programs within the
New Mexico state. OK, thank you.
Yeah, that makes sense. I know
with the um the different
But I, I've now that you say
that I took me about a month to
fill out those forms and all and
the impact, so at least, at
least it makes sense now, yes,
OK, thank you. Just point of
information, Madam Chairman.
Vice chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Members,
thank you for your presentation,
um.
Thank you, Senator Rodriguez. I
think I only got the first
letter of where that money comes
from. I, I don't even remember
what it stands for, but um it it
it's very much new. It's my
understanding. So just to the
committee members, this being so
new, um, thank you for taking on
that this endeavor because as
far as I see it's just you and
all this stuff you're trying to
tackle is quite a bit and it can
be a challenge, especially when
we talk about working with our
tribes, nations, and pueblos in
the whole state of New Mexico
and trying to make.
Contact with them and even the
turnover within our leadership,
um, even just with Navajo Nation
and who, who do we contact, um,
even within the state, we do
have a lot of uh movement going
on. So I appreciate you being in
this position and taking this on
and even with, you know, to
highlight.
About the sheep. You know, if
you haven't really shared a
sheep by hand, you probably
wouldn't really appreciate where
we are now coming to the present
and the technology and what can
be incorporated to all these
things that we we grew up with,
um, so I, I hope you continue
and strength to you in that
sense, uh, to carry this on,
especially um and to get the
help you need and don't hesitate
to reach out to us because I do
believe we'll be seeing you
again and even some of our
member.
here that this will be a program
that we can um very much have
some positive impact for for all
our people in the state of New
Mexico, especially with all
these entities that you're
trying to.
Um,
take grand kudos to you because
it, it at least it's happening
somewhere the work it's
happening somewhere, and I don't
know if there's anything
specific besides funding that
you might need from us.
One of the, one of the, the
things that I would appreciate
is if you um are able to connect
me with any of the youth
organizations in your area that
you may think need this support,
as I said, and you can say yes,
I have IRD and that would be a
really good step for us and
especially uh contact person,
um, as we go about and because
sometimes it because it is a
large area, so one of the things
I wanted to do was to actually
reach the people who are um.
Who are, who are in these
capacities that I can provide
that information with them so
they can be able to distribute
it. It might take a while if I
just go one by one, so it, so
that's one of the things I'm I'm
hoping to.
And, and thank you, thank you
for that and um I guess we
probably need to do some kind
of.
PSA in some sense to our
communities that this is
available through, through you,
and I don't know if you're
funding covers that.
Well, I had given also a flyer
at the uh in on in the front of
um the presentation, so that
would be something like I said,
putting it in key areas of
tribal communities. I know at
one time I, I took an internship
with the Department of Energy
and I got that information in
front of a 7-Eleven store in our
community, so it was, I seen it
and I pulled it. I was like it
was the last day to apply, so I
didn't think any of it I took it
because I didn't have anything
with me. I, I think at that time
I didn't have my my to take a
picture.
I just took the whole thing and
so that would kind of be an area
where I said key areas in the
community where we need to, IRD
needs to be and so that would be
and in the band also um outreach
events if there's a fair we're
trying to like reach the fair
events also feast days, these
type of events that we can be in
the community and just be
meeting just the key 2 or 3
people in an area.
Well, um, thank you. and Navajo
Nation Fairs parade Saturday so
if you're over there and you
find me and this is quite a few
people I can probably introduce
you to. But thank you for your
presentation. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Vice Chair,
colleagues, and a presenter and
audience. I just want to
congratulate you for an
excellent presentation and your
education and career path. I'm
very impressed and, and proud of
you. I'm also glad that you are
working with our chapters
because oftentimes there are
chapter youth are left behind
and in the summertime after
school.
And they're looking for
opportunities and experiences
and especially this holistic
experience really fits and um
I'd like to connect you with the
National Indian Youth Council in
Gallup.
They um they work with students
who are in on an education and
career path. And so I have my
card here. Please add me to your
lift serve of all of these um
opportunities and I, I will
follow your work and see how we
can help you.
Thank you.
And Representative Little has a
question.
I'm actually, uh, thank you,
Madam Chair, for indulging me
one more moment. I just wanted
to provide some information. Uh,
you may have already have a list
of the um, uh, tribal education
department and either directors
or programs. I'm happy to
connect you with them as well.
They were quite active. The
other that um
A group that I am aware of in
addition, Madam Chair, to the
National Indian Youth Council in
Gallup. Um, it was formally that
that of that name in
Albuquerque, but, uh, the name
has since changed, but the
executive director is Darius
Smith, and I, I'll give you my
card and you're welcome to, um,
uh,
Reach me reach out to me so I
can connect you with them as
well. One final, um, place that
I might suggest that you go to,
uh, I found that this is really
helpful is on the Indian pueblo,
what is it called, the Indian
pueblos.org website. Uh, if you
go to that website.
It was from the Indian Pubue
Cultural Center lists all of the
feast days, um, all of the, uh,
uh, uh, feast or celebration
days and otherwise in there and
it it's quite comprehensive,
very helpful, especially when
you're looking to plan forward,
so just a a suggestion on a
source that you might want to
check into.
Thank you very much for that
information and I'll pass my car
around which has my phone number
and my email also, in addition,
that might be easier to, um, so,
OK. Well, thank you very much
for your time. I appreciate your
feedback and I look forward to
the next time I'll be able to to
present and give an update and
um thank you very much.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
OK, committee members, what time
is it?
226. 226.
Are we can start early so we can
just keep moving down,
so we are gonna keep moving
down.
The line with our agenda. Next
we have public comment and then
uh we also have a tour of
historic Luna County Courthouse
after our public comment. So
cooch.
You're on the list.
For public comment.
Public comment 5 minutes or less
and staff will be timing. Thank
you.
I promised I'm we'd take 2
seconds. No, um, on behalf of
the tribe and everyone here,
we'd like to thank you for
coming back after 3 years as is
said, and has been something
that has been done.
For many, many years that I've
been involved, so every 3 years
you visit.
Here at Aquila.
And every 3 years you visit
Mescalero and every 3 years you
visit Gas.
So we're very happy. They're
very happy to have you here
today.
And thank you all for the trip
that you made in order to be
here and to listen to what the
Ford of Apache tribe had to say,
I've had the honor of working
for this group for.
Over 12 years now.
And I only see how grateful this
These individuals are
And how they cherish what they
know and what they respect.
And I duly respect them for it.
So thank you. That's my comment.
Thank you. Next we have.
Mascalero, Apache Tribe, Thera
Padilla.
Again, 5 minutes, please.
Thank you.
I'd kind of like to follow up
on, on some comments that
Representative Ro Royal
Caballero had made and um.
One of the things that really
caught me when she spoke was to
remember to consider impacts to
neighbors in southern New
Mexico, but also I would like to
consider impacts to other tribes
in the state of New Mexico.
One of the things I would like
to do is clarify the decision
made by the Supreme Court
regarding Fort Sill.
What that decision did was
allowed for them to be listed as
a tribe on the IAD website.
And that they could be invited
to the annual state tribal
leaders meetings.
Currently, Fort Sill does have
an active application to develop
a casino here in southern New
Mexico and and Mescalero is very
concerned about this.
We did conduct an economic
impact statement a few years ago
and the development of another
casino in southern New Mexico
would devastate our tribal
economy.
This is how we support our
governmental operations.
And it's very important to us
as, as was mentioned earlier, I,
I think one of the
representatives made a comment
about, you know,
Some of the tribes being the
largest employers in their area.
Mescalera is currently the
largest employer in Lincoln
County and the 2nd largest
employer in Otaro County.
After the military bases.
Also with the recent fires that
we've experienced down in that
part of the state, you know,
we're, we're, we're starting to
realize about a 40% decrease in
our revenues at the end of the
mountain gods because, you know,
the, the operations, the, the,
the different economies that
support us are are not.
We don't have the race track
going, you know, they, they,
we've also had concerns about
the roads up at the ski area?
Will they be able, will we, they
be ready to allow us to open our
ski area. These these are all
really strong concerns of us
arts right now.
We have had
12 of the 13 gaming tribes in
New Mexico have expressed.
Their opposition to Fort Sill
developing a new gaming compact
here in New Mexico.
There are also concerns from
many of the tribes in New Mexico
regarding awarding more than
than $2 million in capital
outlay funds to Fort Sill.
They only have a handful of
tribal members living here, and
I mean, if even if there are 10
to 20 families that move here,
you know, 2 million and, and
maybe 100 people, that's $20,000
per person. That's more than
most.
Entities get within this state.
This is funding that could have
gone to other tribes here in New
Mexico.
And these are tribes that have
had a long and continued
affiliation with these lands
with the plants with the animals
and with the other people here
in the state. We do have a long
standing relationship and
affiliation here in this part of
the state.
We still maintain active ties.
To this landscape.
And I, I just wanted to make
that statement from Mescalero
and express our concerns.
And just put it forth to the
committee. Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Next, we have on the list for
public comment, are Carlos
Caballero.
Oh,
Oops, oops, oops, 5 minutes or
less.
OK. Thank you. Thank you,
everyone. Let's talk about, can
you give us some information
about the tour, Nicole?
Uh, sure, uh, I'm happy to
announce, uh, that we have been
invited to take a tour of the
historic Luna County Courthouse.
I hear a lot of interesting and
fascinating things happened
there in the past. Uh, it sounds
like we have an awesome tour
guide set up. Uh, her name's
Debbie French, uh local from the
area who knows a lot about the
history, should be a quick drive
over to Deming. You can take
your own vehicles and we'll meet
there and meet our tour guide.
Uh, I understand the tours
should take about 40, 45 minutes
depending on how many questions.
you folks have, uh, and then
that'll conclude our meeting for
the day. Thank you.
Thank you. And with that, we
will recess until tomorrow.
Tomorrow we will begin at 9:30,
reconvene at Burrell College of
osteopathic medicine,
So
Right on the edge of NMSU
campus, according to Vice Chair.
