EVA. Let's go ahead and
reconvene and I'll let you go
ahead and um.
Introduce yourselves and tell us
how.
AEVA and what does that stand
for? Thank you.
Well, thank you, Madam Chair,
and good afternoon. I'm
Charlotte Little. I've come out
from behind the desk there
behind the table to pinch it
actually for uh Neva, the
organization that um works with
uh indigenous communities and a
number of issues and includes,
uh, work on civic engagement
with tribal communities across
the state, around the state and
in the cities.
So I'm here today for to
represent uh Arsa Travis, who is
the executive director of NAA,
um, a C3 nonpartisan entity. And
I'm joined by
Uh, name's Joseph Little, no
relation to anybody on my left,
but
uh, an attorney working with
Nava on various issues including
uh political action, um, things
we've gotten into in the past
and current.
Thank you, so, um, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, I'll
start with a, a little bit of a
background for, um, those maybe
here present today or or in the
audience or on the um.
On the webcast, um.
For their benefit, um, in New
Mexico, we have 23 native
nations, which account for over
100 precincts throughout the
state.
And even though
My microphone, thank you.
And uh even the voting
convenience centers are now
available in the state of New
Mexico. Historically, due to the
lack of broadband internet and
infrastructure. It was difficult
to upgrade the election process
in tribal communities, uh,
native communities often didn't
have all of the voting options
available to those in the urban
areas, making services such as
early voting, limited to shorter
time frames and
Ballot on demand services tough
to implement in some
communities. So Neva, the
organization has advocated for
and supported policies to expand
voting access, so that native
people are not disenfranchised
from our right to vote. Native
Americans recall some of you may
recall that we're not able to,
did not gain the right to vote
in this state until 1948, when
Miguel Trujillo, a Laguna, and a
sled of Pueblo.
veteran challenged Valencia
County laws and won the right to
vote not just for himself but
for all natives in the state. So
Neva continues his legacy, um,
as we promote the right to vote.
So today, um, fast forwarding uh
many years here Neva has
established the native civic
engagement and policy table to
ensure that tribal leaders are
aware of and also to support
tribal efforts to engage their
communities in civic engagement
processes. Because as, as, um,
routine as it may be for people
to vote in this country and in
the state in some communities,
as I mentioned,
Uh, voting is still a recent,
um, activity. And for some
tribal communities, um, their
leadership is appointed versus
elected. So it's taken a bit of
time for the practice of, of
civic engagement and which takes
place in tribal communities in
different ways. But to actually
get out to vote has been a
little bit of a harder, uh, uh,
a more challenging, I should
say, um, effort.
So
today, uh, and I'm working with
uh Neva as a coordinator for the
nonpartisan, uh, side of
activities, um, we're working
with Pueblo's tribes and nations
to increase voter participation
specifically now for the general
election.
So this nonpartisan effort
provides each community with the
opportunity to identify leads in
their communities that the
people know and trust to lead
voter, um, education. So there's
going to be in addition, a team
of volunteers who are known to
their communities to contribute
to the effort.
And for many of us that were
have been engaged in um election
activities. Most of this work
has been done as volunteers. I
think many of us have been um
given our time and efforts to
promote the election activities,
um, in previous elections.
But, um, this works now, uh,
through the efforts of the
executive director, Arsa Chavez.
um, funds were raised to pay for
some of these services and that
would be to allow them to get
the tools that they need to pay
for mileage, gas, um, because
some of the distances are, um,
as we know, in New Mexico in
tribal and real communities, the
distances are not, um, short
there and close.
So, um, the funds were raised to
pay for those, um, efforts and
also to pay the leads and, uh,
afford stipends for community
election educators. It was a
positive experience during the
primary election.
Um, the efforts there on the
voter information and education
led to an increase in the
communities that were invested
in the voter turnout. Um, as
evidence of this statewide after
the primary election, um, the
Secretary of State's office
reported the statewide voter
turnout, um, through the, uh,
throughout the state of 22.83%,
which is well below 1 quarter of
all eligible voters in New
Mexico be uh coming out.
To vote and we all want to see
that number increase.
But in the invested communities
and the communities we worked
with, the voter turnout actually
ranged with those tribes from 25
to 36%. Still well below we'd
like to see a much higher rates,
but that exceeded, um, the
statewide voter trend and we
were very pleased with that. Um,
we also had one community that
voted around the turnout was
about 14%, which as many of us
know, is not unusual,
especially.
During our primary for many
reasons, but, uh, this
experience has been um being
used to develop, uh, to learn
from, uh, in moving forward, um,
for example, um,
And the most recent meeting that
we had of all of the leads that
were, um, uh,
Part of this effort, the tools
that they used in their
individual communities were
shared with the others to help
each others to increase the
participation in the future.
The tools that Neva provided
included um.
and delivered were written
materials, uh, printed
materials, uh, such as voter
tool kits, um, this is a tribal
toolkit. It offers, um,
Uh, tips on
the what, why it's important for
people to vote.
um information about poll
working at the polls, if you're
working with tribal communities
with some of the protocols are.
Uh key dates for the general
election because sometimes our
community members and people
voting don't know, are not aware
of the specific key dates that
are, are, um, targeted in the
election cycle. Um, we also have
information on Native American
Voting Rights Act, how to
register as well and how you can
get out to vote. The different
ways and there's uh we also
offer other considerations.
for them to um review as well as
resources that are available to
those that are working with
community members.
And so recall that these are
nonpartisan, no there is nothing
involved with specific
candidates or um.
positions. So, these include
these voter tool kits, a plan of
action for individual voters to
have, uh, posters and other
printed materials. So these
documents are provided to share
with community members, um, to
educate them about the
importance of election. Um,
again, to provide voter
registration information, um,
the dates and the ways people
can vote by absentee ballot.
Voting early in person or voting
on election day as many people
like to do. In each community,
there were specific events that
were held that coincided with
their calendars, their community
calendars, and um,
Uh, they're taking this
experience that they gained in
the primary election to enhance
the efforts for the general. So
something else to talk about,
um today is there is a
collaboration, a coalition of,
uh, primarily Western states to,
um do this activity, conducted
this activity in a fun.
Uh, and playful way to encourage
people to come out and what it's
called is a snag coalition. So
snagging the vote, it connotes,
it has a connotation in tribal
communications, snagging is a
euphemism. It is a fun way to
describe people getting together
to come out to get uh to get the
vote. And so we're, and that is
to acknowledge that we're,
we're, we're all working to try
to get them.
To continue to establish voting
as a community activity, getting
our partners in this sense,
getting our partners and family
and friends to the polls. So
Neva has spearheaded a national
coalition of state native, um,
Of native state-led
organizations, forgive me.
Doing similar grassroots efforts
and these efforts uh include um
organizations from several
states such as California's
Native Voter Project, the
Arizona native vote, Western
native vote, uh, which is based
out of Montana, North Dakota
native vote, and get out the
vote and um Alaska.
The indigenous Idaho Alliance
and the Native Voter Alliance of
Nevada. And this effort is to
inform and educate new and young
voters and their families in fun
settings. Um, there have been
activities, um, that I began,
uh, in New Mexico, Arizona, and
Spirit Lake and North Dakota.
Um, there's roadshows, if you
will, um, uh, of entertainment,
of fun.
for families of of voters for
young people to inform and
educate them on the importance
of voting and their role in
raising their voices,
and last night actually was the
Albuquerque launch of uh
snacking of snag the vote. There
were um bands. There was live
music, uh, there were kids'
activities and bouncy houses
there, there was free, um, uh.
Free information and other fun,
um, uh, was it called Swag that
was available, provided there,
um, in addition, there are
native vendors and other
organizations who are also
working to provide information
to people that's uh to be
resources, uh, as well as the
point is to register voters,
those that are not eligible,
double checking their
eligibility to vote, seeing if
they are registered to vote. So
there will be more to come.
There will be another event
And there will be uh events
taking place around the state uh
which will be announced. The
next 11 that I understand that
is being um uh uh developed is
scheduled to be at the
southwestern Indian Polytechnic
Institute is in Albuquerque.
It's going to take place, uh, on
October 9th, and the more
information will come out soon.
Um, so that is a bit of the
overview on the nonpartisan
side, and I'm I'm going to now
hand this over to Joseph Little.
Thank you.
Um.
Thank you, Madam Chair, though I
do have a partisan side, this is
also nonpartisan at this point.
Um, yeah, uh, as you know, uh,
well, one of three native
attorneys that worked on the
redistricting project, so about
2 years ago I was in front of
the same committee here in
Deming discussing, uh, progress
on the redistricting process if
you will. So 2 years later here
now I'm here saying thank the
chairman very much for
Her help and that we've
implemented House Bill 4, which
is the uh Voting Rights Act,
which includes a native voting
rights provision. We're actually
the first native voting rights
provision in the whole country
and has been looked at as a
model for other states, um, we
are actually working with NAF
that's been made in the American
Rights Fund.
Out of Colorado, uh, and several
tribes throughout the United
States to establish a national
voting rights Act. Uh, so we're
hoping to bring that together in
the next few years.
Um, as you know, the, uh, New
Mexico Voting Rights Act was
signed by law by a Governor
Lujan Grisham.
Which strengthened the voting
rights of the natives in this
area.
Um, we had, um,
Oh, still trying to figure out
how to do these things. There
you go.
Um,
Some provisions within the bill
that were important to us is
that the uh tribes are now
allowed to request or amend
their voting locations working
in conjunction with the local um
uh county com uh county
officials to have that done.
We're also applying for secured
ballot boxes and providing in
some instances funding for that.
Uh, also allowing electors to
use government buildings as
their mailing address, as you
know, uh, in Indian communities
we're spread out all over the
place. A lot of times we don't
have an actual physical address
that you can find on the map.
And so, um, under the new law,
we can uh tribes can designate
official buildings such as their
tribal offices or wherever that
meet the requirements of the
county commissions to be able to
uh deliver their their ballots
and be and have
Ballots delivered to them
through that address. So we're
working with the tribes in that
regard and the Secretary of
State's office to ensure that
these are appropriately located
and if there's any problems that
we can address those. So, um,
we're basically trying to look
at implementing
provisions within the Voting
Rights Act this round, uh, to
see how that works out. Uh, so
far it's been.
I wouldn't say smooth, but it's
been um uh we we've been
successful in making sure that
some of these things are being
implemented on a regular basis
and be interesting to see what
the outcome is. Uh, there's also
a coalition of,
of various groups, uh, which
actually through the UNM Law
School, the Native American
Lawyers Association, the black
lawyers uh law Students
Association and the used to be
um Malsa, I think they used to
call it.
It's the Hispanic uh attorneys,
uh, law students associations
have all gotten together in this
state and we're working as a
consortium.
Uh, to have a law student
volunteers along with uh input
from Native American Rights Fund
that will be available during
the election period to uh answer
any questions or take on any
challenges that anybody makes at
the various voting areas uh
within any communities and uh
try to clarify issues and um if
there are challenges address
them, uh, from a legal
perspective, so that's, that's
kind of where we are at this
point.
Um, as a disclaimer, I will
point out this is nonpartisan.
I, I do chair the C4 section of
Nava, which is New Mexico Native
vote, uh, which is more
partisan, but we won't get into
that.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
So Madam Chair, with that, a
much shorter version of the
presentation today, but we will
stand for questions now if there
are any and do our best to
respond. And if we're not able
to, we will be happy to provide
the responses to the committee.
Thank you, Representative and uh
Mr.
Little.
Mr. Joseph Little, I represented
Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative and, and
Joseph for the presentation.
So.
Representative Little, you
talked a little bit about
monetary uh funds being provided
for travel to vote.
Can you kind of give us more
detail about that and, and how
much money it is, how they get
paid, uh,
And kind of give us an idea of
what goes on there, certainly
these funds are actually raised,
forgive me, Madam Chair, if I
did not clarify earlier that
these funds are for the leads,
one lead in the community and
that's so that the person has
the means by which they're using
their own vehicle to, um, uh,
Gather information to be dropped
off, to be disseminated to reach
out to do the outreach work and
so um.
Mileage is paid to that
individual. We have established
contracts with them. This is not
for the voters. It is only for
the person who is organizing and
trying to get this information
out, if that helps.
Thank you, thank you for that,
and, and I was totally
misunderstood that when you
first presented it, and thanks
for clearing that, clarifying
that, and then uh.
Madam Chair and Representative
Liddle, I'd like to have a copy
of your pamphlet that you that
you hand out that.
So that I could see it and
learn, learn how you're doing
that and how, how it works. Be
happy to provide that to you.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair.
Representative Alcon.
Think you are, Madam Chair. I'm
sitting here quietly trying to
wonder what you're doing.
But
My thinking is that what you're
trying to do.
is to get the people on Native
American land.
To get out and vote, is that
basically what we're looking at.
And you are making sure that uh
It is possible and feasible and
easy for these people to get to
their polling places.
Is that correct?
Thank you for the question, uh,
Representative Alcon, uh, what
this is for is to ensure that
people have the information they
need to register to vote
and how to when they may
register to vote. What's needed
to vote actually providing
information on why it's
important to them to vote for
them to vote. We provide
The information they can ask the
questions about,
well, why should I, um, why is
it important to me? I may not,
and we encountered this mint
often about people feeling that.
That
it's not important for them or
they don't understand the um
benefits of doing this. So, um,
this is particularly to register
them to vote. We're not telling
them this is not to tell them
who to vote for. What, what, um,
actions that they're, uh, they
should take that's for them to
decide what we do is actually
have just the information on how
to.
I hope that's helpful.
This is how Madam Chair, and the
only thing I was wondering is,
uh.
Just making sure you make sure
that the facilities are
available for these people to
get out and vote.
That
It's really between the county
commission, yeah, county
commission, county clerks, and
the tribe, not, not us. uh, so
it's, it's uh between the two
governments, they're the ones
that make the request to the
county clerks. They're the ones
that agree or don't agree if
there's any objections that can
appeal those up to the Secretary
of State's office in order to
get those. So, um, we're we're
just monitoring that in the
sense of if there's a problem,
um, you know, they can talk to
us about it, but
We don't, that's between the
tribe and the county clerks.
The reason I was wondering,
Madam Chair is one of my
precincts.
In the primary, uh, they
couldn't get the, the polls
opened.
after 11 o'clock.
And then when they did get them
opened, uh, somehow or another
the computer system was
all messed up and the only way a
person could vote is that they
provided an ID and they were
able to.
Prove that they're fiscal
address was the same as that on
the, on the voter file.
And it was time consuming, uh,
the few people that did get out
to that precinct and voted were
I mean they were a lot of them
went home instead of going
through that process and
It's just something that makes
me wonder how do we stop and
make sure that something like
this does not happen in the
future because uh you really
basically if the person cannot
vote.
You're taking away their rights
and, and honestly in the state
of New Mexico there is no
requirement for you to have an
ID for you to vote. All you have
to do is know your name and your
last four and you're supposed to
be able to get on that boat and
it doesn't matter what your
physical address is as long as
you are registered to vote. So
that was a big problem and one
of the precincts that I'm
looking at and I'm just
wondering how we can take care
of that kind. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair, yes, in response to
that, I think that's that's the
issue we're looking at because
these are new provisions in here
and we're trying to monitor that
from the standpoint of where the
glitches, what's occurring,
what's the problem, but
ultimately it is between that
tribal government uh where those
votes are uh is occurring in the
county commissioners. We're not,
we're not a part of that, but we
can't help if there is a problem
in there.
Committee member.
I don't have any questions, but
truly I want to thank uh
Representative Little and Joe
for, for all your work and and
for your willingness to step up
here and and help us out with
the information that you had,
very informative, um, I don't
have any questions because you
were actually pretty eloquent
and um just wanted to say thank
you.
Both of you
Thank you, Senator
Representative Robel Caballero.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair, and thank you very much
to um representative and Mr.
Little.
Uh, for your presentation. I
agree with Senator Rodriguez was
very thorough and um it wasn't
on the fly, you are deeply
rooted in this, so I appreciate
that. I've been around since the
very inception of the
organization, and I've been
proud to watch it, uh, grow and
I've seen the positive um.
Outcomes in our tribal commun
around our tribal communities.
There's a like an enthusiasm.
Um, the more informed and
educated, um.
Individuals become in a friendly
way and a fun way, um, to engage
our young people, especially.
Which is really what's the
important thing is engaging our
young people to see them
flourish, um, as I've been able
to, um, has been just a real
Light, um, and, and the outcomes
have proven themselves in terms
of um the increased number of
tribal community members that
are uh being represented uh in
the voter rolls, voter
registration, and I
I liken this to the effort that
national organizations like
LULAC, the League of United
Latin American Citizens who are
now under attack in Texas for
the voter registration efforts,
and I admire our state for not
taking on groups such as.
Never, uh, and other groups that
are just trying to educate and
register, which is a fundamental
right of democracy, um, people
to vote is, um, it's, it's
really incredibly important, as
I said earlier on the
redistricting conversation that
we had, um, you know, one
person, one vote really matters,
and so this is our way to
articulate our voice.
And be represented and so I
really admire the work and have
for a very long time, so I just
wanted to stand up and and offer
support and testimony to I had
the pleasure of a few years
back, um, to support.
Um, get out, not get out to
vote, get out to register to
vote efforts on radio, via
radio. I cut them in Spanish and
then my brothers and sisters cut
them in their native languages,
and they were very effective
because and people would say,
Madam Chair, why radio? Who
listens to radio these days?
Well,
are vast majority of our
communities are still without,
you know, um, internet without
uh access to DirecTV or any of
the other satellite, um.
Offerings and so they listen to
radio and radio is also playing
and all the workplaces. So radio
is an important part and that is
one of the things, one of the
outreach methods I believe that
Navia Navia. I always mess up
when I'm pronouncing Neva,
sorry.
Um,
I want to make it Spanish.
Sometimes, uh, what Neva has
incorporated also in their
outreach to inform is using
radio, and that's um that was
really fun to do because you can
incorporate music and.
Other kinds of things with your
message, but I just, I just
wanted to stand in testimony and
thank you for this and thank
everybody there. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Please, Madam Chair, if I may
add, um, those points are, are
very relevant to what's
happening now. So this
information in each community we
know of tribal communities that
have their own radio stations or
their own publications, their
tribal commun uh newsletters or
newspapers or whatever. And so
in there, the individuals that
are leading these efforts are
identified so that they can know
who it is that people can go to
and have access to, but.
That's a very big part of this
effort, um, and we recognize at
Neva having done this for many
years myself, that, um.
Generally speaking, uh, the
individuals that are tapped to
help out many in this audience
can relate as well. Um, some of
us who work in those, uh, tribal
governments to help to inform
and educate people are tapped to
do so or volunteered if you
will, to do so, um, along with
the other duties that we carry,
so, um, providing um
Uh materials such as this, uh,
such as one pages, uh, or
posters to tribes to uh or any
community to put out there and
publicize because we're
certainly not the only ones we
heard from the League of Women
voters. We know the Secretary of
State and the county's offices
also do the same, so it's a a
very collective effort to reach,
um, to reach people. So we're
happy to do that, um, this is
going to be expanded the work of
the primary.
is going to now be expanded,
Madam Chair, and members of the
committee to all of the tribal
communities we're happy to do
that and um.
Um, look forward to working with
the tribal leaders to get the
information they need to get to
to the Secretary of State if
they choose to go.
Down any of those routes too to
make information to their
communities. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative Little
and Joseph, thank you for your
presentation and thank you toa
Chavez and Aaron Lee. I'm sad,
uh, we're disappointed that
they're not able to be here
today, but we thank you for your
work and your presentation. And
what was it before? Are they
changing the initials of Neva.
Can you tell us a little bit
about that? I'm happy to. Uh,
what I know of is that, um, then
it was previously known as NA.
It was an acronym for the Native
American voter.
Alliance and AVA, um, and that
was changed, uh, couple of years
ago, about 2 years or so ago,
uh, to NA EVA. It's a proper
noun. It doesn't stand. I mean,
it it's not an acronym for
anything, uh, so it is Neva. So
thank you for that question and
it does get a bit confusing
because it still pronounced the
same, so people think it's the
same Native American voting
Alliance.
OK, thank you. Thank you so much
and we look forward to our
continued work together with you
and Neva.
OK, let's move along to our next
agenda item, agenda item number
9, and I believe that is a Zoom
presentation and overview of
state policy and tribal energy
development.
Pardon.
Are you online?
Yes, I'm here.
I don't think you'll be able to
see me, but it says my audio is
on.
And you may start.
OK, I just wanna make sure that
um Marissa Naranjo also has
access online.
Marissa is not online yet.
Kick started it and tell her I
have her presentation on in the
room. OK. May I ask, are you
able to begin the presentation
until uh Marissa catches up, or
are you calling for now? Yes,
sorry. I am letting her know and
um yes, I'm ready to proceed.
Good afternoon, Madam Chair and
members of the committee. This
is Mayanie Chavez Bruin from the
Pueblo of Santo Domingo, and the
executive director of Sovereign
Energy and appreciate the
opportunity to present to you
all today about.
This subject and share a little
bit about our organization as
well as, um, you know, just the,
the current climate of tribal
energy development across New
Mexico and apologies you're not
able to see me. I'm here ready
if it does end up being able to
work, um.
And my, our deputy director
Maronho um is also, I believe
she is online if there's able to
grant her access, but um we're
just uh the founders of the
organization called Sovereign
Energy and our mission on the
next slide shows that we're here
to build the individual and
collective power of Southwest
puelos and tribes to lead the
way towards a just
interdependent and sustainable
energy future, and we envision a
future where tribal energy
sovereignty.
An indigenous voices are
centered within the renewable
energy transition to remedy
legacies of injustice and the
rights of indigenous peoples.
And if Marissa's online, I will
turn it over to her to go over
um the next several slides and
share some more about how we
started and who we are.
Thank you, Miami, and thank you,
Madam Chairwomen and members of
the committee. Uh, thank you so
much for the opportunity to
present to you all today. So as
Maan mentioned, um, that is our
mission and um we work across
the Southwest in partnership
with uh several tribal nations,
tribal entities, local and
national indigenous led and
non-profit organizations with um
state legislative and
congressional leadership and
many environmental NGOs to
really foster a uh regenerative
energy paradigm.
Create those meaningful actions
toward climate goals and support
reparations for injustices
caused by uh harmful historic
and ongoing energy development
practices. So again, just a
little bit about our history,
um,
And I, I apologize, I failed to
um introduce myself, so let me
just go back and do that really
quickly. My name is Marissa
Naranjo. I'm a tribally enrolled
member of Santa Clara Pueblo and
I serve as a sovereign Energy's
deputy director. Um, I also
serve as the environmental
representative commissioner for
the Albuquerque Commission on
American Indian and Alaskan
Native Affairs, and I'm also a
member of the New Mexico
Sustainable Economic Advisory
Council along with Miami.
So, um, just to go into a little
bit of our history, sovereign
energy really emerged from the
imperative need of a nonprofit
organization to uh aid tribes in
our state in navigating the
intricate landscape of community
solar development. Um, as you
may know before establishing
sovereign energy, um, our very
own Ming had spirit, headed the
tribal community solar Task
Force, which brought together uh
tribal leadership, technical
policy and legal experts to
really ensure that tribal
interests and
Sovereignty remained paramount
in the ensuing legislation that
uh Miami will uh review a little
bit later, but, um, you know,
with the backing of multiple
tribes, the task force had
successfully guided the passage
of the first community solar
bill in the nation to contain
those unique tribal provisions,
safeguarding tribal sovereignty
and economic viability of um
tribal community solar ventures.
However, uh, the legislation,
uh, inclination toward tribal
projects, you know, attracted
and continues to attract a
flurry of solar companies really
inundating our tribes with
business proposals and um
sparking concerns regarding
transparency. So, um, you know,
recognizing the mounting
skepticism towards solar
companies or organization
discerned really the urgent need
for a locally rooted native led
nonprofit, uh dedicated to
really providing
That education on renewable
energy development and trying to
instill confidence in clean
energy endeavors. So, um, we
really seek to ensure that
tribes are able to capitalize on
the opportunities afforded by
the Community Solar Act and its
federal incentives in 2021, we
convened the tribal Solar
Economic Forum, followed by a
sequel event in April 2024 and
um those two events together
collectively convened over 2000
participants, um, that
Includes uh New Mexico's 23
puelos and tribes, tribal staff,
tribal leaders, congressional
and state legislative
leadership, uh, federal and
state agency representatives,
solar developers, and community
members. And so through these
gatherings, we really aim to
advance our tribe's knowledge of
solar energy and insights into,
uh, you know, the opportunities,
benefits, and resources
available for tribally led
community solar projects, and we
continue to help develop
networks of support and capacity
for tribes in their
Journeys towards solar
development.
And um since our founding, the
need for tribal renewable energy
education and other services has
been readily apparent as Miami
will go into more detail later.
We've identified and worked with
our tribal and non-tribal
partners to uh identify some of
the policy and regulatory
challenges, uh, gaps in some
opportunities to support tribal
energy sovereignty.
And one of the most immediate
and constant needs arising from
our engagement has also been
tribes requesting support with
their cultural resource
preservation priorities as uh
impacted by the rise of
renewable energy infrastructure
development off Tribal lands.
And um I'm not sure which slide
you all are seeing right now,
but um going into the values of
our organization, um, our core
values, you know, first and
foremost is to support tribal
sovereign and self-determination
to really look at energy as an
act, um, as an opportunity to
repair those historic and
ongoing energy injustices and
disproportionate impacts really
to uplift tribes as leaders in
addressing climate change and
the other values you see here.
Um, hopefully
On the screen and I won't go
through all of the values listed
here, but if you're interested
in learning more, I would also
encourage a chairwomen and
members to visit our website.
And then going into our next
slide, which is on our pillars,
um.
So as I just mentioned in
response to the emerging themes
we're seeing and where it makes
sense for us to be situated in
the tribal renewable energy
landscape. We operate with our 4
strategic pillars of renewable
energy education, tribal
capacity building, policy and
regulatory advocacy and then
cultural resource preservation.
And then on the next slide for
um there are just some, here's
some examples of the work that
we do within each of these areas
for tribal capacity building, we
know that across the board
capacity constraints within
tribal communities and our
nations present a significant
barrier to energy development to
uh support tribes building
capacity to advance tribal
energy sovereignty, our
initiatives encompass uh
technical expertise, policy
guidance, regulatory support,
building partnerships and
Networks, assistance and project
planning, including support with
securing a private state and
federal funding opportunities.
And then as far as policy and
regulatory advocacy, uh,
sovereign energy participates in
legislative, administrative, and
regulatory opportunities at the
federal, state, and tribal
levels to uh cultivate a policy
landscape conducive and
supportive to tribal energy
sovereignty, um, to also natural
and cultural resource protection
and to climate justice.
We also, uh, for example, host a
monthly tribal Energy and
Environment webinar tailored to
support tribal leadership, um,
also tribal, natural and
environmental staff and our
tribal historic Preservation
officers with staying up to date
on federal and state energy
projects and funding resources.
And then I talked a little bit
about um our renewable energy
education services, but another
example of how we provide this
is through developing a series
of white papers aimed to provide
an accessible, up to-date and
comprehensive overview of
emerging technologies, uh, like
hydrogen, nuclear, geothermal,
and we really strive to include,
um, you know, important
considerations and
recommendations for tribes and
policymakers.
Uh, for example, the initial
installment of this series
focuses on hydrogen energy. This
report aims to elevate tribal
understanding of hydrogen by
outlining its use, uh,
production methods and
implications for clean energy to
examine the policy and
regulatory framework at the
federal and state levels, and
then um also address uh tribal
specific concerns, obstacles,
and opportunities and offer
recommendations for both tribes
and policymakers. So as we get
closer to publishing it, we'll
be
to provide a copy to the members
of the committee.
Um, our last pillar is cultural
resource protection. I think
it's important for this to uh
emphasize that sovereign energy,
um, advocates for the expansion
of energy infrastructure while
highlighting the importance of
preserving tribal cultural
resources, uh, traditional
cultural landscapes and sacred
sites, um, as many of you may
know, uh, there continue to be a
number of cautionary tales or
situations where tribes were not
provided the opportunity to
Consult on federal renewable
energy projects from the get-go,
uh, like the Sunsia transmission
line and others where it's um
ending up in the courts. Uh, we
have also seen examples of
projects where, including tribes
from the beginning and
meaningfully throughout the
development of a project
ultimately benefits all
stakeholders and ensures best
project outcomes.
So to do this, we um support
tribes with federal energy
projects that have the potential
to impact tribes individually
and collectively with statutory
processes and consultation under
the National Environmental
Policy Act and the National
Historic Preservation Act
Section 106 process. Some of
those efforts underway right now
include the Department of
Energy's, uh National Nuclear
Security Administration's
electrical power capacity
upgrade project that is the
transmission line.
Being proposed through the Caja
del Rio cultural landscape, uh,
another is the DOE and NSA's Los
Alamos National Laboratory
sitewide environmental impact
statement. Um, the Bureau of
Land Management Solar
programmatic Environmental
impact statement and then the
newest federal undertaking or
set of federal undertakings that
were supporting tribes with is
the DOE's grid deployment
offices, national interest
electric transmission corridor
designation process. So, sorry,
I'm trying so hard not to
uh acronyms, um, but spelling
all of those out, um, but just
moving on to the last slide on
tribal energy, sovereignty. We
believe that all of these
services and initiatives that we
offer that have been based on
our stakeholder outreach with
tribes and non-tribal
organizations, um, really
contribute to advancing tribal
energy sovereignty as a whole
for our New Mexico puelos and
tribes. So we define this uh
tribal energy sovereignty as
the.
right of tribal nations to
steward, govern, manage, and
advocate for energy development
according to the tribe's unique
core values, responsibilities,
and knowledge, uh, energy
sovereignty implies the social,
cultural, and economic health
and well-being of present and
future generations. So this of
course includes uh the control
over resources as far as
decision making processes,
rights, and ability to implement
energy solutions that are
aligned with um tribal
environmental and cultural.
Core values also with um
economic and social benefits in
mind from the get-go of our
tribal communities and then of
course um cultural and political
autonomy throughout these
processes. Um, so I think that's
it, uh, for me and I will go
ahead and hand it off to Mi to
go a little bit more in depth on
our um state policy and how it
intersects with tribal energy
development with um highlighting
community solar.
Sure, thank you, Marissa and on
the slide with the Venn diagram,
um, it's really just to show
what tribal energy sovereignty
means and although tribes are
sovereign nations, achieving
tribal energy sovereignty
requires navigating a complex
nexus of jurisdictions,
including tribal, federal,
state, and local, and each
jurisdiction presents unique
challenges that can impact
tribal energy development.
It is essential for tribes to
strategically manage these
complexities to fully realize
tribal energy sovereignty.
And the next slide shows the
various jurisdictional actors
that are involved within within
that nexus.
So, although tribes are not
subject to state or local
jurisdiction, tribes do depend
on electric utilities regulated
by the state, which requires
adherence to state policies and
regulations, and this dynamic
underscores the importance of
understanding the interplay
between tribal energy
sovereignty and state oversight
in the energy sector. So this
table just details, you know,
some of those different actors
that are involved, so you'll
see, for instance, of course,
the tribes, but as well as um
the investor owned
Utilities, the Royal Electric
Cooperatives, the New Mexico
Public regulation Commission,
and then even at the regional
and federal level, there's so
many different actors that
really have um a dynamic and
play within the the landscape of
the energy space. So for
instance, right now, New Mexico
is looking at joining a regional
transmission organization. Um,
and then also with FEC and the
different relationship that the
Federal Energy regulatory
Commission plays within the
oversight of, for instance,
rural
Cooperatives and those regional
providers or the generation and
transmission providers, but um
this is just kind of to show,
you know, how complex this
landscape really is, and how
many different funds we have to
pay attention to as we're
talking about tribal energy.
The next slide just lists some
of the key state policies in New
Mexico, um, New Mexico has
enacted several key policies
that significantly influence
tribal energy development. Those
include the Community Solar Act,
Energy Transition Act, the
Climate Investment Center, and
the recent New Mexico match
fund, and these policies all
offer tribes unique
opportunities to engage in
energy development supporting
the broader renewable energy
market across the state.
And then I also just wanted to
show, you know, just a a map on
the next slide of how much
renewable energy potential does
exist within tribal lands and
really to highlight that there
is a symbiotic relationship
between state policies that
support tribal energy
sovereignty, and the role of
tribal energy development in
helping New Mexico achieve its
broader renewable energy targets
outlined in the Energy
Transition Act.
So this map specifically
illustrates utility scale solar
PV potential on tribal lands,
and it has um highlights the
significance and scalable
opportunities for wind energy
and other renewable resources as
well.
And going to the New Mexico
Community Solar Act on the next
slide, um, many of you are all
aware of the community solar Act
that was enacted in 2021 to
establish a statewide community
solar program. Before this
tribes could only pursue
community solar projects with
the support of their utility
providers.
Um, the community solar Act
introduced net metering
regulations, and this provided a
stable framework for utilities,
consumers and businesses to
partake in the program, and by
having a billing mechanism that
credits utility customers for
surplus electricity that can
then be exported to the broader
grid.
And the act mandates
participation from
investor-owned utilities such as
PNM, Excel, El Paso Electric,
um, but most importantly in
terms of tribal energy
development, it includes
provisions for native
communities solar projects to
ensure respect for tribal
sovereignty and exemption from
state jurisdiction on tribal
lands. So just an example, uh,
the state of New Mexico allowed
for 200 megawatt program, um,
which is really for the investor
owned utilities.
But also has um some
restrictions for the size of the
facility, the amount of
subscribers, the subscription
sizes, um, whereas the native
community solar projects as
defined in the Act are exempt
from all of those restrictions.
So, although the act does force
or require the investor owned
utilities to partake in the
program and have a net metering
policy that allows these
projects to pencil out
economically, um, because of
limitations in state
jurisdictions.
And tribes are able to pursue
projects that um do not have
restrictions on facility size,
subscription size, anchor tenant
limitations, etc. um, and I know
that um representative Patricia
Royal Caballero is there and can
um share much more about this
act as she was the lead sponsor,
but it was a really monumental
piece of legislation that really
helped change the landscape and
created a huge economic
opportunity here in New Mexico.
Um, the next slide is just for
those who like a a graphic image
of what community solar looks
like. It's just a really great
piece of legislation, also just
to provide access to those who
cannot take advantage of rooftop
solar, um, so especially for
renters, for families in the
pueblos and tribes with homes
and traditional community areas
or where the rooftop cannot um
is not, you know, the fitting
for a rooftop solar array, um,
also those who cannot finance
the project
and multi-tenant homes and
offices. Um, and then we also
just put one more slide for on
the next one for the scales of
solar so that you can kind of
see the different levels of
solar that is um a tribe could
pursue, so there's distributed,
of course, where it's, you know,
the rooftop facility, ground
mount, and then community is
right there in the middle where,
um, you know, it's uh on or uh
basically a couple of acres
where, you know, different
residences and buildings can
subscribe.
To it
And the scale and type of a type
of solar project to tribe wants
to pursue depends on various
factors including project goals,
economic considerations, land
availability, utility
regulations, and the tribe's
role in the project and we'll
dig into utility regulations a
little bit more.
Um, but on the next slide,
You can also see, you know, why
tribes would want to pursue
renewable energy development and
of course many of us here, you
know, the common reasons of
economic development and, you
know, offsetting electricity
costs, new jobs for community
members, um, but for a tribal
perspective, there's also some
different motivations for
pursuing uh renewable energy
development, and that includes
um energy sovereignty as Marissa
defined earlier, but also
self-sufficiency
Um, grade resiliency, so many
tribes actually have um greater
and disproportionate, um.
Issues that arise due to energy
outages, which gives them more
reason to want to pursue energy
self-sufficiency, reliability,
and make sure that their grid is
resilient to withstand that,
especially for essential
community areas and buildings.
um, also to reduce the impacts
of climate change or the
increasing impacts of climate
change, um, especially when it
comes to sustaining cultural
practices and sustaining uh
water protection. So there's a
number of different motiv
that are specific to tribes
that, you know, we really try to
align with and make sure that
we're understanding those key
issues, um, as we see how
projects in renewable energy
policy can help support tribes.
And again, um, types of solar
projects on the next slide. This
is kind of going back to what I
had already mentioned, but um
there's a number of different,
you know, motivations again of
why um there could be different
goals. For instance, reducing
bills for each individual tribal
member, um, you know, reducing
bills for tribal administrative
facilities, um, you know,
generating revenue for the
tribe. So there's a number of
different goals that a tribe may
have in pursuit.
renewable energy or solar, um,
one of the main limitations,
however, is land and rooftop
availability, um, and
jurisdictional issues, but also
utility regulations. And as I
mentioned before, investor owned
utilities are obligated to
partake in community solar but
other utilities particularly
rural electric distribution
cooperatives are only required
or or not required to partake
and only have opt-in
participation.
And that obviously, you know,
has a, a big hindrance for the
tribes who do want community
solar but are located within
those rural electric cooperative
areas. Um, so there's a number
of, you know, just different
issues to navigate when it comes
to that.
Um, also looking at available
infrastructure, transmission and
distribution lines and kind of
the broader grid modernization
efforts, um, and then of course
looking at how the tribe wants
to partake in the project
whether it's land leasing to
also being owners and operators
of the project.
And if we go to the next slide,
um, I also just wanted to
highlight the role of direct pay
in tax incentives and the
inflation Reduction Act
introduced direct pay provisions
enabling tax-exempt entities,
including tribes, uh, to receive
payments equivalent to tax
credits for qualifying clean
energy projects, and this is a
really pivotal piece of
legislation and change in the um
the whole renewable energy
opportunity because before this
tribes were only.
Able to take advantage of tax
incentives that they had a third
party who um basically acted as
a tax equity partner. Now tribes
are able to receive these
directly, and that really
sparked a lot more interest um
in tribes being able to pursue
these projects, um, and if you
go to the next slide, it just
kind of shows how tribes can
layer all of these different tax
incentives on top of each other
to maximize financial benefits
from renewable energy projects
and further.
Support tribal economic growth.
And we're still in the phase of
seeing how exactly these will
roll out. Um, there's a number
of rulemakings and other other
operations that the IRS is
doing, um, but ultimately it is
really helpful for tribes to be
able to pursue these different
bonus credits and um to be able
to to proceed with the project
without having to have a tax
equity investor.
Um, now going to the challenges
in regulatory barriers on the
next slide. So despite
opportunities, even those
offered increased opportunities
through direct pay and um other
funding opportunities. Tribes
still face challenges through
regulatory barriers,
infrastructure limitations and
the need for internal capacity
building. So addressing these
challenges requires strategic
planning, collaboration, and
lever leveraging a valuable
resources.
Um, and there's different issues
that occur internally within
tribal communities, but also um
external factors as well that
pose, you know, just different
challenges in navigating this,
this space. Um, so first the
tribe has to consider the
economic viability of projects,
and that's ensuring that
financial projections and
returns are realistic and
sustainable over the long term.
Um, and this really comes back
to the net metering policies
earlier and this will,
everything kind of bleeds into
that, but looking at how, um,
you know, their respective
utility honors, each kilowatt
hour um that a project may
generate.
There's also looking at the
internal staff capacity, um, and
tribes need to have the
necessary technical and
managerial expertise to manage
these projects in house or
identify if they need external
support. And obviously, you
know, these projects are pretty
cumbersome and require a lot of
hands, um, hands on the team to
be able to make sure that
they're moving forward and this
is not just in the planning
phase but also operations and
maintenance. Um, obviously a
project needs to keep running to
be able to generate
You know, the benefits.
Mm
Um, also looking at tribal
leadership engagement, so making
sure that our tribal leadership,
um, is, you know, meaningfully
engaged in that they support the
project. They play a critical
role in guiding the project
direction, securing community
buy-in, and navigating the
political and regulatory
landscape as well as, you know,
the community buying piece is
equally important, so making
sure that each project has the
backing of the community, um,
particularly when it comes to
projects that impact land use,
um,
Water use and also just cultural
sites.
And, um, you know, of course,
making sure that there's access
to funding, but also the
infrastructure limitations. So
this includes looking at again
the transmission and
distribution lines, determining
what upgrades or new
infrastructure might be needed.
Um, and this is kind of, you
know, one of the, the hurdles in
this is that this is not just
exclusive to a tribal lands.
This is working within the
utility in the broader space for
grid modernization.
Excuse me, there's something in
my throat, um, but you know,
the, the broader PRC New Mexico
Public regulation Commission.
Um, has been working on grid
modernization efforts for a long
time as well as through
renewable portfolio standards.
So it's kind of looking at how
the puzzle fits within um or how
the piece fits in within the
broader puzzle.
Um, and then finally, as Marissa
mentioned earlier, one of the
challenges is really how a tribe
is able to meaningfully vet
different companies and choose
the right partner. Um, so this
isn't just exclusive to tribal
lands, I think obviously many of
us have seen how many solar
developers and companies come
knocking on doors, and just
making sure that tribes are able
to ask the right questions and
you know, that is, it is the
right partner um who supports
tribal sovereignty and also
aligns with
Their values and long-term
goals.
Going into the regulatory
barriers, hm.
Um, it's really difficult to
navigate the complexities of the
regulatory landscape, so there
is interplay between state and
tribal jurisdictions, of course,
um, but some tribes are served
by multiple utilities or rural
electric cooperatives that might
have limited capacity for
self-generation. So some of you
have probably heard about um
many of our co-ops who are
members of tri-state Generation
and Transmission and through
tri-state the previous
We're only allowed to generate
5% of their own electricity. Um,
obviously this really limited
ability for a co op or a tribe
to, you know, proceed with the
utility scale array or a
community solar array because um
they're relatively small loads
and meeting that 5% happens very
quickly, so really uh looking at
those issues of, you know, what
limitations exist.
Um, and then also looking at
different interconnection
requirements is really
difficult, so
there's a number of different
barriers that may exist for a
tribe in trying to proceed um
with the solar project.
At the same time though, there
are different opportunities for
collaboration, and we listed a
few of those on the next slide
where there are projects that
could align with um both state
policies and tribal goals, and
we believe that collaboration
really is key to advancing
tribal energy projects and
working within the framework of
state policy, um, making sure
that tribal voices are included
in policy discussions and
supporting workforce development
are crucial steps forward. So
The first that we identified is
collaborative projects that are
aligned with state policies, um,
and this comes back to just the
vast amount of of solar and wind
energy that tribal lands do
hold. Um, there's a significant
opportunity to collaborate on
these projects or find the
symbiosis of how tribes and
tribal energy goals can support
meeting the broader um renewable
portfolio standards outlined in
the ETA, um, and a really good
example of this is
The relationship between the
city of Albuquerque and the
Hickory Apache Nation in the
development of the PNM Solar
Direct project, and that is a
400 acre project, uh, solar
farm.
Which helps the city of
Albuquerque meet goal of 100%
renewable energy for municipal
operations by 2030. So the more
that we're able to find this
really great partnerships and
relationships, um, it will
further, you know, both, both
goals and um could really
influence the state, um, and
being a leader and
Striving to meet those goals
even sooner than projected.
Um, there's also really great
opportunity to partner on other
innovation like storage
projects, which improves the
grid reliability of the entire
state, um, and also will give
tribes more control over their
energy resources.
And second, we really um
encourage the inclusion of
tribal voices in state policy
discussions. Um, so this is
through different state energy
policy advisory boards or
committees that ensure tribal
interests are meaningfully
considered. So an example of
this.
Is the New Mexico public
regulation Commission, tribal
advisory Council, and that is a
a new body that was formed by
executive order by Governor
Michelle Lujan Grisham.
And does have representatives
from um the northern puelos, the
southern puelos, Mescalero,
Hickory and Navajo Nation as a
five-member body, and I myself
am representative of the
Southern Pablos, but we're
really hopeful that this will be
a leading space to ensure that
tribal voices are meaningfully
included in the state
rulemakings
and regulatory procedures.
And finally, um, just supporting
strong net metering policies,
so, you know, just robust net
metering policy that allows
tribes to sell energy generated
from renewable resources back to
the grid at fair rates.
Everything for how these
projects pencil really comes
back to net metering and what is
the value per kilowatt hour.
Um, and then of course
supporting distributed
generation, um, including
off-grid systems, but that
includes solar, small wind
turbines, microgrids, etc.
And we also just wanted to
quickly highlight one of the a
huge game changer in this space
is the New Mexico Solar for All
funding, um, where the energy,
minerals, the natural resources
department received $156 million
through the EPA to help provide
funding for rooftop solar,
community solar projects, off
grid, home improvements, um, and
making sure that there is an
upgrade upgrade to to actually
all of these different new solar
projects.
And a considerable amount of
this funding will also be used
for tribal communities, and
we're hopeful to continue to get
the word out and make sure that
tribes are aware of these
opportunities.
And that is all um of the
material we have for you today.
Um, our contact information is
listed on that slide if you
would like to reach out to
either myself or Marissa, and we
again thank you for your time
and attention today and hope to
join you in person next time.
Thank you.
Thank you for your presentation.
Questions committee members,
comments.
Vice chair Senator Pinto.
And
The map with the um red stuff in
the Four Corners area. I don't
know if you can bring that up.
Can you um.
It's kind of like briefly
explain.
The color coding.
Sure, madam chair, um, so the
map highlights, OK, great. You
see that you can see it as well.
Um, the map really just shows
that the darker red shows the
basically the the darker the
color, the more solar energy
potential there is. Um, so for
instance, you can see, you know,
Navajo Nation, just how much
solar potential exists within,
um, it shows, you know, the
outlines of tribal land there.
um, so that's really, you know,
New Mexico has some of
The greatest solar PV, um.
rates in the country and that
really just comes to sun
exposure and temperature, um,
but there is a vast potential
here and this one just shows the
confines of a tribal land.
Thank you. And the um
A little bit about training and
the way.
In terms of, so like we're doing
electric cars.
And I don't think we're really
keeping up with some of the um.
Career technical education.
For, for that onset.
So do you think we are actually
keeping up with the the the
education that needs to go along
with all this maintenance.
Uh, training and what you
mentioned.
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, I think um there's
actually quite a bit to do um to
make sure that we're having, you
know, meaningful training and
apprenticeship programs. Um, I,
we've been working and, you
know, just trying to increase
workforce development, um, and
training within the tribal
colleges and universities. So
for instance through Navajo
Tech, um, but there is a lot to
do, especially um if we're
looking, you know, just beyond
the construction jobs, but
engineering and
You know, the other components
of.
Renewable energy development.
Um, one thing that we have
noticed is, uh, you know, a big
lack in, um, I don't basically
access to resources, um, but
also building up young
professionals who are engaged in
this space and understand the
career pipelines, um, you know,
to pursue careers in renewable
energy, um, in the forthcoming
years, we have plans to develop
a fellowship program um to help
build up more individuals,
native individuals in this
space.
Um, as well as to identify other
ways that we can help, um, you
know, build more training and
apprenticeship programs within
projects on and off tribal lands
here, um, but there is
considerable work to be done,
especially as we're looking at
new technologies and um EVs and
charging stations where it is
very specialized skill sets that
are required. So, um, we kind of
just follow, you know, best
practices and continue to stay a
tune of what different um other
well other states and regions
are doing
seeing how we could provide
something um equivalent or even
better here in New Mexico.
and so good.
Start in our secondary
educational institutions with
science are we speaking more
like electrical side stuff?
Madam Chair and members of the
committee, um, yes, through
science as well as, you know,
just um looking at, so that, for
instance, the fellowship program
that we're seeking to do, um,
will really be, um, so more
college level, but, you know, we
recognize that there is a need
to help build curriculums from
elementary education, even, you
know, just to understand the
career pipelines that exist and
how to um pursue, you know, and
shape an education that allows
students to
Um, you know, be in this space.
So we see science and
engineering also looking at um
law and policy development as
well.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. Any further
questions? Oh, representative
block.
Thank you, Madam Chairman. Thank
you both.
Uh, a lot of interesting
information here. I, I just had
a couple quick questions which
I'm just gonna roll into one to
make it easy for the committee.
So, uh, you talked about energy
sovereignty with these different
tribes, nations, pueblos, uh, so
I didn't hear anything about
like natural gas production and
things that are already
happening currently. Uh, what is
your guys's stance on that, and
I know that you also mentioned
the ETA, but since these are
sovereign nations.
They don't need to necessarily
follow state laws that do not
really have privy on them, so I
was just wondering what are your
thoughts on those and then also
regarding the Chaco Canyon at 10
mile buffer that was just
created. Uh, can you tell me if
your uh group advocated for that
10 mile buffer that the Navajo
Nation opposes. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee and representative
Block, thank you for your
questions. Um, yeah, so
regarding the first one, you
know, inherent within tribal
sovereignty is really
recognizing again that each
tribe has its unique core
values, responsibilities, and
knowledge and we recognize that
each tribe, you know, might have
interest in pursuing, um, you
know, different energy
development and we, um, as an
organization we support, uh,
what we define as well clean
energy
Development, which doesn't
result in any fossil fuels.
However, we do recognize that
tribes have different avenues to
support their own tribal energy
sovereignty based off what is
appropriate for them and what is
needed within their communities.
So, um, you know, that's our
where we offer our support
directly for tribes is for clean
energy resources.
Um, and then for the 2nd portion
of your question, or for the ETA
um.
Representative and uh Madam
Chair, so we, we recognize that
tribes do not have an obligation
within the ETA. However, we do
see a huge opportunity for
tribes to support New Mexico's
ability to meet the ETA, um, so
for instance, you know, with um
the Hickorya project, um, you
know, that project is hosted on
tribal land. It is operated
through PNM and it does help PNM
meet those renewable portfolio
standards.
It's, um, with that they are
required to adhere to. So in
that way it does help further
the momentum and the achievement
of those milestones in the ETA
even though it doesn't
necessarily apply directly to
the tribes. Um, and then for
choco, um, so we did not have a
direct advocacy role that
actually um predated kind of
our um we were founded in 2021,
but really, you know, have been
able to fully get our feet in
the mud within the last year or
so, so we did not have
Um, a direct advocacy role in
that.
And I'll turn it over to Mars if
um she hadn't any more to add.
Sure, thank you. Um thank you
again, Madam Chairwoman, members
of the committee, and
representative block for the
questions, um, just as a last
note on the question around
Choco Canyon, um, that, yeah,
that effort predated sovereign
energy that was formally
established in 2019. Um, I
myself was actually a staff
member of the All Pablo Council
of Governors and members of the
Natural Resources Committee that
provided the technical support
to Pueblos in their advocacy to
protect that area around Choco
Canyon.
Um, but that was part of broader
efforts to protect the cultural
and historic integrity of Choco
Canyon from a potential impacts
from oil and gas development,
and for that effort in
particular, you know, there was
a very nuanced um position that
the all Pubblo Council of
Governors had developed, which
is not that they, um, you know,
the puelos collectively were
against oil and gas development
per se, but just insofar as it
impacts um sacred sites,
traditional culture.
properties and um historic
resources that the pueblos are
intimately connected to and of
course support um their cultural
integrity and and cultural
identity.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
You know, I, I appreciate the
input and I'm sorry to put you
guys on the spot since you guys
are after it started or or the
inception of that idea. Uh,
however, I do think that
especially in this committee, we
always talk about consultation
and I think that's so important,
especially regarding the Navajo
Nation during that effort, they
felt like consultation was not
there because they wanted to
help, they wanted to be involved
and they did not feel involved,
so I just certainly have heard
that from many individuals
who've told me that.
Tribal consultation, we want
more of that, especially
regarding uh.
Future energy production in New
Mexico and then just another
point. I know you talked about
geothermal solar and also
nuclear. I'm wondering, uh, if,
if that is just also in the
framework of your clean energy
portfolio, uh nuclear energy,
and that would be my last
question, Madam Chair.
Thank you representative. Any
further questions, comments,
Representative Royal Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Chair. And uh
I, I would be remiss.
Uh, my relationship as it has
evolved with um
Maani Chavez Budin on this
effort. I met this young lady
many years ago and um and I have
just been.
Absolutely impressed with um how
she has professionalized and
developed um the entire concept
of what we had envisioned with
community solar.
And um.
And how it acts.
Um,
Together with.
All of our efforts in the state,
um, towards renewable and clean
energy. And so I just wanted to
thank her and um Marissa Naranjo
for their presentation today. It
was very thorough and I
understand from the staff that
the presentation will be
uploaded to our uh website
later. Oh, she just sent it and
so we will all have access, all
those that are viewing as well
to this presentation because the
entire intent and purpose
of what um we're trying to do in
the renewable clean energy world
is to offer as much education,
uh, as possible about what can
be done.
Once we create the necessary
partnerships, uh, that need to
be in place and we acknowledge.
Um, the natural stewards of our
lands, air and water in this
state as well as in the entire
region and nation.
Um, and that falls into our
indigenous tribal uh hands
because.
These were um bestowed on us,
gifted us, um, as part of our
belief systems and our existence
and so it's really important for
us to acknowledge, um, that we
have not just a natural
stewardship obligation, but just
an obligation in general to
protect our land, water, and
air, and I also wanted to bring
up one important factor that
kept coming up over and over
again and just recently.
about community solar and and
it's um.
Focus, which was to make access
and opportunity to the renewable
world to our local communities,
so it actually affords um our
local communities from from the
local schools on the block, uh,
to the local health centers to
everybody local um that can um.
Attached to or connect to um the
local power grids to provide
subscriptions which makes it a
lot more affordable to our
general population as opposed to
focusing on rooftop solar. As we
know, not a lot of our, our, um,
communities are working poor and
um after 2 or 3 generations
still cannot afford owning their
own home, but they rent.
And um the subscriber nature in
making
community accessible was really
important because it operates,
Madam Chair, like you would
operate uh a subscription to
DirecTV or to your cable company
or to whatever else that goes
with you wherever you go and as
we know um our communities often
are in pursuit of job
opportunities, educational
opportunities, so this is really
important, but it also
accentuates.
The access to uh local
developers who are community.
Developers who are community
conscious, um, such as churches
too. I forgot to mention local
churches who are willing to open
up, so to speak, their
neighborhood, um, to this
access. So that's what makes
community so are so exciting.
For the long run, it's been a
long haul since it doesn't, it
seemed like 10 years ago rather
than just 3 years ago that we
passed the bill because it's
been so difficult to go through
the regulatory process and the
misconceptions and
misunderstandings about what and
how it really operates. So
that's why this presentation
today, Madam Chair, thank you
for putting on the agenda was so
incredibly important because it
kind of opens up our view a lot
more about how accessible it is.
And then the connection
represent
Block 2 and thank you for
bringing it up to geothermal,
because geothermal is another
source that uh can directly
feed,
um, they, there's a lot of
discussion about the
distribution and transmission. I
don't want to get into all the
technology because I'm not a
scientist or in that arena, but
I do know that um as we move
forward in in geothermal
development, um, we will be
accessing another energy source
that
Can then provide or hook up or
connect to, however that works
scientifically, um, to, to, um,
solar and wind energy, and
that's exciting and so I just
thank you for bringing that up
and also our third obligation,
of course, is to the energy
Transition Act and how these two
pieces of legislation were
directly related to trying to
get us to that goal in the ETA,
the Energy Transition Act and um
we're leading the nation.
And in more ways than not, and
we opened the door to, um, uh,
development but more more
importantly in this area, my
goal, my particular goal in
sponsorship of Community Solar
was to recognize the importance
of tribal sovereignty and their
role in as stewards, the natural
stewards, and that I believed
that they had the resources, uh,
the capacity, um, they already
have been empowering their
um,
through all kinds of economic
community economic development
ventures, and this just set
principally in the hands of our
tribal nations, pueblos and
communities, so I just wanted to
highlight that that was the
intent and purpose of
our tribal nations, pueblos and
communities, so I just wanted to
highlight that that was the
intent and purpose uh that we
had envisioned as as a group and
that I had envisioned as a
sponsor. So thank you again,
Madam Chair, and our leadership
team in this committee for
bringing this, um, topic forward
and thank you to Mayani and.
And Marissa for your excellent
presentation.
Thank you. Thank you for your
presentation.
My aunt and Marissa.
We look forward to working with
you.
Going further and uh you did a
We will upload the presentation
and it is already there.
So you will have a contact
information.
So with that, we just want to
say thank you once again and uh
we'll be working with you.
Now we'll move on to public
comment. We have one individual
signed up?
Uh, Derek Watchman, and before I
call on Derek, did you have any
closing comments made, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
I just want to thank you again
for your time today and please
let us know if we can be of any
assistance on any matters moving
forward.
Thank you. Thank you so much.
OK, Derek Watchman.
5 minutes. 5 minutes. OK, thank
you.
Uh, thank you, uh, members of
the committee, Madam Chair, uh,
members of the Indian Affairs
Committee. I'm Derek Watchman.
Um, I currently I'm a
consultant, but I'm currently
supporting the as a acting CEO
for the Kangasitto Band of
Navajo Health Center and so, um,
we're in Tujole and so uh but um
I, I just wanna say thank you
for, and it was good to hear
all, all the comments and so,
but can you sit to where where
One of, uh, or one of 110
chapters within the Navajo
Nation, but we're, we, we are
remote.
We're in between the, the, the
proper nomination if you will,
and Albuquerque and so, uh, we
have unique challenges in our
community. Um, so there's
basically 3 different entities,
uh, including the health center
that I operate, the school and
the chapter and so between the
three of us we're there to
support and, and manage, if you
will, the, the Knyasito ban
Navajos health center, and so,
um, but I, I just want to put in
the plug that
I'd like to request some time at
your next meeting to have a
thorough presentation, um, OK,
with Nicole, um, uh, I'd like to
present, you know, our, our
chapter, we do have a couple of
projects that are on the ICIP.
Um, and so, uh, because our
unique challenges, our unique
situation, we certainly have,
you know, because we're
isolated, we have a health
challenges, energy challenges,
um, I, I was, I was intrigued by
the by the presentation earlier.
I think one of the things that
we're going to look at is
independent power. Uh, from a
power standpoint, we're at the
tail end of Connell divide and
so we routinely are challenged
with brownouts, um, you know, so
we're looking at a micro grid,
so
You want to put that on the
table, uh, we, we do have water
challenges. We have a small
community well and so almost
monthly I have to shut down the
the community health center just
because water is brown, doesn't
work, and so, but I think the
biggest, biggest issue that we
want to bring to the table.
As obviously our education, but
our need to grow our facilities.
Uh, we have a small building, if
you will, and so, you know, one
of my challenges, how do we
improve the, the healthcare in
our community. Uh, we don't, we,
we have a contract with any
health service. We don't have an
Indian health service facility
where a 630 contractor. And so
that obviously leaves us
independent and have to look for
our own funding to grow our
facilities, so I know there's
only a few minutes here.
My ask is to to get on the
agenda so that uh the health
center, the Toja Lake Community
School in Chapter can present,
you know, the issues that we're
dealing with.
Uh, even though we're part of
the, the Navajo Nation, uh, uh,
if you know, if you, if you
don't know, there's 3 satellite
Navajo communities. There's
Tjola, there's Alamo, and
there's Rayma and with over this
time over history, you know,
we're situated outside of the
Navajo Nation, so that certainly
brings, you know, some unique
and sometimes tiring challenges
to address, you know, what we
need to provide government
services to and health services
to our community. So I'll, I'll
end it here, but I
to get on the agenda and the the
Kenyan Cito Health Center, the
Twaja Lake Community School, and
the chapter would like to, you
know, present, you know, some of
the challenges that we're
dealing with and look forward
to, you know, working with all
of you this coming January and
February and March because you
know obviously that's an
important session so again, our,
our goal is to improve, uh, the
overall well-being of our, of
our members. We have roughly
3000 members in.
The can see Tajala
area and so um I do serve, I do
roughly about 40,000 visits a
year.
Uh, to our clinic, and so that's
obviously from our our local
members, but we do have some um
natives that have moved to
Albuquerque that have challenges
and trying to deal with the
Albuquerque Indian Health
Service, the hospital there, so
where the overflow and so we
certainly like to benefit from
that, you know, because, you
know, healthcare is, is
obviously, uh, uh, uh.
Uh, profit generating business
in many regards and so you know
what we like to do is provide as
many services as we can and so I
just want to thank you and then
just to note that, um, you know,
I, I'm not new to this process.
I want to recognize, you know,
my, my late father Leo C.
Watchman, Senior, he was a state
rep representing McKinley, San
Juan, and all the other counties
from 1967 to 1993, uh, and then
my brother was appointed after
my father passed, Leo Watchman
Junior.
He was on the legislature from
1993 to 2000. Uh, I chose to, to
not get into politics, you know,
but I'm, I'm close, but I'm, I'm
a business person and so, but
I'm here today, so I just wanna
say thank you and I appreciate
all the great work that you're
doing representing the great
state of New Mexico, so I can
and thank you very much.
And next we have on Zoom for
public comment, Nat Dean, can
you hear?
Yes, uh, thank you, Madam Chair,
Madam Vice Chair, my name is Nat
Dean. I'm a person with multiple
disabilities and I'm a
disability advocate. Um, thank
you so much for the committee.
I, uh, was not able to make
public comment yesterday because
I wasn't called upon, so thank
you for calling on me today. I
appreciate it with great
interest the New Mexico League
of Women Voters, presenting
today, but I can tell you that I
have been excluded from
participating in
And um and for public forums by
not being able to have access
because the access was tried to
be arranged in advance, and the
vendor that was being utilized
assured that that vendor that
that access would be possible
and it did not work. Um, we
would need to in the sports
remember Para Olympians, and in
addition to our Olympians, and
that we are not wanting to be
inspiring. We just want to be
included. Um, there is a
national, I know I go through.
Place quickly. There's a
national effort to make it
possible to pay for school
lunches or other school
functions by using cash or
check, and or debit card, and
they're not being a fee and that
cash option is a magnificent
option if that is the only
mechanism that you can use to
pay. So I appreciate the
comments about purchasing
tickets online. Um, I want to
remember Doctor Senator John
Pinto, who served in the Senate
from
1977 to 2019, and I was
attending a smaller event at the
um Indian pueblo Cultural Center
in Albuquerque.
He was attending a very large
event in legislative meetings,
he would have headphones on to
be able to hear clearly and we
needed to listen very carefully
when he spoke to be able to
understand his voice, but I
witnessed what's called ableism,
and ageism when he left the
larger meeting and I happened to
be out of my smaller meeting,
and I saw him trying to find the
restroom and I saw people
ignoring him.
And I went up to him, I said,
Can I help you? What are you
looking for? And he said just
the men's room, and I guided him
to where that men's room was,
and it was very, very difficult
to see someone serve so long and
it was so
Uh, well known to be seen in the
context of an old person, a
person with differing abilities
and then be discounted because
he wasn't recognized in that
forum. So I wanted to state,
thank you so much for including
me as an older woman, as a woman
with disabilities, and as a
woman, and I'm not a Native
American, so I have privilege
here and I understand that. This
is September serviceal Awareness
Month, Deaf Awareness Month. I'm
not deaf.
I have an auditory processing
disorder, so I don't even fit in
that community, but yet I have
the needs of that community. It
is also paralysis Awareness
Month, and thank you for
recognizing all of the awareness
that we need to be included.
Again, we don't want to be
inspiring, we just want to be
included. Thank you, Madam
Chair, Madam Vice Chair, members
of the committee for your time.
Thank you, thank you for public
comment.
Everyone here today, uh, my
colleagues, vice chair, and of
course Burrell College. Thank
you so much for hosting us. That
was a wonderful breakfast and
lunch and all of the amenities
here and uh now I will, uh, do a
little bit of housekeeping. We
have dinner at 6 p.m.
at Saud.
the address is 1800 Avenida.
Dassa B.
So we'll see you there at 6:00
p.m. and our, uh, just wanna
thank our uh dinner sponsors,
uh, New Mexico State University,
uh, Pilar Faulkner.
Fort S Apache, Terry.
Palma, Danny Palma, and Brian
Terney and Tracy Perry. We just
want to thank you for hosting
our Indian Affairs Committee
dinner.
So with that, we will recess
until tomorrow, uh, we'll
reconvene tomorrow at New Mexico
State University at 9:30 a.m.
And that will be at the Corbett
Center Student Union, East
Ballroom, room 320. You have the
address on your agenda.
OK, thank you. Have a good
afternoon.
