Thank you. Thank you for
attending and your uh
introduction this morning. Let's
go ahead and begin.
With agenda item number 5.
We have a welcome and status
update from Nina Nunez, vice
president.
Institutional effectiveness and
chief of staff.
Thank you.
A little person. There we go.
So good morning, Madam Chair,
Representatives, senators,
staff, and guests. On behalf of
President John Hammer and our
Dean Bill Pra. I'd like to
welcome you to the Borough
College of Osteopathic Medicine.
Uh, President Hummer and Dean
Pratt and their regrets as they
were unable to attend today.
They're actually traveling to
Artesia um to honor some of our
scholarship recipients. And so
I'll provide a little bit more
information on that a little
later in the in the discussion.
Um, my name is Nina Nunez. I'm
the vice president of
Institutional Effectiveness for
the college and chief of staff,
and it's truly an honor to be
able to welcome you today, um,
and to be able to share a little
bit about our college.
So as you may be aware, um, the
college has a mission to educate
a diverse osteopathic physician
workforce to improve the quality
and access to healthcare in
underserved communities. We
opened our doors in 2016 and
just recently graduated our 5th
class of students. It's a little
hard to believe that we've
already hit 5, so pretty
exciting. Our college has a
diverse student population. We
currently have 734 students
enrolled here at the
Mexico campus and we rank number
2 in the nation for all
osteopathic schools in the
number of underrepresentative
minority students. Um, on
average, 25% of students
identify as underrepresented
minorities in medicine compared
to 11% nationally. So we're
very, very proud of that
achievement.
We have been awarded insight
into diversities, higher
education excellence and
diversity award. Otherwise known
as the Heat Award for the past 2
years in a row.
This award recognizes the
college's level of achievement
and commitment in regards to
diversity and inclusion. Um, and
this award looks at our
initiatives that we have
regarding DEI outreach, student
recruitment, and of course our
outcomes. We're proud to be one
of only 8 osteopathic colleges
nationwide to be recognized for
this honor.
Another notable achievement is
the college's accreditation
status. Um, we were up for
accreditation renewal this past
spring and the coca, which is
the commission on osteopathic
College accreditation. They're
the accreditor for all the
osteopathic colleges nationwide,
um, came, did a site visit, a
thorough self-stu with probably
thousands of pages of
documentation, and we were
awarded the highest
accreditation status by the
COCA. It's a 10-year status and
it was accreditation with
exceptional.
Outcome. This achievement is
truly a testament to our
commitment and dedication to
students' success.
So I'd like to tell you a little
bit about our degree program.
The doctor of osteopathic
medicine degree is a four-year
program for a medical degree. DO
stands for Doctor of osteopathic
medicine, while maybe in a
hospital or clinic you, you've
seen the MD moniker that stands
for your Doctor of Medicine.
Both are fully licensed doctors
with similar training
experiences. DOs receive
additional training in
osteopathic medicine, um, and
manipulative medicine and just
have it.
Different philosophy compared to
the MDs. Um, they have a more
holistic approach, focusing on
the body as a whole in
treatment.
So students spend the 1st 2
years, um, in college here on
our campus, um they complete
courses in biomedical science.
They navigate through
systems-based courses. So for
example, the renal system, the
nervous system, the respiratory
system. They also engage in
clinical skills, osteopathic
manipulative medicine, gross
anatomy, and mission medicine.
So Mission medicine, hopefully
that caught your ear. Um, as a
college who lives its mission.
It makes sense that we would
have a series of courses called
Mission medicine. So let me tell
you a little bit about this
unique core series.
One of our college's strategic
initiatives was initially the
idea of our Dean Bill Para.
And he wanted to develop and
implement a longitudinal
mission-centric early clinical
experience for the students in
the first two years of the
curriculum.
So it's extremely important for
us to ensure our future
physicians understand that
providing health care is
teamwork. They have to work in
um with a lot of community
organizations to ensure that
patients have the support that
they need for their healthcare.
As there is a growing need for
physicians and future physicians
to be socially accountable and
advocate to the community in
which they serve, to be
compassionate and to truly
understand the types of
disparities that exist. This
May include geographical
disparity, socioeconomic
disparity, education
disparities, even physical
environment disparities. Hence
the creation of the Mission
medicine course series. And so
the goal of the course is to
help students develop
competencies to address social
determinants of health to
improve health outcomes.
So for the early clinical
experiences in the Mission
medicine courses the college has
partnered with various community
organizations to place and
prepare our students to develop
a greater awareness and
sensitivity for the root causes
and subsequent effects of health
disparities.
Some of our community and
partners have included the
Amador Health Center, Aronomus
intervention team, Border
Servant Corps, the Boys and
Girls Club, the Donana County
Health and Human Services,
Empowerment Congress of Donana
County, La Casa, Pinion, the
Gospel rescue mission and the
Las Cruces Public Schools. We're
so fortunate to have these
relationships and we appreciate
the support that they've given
for this mission medicine
course. So a huge thank you to
all of those community venues.
During the last 2 years of the
degree program, students engage
in clinical training and
affiliated hospitals and clinics
under the supervision of
physician faculty. We often call
these clerkship rotations. This
includes core rotations in
family medicine, internal
medicine, obstetrics,
gynecology, surgery, pediatrics,
and psychiatry.
Students also engage in
emergency medicine and ICU in
their 4th year. Also some
elective rotations. So during
4th year, they actually try to
hone in on a specialty area, so
many of their electives are
taken in this specialty that
they want to, um, provide care
in.
So the college has several
regionalal academic centers
throughout our state of New
Mexico, um, to facilitate these
rotations, so it includes Las
Cruces, eastern New Mexico,
which is your Roswell, Artesia
area, um, Albuquerque, the Four
Corners region, which serves
Gallup, Farmington, Shiprock,
the Zuni Pueblo.
And in 4 corners, the college
has an affiliation and since
students on rotations with the
Navajo Area Indian Health
Service, which includes multiple
healthcare facilities. We're
also in Rehoboth McKinley
Healthcare System San San Juan,
um, Regional Medical Center,
just to name a few.
So students who are assigned to
the Four Corners region or even
our eastern New Mexico region
have the ability to gain what's
called a distinction in rural
medicine. Um, it's actually a
notation that goes down on their
diploma. Um, and they have to
actually come up with a project
in their their 3rd and 4th year
to address some of the community
needs in those areas for this
distinction.
To date, we have graduated 711
students from the college, so
pretty, pretty proud
accomplishment.
710 of those have placed into
residency programs. That's a
99.9% employment rate. 64% have
gone into primary care
residencies and so primary care,
we're talking about family
medicine, internal medicine,
obstetrics, gynecology,
pediatrics, and psychiatry.
Others have placed into
residencies such as emergency
medicine, anesthesia, neurology,
general surgery, urology,
orthopedic surgery.
Dermatology, ophthalmology, and
so again, we're very, very proud
of our graduates from the school
that are placed into
residencies.
What's very exciting to note is
that 52 graduates have been
placed into residency programs
in New Mexico. This includes um
UNM Health Science Center,
Memorial Medical Center, and
Mountain View Regional Medical
Center. We've also placed 34
students in El Paso, Texas Tech
health system, Las Palmas del
Sol, and William Beaumont.
So residencies can last 3 to 7
years, depending on the
specialty. So for instance,
family medicine, they would have
4 years of medical school, you'd
have 3 years of a residency,
they'd have 4 years of medical
school, 7 years in a residency
program. And so some of our
alumni have just now exited the
three-year residency program. So
we're just beginning to be able
to attract our alumni data. And
so thus far, we have about 20
students who have already
returned to
New Mexico to practice. And so
we're, we're definitely excited
about that and hope to share
future statistics as we see our
alumni come out of, of various
residency programs.
So according to IQ IVA's
National Impact of Physicians
reports for the American Medical
Association, the average
physician supports 17 jobs in in
the economy, including their
own.
In each physician supported an
average of approximately $1.4
million of annual wages and
benefits. So for every 100
doctors who graduate and remain
in our region to practice the
annual economic contribution
would be $141 million.
This does not include the value
in an increase in our community
health and cost savings from
reduced emergency room visits
and hospitalizations due to an
increase in access to physicians
and preventative care and per
the most recent data from the
AAMC state physician Workforce
report in 2020. We know that 38%
of medical students who attend
medical school in our state are
actively practicing in our
state.
That number is even higher if
they not only are educated in
our state but actually have a
residency in our state that
number climbs to 68%.
So the college was determined
early on in this is in it in its
existence to establish, recruit
and hire an associate dean to
promote the growth of graduate
medical education. So graduate
medical education, sometimes we
say GME, those are all the
residency programs after they
finished the doctor osteopathic
medicine degree.
And so under initiatives taken
by the college, we've created 7
new residency programs, um, with
a capacity of 230 residents, of
which 109 are first year, we
call them PGY one positions. So
the college continually works on
its recruitment of applicants
and retention of its students.
We have a supporting 501c3
called the Coalition of
Osteopathic Excellence. The
foundation just hired an
executive director. Her name is
Sean Basham.
Um, and we're working on
building our scholarship base to
to really help the students who
need it. Um, this year we were
able to award $774,000 in
scholarships to our students.
And so that's just a continual
effort. Um, President Hummer and
Dean Pert are actually in
Artesia today and they're
recognizing our student Yates
scholarship recipients. So
students who receive this
scholarship award, make a
commitment to return to the area
to practice after
They finished residency. And so
we appreciate the generosity of
the PY Yates Foundation in
funding these scholarships and
investing in the health and
future of New Mexico.
Um,
In closing, I'd like to to thank
you all for attending today,
Madam Chair, senators,
representatives, staff, um, we
appreciate you and we're so
happy that you're here to see
our college and and learn a
little bit more about us, um,
and I would be happy to stand
for any questions. You committee
members, Senator Rodriguez.
Thank you, Madam Chairman. Good
morning, uh, Nina. I, oh.
to get this down a little bit
more. Thank you, Senator. Um,
good morning. Thank you for your
work and in your presentation.
I've been here a few times in
during my tenure in the
legislature several years
actually, and um I've always
enjoyed and appreciated the work
that you do. Um, but you may
want to elaborate a little bit
just to ease um the the just a
question, not a concern, but
just a question as to how it is
that Burrell College gets state
funding.
Um,
when it is not part, it's not a
university or it's not a one of
the state's colleges, um, and
it's been a great thing for New
Mexico, but I know there's
sometimes there's questions for
clarification. Can you tell us
about that and and see how that
works. Is it part of a
nonprofit, um, tell us about it.
I'll probably let Pilar.
Oh, it
it turned off.
There we go. OK, I can answer
that question, um, Burrell works
with the um Department of Higher
Education as well as the um HSD
from time to time to provide
services for the state. And so
generally our funding moves
through one of the executive
branch departments to the Brow
College, um, so that we can
provide some services primarily
in rural New Mexico and with
at-risk populations.
Could you introduce yourself and
then sorry I'm Pilar Faulkner
and the registered lobbyist for
the Brow College. Thank you very
much, Madam Chairman. Thank you,
Pilar, and so, for example, last
year, the Burrell College got
$30 long overdue, really. It was
something that I know Pilar had
been working on for a long time
and, and so finally got some
funding. Unfortunately, a lot of
that funding tends to be
non-recurring and what happens
is that the funding goes away in
one year and um and.
So you need to work and I know
Pilar is working on that too to
get it, uh, to become recurring
because those are issues that we
need to have as recurring if
it's going to be to hire
physicians or nurses and
continue to provide health care.
That's not a one-time thing that
doesn't go away in a year, and
we need to continue to, to fund
that. But did that funding Par
trying to think here broadly in
the budget, um, trying to
remember where the line item
was. Did that go into HSD or to,
um, how did
Where did that get sent to?
Got sent to um ATD and right now
they're putting together an RFP,
uh, so that the money can then
move to into the Bre College. I
see. OK, and, and who's ATD,
Madam Chairman Pilar,
OK, I see, HD. All right, got
it. OK, well, obviously there's
a, there's a good way to um to
navigate and and get this
funding to to the uh such great
needs that we have here at Byal
College.
And throughout the state. So
thank you very much for that
explanation and uh appreciate
you, Madam Chairman. Thanks.
Thank you, thank you, Senator
Rodriguez. Representatives of
Amora.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for the presentation.
That was a great presentation
in, in your numbers that you
talked about retaining.
Some of the people that go
through through Burrell College
here in New Mexico, uh.
How do you do such a good job to
retain him? Uh, is it by rule?
Of their financing that then
they have to do their uh.
The start of their practice
here. I can't think of the word
I'm trying to say, but.
So, so then.
I'd like for you to tell us a
little bit about that and then I
know you've been watching the
legislature for the past few
years and what we've done.
Uh, in the legislature, uh,
With
Pertaining to doctors and
medical practice and all that.
Can you kind of
Tell us how you feel.
That's gonna affect.
The, the long term of them
staying here in New Mexico if if
they'll really stay after they
do their residencies and all
that or do we still have some
issues there that we need to
look at.
Madame Chan, Nicole.
Um, so Representative Zamora,
Madam Chair, um, in terms of
retaining students, you know, in
our region and alumni in our
region. We've worked very hard
with the state to look at
student loan forgive forgiveness
programs, um, to have them
hopefully return, um, you know,
our other hope again is that
when we have students coming
from all over the nation to
attend Bal, they have a chance
to to see our area and to
practice in our area and fall in
love with our community and so.
That, you know, they would want
to return. But of course, um,
loan forgiveness programs are,
are huge. We definitely want to
see those increase over the
years, um, and I think that's
one of the primary tools that we
can use to be able to have those
students return to New Mexico to
practice, um, in terms of, you
know, the legislature, I mean, I
don't know if Par wants to make
some comments maybe on medical
malpractice or.
Representative Zamora, Madam
Chair, one of the, one of the
issues we are facing is the
malpractice legislation is
having an adverse effect on the
state retaining doctors and um
for one example is my mother's
physician is, is a doctor in the
espanola area and she has this
single practice and.
Her insurance.
Has gone up so much that is more
than her mortgage, and there are
a lot of doctors who are having
to get insurance out of state,
um, so we're.
Setting up a dynamic that's
making it difficult for.
Um, doctors to stay in New
Mexico.
So that's that's one of the
issues. The big issue that we, a
representative that we could use
help with is the Brow College
really can use this $3 million
we're asking for this year to
further these programs and get
more students to stay in New
Mexico and then out into the
rural communities of New Mexico
where we desperately need health
care as, as you all know.
And so protecting that $30 is
critical to Bra's success.
Thank you for that, Madam Chair,
and thank you, Pilar, uh.
You know, we see the numbers and
they're staggering of of the
doctors that we're losing here
in the state of New Mexico and
we really appreciate Borrell
College and what you're doing.
But at the same time we have
work as legislators to, to fix
our issues, uh, where we don't
have the insurance issues where
we don't have uh.
Insurance companies moving out
of the state where we don't have
such a high cost to the doctors
in such a high risk of being
sued.
Uh,
We all need to take a risk. We
need to take a risk as a
patient.
We need to take a risk as a
doctor.
But
The, the imbalance of that today
is just horrific.
And, and New Mexico shows it
and, and we hate to lose our
physicians or we're losing them
and, and we're almost
restructuring the medical field
where.
Where we have
Nurse practitioners doing the
job of a doctor, and we don't,
they don't have the capacity.
And the rights and and.
Everything to do what a doctor
can do.
And we've really gone backwards
in the state of New Mexico.
I love supporting.
The Borough College. I don't see
why anybody would be against
giving you all your ask for the
3 million, I believe that'll
happen and, and, and happen.
In a good manner.
As we go through with this, uh.
But we also need
Brey College and other people.
Like you guys.
That understand the mechanics of
it.
To help us
With these laws and the
understanding, so everybody at
the legislature can understand
what, what we've done and, and
how we've made.
I call it a mistake.
Uh, where we've created
legislation that has made it so
hard on the medical community.
Thank you for your presentation.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh.
Everybody in the audience, thank
you.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Roybal Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and um.
Thank you very much for hosting
us today. I always love to come
here. Um, I'm a big fan of the
college, as I've stated several
times, and so, um.
But what's missing today I
didn't see that has always been
very helpful to whatever
committee we're legislative
health and human service
whatever committee we're here is
to understand where we stand
with our demographics. For
example, how many um Native
American students are enrolled?
How many Hispanic students are
enrolled and staff, um, where
they come from, that's very
important, um, because that
helps substantiate.
Um,
Support
That Representative Samoa
mentioned and others. And so
that, that I asked that
question. I don't know if we
have that data. That's my
question number one, and my
question number 2 is, and I
brought this up before, how you
are incorporating um.
The indigenous practices, uh,
health practices and wellness
practices into the curriculum. I
know that I asked this question
several times in past years,
and, um, so it's it's very
helpful to know because you are
in the mecca.
In this region of natural
healing and um it's very
important that our cultural
practices and traditions
continue to be um.
Taught and uh and they're
guarded, obviously there are
many, that's why it's important
for us to do that and not
outsiders. So that's why the
first question demographic data,
how many staff do you have? What
are their specialties, where are
the students coming from, and
what is the makeup of the
students and then second, how
they're incorporating these
practices. Thank you, thank you,
Madam Chair.
So representative Caballero and
Madam Chair, um, I can
definitely get those specifics
for you. um, and give you a nice
breakdown of, of, of our
demographics of not only our
current students, um, past
students, and even our faculty
and staff. Um, we do have, um, a
higher percentage of
underrepresented minorities in
our staffing than we do in our
faculty. Um, and so we're really
working hard to ensure diversity
of our faculty as well. Um, and
in our curriculum and
particularly
And the Mission medicine course.
We, we have, um, various
sessions on cultural humility.
Um, we also have sessions that
are dedicated to, um, looking of
course at the social
determinants of health, um, you
know, and even some of the
cultural implications in, in
treating, um, patients and in
different backgrounds and um and
making sure that you're
providing compassionate care.
In terms of being specific to to
the practices of the Native
American population, um, you
know, I think that there's
definitely some ability to
explore that more. Um, but I can
definitely provide you some
listings of what we already do
provide.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I,
I'm so I'm going to ask for
clarity on a couple of things.
The
Incorporation of what has been
cultural healing.
And um.
Cultural practices.
I
Part of our land and part of our
Be
And so if we want to ensure,
Madam Chair,
Real diversity.
In both faculty and try to
recruit um
student base then.
I, you know, I think that we
need to be a little bit more
intentional, um, and we've been
saying this for several years
every time we come to Borrell
College. And so at some point,
we've got to see some um
outcome.
And
A little bit more I would say,
Madam Chair, a little bit more
aggressiveness in um recruiting
and, and the retention.
Uh, because all of our
indigenous populations
communities around the state.
are really um.
Practicing
Um, through our practitioner
network, uh.
Our natural healing because of
what
The land produces for us and has
produced for us.
for time immemorial.
And that's really important
because there are a lot of our,
not just our elders, but our
younger generations that are
growing up in these practices
and so it's important to have
that.
Deep rooted partnership. So, but
my question in, in your, from
your response is this, what do
you mean by cultural humility?
Mm.
I think it's really um having
students understand really a lot
of those social determinants of
health again, um, and, um,
recognizing that you might have
cultures that have um certain
traditions in their culture that
should be respected and, um, you
know, and again, you know, I
think that the college has an
opportunity to explore
additional, um, educational
opportunities in that realm. And
so, um, you know,
I think it's, it's definitely
something that we need to
continue to, to, to work on. Um,
in terms of the retention of
students, we are really working
hard to increase our scholarship
base. Um, it's very, very hard
sometimes to uh track students
of underrepresented minorities
when you have other colleges
that can offer full scholarships
and so we understand the
importance of that and so, uh,
you know, with our new executive
director at the coalition, we're
really hoping that we can expand
that scholarship
Um, and do even more outreach.
Um, we have begun to work on
what we call a medical pathway
programs and so we currently
have one with New Mexico State
University, where, um, you know,
students, if they enter the
pathway, they could potentially
be guaranteed admission into the
college. Uh, but we're looking
at, uh, potentially expanding
that and looking at other area
colleges throughout New Mexico
that we could potentially
establish those pathways with.
Um, thank you.
You know, and I, I've been known
to really um.
Dig into the language we use.
And um how that language can
either be beneficial.
Or uplifted in a positive manner
or how it can have an adverse
effect.
And
This is why it's important in my
opinion.
Uh, Madam Chair and panel.
To include
Uh, Native American input and
practitioners into the
development of curriculum into
your outreach.
Um,
and I would be really careful
about.
The
Terminology, cultural humility.
Humility has been traditionally
used.
As a way to um.
Stereotype or as a way to
continue that colonial
mentality.
Because for too many
generations, and I've heard this
from my grandparents, great
grandparents I had.
I had um the benefit of knowing
one.
And
What was taught in Indian
school.
In the Indian schools when they
were taken out of their home was
part of that.
um
Um,
trying to
What's the word I'm looking for?
Trying to
Uh, make force them into our
broader um
Practices cultural, uh,
practices and colon colonialism,
um, was to teach them humility
and the Catholic Church and all
the churches exercise that as a
way to remove them, erase them
from their cultural.
Um, being. And so I would really
look at that carefully and
that's why it's important to
have our input in the
development of all those
materials and the development of
um just everything that we do
across the board, not just for
Borrell College, but across the
board because what we're trying
to do and have been trying to
do, Madam Chair, for generations
is remove the um that
stranglehold.
And it starts with language, I
believe, and so this, this.
could have an adverse effect uh
using that kind of language. And
so, um, I would rethink that,
relook at it. I would invite,
um, you have a lot of in this
region, you have a lot of Native
American practitioners that
would welcome.
Uh, participating and we have
tribal colleges in the state
that are already in the practice
of what you do. And so, um, we
don't want to upend them.
We want to continue promoting
their presence, but at the same
time, um, if you can afford.
A um a broader exposure and
allow them to be trained and
taught.
In another way in order to
incorporate these things into
their already um.
Being their cultural practices,
then that would be beneficial.
So, Madam Chair, that would be
the only thing that I would, uh,
request, and I do look forward
to that data.
It's very important because
again, as I said, it helps
substantiate support, continued
support, but it also um
Will demonstrate that.
You know, we're, we're as a
state have an obligation to look
at all of our um entities of our
educational entities to see how
we can support them. So this is
really important that
demographic data and the data
with uh that I mentioned that
you mentioned you had available.
So thank you, Madam Chair, and,
and thank you for your.
Patience.
Senator Vice Chair Pinto. Thank
you. Thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, thank
you for your presentation and
the work you do with kids, as
you said, 2013, was when you
first started 2013 was our
inception, and we began with
students in 2016.
You know, so I think it was
very, to me it's still very new,
um, because I remember some of
the presentations, um, as you
guys were growing and uh the
committee or some of the
legislators conveying their
concerns, especially about rural
New Mexico and meeting the the
needs out there, especially with
our uh.
Healthcare providers.
The um.
The the IHS
In hiprock the
uh and I'm
So you're able to establish a
relationship with them, but not
the IHS in Gallup.
I mean you you said something
about or is it just warming I
know we have an affiliation. I
was just giving some sample
affiliations and so I'm not, you
know, I, I don't know exactly if
we have others, but I picked out
some samples from, and one of
them is the Navajo area Ind
Indian Health Service, and it
serves multiple health centers
around, um, but.
I'm not sure exactly which one
in Shiprock, but I, I'm more
than happy to look. I think
there's only one as far as I
know part of my district
and um with that too, actually
getting them out there was one
of the things because we, uh, I
think one of the biggest
concerns was the culture shock
of having some doctors apply and
then they come out here and
start working and then they,
they, they have no idea what
they're getting themselves into
versus being in a school, going
to school here and um going out
there, I mean having those.
Internships, and I think we
should have a little bit more,
um, especially for this
committee, in depth on how you
meet the needs of our Native
American tribes, nations, and
pueblos in New Mexico, um, and
that sense will also allow us
to.
How we can support you if, if we
have other avenues to um.
Recruit in that sense, and, and
where we can um put that
forward, and I know our our
higher education um.
With the faculty with some of
our higher education tribal
colleges and universities is
actually having enough students
to maintain faculty, um, in the
healthcare field. So having a
school specialized in it, I
think would make it a little bit
uh
easier in that sense, um, to, to
have those classes there.
But we, I would like to to know
a little bit more, especially as
we get closer to the session,
um, so the ask that you have so
we can put in our support on on
our behalf um towards that. The
scholarships and the money the
state's investing.
If they decide not to stay here,
do they have to pay back?
Anything.
Currently know.
So everything we invest, um, the
time, the money, which you guys
put into, um, if they decide
they don't wanna.
Stay here and go out of state,
then there we don't have any
kind of incentive to to keep
them.
Um, so.
Senator, the
How the state scholarship
programs work is you earn.
More money the longer you stay
in New Mexico towards paying off
your student loan debt.
And so it starts with the
percentage the first year. I, I,
I can't remember exactly what it
is, but I think it caps out at
like 25%, but you have to stay
here all those years in order to
get the money. We actually, as
the lobbyist for Royal College
in 2016, that was one of the
amendments we made to the
existing, um, scholarship and
loan repayment programs was to
change what percentages the
doctors would get.
The longer they stayed, we kind
of backloaded it instead of
front loaded it to encourage
doctors to stay longer.
Thank you, thank you for that
because I know there are some
other programs with IHS that
they tried to incentivize, but
if they decide not to where they
have to work for IHS for so so
long and then they'll have so
much forgiven, um, but that
those programs, I'm sure they
have to be competitive in that
sense, but um thank you for the
work you do and um I hope you
can meet the requests for uh
that information as soon as
possible.
Thank you Madam Chair.
Thank you
Representative Little.
Thank you, thank you for the
presentation. I apologize for
being late, but I was able to
hear this last presentation, uh,
I was here for the, uh,
presentation you made last year.
So thank you, uh, and I
appreciate the update. Uh, a
clarifying question, Madam
Chair. I'm curious as to, uh, I
just wanted to clarify that I
heard what I think I heard, um.
Uh, did, did you say that the
increase in pay uh for the
scholarships, the increase in
pay was for loan forgiveness or
was that just for salary?
Um, represented a little the the
programs I was speaking to or
the state run programs out of
AED.
And those are loan repayment.
And loan forgiveness.
Yeah.
Thank you for that
clarification. Appreciate it.
Thank you, Representative.
colleagues any more questions,
concerns, uh, I just want to say
thank you, um, Vice President
Nunez and uh Pilar for working
with Burrell College and I'm I'm
thankful for the presence and
the work in the Four Corners
area.
I live in Gallup and um.
Care about my community and the
healthcare services there we
have Indian Health Service. We
have the VA satellite clinic, we
have the New Mexico C um
community health and then of
course, uh, we fight. So wanna
thank you for uh providing
opportunities there for our
students to move into this field
and uh wanna give a support
shout out to Muscalero. They're
here in the audience.
So I think if we could help them
develop and grow their own
health professions in this area,
that would be wonderful.
And then, um, I, I see the
cultural relevancy term a
different way.
I work in the hospital setting
and I work with uh patients and
I think it's a, it's a sacred,
it's a sacred term.
It's um.
Cultural relevancy, I think, um.
I use it in my world of work in
the hospital setting and we're
on the right track and I
appreciate. So with that, I
don't have any more questions. I
just want to thank you and I'd
like to visit with you offline
regarding the programs in the
four corners. Madam Chair, if I
may also, uh you're all invited
to a dinner at salud tonight at
6 o'clock. It's hosted by NMSU
uh Burrell as well as some
other, uh, other, um,
Sponsors that will be there to
meet with you guys.
Thank you, thank you for your
hospitality and thank you for
letting us meet here. It's a
beautiful campus. The view is
wonderful and thank you for your
hard work.
Thank you.
OK, next on the agenda is item
number 6. We have League of
Women Voters of New Mexico
update.
Come forward team.
OK.
Good morning, Madam Chair.
Members of the committee.
I'm Hannah Burling, co-president
of the League of Women Voters of
New Mexico and project lead for
Fair districts for New Mexico.
With me today is Dick Mason.
The league's voting in elections
director and the project manager
for Fair Districts, and I
believe on Zoom, we have
Leonard Gorman?
Executive director of the Navajo
Nation Human Rights Commission.
Lauren Bernelli, policy analyst.
For the Navajo Nation Human
Rights Commission and Cedric
Page of the San Francisco I'm
sorry, Santa Fe chapter of the
NAACP.
So
To begin with, we have our the
league's election activities for
this year.
Which include of course
Publishing our online
nonpartisan voter guide vote
411.
Uh, which gathers and collects
information on polling places,
races, ballot issues, and
candidate answers to very
carefully chosen nonpartisan
questions.
will be printing and
distributing the voter guides in
our 4 local league areas.
And we will also once again be
printing and distributing the
Native American voter guide.
In 2018, we were asked by the
Secretary of State's office to
print a voter guide for the 12
counties with significant Native
American populations. The
concern was that without
Uh, broadband access, that there
was difficulty in getting
information out.
Unfortunately, the Secretary of
State's office could not fund
this effort, so we raised the
money ourselves and do it.
And we're very proud to announce
that this year.
will be able to include
candidate answers to the
questions.
State and local bond issue
information and the pros and
cons of constitutional
amendments will also be
publicizing voting information
through various tabling events,
social media, PSAs, and this
includes when and where to
register.
When and where to vote and how
voting is done.
We will continue to combat voter
suppression, Miss Diss and
malformation.
And we are still working with
the democracy project to
reassure voters that the
election system works and that
their ballot counts.
The project is developed video
and audios of county clerks and
other election officials urging
New Mexicans to vote. We had
some of those out last year.
And I believe they're running
again this year.
And of course, we hold candidate
forums where candidates can let
voters know where they stand on
the issues and answer questions
fair districts is a project of
the League of Women Voters of
New Mexico.
And it works towards
redistricting reform?
We are now nearly 50
organizations.
Who have joined together to
support fair, transparent, and
trusted redistricting in New
Mexico.
We worked to pass the
redistricting Act in 2021.
In the legislative session and
that created the citizens
redistricting Committee, the
CRC, uh, which was charged with
developing 3 recommended maps
for the congressional districts,
seats, the New Mexico House and
Senate, and the publication
commission.
Fair districts played a major
role in promoting public input.
And while the public input was a
huge success, there were some
other issues.
First, due to the appointment
process, CRC membership did not
represent the geographic and
racial diversity of New Mexico?
And second, the maps proposed by
the CRC were only advisory, and
as such some of the final maps
were developed behind closed
doors.
This made it clear to us.
That it was time for a
constitutional amendment to
create a redistricting
commission independent of the
legislature.
Uh, beginning in the 2022
session, Representative Natalie
Figueroa and Fair districts were
to introduce HJR 9 to put the
question of creation of an
independent redistricting
commission on the ballot.
Uh, these efforts have
continued.
And a similar joint resolution
will be introduced in the 2025
legislature.
By committed legislators.
And with that I will turn this
over to Dick Mason.
Thank you.
Uh, good, good morning, Madam
Chair. Members of the Indian
Affairs Committee, um,
I want to thank you for the
opportunity. I'm sorry. I told
her to do it and then I didn't
do it.
So,
so, um,
Uh
I'm going to be, I'm gonna be
presenting um the current
version of the joint resolution
that would put the question of
um a creation of an independent
redistricting commission on the
ballot in the next general
election, um, we really do
believe it's time to let the
voters decide whether they want
an independent commission.
So the documents I've provided
to you, I think that if you
have, if they they have been
handed out.
Um, there were the clip, yeah,
um,
There are 3 that are relevant to
my presentation. The first one
is the House government election
Indian Affairs subcommittee
substitute for HJR 10, which
passed House government election
day affairs in the 2024 session.
Then is the proposed joint
resolution language for 2025.
The only change from the 2024
election came from a proposed
amendment from Representative
Little. Um, in that
clear that um did that the
representation they had to be
geographic and racial diversity
on the Klan and how that would
happen. So that's the only
change that we made in the 2025
um language from what past House
government election today in the
Harris, and then there is a one
page document that summarizes
the 2025, um, joint resolution
and the process of how it would
happen.
So over the 5 years, um, we've
been working, um, we've we've
fine tuned the language based
upon input from legislators.
And from the community.
So now some of the major
features now is we recognize our
original joint resolution had 13
pages. We realized that could
never go on in the Constitution.
Uh, that's just too much
language. So we've pared it down
to 3 languages, 33 pages.
And um
and then there is going to be
required enabling legislation,
um, because it is pared down, it
just sets out the general
principles, um, that that would
require a role for the
legislature and enabling
legislation. So they, the final
details can be worked on with
the with the by the legislature
and um
So some of the features of the
joint resolution is the first
section is just um amending the
existing language. One of the
things the legislative council
Service and the legislature has
asked is a lot of our a lot of
our language is not gender
neutral. It refers to his, his,
his, so what they do is they
replace that with Senator or
representative, so they make
the, you know, anytime they do
changes they they're, they're
making um
Language gender neutral. And the
other part is to strike the part
that gives up assigned
responsibility for redistricting
to the legislature. So that's
just a change to section one.
Section 2 is what addresses, you
know, what the independent
commission will look like. So
the the commission will consist
of 9 members, 3 from each of the
two major parties.
And then 3 from decline to state
are minor parties.
And then 6 members will be
chosen randomly um from
applications, um.
Then they will choose the final
3, and the reason for that is to
assure if the if in the um
random selection, there isn't
geographic and racial diversity,
you know, it doesn't reflect the
demographics of New Mexico, then
they can do it by, you know,
choosing the final three from
from the pool of applicants, um,
And so there's absolutely clear
that the final the final, the
final composition of the
commission must reflect the
ratio and geographic diversity
of New Mexico.
And so the, the
The Commission will develop maps
for congressional, New Mexico
House and Senate in any other
offices that may be requiring
redistricting and we use general
language because as we know the
PRC went from elected to, um,
you know, to appointed, um, and
then that the the commission
will deliver their maps to the
Secretary of State, no later
than 6 months after they
received the census data.
And then those maps will be used
in the next relevant election.
Um, the joint resolution
requires that the proposed maps
must conform to accepted
redistricting standards and we
put those in some detail,
um, in, in, in the language of
the joint resolution.
So in closing, you know, we will
be asking for the endorsement of
the language by the Indian
Affairs Committee. Um, we know
you don't do that at this
meeting. We will submit um
legislative council service
language um before, you know,
well, well in advance of the of
of that meeting. Um, and I'll
leave it up to you, um,
do you want to wait till um
Mr. Gorman and Mr. Page present
and then ask questions. OK,
that's so next also in the
packet we presented is the
resolution from the Nava Navajo
Nation Human Rights Commission
in support of an independent
redistricting commission and um
Mr. Gorman, who I hope is
connected, we'll be, um, we'll,
we'll be talking about how the
Navajo Nation came to conclusion
they would be supporting an
independent redistricting
commission.
Mhm.
Mr. Gorman, can you hear us?
To
Yeah,
in.
Can you give Cedric a call? I
think she's she's calling.
All right.
I don't, I don't have Cedric's
phone number, do you?
I have limits.
I.
on our website.
While we're waiting, uh, Senator
Rodriguez, thank you, Madam
Chairman. I thought I'd take
this opportunity to, um, while
we wait, uh, to thank Hannah and
Dick. I mean, truly, these two
individuals have been above and
beyond an example of what
volunteerism is and and just
genuine advocacy, my goodness,
your commitment is admirable and
you serve as an example for
everyone else, you know.
Voting does matter and, and so
we need to do more to get more
people engaged with the right
information and so I noticed
that you had done this wonderful
um uh uh printing guide. You
printed a guide for Navajo or
for Native American voter guide
and uh I remember we discussed
that a good while back and it
just wasn't the funding wasn't
there and I don't know what else
took place, but you go around
those obstacles and those
barriers.
And you get things done and
that's what you did here. You
raised the funds. If the state
doesn't want to do it, you'll
figure out a way, but I know
you're gonna get it done for the
right causes, so, um, I just
want to thank you both for, for
all your work and of course,
Hannah is our president of the
League of Women Voters for many
years. We couldn't ask for more.
Thank you very much. Thank you,
Senator. Thank you.
Thank you, Senator.
Representative block.
You knew
OK
OK, thank you, Madam Chair.
Yeah, I don't know if I'll be
quick or not, but thank you, Mr.
Mason. Thank you, Ms. Burleson.
Burleson, right? Bur Burling,
I apologize.
Thank you so much for being here
and uh for this information, you
know, I, I, uh.
I like the idea of an
independent redistricting
commission. I do. I think it's
critical for our state to have
True representation that's not
hand selected by the same people
who will be on the ballot and
are in office. So I think that
gives fairness to the people,
um, Madam Chair, and
You great folks. My question was
regarding the random selection.
Of
Individuals to serve on the
commission is that for both
parties or is that just for
independence and then.
How do you vet those people?
Because Madam Chair, and uh,
Mr. Mason, Miss Burling.
I, I just don't know what the
caliber of those individuals
will be when we get those
applications. How do we stiff
them out because it says the
Secretary of State is supposed
to to promulgate or whatever the
words are, but how do we ensure
that that is an open process,
Madam Chairman.
Um, OK, Madam Chair,
Representative, um, we
appreciate your support in the
past for an independent reducing
commission. And um,
There may, there is going to be
enabling legislation,
um, the Secretary of State has
to do vetting to make sure that
all the standards, their vote,
you know, they, they registered
voters, you know, that they're
really you know that, um, and
in, in the longer version we had
some exclusions.
Now when it comes to enabling
legislation, we'll be
recommending that the
legislature they put some of
some of those exclusions and one
of the things that's been raised
is
Um, concerned about expertise.
In the applicants now that in
the longer version we had two
ways the Secretary of State was
going to send randomly out
invitations for people to apply.
Um, I forget the number they
were going to send out and and
then we were just gonna open it
up so people could apply who
wanted, who want to apply and
then I say she was going to
train him.
There might have to be an
enabling legislation, some
concern about expertise,
um, because I know it was raised
that in Michigan and Random.
there wasn't enough expertise on
on on the commission. So,
You know, that's one of the
things we'll look to the
legislature, you know, just like
we accepted representative
Little's amendment, you know,
when this thing, you know, maybe
go into your committee if you're
in house government elections
in committee. So yes, um, so
Madam Chairs representative.
That's my response, OK, if you
have a further question.
Thank you so much, Madam
Chairman. Thank you, Mr. Mason.
So my, I guess my question
regarding that would be my, my
concern is not necessarily about
expertise because I want this to
be made up of regular Joe's,
people like you and me who are
voters in the state, who care
about elections want fairness.
What I am concerned about, Madam
Chair, is
If the Secretary of State is in
charge of keeping track of the
list, then.
I don't necessarily want to say
I don't trust the Secretary of
State, but I don't trust the
Secretary of State. So I would
want to make sure that that
would be a public record of
every single person who was
selected, and then I'd like to
see who is winnowed out, who
was, whose applications were not
done correctly and then whose
were because uh I just want to
see everybody who was involved
just to make sure that we got
everyone at the table, if that
makes sense. And I know that
that we stripped down the bill a
little bit because we want it to
be on a, on a ballot, and we
don't want the ballot to be 6
pages, right?
But I would love a six-page
ballot if it means getting it
right now so we don't have to do
it later on.
And.
Yes, I mean, the league is all
about transparency. So yes, we
were, so we want the league, you
know, so man, I'm sorry,
managers,
but um yes man representative
definitely and we, you know, you
know, in the longer version we
had that the selection had to be
public. It had to be a public
meeting, you know, and we, I
think we even specified they had
to be representatives from both
political, you know, from the
two major parties and other, you
know, so just make sure isn't
just public, but do we have to
make sure that
There's a good representation at
the public at the public
selection,
but your point of
Making those who are vetted out
available.
It is a good suggestion.
Because that isn't, you know,
that was even in our long
version, but those who have
vetted out, you're right, um, it
should be just like a, you know,
a provisional ballot that's
vetted out should be available
to the public.
So Representative, thank you for
raising those points.
Thank you.
Yeah, of course. That's pretty
much all I, that's pretty much
all I had, but I just want to
say thank you and yeah.
OK, then I will uh talk very
soon.
OK, for uh we do have uh Mr.
Gorman online now, so we'll
continue with our, uh, his
presentation here and and uh
come back for questions again,
OK, members, go ahead.
Mr. Gorman, can you hear us?
You may.
Li Yan
Maybe that'll work.
the
And start concluding your um
questions. So thank you.
All right.
I think that's better. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Maybe.
I'll pick up later and return.
Difficulties.
Um.
Mr. Mr. Gorman, are you there?
or Mr. Page?
We thought we had challenges
during COVID.
Hello.
Is that uh Mr. Gorman or Mr.
Page? This is Leonard Gorman.
OK, you may get your
presentation.
OK, thank you. A yeah a little
bit of a technical difficulty
here, um.
Uh, it's a, yeah,
uh basinhain.
Just, um, a highlight on some of
the work that my office does,
uh,
That is my office, uh, is been
engaged in redigiting activities
the past.
3 cycles.
Um, the first one that we were
assigned to was in 2011.
Uh, but before that, um, I had
the opportunity to participate
in the 20.
01, redistricting activities,
uh, in all the three states,
Utah, Arizona, and New Mexico.
And um,
Through that experience and that
gaining expertise in the area.
We've also been able to
participate in various
litigations relating to uh
redistricting. Um, we were
called upon uh back in 2011 to
participate in the twelve-party
litigation in New Mexico.
Uh, and Navajo Nation was very
lucky to um prevail in all of
the four litigations at that
time. Uh, the good thing about
the 2021 redistricting
activities is that for Navajo
Nation, we did not participate
as much as we had in the past in
any litigation regarding uh the
redistricting in New Mexico. Um,
so,
We've been authorized by
legislation by the nomination
councils now but at committee uh
to make uh and participate in
all redisiting activities uh for
this cycle 21 and 22, uh, to
ensure that Navajo voting
strength is protected.
Um, that every aspect of the
redigiting activities that
there's no retrogression
activities that is imposed on
the Navajo people. Uh, so we
were very fortunate to
participate in various parts of
the New Mexico process.
I think part of the difference
that we see.
Uh, between New Mexico and
Arizona and Utah is the fact
that the other two stakes do
allow uh uh I suppose you could
say uh citizen participation at
a higher rate, uh, primarily
because in Arizona, in the year
2000.
Um, we as citizens of the state
uh initiated and put on the
ballot a proposition to allow
the establishment of the
independent redistricting
commission. And since 2000 and
2001, uh, that was when the
independent redistricting
commission took on the role of
approving the congressional and
legislative redistricting plans.
And and and of course, there's
always contention between
political parties
Uh, the question was raised by
one of the parties, whether the
independent redistricting
commission had the full legal
authority to adopt the, the
plans that they forwarded and it
went all the way up to the
Supreme Court of the United
States and the Supreme Court at
that time, uh, issued a
favorable consideration that the
citizen approved this.
new plan and the independent
redistricting commission in
Arizona is, is legally
established.
In that sense, um, there's a lot
of level of participation,
citizenry, participation in the
independent redistricting
commission on Arizona side, and
also the uh the Native American
population on the Arizona set is
substantially less.
And then in New Mexico, uh, in
New Mexico, there's a higher uh
Native American population.
Uh, and then you also have, we
also have the land aspects in
New Mexico, the northwest
quadrant, uh, is it as its
label.
I remember in 2011 when we went
to court, um, then Supreme Court
justice basically said uh to the
parties, all the 12 parties that
leave the Northwest quadrant
alone, uh, the indigenous
peoples in that area will
provide their uh um
self-determination plans.
As to what they believe is in
their best interest, uh, the
redistricting plans would be
based on their wishes and that
those plants will be fit into
the rest of the state are
redistricting plants. That was
wonderful. That was great. Uh,
so in this, uh, line of thinking
based on our experience, that we
believe that Arizona has a very
good process. A lot of citizens
participation and uh
I'm glad to report that the last
cycle during the 2021
redistricting activity and
Native American was appointed to
the 5 member commission.
Um, and we participated along
those lines of, of the
redistricting plans throughout
the state. So in that sense, I
think, uh, based on our
participation as members of the
New Mexico redistricting Task
Force that submitted substantial
number of uh reports and
recommendations to the
legislature in 2021 and 2022,
and we continue to participate
in voting activities now as a
board member of
The observed New Mexico voting
for the 2024 elections, uh,
we're very happy to encourage uh
you as a committee of the
legislature, uh, to favorably
consider uh the proposal to
establish the in uh allow the
public in the in the state of
New Mexico to vote on
establishing an independent
redistricting commission that
would have a role much similar
to the state of Arizona. So
that's basically
But we wanted to share with you
and yeah, thank you very much
for allowing my office to
participate in your discussion.
Yeah, thank you. Next, do we
have uh Cedric Page.
OK, while we are waiting.
Cone, did you have a question?
Boy, I had to make sure that I
went before Mr. Representative
Samoa. OK.
Let's see if I can get this
right.
Right now we're doing now is how
many, how many members are we
looking for that's going to
serve on this commission? How
many total people will serve on
this redistricting commission.
99 total throughout the whole
state.
And they will all be picked
from uh you said uh.
They'll be big politically and
then of course, uh,
of course, some of them will be
declined to stay, is that
correct? How's the makeup gonna
be exactly?
Madam Chair, representative, um,
did, did the language reads 3
each from the two major parties
based upon um registration and.
But 2 each
No, 3 major parties, 3 each from
the two major parties 3 each
from the two major parties
and then 3, so the total
membership is 933 each from to
um from each of the two major
parties and then 3 from either
declined to state or a minor
party right now that would be,
you know, I think the
libertarian Party is the only
recognized party and so, so
that'd be that'd be.
But the way it's going to be I
was sure geographic and racial
representation.
The 6 of those are going to be
selected randomly and in
enabling legislation we might
say 22 and 2 have to be selected
randomly. Then they're going to
select.
The last 3.
That's just to assure that this
geographic and and racial
representation because that did
not happen on the citizens
redistricting Committee, um, you
know, 66 out of the 7 were from
Albuquerque and the 7th was from
Balin. And uh and um had one
woman, no Native American
representation, um, so we, you
know, we, we want the commission
to reflect New Mexico.
OK. So, so, Madam Chair, so how
are we going to get make sure
that uh we don't have this
problem come up again like what
happened last time where
everybody so to speak, was from
Albuquerque.
How we're gonna make sure that
uh these people are going to
represent the whole state.
And not just a portion of the
state of New Mexico.
Well, Madam Chair,
representative, one of the
things, you know, when you get
the, um, you know, the, the,
again, we didn't specify the
vote on the commission to
another to approve a map, but
when you get 33 and 3.
Um, you know, you're gonna need
a majority, um, to in the past.
Now, in the end, I'm not
suggesting this. Some states
require a supermajority, you
know, in order to approve a map
or say it has to be at least one
Republican, one Democrat, and
one, you know, declined to
state, you know, so there's a
way of assuring um that there is
broad support for, um,
So
OK, let's get to the chase, uh,
Madam Chair, I mean, I just, uh,
OK, so what we're gonna do is
we're gonna have 9 people and
they're gonna become the,
they're gonna make the decision
as to how I am going to serve my
district.
They they're going to divide my
map.
9 people are going to do that
now.
They're going to do that with
these redistricting commission.
The Constitution says how many
people in today's world, in
today's world, are making the
decision as to how we redistrict
the state of New Mexico.
How many people are involved and
get to vote on it.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, one of the things,
and we didn't put it, but it's
implied in in the enabling
legislation we're going to
require the same vigorous public
input.
That was rec I mean the big
success of the citizens
redistricting Committee was the
amount of pub and thanks to
Justice Chavez and the other
members who were on the
committee, there were, there was
a lot of public um participation
both online, you know, they set
up an online system so people
could comment and then they had.
I forget how many 12, I think
public meetings, um, and they
were available on Zoom, um, I
think they went to Crown Point.
We did one at the end they did
one at D&D and accounts and they
would, um, you know, they were
down here in Las Cruces, so they
received a lot of public comment
from around the state. We would
want at least that amount of,
you know, public input onto and
um I mean some people talked
about their specific districts.
Um, I remember, I think it was
House District.
42 when we were up in Las Vegas
getting public input and the
people talked about the
The District was split by
mountain, a mountain. So how,
how do they participate, you
know, um, you know, cause they
legislator lived on the other
side of the mountain, how do
they participate participate.
That's the type of input we got.
You know, when, when we were
traveling, when we were
traveling around the state, so.
Thank you. Madam Chair, if I
remember, and I'm, I'm an old
man, OK? I remember correctly,
uh, the speaker and the, uh,
And the uh prote uh appointed a
committee, a legislators.
And they went around the state
and got public input from the
voters and the people from
around the whole state of New
Mexico. They did the same thing
that you're uh.
9 member commission uh did
accept, uh, probably even more
extensive because they fact is,
uh, I think they were more open
to everybody in the state of New
Mexico.
So you're gonna tell me.
OK, so you're gonna tell me that
9 people
are going to do a lot better job
on redistricting than 112
people.
You gonna tell me that 9 people
in the whole state of New
Mexico.
are going to do a lot better
job.
A redistricting the state of New
Mexico than the people that
represent the state of New
Mexico that come from every walk
of life in the state of New
Mexico that represent every
different niche and corner in
the state of New Mexico. These
name people are going to take
over and do the job that those
112 people elected by the people
of the state of New Mexico are
doing right now. How does that
fit into your
Into your brain there 9 versus
112.
OK, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um,
Quite honestly, and this has
been recognized by every other
democracy in the world. There is
an inherent conflict of interest
with legislators drawing their
own districts.
Um, we are the only democracy in
the, in the world. As a matter
of fact, the economist in The
Economist magazine that rates
democracies throughout the world
lists us 17th and 17th in the
world. They've listed us as a
flawed democracy. They list two
items gerrymandering and
electoral college has been why
they why they downgrade us as a
democracy. And as for the
reason, you know, this is
inherent, it's
Reflection, you know, on, on
legislators of their honesty,
it's just an inherent conflict
of interest in in people drawing
their own districts. So thank
you, you know, I know you, you
have a different opinion of it,
but that's fine. Um, so, um,
that is, that is why other
countries have, have left it to
in independent entities to to
redraw district so.
Thank you.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. I
just wanted to throw that out
because I just cannot understand
how we're going to go around
select 9 people to do the job of
112. I just don't understand how
those 9 people are going to do,
are going to represent.
What 112 people elected by the
people of the state of New
Mexico, how they are going to be
representative.
Of everybody in the state of New
Mexico and if you saw that last
commission that was appointed.
Uh, Judge Chavez is I consider
him a good friend of mine.
Oh my god, I.
The commission was on
Albuquerque.
So I mean, why didn't we just
I just don't understand why,
why, why we even went to that
trouble? I mean all you did was
eliminate us in this last
districting and you gave it to
Albuquerque to do the
redistricting. That's all you
did.
And I honestly, I think that was
unfair to the whole state of New
Mexico, to every person who
lives in the state of New Mexico
that redistricting process that
we went through this last time
was totally unfair to every
citizen in the state of New
Mexico. Thank you, Madam Chair.
That's all I have.
Thank you, Representative,
before I call on our next
representative or senator to ask
a question. Do we have Cedric
Page online to present.
Uh
Yes.
Can you hear me?
Yes, we can.
Well, thank you very much. Had a
little trouble, uh, technically
getting on to the meeting.
Uh, my name is Cedric Page. I'm
a professor emeritus from the
University of New Mexico, Los
Alamos, uh, the subject area is
geography, but you'll see in a
minute there's very relevant to
the subject of redistricting.
Uh, I'm very active in the Santa
Fe branch of the NAACP I'm a
member since 2008.
I am a treasurer of the
organization. I've been a past
president, active in other
community organizations here in
The Santa Fe, northern New
Mexico area, uh.
As well as statewide. I serve on
a regional development
corporation Board. I'm also a
regent at the New Mexico
Military Institute, which you
all know as a statewide uh
institution.
Uh, why is redistricting
important, um,
To me, and uh uh my engagement
in this process for the last 2.5
years.
Uh, I'm a geographer, and I
believe that uh folks should be
able to uh understand their
community and reflect that
community in a map.
Uh, so, uh, that has led me to
be uh involved in the uh
Uh redistricting effort. Uh, I
started in 2021 with the New
Mexico first uh effort uh under
Justice Chavez as the chair of
that organization at the time,
and in 2022, I served as
co-chair of the New Mexico first
effort uh to move rediting
forward in this state.
Uh,
Fair districts, uh,
Engagement uh has been a
continuing effort of mine and
interest of mine. Uh, it's also
a commitment to fair,
transparent, and trusted uh
rediting process.
Uh,
I believe as a geographer, going
back to my uh
Origins as a professor, uh, as
an educator, that individuals
should have the skills, and I
think this process of
redistricting, uh, and an
independent commission will
allow more people access.
To our electoral process and
understand how they draw their
boundaries, how they identify
their communities of interest to
the concept and the term used
frequently throughout most of
the redistricting discussions,
uh, that I've been a part of,
communities of interest. How do
you draw a map, uh, showing your
community of interest, which
will then be reflected in the
individuals who will serve your
community and legislatures and
other elected uh bodies. So, uh,
with
That, uh, I just wanted to, uh,
encourage you to to look very
carefully at the redistricting
uh efforts, the independent
redistributing commission, and
the efforts to uh create a fair
and just one here in the state
of New Mexico.
Uh, as good as a member of the
NAACP, uh, we are a branch here
in Santa Fe. Uh, we have uh
branches throughout the state,
uh, the Donana branch, uh, is a
partner along with Fair
Districts in New Mexico, and uh
we think through our commitment
to uh secure political, social,
economic, educational equality
of rights that this is a process
that will weaken uh support
fully.
So thank you very much for your
time and I appreciate the uh uh
opportunity to join in, uh,
despite the technical
difficulties. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you all
presenters. Now, I will come on
and represent.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee and presenters
and audience and.
There is no doubt.
And there's no question that
there was some unrest about the.
Redistricting in the state of
New Mexico.
There were a lot of things that
were done unfair.
There were people pushing their
weight around to to get this
done the way they wanted it
done.
There were some things that
should have been.
Looked at in a more serious way.
When we look at the Voting Act
of 1965.
There were deviation numbers put
in there for minority parties.
To get a fair share to get their
people elected when we look at
the
Redistricting the state of New
Mexico?
All the deviation numbers.
Went to the northwestern part of
the state to the natives.
My Hispanic people.
Black voters in the state.
Did not get treated fairly.
On that issue
I will carry that.
For the rest of my life thinking
that I as a legislator couldn't
change that.
And I couldn't get my people
their fair share.
of seats in the house.
And in the Senate.
As we go forward.
We need to treat everybody fair.
And once we do that,
We'll get it right.
But we all fight.
For our people.
I'm not mad at the native people
themselves.
As individuals,
I'm mad at the system because
how it got done.
I want to call the young man I
talked to a demographer, maybe
he's a geographer or.
Uh, uh, the person that writes
the maps.
The person that wrote the maps
for the native people, me and
him had a real
Strong conversation.
After a hearing in one of the
committees and in that
committee, my district was the
only district in the state of
New Mexico that a that a bill.
was filed
To change
My district
My district
was
Developed and mapped and put
together.
So the Hispanic.
Person could carry this
district.
I, I'm Hispanic.
The debate there was.
That I wasn't the right kind of
Hispanic.
Because of the majority party
today.
I didn't match what they wanted
in that district.
Being a Republican Hispanic put
me in the spotlight for them to
change my district so that.
They wanted to change it where a
Democrat Hispanic could have it.
To me, that's not fair.
The deviation numbers would have
changed things for minorities
across the state if it would
have been fairly distributed.
I can see what representative
Alcon is talking about.
If they all come out of
Albuquerque, it's not fair.
We have to do it in a fair way.
Communities of interest have
been cut.
Split
You name it across the state of
New Mexico.
Was that fair? No.
That was not fair at all.
But I don't see
An independent party.
Taking care of the issues.
That the representatives.
And senators in Santa Fe.
can see firsthand.
Somehow we have to fix it.
Everybody has different ideas.
Which is a good thing because
maybe we can get to a good
general consensus of what we
need to do.
I don't believe myself that an
independent party.
Can fix this.
I don't see somebody that wants
to get involved in this being
neutral in a sense.
And that's why we have to have
the 9 members and that's why we
have to have 3 and 3 and then.
3 come from another place.
But how do we get to that?
It's
It's a good question.
I appreciate your efforts.
I don't think this is the
answer.
I look forward for the state of
New Mexico to get better at what
we do.
At
Representing our people well.
We just, we go forward and we
look for answers and.
I think more of a balance.
In the people, whether it be in
the legislature.
Or outside the legislature that.
If, if we could, if we could
have maybe gotten.
Stayed stayed with lines that
were definitive, like back in
the day when we used to do
counties.
And then if we would have taken.
An even number of.
The two majority parties in
Santa Fe?
An even number of people and let
them.
Debate on it.
Instead of having such a spread
on the two parties.
And, and.
The stronger party.
Being able to push their weight
as to what happened here.
And another thing.
And I'll say it and I might get
shot before I leave this room,
but under the new speaker.
I don't believe this would have
happened.
Under our speaker we have now.
Our former speaker was very
strong in his beliefs and his
stance and what he wanted.
And that showed in our
redistricting.
Madam Chair,
Presenters, thank you.
Thank you, Representative,
Representative Royal Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you both for your
presentation. I'm a huge fan of
League of Women Voters,
they've, I've been involved or
they've supported me in all my
life endeavors since I was.
Fresh out of uh of high school
and getting ready to register
voters. That's who led our way
back.
I won't say how long ago, so
thank you, um, I have a few
questions, but I, I do need to
say this because I come from an
informed place.
Uh, I have served on um almost
every redistricting, um,
process, 1970, 1980, 1990, 2000.
Uh, I stopped in 2000 when I
moved back to New Mexico and
then became a state
representative, so no longer was
involved directly in
redistricting efforts. However,
Um, and Madam Chair, those
efforts were in a horrible
state, I would say, in Texas,
which is a very difficult state
to navigate through anything.
Um,
Democracy related, if you can
follow me on that, on that note,
so.
Let alone partisan, just being.
Just upholding the values of
democracy and that status was
very difficult. So as you can
well imagine, Madam Chair, um,
we were confronted with.
Deep rooted.
Um,
Issues
That, um.
For only courts of law could
assist in, in resolving.
When we were drawing lines. And
so it was both very educating
process but a very um difficult
navigating. So I appreciate it,
um, the process that I witnessed
and participated in in this last
uh redistricting of our state of
in our state of New Mexico and
as uh Madam Chair was, was
nicely put in this uh summary
sheet fair by fair districts,
Mr. Mason's group, um.
He, they acknowledge in the
third paragraph, um, it was a
very robust.
Um, and.
You know, um.
They traveled around the state,
as you mentioned, and there was
a lot of of input.
Both via Zoom as well as in
person wherever we went. I was
able to go in person to several
and then most of the others I, I
tapped in via Zoom. That's how
interested I was in being, being
able to gauge.
The effectiveness with the where
the problems were.
And how to mitigate them for the
future. That was my intent and
purposes, purpose, Madam Chair,
in addition to that purpose, I
Um,
Also, very familiar with the
Voting Rights Act. I
participated in uh getting it
passed and then that.
I am that old.
And um in the amendments that
followed. And the reason is
because I've spent a great deal
of my formulaative years.
Um, fighting at large systems.
To incorporate single member
districts. So if you understand
the notion of going from at
large where communities of
interest now that they're
referred to, but in those days
it was minorities.
Um, would never be able to elect
a representative of their own
because of the um
The nature of that large
districts. It just eliminated
our ability to have a vote and a
voice.
So it was a long card. I was a
plaintiff in many cases, um, by
the latest of which was in El
Paso, the El Paso Independent
School District, which is known
as Sierra versus EPISD, uh,
where we fought a hard legal
battle to finally get rid of um
at large systems. So that is my
passion, that's been my passion.
So when I object.
To certain components of what's
being proposed or the entire
nature, it's because it's coming
from an informed place or from a
place of lived experiences and
it.
It
You have to teeter totter and
find the balance.
Because you don't want to go
from one extreme to the other
extreme, you want to find a good
healthy balance that as Mr.
Mason.
Mentioned, um.
It
doesn't always fall in our hands
as one of the leading
democracies of the world,
supposedly.
So I understand that very
clearly.
However, I have, I want to get a
few other things clear before I.
Go any further. I wanted to
know, and I don't know if you
mentioned it or not, how many
other states, uh, we are
mirroring our, your joint
resolution.
Oh,
with.
How many other states have such
as joint resolution, ma'am Chair
Representative, you mean have
independent districting
commission there are various
versions of independence, OK,
um,
Mr. Gorman mentioned Utah. Utah
is sort of a hybrid, um, but
Arizona, two of our neighboring
states, Arizona, Colorado, um,
California, Michigan, um, are
the main, are considered the
gold standards on independent
Districting commissioned.
Um, but it's going on the ballot
in Ohio.
If they, if it isn't thought to
be taken off, but um.
So it it it's something that's
moving um through throughout the
country, um, that there are
states, but two of our neighbors
are, you know, Colorado and
Arizona are, um, to have
independent redistricting
commissions in Colorado just
passed
I I honestly don't know how they
pulled this off, because they,
they needed, they, they had the
alternative of doing initiative
petition or going through the
legislature. They chose to go
through the legislature.
Yeah
They get 100% vote in both
chambers.
Don't know how they pulled that
off. Um, it went to, you know,
it and, and, and then it went on
the ballot and went fairly
overwhelmingly, um, so and
they're, they're they're 2021
was a ballot,
um was um.
redistricting was considered
very fair.
By both parties.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Mr. Mason.
The um next question I have is,
in the, in the, there's a reason
why I asked about the other
states.
Uh, because it's important for
us to take note of the history
of representation.
In those states. Um, there are,
again, those states represent
really deep rooted, um.
Failures to represent.
And um communities of interest,
minority groups and populations,
uh, out of, out of the ones
you've mentioned.
The majority have faced um uh
you would need to research
litigation. So for failure to
represent. So my next question
is um how does this, um, joint
resolution.
Or are independent.
Districting commission,
redistricting commission of
align with the Voting Rights
Act.
Well,
as you can see, you know, in, in
the language one of the things
that there has to be geographic
and racial representation on the
commission. The one thing that
the Supreme Court did leave in
place, remember, was um, you
know, they, they, they said they
did not rule on Pateran
gerrymandering, but they do
leave um the new US Supreme
Court will rule on, um, racial
gerrymandering still, and that's
why.
Hoots have been brought in
Alabama and other states because
the Supreme Court will still the
rule on racial. So you still
have the Voting Rights Act.
As protection from the US
Supreme Court.
But you know what our New Mexico
Supreme Court in their ruling on
the Republican lawsuit.
They also said that uh the New
Mexico's equal protection
clause.
I can also be considered on a
A number of issues including
Patterson gerrymandering.
Our Supreme Court was the first
state Supreme Court that used
the equal protection, our equal
protection clause to say that
they could as a as a state
Supreme Court rule on and
We, we heard applause from
around the country for that
ruling by our Supreme Court that
that they set the precedent that
um
under equal and a lot of other
states have equal protection
clauses built in that they could
rule on unfair, um.
Jerry, um, you know,
gerrymandering.
Um
Just to have an echo. Thank you.
Uh, and by the way, I know Mr.
Mason from many, many, many
years. Thank you. So the next
question, um, in your third
paragraph.
Uh, the very last sentence, um,
where you're providing the
reasons why, um, you acknowledge
the process, but then you also
say the buts, and the second but
was um some of the final maps
were developed behind closed
doors.
Could you explain what um
What you mean by behind closed
doors?
Um, I, you know, I think
Representative Z, Madam Chairman
Representative,
I think representative Samora
referred to one.
But if you look at the documents
that were
Demanded by the judge in the
5th.
When they ruled on the
Republican lawsuit and they they
recovered emails um of
discussion. You will see the
discussions that went on behind
the scenes in, you know, as far
as developing the maps and, and
quite honestly, you know, um,
that was more in the Senate than
in the House. Um, but if, if you
look at the documents that were
recovered during that loss, so
you will see the discussions
that were going on behind the,
behind the.
about various districts and
about very quite honestly about
racial representation, um, so
both plus and minus. So, um.
it was documented in those
documents that they that
that were required, you know, by
the judge down there.
Thank you, Mr. Mason.
So I'm coming back to thank you
for these are things that I
needed to um clarify that going
back to the basic premise of one
person, one vote.
This is incredibly important.
Unfortunately or fortunately,
depending on what side you're on
in the state of New Mexico, the
state of our New Mexico is.
Um, minority majority.
If you combine our Native
American populations with our
Hispanic populations we by far
dominate.
By far.
So there's
If you're on one side,
non-native, non-Hispanic. It's
not going to be fair to you.
Because there's no in your view
or their view or whoever the
view is, there's no one person
one vote, right? But in our
view, because we've suffered
generations
of not being represented, not
having a vote, not having, I
mean, not having a voice through
our vote.
Um,
It's fair. It's time to turn the
tide.
Mhm
Definitely time to turn the
tide.
It's
Unfortunate for those
individuals, um, that don't see
it that way because
As was told to us in legislative
education study group if we're
not careful and the finger was
pointed to native populations
and Hispanic populations that we
were going to have reverse
discrimination cases against us
because of Yazi Martinez that
was told to us.
Here in this town at a committee
hearing.
How can we have that occur?
Madam Chair,
How can we have that threat
thrown to us?
Because we dominate the face of
the state of New Mexico and it's
the same argument about
representation.
It's so incredibly important to
have as representative Samoa
articulated in his presentation
if his district wants to elect.
Uh, Martin Samoa is their
representative because he's
Hispanic and he represents their
faith. It's their right to do
that. They have the right to do
that.
That's one voice and 11 voice,
one vote, one person, one vote.
That's what that democracy, our
democracy is based upon
We're not there to qualify his
political stances. We're there
to honor the voters that put
them in there.
The same that put me in there
for 7 terms now.
It's not about in this case,
it's about representation.
So if I'm not.
The good enough.
Hispanic and we were told when
we were plaintiffs in the
redistricting, the major
redistricting case that went in
the records and I was proud to
be a plaintiff on. We were told
back in 1984.
We were told
You're going to face criticism
because then you're gonna be so
dominant in the population that
the decision is going to be made
whether you actually are true to
your quote unquote Hispanic
leaning or native leaning or
whatever if you're truly
representative and our argument
back was, OK, so that's why we
have an obligation to represent
our district to the best of our
abilities.
And if that's the consequence,
we face the consequence, right?
Represent, so that's where I'm
getting at and so I appreciate
you being here. There are a lot
of questions that still need to
be, um, um, answered.
A lot of of uh steps we have to
go through, but as I was open
with you before, I was not
supportive of the independent
commission because I believe
that that falls within our
purview as the 112 represent
elected and because of the fact
that we represent.
Who we were elected by, not a
party, not an individual, not
Uh, played a
Pay to play efforts.
Not any of that. We're there to
represent the populations that
we were elected to do to
represent and by doing that part
of our obligation as legislators
is to be involved in the census
and be involved in the, the
redistricting processes is my
view, but again, I'm open.
To, to, as this rolls out, um,
I'm, I'm always open to listen
to the other, um, perspectives
on this matter, but I have
fought the civil rights fight.
My entire life and I'm not
willing to give that fight up.
We'd like to thank you, thank
you. Representative Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you so much for the
presentation, um, I appreciate
the comments that I've heard
this morning, uh, and
contributions. Uh, I'm going to,
Madam Chair, um,
Uh, this was when I first came
into office, so I am, uh, a
newer, uh, uh, member of the
legislature.
And um prior to this in 2021, I
will speak to my experience
directly in 2021 during the
redistricting process. Um, I
guess I will begin with asking,
uh, can you please tell me
because I cannot remember um
right this moment.
How many times the redistricting
efforts of the past had to be
litigated in the state of New
Mexico after maps were drawn by
the legislature.
Um,
Quite honestly, up until 1990 we
were under scrutiny from
the Department of Justice. They
removed us from what's
maybe you can help me represent
him. What's the term of
preclearance of redistricting,
um.
But then after redistricting in
1991, the Department of Justice
came back in. They said we that
wedistricting had been done
unfairly, um, so they actually
came in and they ended up
writing the maps or adjusting
them that they had to so that
they can and then in 2001 there
were lawsuits.
Um, I think it was $80 million
the state paid out because the
courts have ruled that the state
has to pay the expenses of the
the challengers toothpin and in
2011 there were, there were
challenges and again I think
that was 3 to 4 million. I don't
know exact figures. Um, and then
the Republican lawsuit,
I think the figures are just
out. I don't remember what it
is, what the state had to pay
out for the Republican lawsuit
on Congressional District 2.
Um, I, I don't have that figure
right now, but there have been
and quite honestly, Madam Chair,
members of the committee and a
representative.
From the league's viewpoint.
It isn't even a cost of the
lawsuit. It's what that does to
the public confidence.
When they see those lawsuits the
system is rigged. I mean, that's
the way they look at it, you
know, everyone's trying to that
from the league's point of view,
that is the biggest cost of
those lawsuits, and the reason
they were brought, so that is,
you know,
That that is the biggest cost,
so.
Thank you
Thank you very much for that
response. Um, Mr. Mason, and
thank you, Madam Chair. Um, I
asked that question because
there was a reason that uh more
people became involved. There
was a reason, um, because of the
trust and the credibility that
was eroded. I wouldn't say it
was nonexistent, but it was
eroded during those lawsuits
where the courts had to actually
step in to redraw those maps,
um, and
I think it's fair to say no one
was satisfied with those, and
that's what we're hearing today,
um, of past experience.
Um,
When I became involved, Madam
Chair, as you may recall, I was
involved in this with the Native
American Redistricting coalition
that was an unprecedented, well,
I wouldn't say unprecedented.
There's been many efforts by uh
communities um of color to
become involved, but this
coordinated effort brought
together all uh tribal
communities, and many of those
maps had specifically reflected
the fact um previous maps had
reflected.
the fact, Madam Chair, that
these communities' voices had
been diluted. Their votes had
been diluted, um, and so,
With this effort, um, this map
was upheld.
Um,
I
Feel very confident in saying
that the voices of of
communities because many, not
just the Native American
community, these maps were
supported by others, communities
around the state and we felt
that was extremely important and
spoke to the representation and
the voices at those community
meetings are taking place around
the state.
Certainly there are lessons
learned.
There were lessons learned.
There were, um, uh, ideas to
better this process in the
future for the future, um.
And I am in support of this. I
have gone on record to say this.
um, I speak as a newer member
and I believe that the
I believe that I saw.
I saw directly as some in this
audience may have experienced
the
The real forceful nature of
those incumbents who were
protecting their seats. I was
not working with them. They were
not my colleagues then, but I
took note of it. It's hard to
not remember this and not
remember the experience that was
had.
And if it can become a more, you
know.
In the best way possible, a more
impartial, uh, non-conflicted
resolution to maps being
produced. I think that's what we
all want in this state. I would
dare say, um.
And so, um,
I appreciate the information
that you've shared today. I
appreciate all the questions
that were asked because I do
think that those questions are
going to help us create
something better.
And I'm looking forward to the
enabling like this.
Coming onto the ballot as a
constitutional amendment will
allow for the people to speak.
To register their opinion and if
it passes, great, and if it
doesn't, there must be a reason
why as well.
So
Thank you for your work, um.
I think it um I'll, I will leave
it at that and um I look forward
to working,
uh,
To help
Spread
Good information out there. I
appreciate all of the work that
the League of Voter of women
voters does and has done in
their past, um.
Uh, to help the citizens of New
Mexico, all no matter where
they're at to get fair,
impartial, nonpartisan
information. And I look to
forward to having this to the
extent that it's possible to not
have that be a part of this
process. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative Vice Chair,
Senator Pinto.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, um, one of the
things, you know, when we talk
about the redistricting, uh,
especially when we talk about
the statistics and the data and
thank you for your work, um, in
your presentation.
The consideration of um the
human factor of emotions of
people not, you know you can't
satisfy everybody and not
everybody's going to be happy
and in that sense, and that
cannot, it's, it's just not
gonna be something that can be
calculated and um I'm satisfied
in in my terms, um.
Personally, uh, but open, I
don't know, and I don't, you
probably might not be able to
the thoughts on the open primary
because I understand you are a
group and you're just two
members of the group that you
would take it back to the group
and maybe come back with an
opinion about the thoughts on
open primaries because I think
that is really something we have
to consider when you talk about
others, these other states that
are participating uh with these
redistricting committees, uh,
these independent.
Commissions that if they have
that in place, I think that is
also something that has to be
considered um when you're
implementing something like this
because that means the state has
evolved in a different way, um,
moving forward in eliminating
some of those barriers for the
voters, so, you know, to to
really try to say, well,
comparing us to other states. I,
I don't think that's fair
because I think there's other
factors that should be included
in it, so it's not really a
question, more of a comment,
maybe to take back and we see.
In the future, maybe we'll have
a discussion about, but thank
you for the work you do.
Madam Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
are you asking about support for
an open primary,
so I think this particular
organization's thoughts on the
open primary and how that
factors in with it.
Madam Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
we do have a position that
allows us to support open
primaries, and we have worked in
the past to do so.
OK, thank you, colleagues. I,
uh.
Just want to say thank you for
your work and your presentation
and I was at the Crown Point
meetings and um I think we do
need to work on, um.
Fair representation of committee
members and staff.
And I think when we work on our
legislation, our language, we
need to be clear about what
we've heard today from all of my
colleagues. I think they've all
had great comments, concerns,
considerations, and so with
that, we'll see you in Santa Fe.
At our last meeting when we
consider legislation.
OK. Thank you so much, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
and we will be submitting that
draft for endorsement at the
November meeting.
Thank you. Thank you.
people.
OK, let's move on to our.
7th presentation right before
lunch we're a little bit behind
schedule.
New Mexico Activities
Association. Sally, welcome.
Good to see you.
You did.
And I'm gonna step away, OK.
So go ahead.
Hello, thank you for joining us,
and I think you've been with us
before,
so.
Um, into this. OK, so we just
try to make sure when the mic's
on, it's red and then um when as
we speak, just turn it off. So
the little, the little person,
yeah, so when my guy at a time
so because we get an echo on our
online stuff and you may begin
and then after your presentation
we'll see if there's any
questions from the members, but
thank you for joining us today.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, thank you for having
me. Um, I asked, when I was
asked to speak, I was asked,
what do you wanna hear? So, um,
I'm gonna give you an overview
of the NMAA because there are
some misconceptions out there
about the New Mexico Activities
Association and give you some
information and then be open for
questions if you have anything
in particular.
So we'll go ahead and I do have
a presentation there just so
you're aware, the NMAA is a
member-led organization. Um, a
lot of people think that I sit
up there and make all the
decisions, but I have been hired
by the superintendents in the
schools in New Mexico to make
sure that the rules and
regulations that they have
adopted are followed. And so any
rule and regulation of the NMAA
goes through a process.
It starts with the sports
specific committee or a bylaws
committee or an NMAA staff
member or board member, and that
rule and regulation then goes to
vote by our commission. Our
commission is made up of
athletic directors across the
state, and then if that is
favorable for the commission,
then it goes to our board of
directors which are made up of
superintendents across the
state. Um, and lastly, if that
is passed, then it
Go out to referenda, so then it
goes back to a vote of all the
member schools. So there is a
long, long process for any rule
or regulation to be placed in
our bylaws, also by the state
statute at the end of the year,
um, we do send everything to the
public education department, so
they are aware of the new bylaws
that are going to be occurring
in the handbook.
The, the NMAA is made up of 160
high schools and 200 middle
schools.
And we service every year 50,000
student athletes, and then we
also service 30,000 students in
activities, so we service 80,000
students year-wide, yearly, with
extracurricular activities, so
um we do touch a lot of kids in
the state of New Mexico, and
those numbers are just 9th
through 12th grade, we also
serve our middle schools as
well, so there are even extra
that we serve.
Um, I'm gonna go through some um
that have a lot of the Native
American students, um, in um in
which we have two boarding
schools, um, actually we have
more than 2, we have two main
ones. We have Santa Fe Indian
School. We also have Navajo
Prep.
Um, Wingate and Pine Hill, those
are our Native American boarding
schools, and when I say Native
American, those are the most
where they are mostly at are
Native American students. Um, we
do have a boarding school rule
and for Navajo Prep in Wingate,
um, those kids that decide
they're going to board at those
schools are given immediate
eligibility for sports and
activities, even though that
they are transferring from
another school, they're giving
immediate eligibility.
Where Pine Hill and Santa Fe
Indian School are not and the
reason for the difference
between the boarding schools is
boarding school rule has a 1.3
multiplier for student
enrollment because they do get
this immediate eligibility no
matter where they coming from
and boarding. Um, however, in
Santa Fe Indians' case,
especially in Pine Hill, that
1.3 multiplier on enrollment
would have taken them from class
3
to class 4A. So Santa Fe Indian
School has chosen to not enact
the boarding school rule so that
they could stay in AAA. Same
thing with Pine Hill, it would
have taken them to AA, but they
remain in Class A. So those are
the boarding schools that um
service those students.
We also have the BIE schools and
I went through that are
non-boarding. Um, also the
charter schools so that you can
kind of see some of the schools
that um throughout the state of
New Mexico that are part of our
membership that we service on a
daily basis. Um, so you mes Gla
Apache, Alamo Navajo, Tahajli
Northwest are our BIE schools
that are not boarding, and then
we do have two charter schools,
Naka and Walitoa that are also
members of our association.
And these are schools that I
went through just mostly in the
northwest part of the state that
are the public schools that
serve a lot of Native American
students, um, that we have that
are members of our association.
And I got, so we talked about
the 80,000 students that we
service every year. We have 14
sports.
And we have 24 activities and a
lot of people always think of us
as athletics, but 24 activities
from English Expo to bowling to
Science Olympia to speech and
debate to junior ROTC and we can
name a lot of them. We have
education Rising, which is an
activity for our students that
want to become teachers in the
state of New Mexico. We sanction
all of these, um, and so, um,
some of our
Fancial means goes to them, but
we are a support for all of
these activities. And I put in
there that we service all
students in New Mexico and the
reason I say all students is
because we have the 160 high
schools in 200 middle schools
and all of those students within
those schools, but nowadays,
especially since COVID, we have
a lot of students that are
homeschooled, charter school,
alternative school, or
non-member of private schools,
and we allow those students.
To participate at our member
schools in their home
attendance's own school, so
every kid in New Mexico 7
through 12th grade has an
opportunity to participate in
sports and activities.
Hm
Um, this is a little bit, people
aren't aware of this part, but
in that little back bullet on
the bottom there, we received no
money from the state of New
Mexico, um, the legislators, no
money whatsoever comes from the
state of New Mexico. Our funding
is 50% state championship ticket
sales, uh, 25% of it is
corporate dollars and 25% of it
is membership dues from our
schools, but we are considered a
nonprofit.
Organization and so we are, um,
like I said, there is no funding
that comes from the state, so
we, we do have a $4.2 million
budget. I have 13 staff members
that work for me, um, but once
again, um, we are considered a
nonprofit organization.
Um, and so as you are, are a lot
of you are aware, the benefits
of extracurricular activities,
the lifelong skills that these
students, um, achieve um from
teamwork to goal setting to
perseverance, um, and I have a
list there, the leadership
skills, their fitness, um,
interacting with each other. We
are education-based athletics,
an extension of the classroom,
and we truly believe that what
we provide in our schools, it's
different. A lot of nowaday.
There's a lot of club, um, but
we are in the school setting
where we're an extension of the
classroom and what we try to
tell our coaches is how you act
in the math classroom should be
what you're teaching also in
sports, but sometimes that gets
a little bit of awry there, but
that's what we're hoping that um
we understand um and even with
every our rules and regulations
that our kids are going on to do
really good, good things because
they play sports and do
activities.
Um, as I explained about the
extension of the classroom,
national facts, we don't have
the facts specifically in New
Mexico and I really would like
to see if we could get that
specific to New Mexico, um, but
we have higher, you know, kids
that participate in
extracurricular activities
nationwide have higher GPAs.
They have higher test scores,
lower dropout rates, lower
truancy, fewer discipline
problems. These are the kids
that.
Um, they have an oversight and
there's rules and regulations
for them to participate and we
have saved so many kids because
of extracurricular activities
and it's something that's dear
to my heart because you just see
these kids that thrive and that
some of the kids that need, they
need that guidance. Um, those
coaches are their role models
and we continue to talk to the
coaches and the athletic
directors about that and and um
because that is.
A lot of these kids, 99% of them
will not go on to college to
play sports. This is their
experience. This is what they
remember and all of us who've
played sports, you know,
especially I always talk to the
men and they always remember,
well, back in 1970, I did this,
I did that, and it went from
being a 10 points to game 12 of
a sudden it was 25 and 30 points
a game, but that's OK because
those are great memories, and
those are the lifelong
friendships that they have in
extracurricular activities.
As, as a lot of you know, we
have a compete with class
initiative. Um, I've been at the
NMAA for over 20 years, um, 41
years in education.
Um, and 12 years or 12 years
when I became the executive
director, um, I've got a
committee together and we came
up with New Mexico's own
sportsmanship initiative. We
were using um pursuing victory
with honor, but that was out of
California. So the first thing I
said is, why are we using
something from another state.
Let's do something from New
Mexico. So we got educators from
throughout the state. We had
kids on a committee, coaches,
administrators, and we came up
with our
With class initiative and the
basis of it is a respect,
integrity, and responsibility
that our kids need to learn and
and then we have a stay in your
lane initiative with this and so
basically we're trying to tell
parents to stay in their lane.
Officials to stay in their lane,
you should just be officiating
the game, you know, coaches stay
in their lane and we have to
continue to remind people about
staying in your lane. These kids
are 1314, 1516 year olds, and we
think that they're going to go
on to the NBA or pro sports and
we're screaming in the stands at
um and all they want is just to
have fun. And we need to make
sure we go back and remind
people that it is for fun and
these.
The memories that they're going
to have for a lifetime, and
that's what we want to do.
Therefore, 2 years ago we put in
our 2 strikes policy where
basically is a little bit more
in that compete with class that
we're not going to tolerate bad
behavior after COVID, it has
been pretty, it's been pretty
hard. They're not only here in
New Mexico but nationwide. And
so we need to go back and
remember that we represent New
Mexico and just because Texas or
Arizona or Colorado do something
that doesn't mean that we need
to do that.
We need to be our own self and
make sure that we um help these
kids and give them a good
experience.
So I'm open to any questions.
That was just an overview um for
you and you probably have
specific questions, but wanted
to give you a little bit of an
overview. Madam Chairman, thank
you.
Thank you, Representative
Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair. So
It's so good to see you. I will
acknowledge seeing her again.
Um, I've had a chance to follow
your career in the state in
Europe, um, sports activities,
um, uh, so,
This director and I, um,
actually we're uh
competitors in high school. She
paid for Saint Pius High School,
and I played for Bernallio High
School and we were in the same
district. It was extremely
competitive, but I remember you,
I remember you well having
played.
With all of this that you're
trying to move forward and I
greatly respect what you're
doing, so I'm glad to see you in
this role. I was always very
happy to know that this is what
you were doing.
So Madam Chair, I have a
question. Thank you for all of
the information you provided. My
colleague and I were sitting
here saying, wow, we don't hear
a lot of this specific
information, so I truly
appreciate it. Regarding the
boarding school, Madam Chair,
the boarding school rule. I'm
just curious, I appreciate the
explanation of how that, what
that is. Um, my question is
whether this is, uh,
There are not. My question is,
um, I don't believe that there
are only Native American
boarding schools here, so the
boarding schools that if there
are any in the state of New
Mexico that I may not be aware
of this this rule also, um, I
have, um, do they also this is
rule also applied to them so
that they have the opportunity
to elect.
Um, how they want to be
classified. That is correct. So
back before I came in 20 years
ago and before that when Nimi
started participating in
athletics, um, they needed in in
the southeast part of the state,
they needed them to participate
in the actually it was a sport
of football. And so at that time
the board of directors, the
member schools wanted to enact a
boarding school rule where.
Kids would get immediate
eligibility if they came from
even outside the state and they
came to board and allow these
kids to participate. So that's
where the boarding school rules
started.
Um, way back 30 years ago, um,
so we have continued the
boarding school rule. There's
been a little bit of tweaks here
and there uh years ago when when
students left the boarding
school, no matter what, they
were not able to participate at
their new school like they went
back home and they were not able
to participate. We have changed
that where if they leave the
boarding school, they can go
back home and participate on the
sub-varsity level, and they
could play varsity in any sports
they did not do at the boarding
school.
School. So that has changed a
little bit, but the other
boarding schools we do have, we
have NIMI, um, we have Manal,
are the other two main boarding
schools that we have in the
state of New Mexico.
Thank you Madam Chair. That was
my question.
Thank you, Representative,
Representative Samoa.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for the presentation.
I feel like the two strike rules
too too harsh and too strong.
We, we don't get to just.
That one day, one day I'll
probably get thrown in jail for
for what I do,
but it's, it's very emotional
with your grandkids and your
kids playing and stuff and, but
no, it is a good rule, uh,
sometimes we tend to go
overboard, you know, and, and.
Things are said that that
shouldn't be said at those games
with kids and we've all seen
that.
Uh, my question is, Madam Chair,
and, uh, presenters.
Do we see pickleball coming into
the pitcher soon?
That
Um, let me explain first off the
uh Madam Chair, if I could
explain his comment on the two
strike rule, there is a little
bit of a misconception on the
two strike rule because we do
have parents that are
grandparents and they, and they
go, they get out of hand. Um, we
are still with our compete with
class initiative where they will
maybe be ejected themselves, but
that does not give everybody a
strike. So we still handle
individual cases. Um, the strike
will
Come when it's a huge fan base
or there's fighting in the
stands or there's derogatory
comments that are made. That's
where the strike will come in
and last year out of all of our
activities we have 14 sports
that I said and you know, many,
many games. We had 19 strikes
last year for the first year.
That's 19 too many, but we're
hoping it is less and not one
school had two strikes. So what
we saw is when a school did or a
parent fan base did
Get a strike that they really
calmed down and remembered why
they were there and so um we
really feel that this year we
haven't received one yet in 2
weeks. Start knocking on wood,
um, there, so we're, um, we're
really hopeful as far as
pickleball.
That has come forward along with
flag football along with
lacrosse and along with boys
volleyball, those are the four
that have come forward. However,
we do have a rule that 16
schools have to be able to
sustain a program in order for
it even to be an activity, and
those sports I just mentioned,
we do not have the support from
the schools to put it in place
so we're watching those
sports to see um where we are.
Boys volleyball is probably the
one that's closest. However, my
concern is for our schools when
it comes to Title IX, that right
now we're pretty good when it
comes to Title IX and within the
14 sports we had boys volleyball
and we've probably tilted the
the gender to a lot of the boys
participants. So if you add boys
volleyball, do you add girls
flag football, which is
Probably what needs to happen.
However, the schools do not have
funding and the buses and
everything to be able to sustain
two more sports right now. The
funding, especially
transportation is really, really
tough, um, in our schools and we
have coaches that are driving
buses and sometimes they can't
get there and that's one area
that until we get the
transportation, um, situated in
the state of New Mexico. There's
just nowhere to add any other
sports.
But pickleball is not one that
everybody has so far.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you for that answer. You know,
and when you talk about
transportation.
That really hits me because when
I was a kid.
I was born and raised on farms
and ranches.
And the reason I didn't
participate in sports as a kid,
as a child, was because my
mother didn't.
Did never, never got her
driver's license, so she never
drove publicly right on on
public roads and stuff.
We were too poor to afford.
The gas and a decent car that
was dependable to be back and
forth to the schools and.
Then my dad was always working
and it just, it just didn't play
out.
And I remember trying out for
the track team in junior high.
And I was at the lead of the
pack running and the guy behind
me kept telling me, slow down
and pace yourself, slow down and
pace yourself, and so I didn't,
I wound up not participating
even though I tried out for the
track team and the guy that was
telling me to pace myself, he
placed records in that junior
high that year. So I was
thinking I could have done
better than that but, but, uh,
there's a lot of children that
don't get that chance, you know,
and, and we all work.
I think to give them the chance,
but there's still some that fall
through the cracks and.
And it's gonna happen. It's,
it's just hard to accommodate
everybody. But thank you for
your work. Thank you for what
you do and.
And uh
I, I look forward to supporting
the schools in their activities
and what they do. Thank you,
Madam Chair and thank you,
presenter.
Thank you representative.
Representative Royal Caballero.
Thank you Madam Chair, and thank
you so much for your
presentation. Our paths have
crossed so many times, um, and,
and one of the, on your um.
Slide 10, page 5 on our handout,
one of the national facts that I
think is really important that
we need to emphasize and thank
you for emphasizing it is your
last item that says fewer
discipline problems.
Um, that was really evident, uh,
my son, and it's embarrassing to
him. I was one of those rowdy,
rambunctious parents that always
mothers and track and field
would always be at the um.
starting and ending, and then I
would embarrass him because I
would yell out.
Go, go, go and give his um
nickname that was only privy to
us. And when the coaches would
hear that or the other parents,
they'd come up and they'd say,
Are you sure he wants you to be
calling him Cle boy, which says
short for Celestinno but celeboy
and I didn't, I never would
think about that, Madam Chair.
It was just natural for me to be
yelling out there, um, but he,
we were in representative chair
Alcons.
Are my son played for Grant's
high school, both football and
was in um track.
And um this was said over and
over again amongst the parents'
mothers primarily that would
prepare their meals and so on.
that how important the sports
involvement was for their, um,
Children.
Because of the discipline, it
really helped single mothers.
Particularly with young men and
the discipline area and to keep
them focused and so sports and
military are usually associated
with instilling that discipline.
So thank you. I, I thank you.
There were quite a few things
you presented today, Madam
Chair, that I wanted to commend
you and that I had no idea you
were doing and um I'm, I'm very
impressed with all of your um.
Additional items like the
English Expo, the bowling,
education rising, and so on.
Those are really important and
it shows that you're directly
working in partnership, um.
With uh um.
A multitude of educational
groups and I think that's really
important because they all need
to be merged together.
And on the two strikes, um.
I in the district that I
represent, um.
There's a lot of sports
activities and um I know that
there were several circumstances
that stood out, um, that were
unfavorable in the way that
parents
Grandparents handled themselves
violently, um, during
Games and they were very poor
examples. So thank you for
putting that in because
As rambunctious as and involved
you want to be, um, you can't,
you can't cross that line. So I
think that's really important
and it also shows that we're
supposed to be demonstrating
discipline to our kids. And then
finally I just on another humor
note representative I've gone
might remember my father, who
was in his 90s, would love to
come up from here to see his
grandson play and all he could
remember was.
He couldn't remember names, but
he would say, how's that
quarterback friend of yours. How
is that tight end friend of
yours? How's that, you know, and
then he'd be giving them
guidance while he was sitting
there and remembering, so it's
important to have you around and
to have all of your programs
because they do truly involve
families. um, and that's what's
the most important. We want to
put aside the negative stuff but
really highlight um the positive
involvement.
Thank you so very much for all
you do. I don't have particular
questions. I just wanted to
commend you. Thank you very
much. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative B block.
Questions, please.
I don't care. I didn't have any
questions, but I appreciate you
for being here today. I think,
uh, you know, it's good to learn
a little more about what the
organization does and, and yeah,
I have a lot of cousins that
I've gone to their track meets
and basketball games and
everything, so it's good that
your organization is continuing
to uplift kids and also I, I
agree with you on the point
that.
There's a lot of people who are
like, oh, my kid's gonna be the
next Michael Jordan. Well, let's
start him out having fun, right?
That's what sports are supposed
to be about, so I appreciate the
uh the camaraderie that you guys
are building with this, and I
think that's a very good thing
to do. So I just want to thank
you so much and uh.
Keep up the great work. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative, uh,
Madam Vice Chair Pinto. Thank
you. Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee, thank
you for your presentation and
the work you do. The
Safety
They think it's a priority. I've
been to a couple of games where
we've had, um, even on the
reservation where we have the
state police actually present
and was enlightened to hear some
of the stories of some of the
competitions getting very um
high strung out there.
How, I mean, where does that,
um, because they have to be
paid.
Is there extra funding or how
does NMA, I mean the the
protocol in that sense of any
reports or anything because.
That distinguishment of um
Small venues.
And they talk about being unfair
when they talk about the
ticketing and who gets to get
in, especially when we talk
about the lines, first come,
first serve, those with
disabilities. There's a lot to
consider is that under your
purview or does the school, um,
the one that the uh the district
guard who handles that, um, for
the majority of the games is
this individual school and the
individual district, um, we take
ownership over the state.
Championships
Um, but however, the regular
season, the district games, the
district tournament games that
are under the purview of the
school. Um, we do have the only
rule that we have bylaw that we
have is to make sure that the
EMTs, the ambulances and the
community are aware that there
is a game, so if something does
happen to a student athlete or
or even a fan that they're
they're ready to go, um, but
other than that, as far as
security, police presence, that
is a school district.
Decision
And Madam Chairman, thank you.
The, um,
So the EMTs are notified, but
there's no uh guidelines saying
that they have to be within a 2
hour, um, you know, uh there
there's a facility within,
within that time or that they're
because I remember that we
actually at the football games,
the EMTs will be parked at the
end of the field unless they had
a call.
Um, that were in the area I
don't really see that anymore.
And, and that is, um, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
that is um mostly because of
cost.
And a lot of times with the EMTs
or at the end of the field is
because they had a kid playing
and they wanted to see the game,
so you would see that a lot in
the smaller communities where um
they would have that presence,
um, and but now with the cost
and and the there's not enough
of these, you know, EMTs that go
around. They really don't
usually sit somebody at a
football game, but they're aware
as they're doing their job,
they're aware of something going
on, but you still do have those
communities that the EMT is
there.
For the games and the thing that
we have to think about is you
see him at the varsity contest.
But we've got kids playing C
Team JV and, and we have
injuries there too, so we just
want to make sure that all these
kids are treated and make sure
they're, uh, there's an EMT or
somebody's available, um, an
athletic trainer, um, you know,
right now the legislators passed
CPR and AED last year, so all
our coaches are CPR and AED
trained. And so those are things
that we're trying to get with
coaches to make sure that our
kids are safe.
And Madam Chair, members of the
committee, the um costs for
these extra security measures,
the schools responsible for it?
Yes.
And so I just want to make the
committee aware of that because,
you know, in our rural areas
when you talk about
transportation, uh, because that
one game and there was actually
8 state police 24 state police
there along with the school
security and that was inside the
gym. I was like, and I think
most of the stuff happens
outside of the venues as far as
jurisdiction.
And
I'm understanding that some of
the schools do not have an
athletic director anymore funded
by some of the um uh school
districts which
So I went to uh try to go to
attend the cross country meeting
to Hachi. They had an MDOT signs
for special event and I don't
know if some of you ever been up
there, but it's up on a hill,
and it's a 60 right at the end
of that, it's a 65 mile per hour
speed zone limit.
And the they graded it. Um, I've
been to quite a few meets back
in the day, but this particular
one, when I went back to a 10,
we had people parking out on the
highway, crossing the four-lane
highway, um, it was, I was just,
I, I just had to go home cause I
couldn't, I could not.
I don't even know if they were
porta potties up there either.
So that planning and eliminating
if there was, I don't know.
There's if that particular
district eliminated the athletic
director for that school, but
that planning seemed to not be
very well thought out, um,
compared to other past events in
that same area for that same
event. So I'm very concerned
about where um
Why it's not, you know, the the
safety stuff and might just, I
don't think it's something you
can answer, probably just look
into it as we move forward.
Madam Chair, Madam Vice Chair,
um, I go around in the
regionals, we have school board
meetings where every school
board member and the
superintendents are part of
these regional meetings and in
fact yesterday I was at our
commission meeting and that was
one thing that I am putting on
the radar to talk about his
athletic directors, um, schools
that people don't realize the
that they have and you just
talked about safety, that's one
job to make sure we have porta
potties and that they're safe
and, and, um, a lot of athletic
directors are also teachers and
there and some of them are even
coaching or they're doing
activities and the job that they
are put or they're only given a
stipend to be an athletic
director. Nowadays, an athletic
director, athletic coordinator,
that's a full-time job in
itself. And uh we're gonna talk
to the school board members to
make sure that they're aware
that.
That is something that the
schools need to fund because of
liability, because of everything
that they offer these kids and
so it's on my radar to talk to
school board members about it.
Yes, because my understanding is
the school's actually kind of
buying insurance from you for
some of these events to take
place.
Is, is that my the the Madam
Chair, um, Madam Vice Chair,
the, the schools, um, are,
they're insured by New Mexico
Public School Insurance
Authority, and we're all in the
same, we're all in the same area
and the same boat on that, um,
but there is the Nysia now is
providing an insurance that, uh,
schools can buy for
Every student athlete, um,
before that they would have to
get insurance from their
parents, but now they're doing a
package where all our student
athletes at a school, if they
buy the package from NASA every
student athlete will be covered
and if the parents do have
insurance, then that's the
secondary insurance, so these
kids are really double covered
and so, um, a lot of school
districts have taken that
opportunity and it's we've
talked about it amongst our
athletic directors that we need
to get that out there because
it's a very good program for our
Kids and making sure that
everybody's insured.
Thank you. So, Madam Chair,
members of the committee, I
think.
At your next meeting, if since
you're all your school boys,
especially pertaining to the
athletics and the security that
those costs if they could bring
those forward so we kind of have
an idea because I'm even on the
education study committee, and I
don't recall us really talking
about it, even though we should,
and I think that might have been
the committee who came before,
um, but we didn't go into that
realm, I don't think about the,
the funding too much.
Uh, so, but I I want to make
sure that we're, um, you know,
the safety because.
Out in our area too, when some
of this escalates to a point
that jurisdictional boundary
becomes um the safety of the
students and the conflict is is
is something I.
It shouldn't, you know, it
didn't occur back in the day. I
remember how some of the games
and some of the things that were
said were not really taking that
uh.
Heavily. It was more a lighter
and a comical mood um for those
games because it was a very
interesting cause it was like in
med school at that time.
The um
Admissions for the tickets, you
said you guys only collect for
the uh state championship games,
but not the district games,
those, those go to the school.
So what some of the parents I
brought up, um, is, I know some
of the rule at schools they do
have the uniforms and stuff, but
some of our urban students, um,
said that they have to do
fundraising.
And with that is how are we
trying to make sure that there's
no favoritism in that sense, um,
especially for a student if they
can't afford to fundraise too
for that participation kind of
to be equal in in that sense.
Um, ironically, I just did a
presentation to a school board
as a, a, a school district. I'm
on Title IX and uniforms come
up.
Quite a bit because every single
student athlete should be
treated the same, and when you
get parent involvement in there
and some of them, some sports
get new uniforms because parents
are buying them and then others
do not. Our school districts do
a good job by, let's say every 4
years they're going to get new
uniforms and the varsity are
going to go down to the JV and
so on. It's when the outside
sources, the parents come in and
and buy things for certain
programs is where your Title IX
is tilting and.
Schools is out there, they
really need to make sure that
all kids across the board are
treated the same. Um, you
mentioned about, um, you know,
safety and the legislators. Yes,
I kind of go under the, we kind
of go under the radar because we
do not get state funding and,
and we, and we make sure it's
that way, you know, that, you
know, our schools need
operational dollars for other
things. So if I can sustain
athletics and activities, you
know, the NMAA without any help,
it, it works and we have been
able
To, but our schools do need that
help, and we just talked about
truancy, some legislators talked
to me a few years ago about
dropout rates, and the first
thing I said is we put, we put
money into drop route rates. We
put money into truancy and how
we're going to do that. It's
athletics and activities. That
is where we're gonna get our
kids to once they're hooked with
something their involvement at
school, they're going to stay in
school and that's what's really,
really important.
Um, Madam Chair, members,
because I don't recall ever
actually kind of seeing data
either from the public schools
or any of the presentations
through LDSC about how much of
the um students are
participating in sports and how
that correlation with those that
are dropping out or do have the
truancy problems if they're not
in participating within the
school, especially when we have
all these programs going on. So
I
I'll try to push a little bit
more on the um, for them.
The um
Ticketing and
This is where in my area because
we don't have internet and some
of the uh visiting um schools
came to to our area to get into
the games that they didn't know
there's not going to be
ticketing there, especially when
it comes to districts. Some
people don't go to games
regularly. It was me too at one
point, went to a game and
they're like, well, did you
already buy your ticket? And
I'll say, well, what do you
mean? So getting to the gate and
getting up there and getting
into the venue.
was not aware that you needed to
have a debit card, um, which
many of, uh, in my area, a lot
of people are unbanked, um, and
how do students get in, um,
knowing that they're not
unbanked, um, because there's
not student.
There's not a real ticketing
because no cash is exchanged now
and for every transaction, my
understanding, um, that there is
a $3 transaction fee. So yeah,
the ticket's $5 but you're
paying $8
I don't know if that's really
conveyed to some of our, our,
our people that are out there,
but that is not your handling,
that is the school's contract or
who who negotiates that
contract?
It is our handling when it comes
to state championships. So like
a first round basketball game
that would be our handling. The
regular season and all the other
games are the school's handling.
Um, when it comes to our state
championship, we will never, um,
and, and I've told my staff and
we haven't.
If we have a parent that has
come up that does not have a
credit card, we're letting them
in the game. I'm just, I'm just,
we will never have a, a person
stand out there.
Um, we try to tell everybody and
make sure that they know ahead
of time about we use what we
call GFA, the digital ticketing
and um, yes, there is a, so what
we did this last year because of
the fees, we had a $5 ticket and
a $10 ticket. We now have 77 and
12, but that encompass the fee
so we're not, you know, we're
not misleading people that, oh,
it's $5 and they go and it's,
it's $7 or $8 so we have done
that to try to help, but yes, it
is.
Just we have to continue to make
sure that we're educating the
public that everything's going
digital and the cash is not
being exchanged since COVID
nationwide, as you know, cash is
just not being exchanged in a
lot of these venues, but we need
to do a better job in getting
that word out, but I would tell
you that anybody who comes in
that does not have a credit
card, we have let them in the
game and state championships.
Now I don't know what they do
during regular season.
Yeah, and Madam Chair, members
of the committee.
Because that uh
One of the things too was the
the visiting and the hunting.
With the.
Uh, the capacity when they talk
about smaller venue was the
I don't know, is there a limit
on the amount of tickets you can
buy because I think at one venue
it sounded like they, I don't
know if it's the school or a
person bought 100 tickets and
which kind of takes a big and
then they're distributing or
whatever and I don't know how
that works, but is there a cap
and then so that the visiting
team does actually have an
opportunity um to to tend the
game.
So during the regular season in
district that once again that's
the, the school's decision and
how they do it, so it might be
whether it's Gallop McKinley
County schools, or that's a
decision now as far as state
championship, we have a 2030
$50.
50% rule where.
Pre-sale, the home team can only
sell by 30% of the tickets. the
away team gets 20% of the
tickets and that's for family
and and everybody makes sure
that they have it and then 50%
must go on sale on the day of
the game, and that's to
everybody and that's our state
championship rule, but I don't
know if the regular season, if
the schools are doing that
during the regular season.
OK, because that's what I say if
it's all digital, how do they
know where you're from.
Well, correct, correct. And so
the state championships, we
monitor, we now, we know gym
capacities, so we monitor them
and we will cut them off.
On certain links if we see that
it's, it's uneven or it's not
fair, so we have access to that,
so we are watching it on our
end, so the digital ticketing
has truly helped this issue
because we are too monitoring
it, so it's not somebody just
getting the tickets at the
school we're monitoring it on
the backside as to how many
tickets are sold, making sure
everybody can get in the game,
so.
Thank you, thank you for that.
And this is probably more of a
comment than uh for you to come
back on about the transgender
and some of that coming in their
discussions, and I'm not sure
what.
Where to go with that either,
but just letting you know that's
something that's been.
posed to me about um where it's
headed, so we'd sure appreciate
some of your input on that too
as we move forward. But thank
you, thank you for your
presentation.
Thank you, Representative
Zamora, you had a question,
Madam Chair, my question was
answered. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative.
I just wanted to thank you for
your presentation and thank you
for your hard work.
And um really appreciate the
character development and the
life skills that you implement
in this program. It's very and
representative Zamora, just want
to remind you that back in the
day there was no fighting in the
stands.
So be careful when you go to
games. Don't get too angry.
Thank you, thank you so much.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
And uh lunch is sponsored by
Borrell College, and I believe
there's enough for all of us,
Madam Chair, um, before we break
for lunch on a point of personal
privilege, may I?
Sure. Um, I'm privileged today,
uh.
Which rarely happens to have our
lieutenant governor of my tribe
present with us today and I'd
like to acknowledge and
introduce him,
Mr. Richard Moreno, if you could
please stand, this is the
lieutenant governor of our
tribe, the Pito Manzotiwari
Pueblo of San Juan de Guadalupe,
so I'm so honored to have him
here are unfortunately our
governor had a little bit of a
an accident that I wish all of
us will have a prayer for him.
Uh, he hurt his back and broke
it in 7 different spinal areas.
And so he's in a lot of pain
right now and so the Kaika and
his mother went to take care of
him, help care for him, so
otherwise we'd be in full force
here today, but thank you so
much for for being here and um.
Representing us, thank you,
Madam Chair for this point.
Thank you. OK, we'll take a
lunch break and I believe
there's enough for all of us in
this room. Thank you. We will
reconvene at 1:30 with an update
from
Any
EVA.
