Mhm
to see if Christina comes we'll,
we'll start.
Well, you can just let her know
that we started.
Good morning, Mr. Chair, members
of the community. My name is uh
David Archuleta. I'm the
executive director with the
Education Retirement Board.
And to my right is Mr. Jacob
Mall, our general counsel with
the agency. Uh, we've got a
short, uh, uh, presentation for
you today that includes a couple
of, a handful of updates uh
regarding the organization and
then uh some proposed
legislation that we'll be asking
for your support for this next
year in the form of two bills,
some cleanup language and uh a
new section of law that we would
be asking you guys to to endorse
today. Um, just briefly, that's,
that's a list of, uh, those are
the discussion items that we
have for you. So if I could ask
you to turn to you want to get a
little closer.
Yes, sir. OK.
If, if I could ask you to turn
to page 3, we just got our
actuarial evaluation update last
week. Um, it's still in draft
form, it'll be presented to the
board in December, but these are
basically the official results
of this. Uh, there isn't going
to be anything changing with
regard to the any of the
financial information presented
here. So some really good news,
I'll jump to the punch line
here. Our funding period has
been reduced to 22 years. Uh,
just 4 short years ago, it was
at an infinite stage, then it
was reduced to 46 years.
Then it dropped down to 33
years. Uh, last year we were
reporting 26 years.
And now we're down to 22 years.
Um, that is the result of
several changes and reforms that
have taken course over the
number of years, right? Since
2013, the, the changes that have
taken effect, along with the
increase in employer
contributions that you all
supported just a few years ago.
Uh, that's put us on a path
toward getting to 100% or having
100 pennies for every dollar
that we owe sometime into the
future. Another couple of quick
updates that I think you might
be interested in knowing is the
number of active membership has
grown by nearly 1400 members, so
Uh, more new teachers in the
system, uh, that we have going
for this next year. We also have
growth in the number of retirees
and beneficiaries. You can see
that that grew by almost 1000
members this last year, retiree
payroll, the amount of money
that we distributed to our
membership, uh, was in excess of
1.3 billion while we were
approaching 1.3 billion last
year, it grew by about $50
million over between last year
and this year. The average
benefit is just under $2200 a
month. I'm sorry, just at $2200
a month, growth of almost 600
dollars compared to the previous
year. But if you look at member
contributions, what active
employees are playing along with
what the um the the local
administrative units, the
employers are paying, the
combination of those two numbers
grew by almost $150 million
meaning that we're gathering,
we're collecting more money off
of the payroll that's been
reported to us this last year,
which was more than 315 $315
million growth compared to the
previous year. And again, uh,
the funded ratio at 64%, nearly
65%, uh, but a reduction.
in that funding period. So we're
expected to reach that 100%
funded status, and few for fewer
years.
If you turn to the next page,
this is a photo of the building
that we've been talking to you
about for quite some time now.
Uh, we broke out on this
building, uh, back in January,
uh, the construction remains
underway. This is a photo taken
from the place about 2 weeks
ago. Uh, there's been
substantial improvements since
that time. Uh, we've run into a
little bit of a hiccup, uh, with
the city of Santa Fe. Uh, right
now we're we're trying to
negotiate with them, uh, right,
there's a belief that the
ordinance that they have
applied.
to state property were in
disagreement with that as a
state agency, uh, the
construction industries division
applies and they basically
approved the plans and our
construction of this facility,
um, but we're having a, a
conversation with the folks over
at the city to hopefully move
past that, otherwise we're we're
stuck without water for some
time.
If you turn to the next page,
uh, on page 5,
just briefly, uh, really good
news to report on our investment
front, uh, we earned an 8.64%
overall return on investment
this year, slightly below our
policy index, um, but overall,
you can see that we've been over
the target, our bogey of 7% for
the one.
5, 10, and 30 year period, we
fall under for that three-year
period in terms of the
investments, uh, but overall, we
continue to outperform most of
our peers in the pension space
of investment funds in excess of
a billion dollars. If you turn
to page 6, this just shows the
growth in our trust fund balance
and obviously that's a
combination of those
contributions being made by
members along with the employers
combined with our investment
returns that has translated into
that $17.1 billion.
who were reporting at the end of
this fiscal year, uh, the last
report that we received, which I
believe was as at the end of
August showed that we're up at
about $17.5 billion. And again,
that's all contributing to that
increased funding period that
we're experiencing right now.
And then if you turn to the next
page, uh, I'll just briefly go
over some of these and I'll ask
our general counsel to fill in
any of the blanks when I after I
summarize this information, uh,
I, I think I mentioned the last
time I was making a presentation
to you, we'll be asking for some
support for a bill. Uh, there's
nothing spectacular about what
we're asking to do. It doesn't
change the needle in terms of
our funded policy or what we
give in terms of the cost of
living adjustment, any of the
major things that we think may
be popular, but there's some
necessary technical language
corrections that need to be
Uh, included under the statutes
that have been identified by our
general counsel and our legal
folks to match up with their
business practices. And the
first is an amendment to Section
22-11-5-1, and there's just some
language changes here.
Basically reflecting the board
members when uh will not receive
a single gift value in excess of
$50 and you can see the
technical correction there, not
exceeding it, and in the
aggregate value, um, not a big,
uh, not a big change, but, uh,
it
Technically a necessary
correction as identified by our
investment, I'm sorry, our
illegal folks.
If you look at the second change
that we would be requesting
under 22-11-11, we would be
adding unclaimed member
contributions to the list of
items, uh, that would remain in
the fund.
Uh, in the educational
retirement fund, and then we'll
talk a little bit about how that
ties back to the second bill
that we'll be requesting support
for. So we'll be requesting uh
support for a bill that, uh, Ms.
Voskas has drafted up for us. It
changes 6 of the items and then
we'll be asking for a separate
bill. Uh, this way one if the
second bill doesn't pass, it
doesn't derail, uh, this part of
it, um, which is necessary uh to
meet up with our business
practices again.
If you turn to the next page
under section 22-11-24, um,
this, in this situation here,
uh, we're asking to further
clarify and define this as
being, uh, you know, basically
we're looking at the average 5
years, uh, to calculate your
pension earnings, uh, the
average of your highest 5 years.
Will this specifies and it
matches up with our business
practices and our rules to say
the 5 years a contributory
employment, meaning the member
employer has made contributions
through the last business day.
Of the 60th month of the
contributory employment or if
the member is under contract,
the member and the employer who
make contributions for 5 years
to do the last business day that
the member can provide services
under the contract, and
sometimes there's like a
technical correction or a
technical uh question that comes
into play whenever we're
calculating those final
benefits, and there's a lot of
back and forth between the
member and our organization,
that they work 16 full days into
the quarter because we calculate
it based off of quarters and not
necessarily months. So this is
gonna
make sure that we uh match up.
Capturing 5 years as opposed to
nearly 5 years. Um, so again,
this is some language that has
been proposed to to address that
situation.
On section 4.
This does not change the cost of
living adjustment, it's
referenced as part of the cost
of living adjustment, uh, but
it's based on the funded ratio,
so some technical correction,
and you can see the language
there, benefits of a member who
is on a disability status in
accordance with this language.
Basically what happens is if a
member is disabled and they
retire under disability, they
will keep that disability, cost
of living adjustment, even after
they reached the normal age of
retirement, which I guess
technically you can see it as
being if they
that normal age of retirement
than with the disability
retirement, cost of living
adjustment still apply. In our
view, it does, and that's been
the business practice that we've
had. So it's a slightly higher,
uh, cost of living adjustment
than it is for regular members,
but if they, if they retired
under disability, they would
maintain that disability
retirement moving forward. And
that's been our business
practice, and simply we're just
uh matching up the language to,
to that practice.
On section 5,
Uh, so this, this part applies
to the folks, uh, that are
purchasing service credit and
making sure that we match this
up because there's one section,
I believe it's for the military
folks that were left, they're
required to pay their full lump
sum within 60 days while other
members that are purchasing
service credit have 90 days. So
we're changing, I'm not sure at
what point that got lost in
translation, whenever this,
whenever our statute was
amended, uh, many years ago to,
to reflect that, but basically
it's changing that to make sure.
that they have, uh, as much time
as as anyone else, uh, for ait
that service credit.
And then lastly,
We have the news, oh.
Under section 6 or under item 6,
section 22-1155. This would be a
new section of language, and
this would allow our, our
statute is very specific in who
allows, who it allows us to
communicate member information
to.
Um, basically it's to the member
to their beneficiary. Uh, it's
very specific as to who may uh
request this information, but
this allows us to transfer
information to the public
employee's retirement
information and for them to
reciprocate and transfer
information to us so that we can
identify some of those members
that have perhaps fallen through
the cracks, uh, as an example,
if someone started in state
government 30 years ago had
earned a few months' worth of
service credit. They've gone on,
now they've retired from the
Educational Retirement Board and
they've completed.
for going that they were part of
um they retired from er and now
they, they've got some service
credits sitting out there with
the educational retirement Act.
This will allow us to bounce
some information off of Perra to
identify these members, the best
address that we have for them in
order to uh update and contact
them, uh, so they can draw on
their retirement.
And then the last section of
this bill, I'll ask uh Mr.
Malta, to discuss this and uh to
talk to you because he's been
working a lot on this uh a fair
bit and given the opportunity to
speak.
Thank you all, chair.
So this new section is really
triggered, uh, regarding when
there is a requirement for the
educational retirement Board to
pay a benefit.
Uh, so this comes up in one of
two ways, uh, either a member is
active or inactive, uh, they've
reached a certain age where IRS
requires them to start taking a
disbursement on their
retirement, um, but we are not
able to contact them.
Uh, we don't have, uh, ways to
pay them. We don't have ways to
contact them. The other trigger
is when a member deceases, uh,
and we are trying to get a hold
of their estate or if they have
a beneficiary who we don't have
good contact information, that
is also the trigger. So in this
particular section, uh, that's
what we're looking at. And so we
are describing first, uh, what
is a member's accumulated
contributions, uh, this is going
to be.
that is being accrued throughout
the entirety of their membership
through the ERB.
Uh
As we go through, we'll see in
section A1.
Uh, this is, uh, that first.
Indication of what we're looking
at, uh, that the member has a
balance in their account with
money that is required to be
dispersed.
Uh, the board has notified the
has attempted to notify the
member at their last known
address, uh, and if we have not
heard back within 60 days of
sending that letter, uh, that
would then make this account go
into the unclaimed member
contribution status, and then
that second category as I just
indicated, uh, is when we have a
member who has deceased, uh, we
are trying to contact their
state, uh, or beneficiary if
they had one listed, uh, in
order to pay them. So both of
the triggers here
we're required by IRS
guidelines, uh, or our own
statutes to issue a payment, uh,
we don't have the required
information to issue that
payment so we're searching for
them.
So then the second section that
we get to here is once we have
attempted to, we have been
required to pay something. We
have attempted to contact them.
What happens then?
So at this point, uh, B1, uh,
Makes very clear, uh, that
These contributions
Uh, are going to be kept in the
fund. Uh, they're going to be
used to invest and reinvest, uh,
for the benefit of all of our
members any beneficiaries as
well as the fund in total, uh,
and the two specifies, uh, that
the member's account shall be
closed and no further interest
shall accrue on the member's
unclaimed benefits.
What this essentially does is it
pauses the member's account. It
takes a snapshot of their
account at that time, uh, all
moneys that have been
contributed all interest that
has been earned on that member's
account will be frozen, uh, and
if any uh member shows up, the
estate or beneficiary shows up
to claim that money, they are
entitled to it. They have a
right to that money. Uh, this is
just taking a freeze frame and
stopping interest from
recruiting on some of these
accounts.
Uh, as there are times where it
has been many years, uh, if not
longer before we can locate
somebody to make the required
payment.
Going into to see.
Of this new section, uh,
Yeah, this is mostly just
identifying what all of the
monies are, uh, and
That any money that is
Either unclaimed member
contributions, interest,
dividends, gifts, bequests,
rents, income from investment of
the fund and other money does
not specifically provided for
otherwise in our statutes, uh,
will be kept, uh, as part of the
educational retirement fund.
Uh, finally, the, uh, is a
definition, uh, for unclaimed
member contributions.
Again, just identifying that
these member contributions, uh,
include any interest that was
earned, uh, before the account
was closed, uh, as provided for
under section B.
Uh, and that they have not been
claimed by the member at that
time. So again, all of these
contributions and interests are
the members or the estate of the
member or the beneficiary.
Uh, what this new bill does, uh,
is it gives us a procedure to
contact uh the estate or the
member or the beneficiary, uh,
freezes the account and provides
for the ERB to continue to
invest those funds or reinvest
those funds, uh, for the benefit
of other members, beneficiaries,
uh, and the fund in total, uh,
but clarifies that if a member
or a state or beneficiary shows
up, um, that they are entitled
to those monies.
Uh, and they would then get them
once they fill out the proper
paperwork and give us an avenue
to pay.
And Mr. Chair, members of the
committee, uh, just for
clarification purposes, this
came about as we're looking at,
uh our actuarial report, you
know, we account for every
single member that we have.
They're their own personal
liability. So when you, we
report these numbers, you know,
it's all 170,000 members. Those
people that are paid into the
system, those people that have
earned credit, those people that
are receiving a benefit. Uh, so
it's a combination of all those
things. This will allow us to
account for those members
differently if we've tried to
make outreach and contact to
them. We have not heard anything
from them.
Again, there's still being
entitled, they and their
beneficiary will still be
entitled to the money. It's
just, we're not going to
continue to compound the
interest on that, uh, moving
forward.
And Mr. Chairman, members of the
committee at Stanford, any
questions or we stand for any
questions.
Thank you. Thank you very much,
members.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you
for the presentation. I'm gonna
start with
Proposed legislation. 3.
Between the current language and
the suggested change. What am I
missing? Cause I only see must
changing to shell.
The original language already
has contributory employment.
So what
Different other than that word.
Yeah.
Uh, Mr. Chair, and
Representative, uh, the bolded
language is also new, uh, so it
was a little difficult to fit on
the slide exactly where that
fits.
as you pointed out, there's one
word that is being changed to
must, uh, and then that bolded
language right underneath, uh,
is all new language.
Thank you. I thought the molded
language was
Mr. Cha justplanatory. I didn't
realize it was proposed
language.
Thank you. The other question, I
guess, is about
Um
The new section in the separate
bill.
Mr. Chair,
Um
Section A, you're setting a
limit of 60 days where we just
in the previous page, changed to
60 day to a 90 days. Why are we
not being consistent and making
it 90 days.
Mr. Chair, this is already after
it's been a period of time, we
haven't heard from this member
in quite some time. So we're
trying to, we're giving them.
The, the previous, the previous
section is for the purchase of
service credit. So we're giving
them a longer period of time to
get that everything together in
order for this, uh, in this, in
this particular section, I'm not
sure if it relates back to
Uh, why would we have a random
60 days. It's not, OK.
Mr. Chair, Madam Representative,
so just to clarify the, the 90
days that we were talking about
in the other section, that's
where I remember to gather up
all the money to pay for service
credit.
Uh, so part of the issue with
that language.
That was there is that it
required a single lump sum, uh,
made it very difficult for
individuals to buy service
credit. So, just to answer that
piece of it and then going into
the 60 days, uh, this is, uh,
the
Very similar language to what
Perra has, uh, in their rules,
uh, so they provide for this
essentially same function that
we are providing in this new
bill, uh, but they provided in
rules. We look at the 60 days,
uh, as an appropriate time or a
few different reasons as
Director Archuleta said, often
it's been quite a while, uh,
since
We've either lost contact with a
member, uh, or a member has
deceased and we did not learn of
their death.
Uh, and so this is giving us a
more defin definite period, uh,
with which to reach out to them.
Hopefully, members are keeping
their contacts up to date. Uh,
we never get into this issue at
all. Uh, this only occurs when
we've lost contact with a member
or we are not notified, uh, of
the death of a member.
Uh, in the 60 days, uh, is
essentially pulled.
From the per rule, uh, that
mirrors what we're attempting to
do here in statute.
Mr. Chair, thank you. So,
Where is it specified? What
attempts to contact have been
made prior to this coming into
play.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Madam
Representative, uh, up until
this point, uh, we have, we
would not have made attempts to
contact them, uh, because there
was nothing that we were
required to do at ERB.
Uh, where this, where this
trigger is, is that we are
required to pay something, uh,
as I said, for the, for the
member, whether they're active
or inactive.
Uh, that is when there's a
required disbursement by the
IRS, which means a member has to
take a disbursement or they have
to pay penalty on that.
Uh, and then for a deceased
member, uh, the only way we
generally find out that a member
has been deceased is when the
estate, uh, or beneficiary
contacts us to let us know, uh,
sometimes that takes several
years for the estate to figure
out that they're
Uh, deceased loved one actually
had an account, uh, and where to
go for that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
I understand what triggers it.
It just seems 60 days from the
first attempt to contact to
declare it frozen and
unreachable. Seems like a fairly
short amount of time. But next
question, what, how many are we
talking about? How many member
accounts would this apply to?
Mr. Chair and Representative
Figuero, so right now we have uh
a section of our member services
group that is dedicated to, it's
called the inactive unit. So
they are attempting to get a
hold of members whose accounts
are dormant every single day.
Uh, on average, we send out
probably 4 or 5000 letters, uh,
every 2 months to these members
when they reach that age of 72
where they required minimum
distribution age.
Asking them, you know, you're
letting them know that, hey,
your account is dormant, you
know, you need to make this
distribution or you've got some
money sitting here. A lot of
times we don't hear from these
members.
Uh, wouldn't surprise you to
find that out. We do show there,
you know, refunds, we refund
anywhere between $40.50 million
dollars every year. Uh, we go
through a number of
reimbursements, probably about
1200, uh, every two months, but
ultimately, this just allows us
to account for that, to say, OK,
we've sent you a notice, um, but
in officially here, we're no
longer gonna be a uh
accumulating additional
liabilities associated with your
account after the 60 days.
Typically, these people would
have
You know, hadn't been
contributing or responding to us
for a longer period of time than
just the 60 days.
But I would imagine if you were
to receive a a letter indicating
that you have some money sitting
out there, uh, or your
beneficiary does, it's probably
likely that you're gonna contact
us to say, you know,
Ready to
Accept payment whenever you're
ready to pay it.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Director. Well,
You made reference to if years
down the road the member or
beneficiary of the member come
back and say make their claim,
it will have been frozen at the
60-day point, no more interest
accrued. So,
Next question, how often does
that happen years down the road.
Mr. Chair, Representative
Figuero, right now it doesn't
happen. So we're not, we're not,
we're not doing that. So I, we
can probably go back and look to
see how many people this would
apply to in any given year. It's
not a large number of, of
individuals, but um right now,
it doesn't occur.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Very well, thank you, Senator
Neighbor.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
I'd like to look at the one
bill, the, the larger of the two
first and then we'll get to the
second one.
On page 12.
The, uh, language at the bottom
of the page.
If a
Teachers on disability and
during their disability period
up to the time that they would
otherwise
After retire, reached the age of
60.
Um, you said they're entitled to
a
An adjustment that may be an
excess of what the regular
members receive.
Mr. Chair, uh, Senator, that is
correct. So the retirement, the
cost of living adjustment for,
uh, disability retirements this
last year, I believe was 2.1%
and for
Virtually everyone else, it was
1.68%. So it's a, it's a slight
adjustment factor, and I can't
recall it off the top of my
head. Uh, but it's a, it's a
slightly different adjustment.
Well, Mr. Chair, maybe I can
understand the logic between
having a higher rate for, for
those on disability during that
time period, but
I'm not sure I buy the argument
with
Once they become
Of the age that they would
otherwise retire, I don't know
why you would distinguish
between a regular member and a
member who originally retired
because of disability. It seems
to me that it ought to be the
same across the board for all
retirees under that plan, that
are 68, 60 years of age and
older, and there should be no
distinction as to the cause of
your retirement.
Could you explain why there's,
why, why you'd wanna continue to
have two different rates. Mr.
Chair, Senator and Ibert as my
general counsel assisting my
ear. It's basically, you know,
they're taking a lower payout.
They retire under disability,
their, their pension is lower
than a normal retiree, but their
cost of living, Mr. Chair, is
gonna be the same.
Because the cost of living
adjustment.
Uh, cost of living for all of us
is gonna be the same.
So why,
so
right now the, the, the law is
already set so that they
already, they are already
receiving the higher I still
living adjustment today.
But basically, this would allow
it to continue after they reach.
Uh, the, the normal retirement
age, so it would just
That the disability, the cost of
living adjustment that applies
to them when they first retire
would continue throughout the
life of their retirement versus
reverting to a lower amount.
Um, as you would with the normal
retiree.
I guess if you want to do that,
it seems to me if I were a
regular teacher, I might be a
little, a little concerned why,
why my uh colleague next door is
getting a little bit higher cost
of living adjustment when we're
both the same age or whatever.
Um, but
That's not my, my fight.
The, the next bill, uh,
Concerns me greatly.
We have on our books an
unclaimed property uh statute. I
don't know if, if uh if you're
exempt from it or not, it's been
a while since I read it, but
The unclaimed Property Act.
Has significant
Procedures and significant
protections for
Anyone who has property that's
unclaimed, deemed abandoned, and
requires uh
Industry
Including government to go
through a variety of of steps in
order to, uh, uh, in essence,
uh, cause that money to
ultimately cheat to the state.
And the concern raised by
Represent Figueroa, uh, 60 days,
uh, uh, is certainly short, and
if you wanted to
Terminate somebody's account,
you could very easily do it
under this legislation were it
to pass. Um, and so that causes
me uh some concern. I know you
may have procedures that, that
go well beyond that and, and you
try to
Turn over every rock.
Before you, you engage in this
process, but, but we already
have statutes on the book to, to
deal with some of this, so I'm,
I'm, I'm very concerned about.
The, uh, I'm, I'm very concerned
about the efforts that are set
forth, if this were to become
statute, that you would have to
engage in to get to that point.
And it doesn't come close to
anything that's in the current
unclaimed Property Act, and, and
so, um, I would be very, uh,
Hesitant to
When much support to, to build
like this. I, I would lend
support to a bill that
ultimately allows you to uh
having gone through a, a
rigorous process.
Of having that money staying
with the uh retirement system
and be part of the, the corpus,
if you will.
I don't object to that aspect of
it.
But the procedures leading up to
it, I think are woefully
inadequate, and, and I would
just, uh, uh, say that, you
know, we have statutes on the
books and unless you're exempted
from it, uh, they, they provide
for significant uh
Protection to, to our citizens
and to people like this that uh
would be forfeiting something
because
This bill says that uh once
Once you go through your
process,
60 days.
Send out a notice, certified
mail.
Get it returned undeliverable.
On page 2, line 12.
Once it's determined and claimed
the member's account shall be
closed and no further interest
shall accrue. Um, and, and
basically if you close the
account.
That person
I'm not sure would have a right
to, to get their account
reinstated. There's nothing here
that indicates that.
That account's closed, it's,
it's gone. That money goes into
the corpus.
And uh then over on page 3,
it's not subject to any form of
garnishment, collection,
execution, or transfer. That
tells me that it's gone forever.
So, um,
I, I would be
I would be very hesitant to uh
Uh, do anything with this, and
Uh, I would
Encourage you to look at the
unclaimed Property Act and and
If uh, if you're not exempt from
it, uh, maybe use that
procedure, which already exists.
then just have a bill that
simply says that if you go
through those procedures and
that money
Continues to stay in the uh
corpus of the retirement Act and
does not che to the state of New
Mexico.
Which I think is your real.
Intent and purpose, Mr. Chair,
Senator and I, maybe, maybe
there's a little confusion. So
we're not, we're not proposing
that we don't provide the member
to access to their account at
some point in time in the future
if they show up. It's that we,
they would no longer continue to
earn interest on that account
moving forward. So if we've
notified this member that they
have an account sitting out
there, and they ignore that and
3 years go down the road,
instead of earning interest on
that account to have a greater
benefit or a greater balance
some point in the future.
They wouldn't be eligible for
that additional amount. We're
talking.
Probably a small fraction of the
overall benefit, uh, but the
account, they would still be
eligible to receive the, the
benefit that had been accrued up
until that point in time. So
we're notifying you and or we're
notifying the beneficiary, uh,
or the estate and nothing is
done about that.
As, as, as Jacob mentioned, it's
basically freezing the account.
They're just no longer earning
interest on top of that, but the
account would still be available
and they would still have access
to it.
And Mr. Chair, Senator and I
were just to uh
Look at that, uh, B2, uh, where
it says that the member's
account shall be closed, no
further interest shall accrue.
Uh, that's what director
Archuleta is saying as, as the
snapshot of the account.
Uh, but if you go further, uh,
it goes on to state that
provided that the member or
beneficiary or the estate of the
member may apply at any time to
receive an amount equal to the
member's previously determined
unclaimed member contributions,
including interest earned. So
they're always going to be
entitled to that snapshot, that
is their money, uh, we're just
holding on to it until we get
payment instructions and the
right person coming forth.
Uh, one of the other points that
you made, Senator Nibert, is,
uh, regarding, uh,
The states, uh,
Unclaimed laws, uh, all of the
funds that are held under the
Educational retirement Board are
constitutionally protected as
well as protected under our
statutes.
Uh, so this is clarifying a
little bit.
Uh, in case there was any doubt
from the constitutional
protections as well as the other
statutes that the money
generated by the fund for the
fund stays in the fund.
Uh, this is allowing us to make
sure that there's no confusion
that we can continue to invest
member funds until they are
claimed.
Uh, and as Director Archuleta
said, the 60-day notice is
really just telling them, if you
don't get back to us within 60
days, your account will no
longer accrue interest. You are
still going to be entitled to
that account, no matter when you
show up, if a member, uh, uh, a
state shows up and says it was
20 years ago that my loved one
died, they can still collect
that money. Um, that's always
going to be the members' money.
Uh, we're just holding on to it
until there's someone to pay.
Mr. Chair, why do you then say
in line 18 of page 2, the
member's accounts shall be
closed.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Neibert,
uh, it's an administrative
closure internally, uh,
essentially, we, we will tag the
uh account as a code that says
unclaimed member contribution,
uh, that is in our system just
an indication that that account
should no longer accrue
interest.
But Mr. Chair, it's more than
just administrative matter,
it'll be a statute that says the
member's account will be closed.
That tells me that account no
longer exists.
I
Leave it
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator and I
were, uh, you know, certainly
the way that uh the intent is
and what we believe is captured
both with the entirety of that
section is there's always going
to be that money, whether it's
the account itself is physically
closed, the money is still
there, uh, and that's where the
rest of that section comes in
that a member or the estate or
the beneficiary at any time can
come forward and collect that
money. So the money definitely
doesn't just disappear, go into
the ether. Um, there's always
going to be a snapshot of that,
however, because there's no
interest accruing, there's no
contributions being made to the
account. Uh, there's no reason
for the account to remain
active.
Uh, because nothing's happening
to it. So we're taking the
snapshot showing what was owed
to the member at that time of
the closing of the account.
And then we're holding that
money and investing it,
reinvesting it, and then if
anybody shows up, we will always
have a snapshot of what that
account was at the time of
closure, and they are entitled
to that money.
Uh, so we believe
As it's written as a whole, uh,
We believe it's clear that the
money is owed to the member or
the estate or the beneficiary,
it is always owed to the member
of the beneficiary or the
estate, and they can collect it
at any time, uh, once they reach
out to us or they respond to our
letter.
Mr. Chair.
I read if the account's closed.
And granted
And go back and get what was
owed.
But what about future?
Payments that were to be made to
that individual.
Uh, Mr. Chair, there's, there's
no mechanism to pay them
anymore.
Mr. Jeri, Senator Neibert, uh,
I think that's a
There doesn't need to be an
account active and open, but
there's still be to still be a
required payment. Uh, we would
know what is owed the account
doesn't go away, uh, it's just
toggled as uh unclaimed property
in our system.
Uh, so it's not that the account
is erased, uh, or it goes away,
uh, it's just set to a new
status. Uh, that status will
have the snapshot in there. Uh,
there won't be any other
payments until somebody comes
forward and then we're gonna, at
that point,
Uh, in most scenarios, we'll be
refunding all of the unpaid
contributions and interest at
that time, uh, it's possible
under the A1, where a member is
required to start taking a
disbursement, uh, they didn't
realize it that once we find out
about that person, uh, we may be
either doing a full refund, uh,
to them, uh, or they may be
doing payments from that, if
that occurs, uh, then
We would
I believe essentially turn it
back to uh not necessarily an
active status but a payment
status. Uh, so to speak, so.
In either direction, whether
it's a member who's required to
take a disbursement for the
estate beneficiary or uh another
member coming to collect this.
They're always going to know
what is in the account, what is
owed to them, uh, and it's just
a matter of them providing their
form of payment and instructions
to pay for us to accomplish
that. So there should never be
an issue of somebody coming
forward saying I am the rightful
person to inherit this, to
receive this, uh, and this is
what I'm owed, that we believe
is accounted for in that latter
half of the B2, uh, that they're
always going to be entitled to
that.
Well, the latter half of BQ only
have, only pertains to
Moneys that have previously been
determined and claimed, not
future uh entitlement to their
retirement benefits.
Mr. Chan, Senator, I, I believe
that's the same. Again, it's
just so that that
Liability doesn't continue to
grow.
At no point would we deny a
member what they've either
contributed them or their
estate.
So I, I'm trying to think of a
way around the whole closed
idea. I know that you're
thinking, hey, it's closed, but
we're not trying to prevent a
member from having access or
saying, OK, now that you, it's
been so long, and we sent you a
notice after 60 days, you're no
longer gonna be eligible to
receive this. It's just, it's no
longer gonna continue to accrue
interest growing or liabilities.
And Mr. Chair, Senator and I
were maybe one other bit of
information, uh, at the point
where either of these sections
are being triggered.
The only thing going into a
member's account would be
interest. They're not
contributing, uh, they're,
they're not working, they're not
earning anything. Uh, so at the
time where one of these sections
is triggered, uh, they're,
they're likely not adding
anything to that account, uh,
other than the passive interest
that is being generated uh
through the fund, uh, and that's
what we are attempting to cut
off here is, uh, once we give
them the notification that they
need to
Also what to do with the money.
No more interest will accrue
after that point.
But up to that point,
essentially that's the only
thing going into the account.
There's nothing else that's
being accumulated, uh, or
generated in that individual
member's account.
But, but Mr. Chair, the, the
member is not interested, I
mean, a little bit interested in
interest.
But primarily the members
interested in getting their
monthly payment from
Uh, the retirement fund.
And if
If the statute says that that
member's account is closed, and
I understand you guys may have a
different interpretation, but it
tells me that that account's
closed. It does not exist
anymore.
There's no mechanism to pay that
person.
And I'm suggesting that you
probably ought to rework some of
this language to make sure that
that's not what occurs because
if that occurs, you're gonna
have a lot of angry folks that
came back from Tahiti and says,
where's my next check?
Um, but I'll move on. On page 3,
line 5, you're exempting the
monies from garnishment
collection, execution or
transfer, and I'm not sure.
That's a good policy either. Um,
you, you may have
Have, uh
Uh, parties that, uh, should be
entitled to that.
Through, uh, uh, some core
mechanism and that may be an
ex-spouse, it may be, uh,
children, it may be otherwise,
so, uh, I, I'd look at that
language and see if that's
really what you wanna do. Um,
but again,
I would be, uh,
Very hesitant, notwithstanding
your explanations about some of
the language you've employed
because I, I think it could take
these places that you don't want
to be.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Well, thank you, Senator.
Representative Borego.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, Mr.
Archuleta, and uh gentlemen, um,
I concur with um Senator
Neibert, I mean, I, and I'm glad
that uh Greg is in the room also
because you said you mirrored
the language that's in the para
um, and I, you know, I, I look
at it a little different um
perspective, and I guess I have
to ask the question. So when you
freeze that account,
Essentially, there's no interest
being generated on that money,
so that's been sort of
Put into uh where, where is that
going? I mean, is it going into
a dormant account or
Mr. Chairman Representative
Borego would remain in the fund.
It would in the fund. Now, is
that money drawing interest as
it remains in the fund. It is,
right?
For some reason we're penalizing
the employee who's worked.
25 to 30 years in order to gain
that pension.
And I mean, I, I really think
that we need to look at the
language and possibly rework it,
and not just for ERB for Para as
well, because if that's being
done, then in a sense, I mean,
there are extenuating
circumstances in people's lives
that
60 days, even if you default on
a loan or your home.
The bank is not gonna throw you
out of your home in 3 months or
2 months. I mean, it's just, it
just seems, um,
You know, very sort of the
language is
We could, we could work around
that. There's no appeal process.
That's another thing. So, let's
say I was out of the country for
2 months and I came back and the
letters were at my home, but I
didn't respond.
There's nothing in here that
says I can appeal that, that.
Situation.
And so I think that there should
be some sort of mechanism in
there that would allow
That retiree to
You know,
Hey, hey, I was out of the
country for 2 months.
And I got this letter and I
didn't, you know, I didn't
respond, and now I've lost my
pension or, I mean, not
completely lost my pension, but
I've lost that interest amount.
Correct? Is that what I'm losing
the interest on my pension. So
Mr. Chair and Representative
Borego, if you look back to
section A, number 2. This is,
this is, this applies to the
beneficiary of the state.
So after the board received
notification of the death of a
member, we send out a notice to
the beneficiary to say, hey, you
have money available here. So
after we receive notification.
So that may be 2 years after the
members already passed. So the
beneficiary is the one that's
getting hurt. So they would be
I don't know. I, I wouldn't
necessarily describe it as being
hurt. They're, you know, after
we notify them that they've got
money available and they've got
an opportunity to come in and
collect it. If they don't come
in and collect it, then they're
still entitled to a benefit.
They're just not going to
continue to
Uh, receive interest on that
benefit amount, after we freeze
each they're entitled to that
frozen.
But they're not entitled to the
interest which the state is, is,
uh, collecting.
They're collecting that interest
on the entire fund. So why are
they penalizing that benefit
that beneficiary, and, and
here's a really kind of extreme
example, Mr. Chair, but, um,
Police and fire. They don't get
Social Security.
I mean, they don't earn Social
Security, and so if a police
officer dies or a, or a
firefighter.
Guys, and their wife or husband
or whatever comes forward and
says, I, I would like to claim
this, but they didn't claim it
in time, um.
You know,
I just feel like, like we, we
really need to look at that.
That language and we need to
look at it both in para and at
least give at least look at what
the banks do for like a house. I
mean, if you default on your
house, you can still stay in
your house for almost a year, 6
months to a year.
And you're still, you still have
an opportunity to pay that.
You know that that amount.
And keep your home.
And I mean they don't just
So you on the street, it just
seems like it's kind of extreme.
Um, OK, so I'm gonna get off
that cause I think we've all
said that enough, but the other
thing um with regard to the
disabled, um,
Language, and I don't remember
exactly what section that was,
but
Um, isn't there a, um,
Something in the statute that
says, if you're disabled and you
take, you take on Social
Security at some point that it
reverts to Social Security and
you forfeit your
Uh, retirement. Is that correct?
Mr. Chair Representative Borego,
not in our statutes in statutes,
but it is in the, it's in the
cost of living adjustment to
anything related to Social
Security, so you don't tie
anything there. OK. So that was
my question on that. So thank
you for that clarification.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Rodriguez.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good
afternoon, David. Nice to see
you and Southern nice gentleman,
um,
Maybe I need to read more, see
more, study more, but
I'll tell you what, David, I
agree with what's been said here
today. First, I guess I'm trying
to visualize the situation where
a person um retires or let's go
back, passes on and this applies
to the beneficiary you
mentioned, right?
So the beneficiary comes in and
again 60 days is short. I mean
you're hardly, you haven't,
haven't had enough time even to
grieve within the 60 days, let
alone
Be wondering when you receive a
letter in the mail, whether you
can even get up and go.
Run to PER or to ERB and, and
ask about it and see what's
going on or what you can do
about it.
60 days is way too short.
Number, uh if it's gonna happen
at all. But number 2 is, I think
what we're trying to do here and
I was listening to Sandra Nybert
and, you know, it's to me it's
pretty clear that when you say
closed an account is closed,
that's what it means. The
definition of closed means
closed. It's not open anymore.
And so I think the, the
You're trying to apply dormancy
instead, or also maybe
temporarily closed, but not
close altogether. Um, because
then it takes some other action
to open the account again if
it's gonna be closed when my
beneficiary goes in, for
example, and that person has to
go in and reopen the account
somehow or you have your own way
to, to open it, but as far as
I'm concerned, um, as a
beneficiary, it's closed.
So there is some confusion
there. Maybe we want to work on.
Um, but then another point I had
written notes on here is um
Um, it, it seems like what
you're trying to do, please
correct me so so I can learn. I
wanna be an educated.
person here as we're moving on
with this.
Because we are the voice for
these uh retirees and, and even
the beneficiaries by virtue of
the policies we do.
But, um, let me say this, you
are trying to get
The interest
Of a of an account.
Of an amount that a person, the
retiree has been, is eligible
for, OK? And stop me as I'm
going if you allow Mr. Chairman.
Um, the person is eligible for a
certain amount of retirement.
Then that amount is there.
For the, for the retiree, when
the retiree dies, we know we can
go to a beneficiary, then at
that point that
And at any point that amount of
money that sits there for the
retiree.
Should be eligible to gain
interest, do whatever.
Whatever any other.
Retirees's account does, um, and
so it seems like what I
understand is that you're trying
to take the interest after 60
days that you would give notice
and I don't know if it affects
yourates immediately after 60
days that you would separate
that interest or, or if it's
effective at another time and
the notice is just 60 days after
that you can clarify for me in a
moment, but
Um, it seems like you would take
the interest and you would
invest it.
And this investment is for the
state.
The investment returns would be
for the state, but yet the
interest was initially, it
initially would belong to the
person who who has the amount
paid into this, into the
contribution fund or hers or his
retirement. I think
I don't know that we can
actually
Remove the interest if I'm
understanding this, we remove
the potential for a
Retirees, beneficiary to, to
take any further growth of the
amount that's there that the
retiree left for that
beneficiary, and that the
retiree is entitled to.
Um
And we're removing that
possibility because once that
interest is removed.
Then the person never gets that
interest back. They just get
what was in the fund after 60
days and no more than that.
They, they're not entitled to
gain interest because that
interest is going to be given to
the state and the state invested
for returns to be used by the
state, not the.
Not the retirees beneficiary,
right? Is that, you know, I'm
probably repeating myself,
David, help me understand this,
Mr. Chair Mr. Chair and Senator
Rodriguez. So again, that it
will be for the state, it would
be for the trust fund. So the
money would, would stay in the
trust fund. And I think, again,
there's there's two situations
here. One is a member meets the
required minimum distribution
age, and by law, IRS guidelines
are required to take a minimum
distribution or receive whatever
money they have in their
account. So let's say again, in
an example where I started off
my career 30 years ago, I have
some small contributions that I
contributed over to ERB. It's
sitting in the account, and we
send you a letter and we say,
Saturday, you've got, you know,
you've got $600 sitting out here
contributed 10 number of years
ago. Please come in and either
take a distribution, you're
entitled to a small amount.
Actually, it won't be, it'd be
for a refund in that situation,
because you didn't have, you
weren't divested period, so
you're not gonna get a benefit.
You have some money sitting out
there. We're gonna say, come in
and get it and you decide, OK,
well, we haven't received notice
or you haven't reached back out
to us.
To say yes, I'm gonna take the
money, um, in this point in
time, we would say, OK, we're
freezing the account, so you're
no longer earning any any
additional amounts on that.
Typically, this is years after,
so it's going to be someone that
hasn't been in contact with us
for a number of years or
contributed. This isn't going to
be for a retiree that's coming
into the system or getting ready
to come into the system. And in
terms of the beneficiary, um,
seldom seldom seldomly seldom
lily are we ever notified within
16 days of someone being uh
Deceased that, here, I'm, I'm
here ready for my money. This
isn't one of those situations,
we're doing research on the
60,000 inactive members that we
have every single month. So
we're looking to say, OK, which
of these members has passed
away? We go through LexisNexis,
and a host of other systems to
say, OK, you know, we're looking
through obituaries to find out
is this member still alive?
And at that point in time,
We determined that, uh, the
mischarge led has been passed
away for the last 3 years. So we
send a notice to the
beneficiaries contact
information that we have on
file, and we say, you have money
sitting out here, or there was
some money, not necessarily the,
whatever the balance was, you're
entitled to X number of dollars.
At that point in time, I've got
60 days from that period of time
to come back in and say, OK, I'm
gonna claim the money. But it's
usually, it's, it's rarely
within 60 days. So the grieving
process is typically occurred.
Um, they'd still be entitled to
the benefit, they'd still be
entitled to a refund of any uh
unclaimed contributions, it
would be
It would be a small amount, but
we would be accounting for these
unclaimed distributions
differently on our actuarial
studies, and what we report is
part of Gatsby. So it's no
longer again growing, um,
Growing in size. We're talking,
you know, uh,
To a small number of people, you
know, that typically don't go
through this process. Right now
we're not.
Uh, well, anyone is entitled to
whatever uh benefit their
Statutorily, uh,
Prescribed right now, um, this
would just sort of simply cut
that off, uh, in, in, in the
future, not cut them off from
the benefit, but cut them off
from ros in the benefit for
those members.
I see. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Did a little more if I may, and
I promise I won't take too much
longer, but David, help me
understand when you mentioned um
that it'd be years out when you,
you know, these are for people
years out that part confused me
because um
For if, if it's years out, how
does that come to play with the
60 days. I'm confused with that.
So, Mr. Chair, in, in an example
is, again, um, you know, we run
through, we run all 60,000
inactive accounts that are out
there, uh, over the age of 72
or, you know, every year we have
people hitting the age of 72.
And we run that through
LexisNexis and I'm, I'm
forgetting the name of the
software that we use.
Thomson Reuter and we discovered
that Mr. Archuleta passed away
and, and 2015.
And at that point, that triggers
a notice to say, OK, well, he
lifts his wife as a beneficiary.
At that point in time, we send a
notice to Mrs. Archleta saying,
you've got money out here. Uh,
that would be your time to come
and claim it either through the
benefit that you'd be entitled
to, and more than likely she's
gonna know that she was entitled
to benefit when he first passed
away, but if she didn't know
that she was entitled to
benefit, some people are of that
situation. Usually, you know
when you're a beneficiary,
you've signed off on some
documents, you've provided them
when you, uh, when the member
retires or when they first sign
up for benefit, they know that
they're the benefit of, uh, or
entitled to some benefit in the
future. As soon as they received
notice of that, at that point in
time, they've got the 60 days to
come back in. It could be a year
that someone passed away, they
just came online, we figured out
that they've been, you know,
they've been deceased a year.
It's rarely 60 days, you know,
from the time the member passed
away till us.
Basically, uh, raising the
account. Chairman David, is
there any, any opportunity for
that person to say an elderly
woman comes in, you notify her,
her husband passed away. She was
the beneficiary, but she's an
elderly person, a little frail,
can't get out there and do what
she needs to do. Uh, is there
any opportunity for hardship
waiver for something like that
before the 60 days.
It can for her.
Um,
You know what I'm saying? That's
it's like Representative Borego
mentioned in every situation is
different and there's some that
may have more.
You know, bigger situations than
others to be able to do this, so
I just wasn't sure if you had
anything or it's set in stone
that that's what it is, 60 days
and, and if the person doesn't
come in in 60 days, but comes in
in 61 days, uh, the account has
been frozen. What we're calling
it frozen now, but it was closed
earlier, yes, we have to make
sure we know what we're doing
here. I mean, as far as that we
understand is what I'm saying.
So, um, tell me, Mr. Chair and
Senator Rodriguez under the
current draft of the proposal,
it does not include any sort of
hardship.
waiver if we did include a
hardship waiver, I think then we
leave it to um either
The board having to prescribe
rules around, you know, what
those circumstances would be,
age, you know, illness or, or,
or other, or it's left to the
interpretation of the executive
director. And we, we want to
avoid that sort of situation,
um.
And
Again, I mean, that's under the
current draft that we have here.
Yeah, thank you.
An appeal process, for example,
we mentioned, but, but let me
just end here by just asking the
final question. How does this
impact
Um, PERA, and I know that you
mentioned something and I'm
sorry I walked in a little bit.
Within the conversation you were
having already, but I, I think
you may have mentioned that this
mirrors PERA has Mr. Chair and
Senator Rodriguez, this was, I
believe based off of their
current rules, they have a rule
rather than us trying to run
this through the board and
create an administrative rule,
uh, we thought it would be best
prescribed in statute.
The
Can we, can I have great respond
to that, Mr. Chairman. I want to
make sure that there's no
unintended consequences here or
anything like that.
I don't think so.
I'm just kidding.
Great, can you help us out too?
Uh, thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Senator Rodriguez, so yes, this
is based off current processes
that we do have in place. Uh, we
went through a similar exercise
in about 2014.
Um, and, and one of the reasons
we did that is, um, you know, I
was at ERB 10 years prior
before uh I moved to Pera and
the problem that David is
Uh, discussing with these kind
of unclaimed accounts, uh, with
small balances is something that
it seems like
Nationally, um, I don't know
why, but that teacher systems
deal with more than public
systems. I don't know if it's
just
Some teachers are just much more
mobile or they get into the
profession, decide they don't
like it and they leave, um, in
Pera's case, some of the issues
that we had were, uh, our
employers were
Not very good at reporting
timely to us. So if, if I worked
for the city of Santa Fe, um, I
worked for a year, I worked for
a year and a half. I left, I
took out my contributions.
Uh, but then since the city of
Santa Fe doesn't report timely
or didn't back in those days.
We've gotten much better at
this, you know, say a year
later, $30 is reported on my
behalf, but I've already
withdrawn my balance. So we had
a, a huge number of these small
balances gaining interest that
the person really wasn't
entitled to. Um, it doesn't
touch anybody that is due a
benefit, so we call those active
or inactive vested members, so
somebody, if I left today,
Um, from the state and I went
elsewhere, you know, I'm do a
benefit when I turn 61.
You know, that's about 20 years
from now.
Um, so that money stays, and
when I become eligible or any
member becomes eligible, we
notify them you're eligible.
Please fill out the application
for pension, if they were to
pass away, we would notify their
beneficiary. We would go through
the retirement process. So these
balances that we're talking
about aren't, they're not
retired members, they're not due
to retirees or they're not due
to somebody that we owe a
benefit to in the future. These
are small balances that we're
trying to clean up. Um, so we
don't have Elisa Perez, um, the
same issue that ERB that I
to deal with because it just
compounds, you know, a lot of
these people, they are talking
about, I bet are probably
adjunct professors who went and
taught a semester or two.
Contributions were withheld.
They're never going to be dual
benefit. Um, they do the balance
that they have plus a couple of
years of interest, um, but those
are accounts that may never be
paid out.
So it kind of is accounting kind
of, you know, like how Thaksin
Rev does unclaimed property.
That's how we modeled our um
process. We don't, we don't send
it to tax and Rev. We have our
own unclaimed property, um,
process and anybody, any member
or former member could go onto
our website, put in their, um,
social security numbers similar
to Jackson Rev and see if they
are
Do a balance from us.
OK. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So
Greg, to say you
God forbid pass away, and you,
and you have a beneficiary or
any one of us have a
beneficiary, so this doesn't
apply to a beneficiary just if
the beneficiary can't go and
claim anything within 60 days,
that doesn't apply that way or
does it?
Mr. Chairman and Senator.
is our beneficiary, my
beneficiary would be due my
benefit.
Um, so we have a number of
reporting death reporting
services, um,
Kind of morbid to say not fun to
talk about, uh, but once we are
notified, a lot of times,
Perra is notified before the
family notifies us. Um, so we
act proactively reach out to the
beneficiary and say you are due
a benefit, please fill out the
paperwork, you know, we need
death certificate, we need uh
proof of age, and then we get
that beneficiary set up on
payroll.
So never at any time when a
beneficiaries do a benefit, are
they not getting it?
I see. So a person can be longer
than 60 days. Just say your
beneficiary can't go for
whatever reason in the hospital
or whatever may have happened,
and if they don't, if they, they
can, they need to take 6 months
before they claim anything. Is
that doable without, I mean,
they get their be their amount
in the fund, but, but that the
interest part we're talking
about hasn't kicked in then or,
or does it, Mr. Chairman and
Senator, I defer to ERB on how
it works on them, but for us,
um, we're just gonna pay them
the monthly benefit. So, um,
You know, and usually what's
paid out first is a
contributions they played, they
paid in as well as the interest
that was accumulated after that,
it's, you know, usually that's
exhausted within the first.
3 to 4 years of retirement.
After that, the benefits going
to continue to be paid out from
the fund.
I see. A person is not left out
if, if they can't go within 60
days, they're not left out from
getting any additional interest.
Whatever amount would be that.
Uh, uh, Mr. Chair and senator,
if, if they do a benefit,
they're not left out. You know,
if they have $30 on account. And
you know, after whatever, 6
months, um, they're not allowed
that additional.
Um
Interest on that $30.
And Mr. Chair, Senator
Rodriguez, just to
Put a little bit more on to that
point, uh, typically when a
beneficiary is named, uh, this
process is never going to kick
in.
Uh, I remember the diseases.
Uh, we have the beneficiaries'
contact information. We have
their banking information, those
types of things are generally
required as soon as the member
retires, uh, we would just
automatically start paying the
benefit to that beneficiary.
Uh, this process only kicks in
if there's been a disconnect.
Uh, meaning, uh, the, the
beneficiaries's information has
changed, uh, and we don't have a
method or mechanism to pay them
that benefit. So we're trying to
reach out to them to let them
know, uh, you know, get back in
touch with us, let us know where
to send this money, um.
But
Typically, when we're looking at
these types of situations, as I
said, that this is going to be
automatically done. Uh, this
situation would only occur when
we cannot get a hold of
somebody, uh, and as Director
Archuleta pointed out a little
bit earlier, uh, you know, this
process in the 60 day letter,
uh, that that clock, so to
speak, only starts ticking once
we have learned uh about the
death of a member. Uh, so it
could have been 10 years have
passed before we learn of the
death of the member, uh, the
interest will continue to accrue
that entire 10 years. Uh, the
interest doesn't stop accruing
until we learn of the death,
until we've reached out to the
members of state or beneficiary,
if they have one and still have
not heard back.
So anything up till that point
is still going to be owed to the
account.
OK, thank you. I've taken enough
time. I appreciate all your
work. Thanks a lot. Thank you,
Greg for
Thank you all.
I don't see anyone else, so.
We start to let the, uh, you are
presenting a request for an
endorsement.
Mr. Chair, we are.
OK. And uh you've seen the
concern, so, yes, sir. OK.
Uh
First will take um.
Uh, legislation 2286.
47.2 SA.
And we do have permission to
have a
Representative of Alcon and
Representative Allison to vote.
So, uh
Startle take a role first, uh.
We need a motion for the
endorsement.
To move along.
I will move for a motion for
endorsement.
Mr. Chair, do you need a second?
I will say.
And just to clarify, Mr. Chair,
it's 0.228647.2 SA. That is
correct. Thank you.
Right, I'll, I staff will uh
they will call.
Borego, Cynthia?
Mr. Chairman, about no, and I
would like to explain my vote.
Castiliano Ambrose is not here
today. Uh, Figueroa Natalie.
Yes.
Um, I'd be Soto Daniel absent.
Um, Martinez Allen, absent.
Nibert Gregg.
Ream William, Bill R.
We, we can't vote um on an
endorsement of a concept. So if
we go that route, then this bill
will not be endorsed.
Um, Sanchez Joshua A is absent.
Sadia Lopez, Antoinette, absent,
Serato Linda, absent.
Stephanics, Elizabeth absent.
Royal Caballero, um, absent.
Senator Gonzalez. Yes.
Representative Allison.
Yes.
And Representative Alcon. All
right, so then this bill has an
endorsement.
Uh, members, uh, now we're on.
OK, sorry. Mr. Chairman, I, I'm
gonna change my vote to yes. I
I, um, I have some issues.
And I hope that they, they can
get
Revised
Um, I'll just change my vote to
yes, and
I hope that there are some
amendments.
Very well. Thank you.
Yeah, so.
quote
So this, um, we had a 7, yes, 0,
no.
With that, we do have an
endorsement and that is on
point.
228647.2 SA.
Uh, members now we're on the
0.2287.
59.2 SA.
And I will go for an
endorsement.
Yes.
Yeah
Well
First stone
There was a motion in place for
Endorsement
And uh is there a second?
OK.
See none, then he dies for the
motion for endorsement.
OK.
Very well.
Take care. Thank you.
Now we're unknown.
Yeah.
Item 4, retirement.
Healthcare, Neil.
You're on.
Mr. Chart, members of the
committee, uh, thank you for the
opportunity to present today.
Um, just to kind of kick off if
I could just do a couple of
introductions with me today as
far as my staff.
I do have my deputy director,
Linda Attencio, and right next
to him our general counsel, Mr.
Mark Hayden.
Uh, I myself is with data I'm
Neil Keeper. I'm the executive
director for the Thai Healthcare
Authority.
Um, once again, if we do turn to
the next page, you will see as
far as in the agenda, there are
a number of items listed, um,
some of these I will just
briefly highlight. And then
there is some that I do want to
focus on a little bit more. I do
know there were some questions
in regards to the July meeting
when I presented. I wanna make
sure I follow up on some of
those questions, uh, from the
previous meeting as well. Uh,
but moving on to the next slide,
slide number 3. This gives a
little bit in regards to our
background of what our
organization really tries to um
accomplish and
I'm really trying to administer
affordable healthcare, making it
secure for our retirees and our
members who participate with us,
um, we were passed in 1990,
started paying benefits in '91,
and there was no premari funding
in regards to our organization,
and we have since grown of the,
you know, close to 16,000
members that we had at that
time. Uh, now we have over
65,000 members who are
participating with us as far as
active members looking to come
into this program is around
93,000 and we do see
304 employer groups, uh, ranging
from the schools, state agencies
and local governments that are
participating with us. As far as
our budget is around 406, but
most of that by 99% is really
just going to healthcare
benefits, as it shows, which is
that $402 million.
Um, as far as the different
revenue sources, you are gonna
see where we get the employee
employer contributions, retiree
monthly premiums, some of the
tax expense of fund
distributions, some
miscellaneous, such as some of
the rebates we get for being a
Part D plan, performance
guarantees from carriers, making
sure that they're providing
quality uh uh assistance of
customer service to our members
and reporting.
And also interest earnings. Um,
one of the other things I did
want to bring up at the time for
the last board meeting in July
was not completed or finalized
in regards to our RFP for asset
management consulting services,
uh, a selection was made, and we
are utilizing Mikita, uh, who
was with us that'll be providing
some additional consulting
advice to us as it relates to
our trust fund and some of the
investments that we do through
the SIC.
Moving on to page 4.
Uh, you will see a listing of
our board of directors, uh, does
represent a broad representation
from many different groups that
um are being represented on our
board. Uh, I will make note that
one of the newest ones that did
start as far as July with the
passage of the new bill for the
healthcare authority. Uh, we do
have that new board member that
has joined us, which is uh Ms.
Alex Castillo Smith, who is now
sitting on our board as well
from the healthcare Authority.
Moving on to the next slide
number 5, kind of getting a
little bit more into some of the
challenges. Um, I do bring up
some of the changes that we see
many times, not just at the
state level, but at the federal
level, uh, particularly in this
instance, related to our
Medicare benefits that we offer.
Um, there was the inflation
reduction Act. This is a federal
mandate for Medicare Part D that
did have some changes. Um,
currently with anybody that is
participating under Medicare,
there is actually a cap of $8000
moving into 2025, that cap
actually moves from 8000 to 2.
2000. So while it's a great
benefit for our retirees and our
members and that they do have a
little bit more uh security and
knowing that there is that
little safety net for him as it
relates to the prescriptions,
uh, that cost does have to come
from somewhere as far as making
that up, so I do have on the
next slide, we'll get a little
bit more detail, um, but I
definitely want to bring that
up. Some of the other items that
we look at too is as far as the
Medicare Advantage star ratings.
Uh, we've seen some of our plans
where maybe they've lost the
star rating that they were
previously at or even looking at
some of the risk scoring that
gets calculated.
based on how they get
reimbursed, uh, from the Centers
for Medicare. Uh, this does have
an effect on our premiums, um,
as the plans are looking at
them, uh, between the inflation
reduction Act and some of the
the the money to get reimbursed
for, uh, really goes into some
of the costs as far as how they
calculate and I got some more
information on that as as it's
transpired based on the latest
RFP as well as our annual board
meeting, uh, which I'll bring up
here a little later as I know
there were some questions for
last meeting regarding it. Uh,
some other things that I know
are challenges that we continue
to see are the statewide.
shortages for medical
professionals, we continue to
work on this. We see a lot of
action being done in some of the
other committees. Um, and we
look forward to continue to work
to try and assist with that. We
know with the increase of
prescription drug costs.
Um, as we do stay, you know,
obviously there's the inflation
reduction Act that's capping
some of it, uh, but we're still
seeing more drugs that are
coming to market that are a
little bit more expensive. I'm
sure people are familiar with
also the GLP ones, uh, where we
know there's some additional
costs, uh, that have been kind
of placed a burden on us as far
as for covering it. Uh, we do
hope that there will be some new
ones that have come as far as
biosimilars to kind of help
offset some of those costs, uh,
but it's something that we have
to closely and continue to
monitor as it does have an
impact on us.
Moving to the next slide on
slide number 6, this is where I
was talking about the inflation
reduction Act and talking about
how that cap moved and how this
kind of directly affects us.
Well, if we look at the 22,
diagrams here of 2024 and 2025,
you know, both of them do show
on the very bottom line that
there is a deductible. I will
let you know on any of our
plans, we actually do not have a
deductible. We cover, uh,
through the deductible for all
of our members. So they would
not have any responsibility as
it relates to deductibles, where
we start to kick in is when we
look at the initial coverage.
You can see in the initial
coverage for 2024, where we're
currently paying about 75%, um,
and then 2025 that would change
to 65 with the manufacturers
picking up 10.
The coverage gap on the left
side, which shows the 25%, 5%,
and 70%. That is actually going
away in 2025. Um, so as far as
where some of that additional
cost share that would either
come from the beneficiary or a
large part you see as far as 70%
for manufacturers, that's
actually going away. Now, for a
lot of our members, this could
be a little bit more of a, you
know, on our plan twos, a little
bit more of a burden to them
when sometimes they got into
some of these high dollar
prescriptions on what they could
have to possibly pay. Um, but in
moving into 2025, we see that
go.
And it's also gonna be in
relation to some of the plans we
have on why this impact uh uh
occurred even in some of the
plans that we previously
offered. But when we start to
look at the catastrophic
coverage on the, the left side
for 2024 and the very top. We
see where the Medicare Part D
plan, such as our South was
covering 20% and then the
government was covering 80%.
When we look to the right for
2025 that's coming up, we can
see that now we are gonna be
covering 60%. Uh, so that's 40%
jump in the catastrophic phase,
and then as far as the
manufacturers, they'll be
picking up.
and the government who had been
paying 80% is actually going
down to 20.
So we could definitely see where
this is something that we are
closely monitoring because we
see where there could be a
financial impact to this
organization as we provide these
benefits and something that
we'll continue to monitor as the
year goes on, uh, for 2025 when
we continue to work with our
actuaries and the reporting
comes in.
Um, on a side note, though, we
do know that coming in 2026,
there will be the 10 drugs that,
uh, Medicare is negotiating. Uh,
they've actually determined what
those 10 drugs are for 2025 and
we'll be continue to monitor for
2026 to see exactly what effect
that may have as it relates to,
uh, the benefits we offer and
what those costs.
Moving on to side number 7. I
provide this as far as the
enrollment counts because I know
a question came up in the last
meeting, you know, kind of
asking exactly how our plan uh
is doing as far as what are the
memberships that are members
that are coming in, what are
some of the members coming out.
Um, so I kind of have a, a few
different little time periods,
uh, looking at July of 2014,
July of 2019, and July of 2024.
Um, 1 of the things you can kind
of see is that we've continued
to see at our medical, uh, for
pre-medicare, that there's been
continuous, uh, drop.
With that coverage, um, this is
something that we've seen even
prior to uh July 31st of 2021
when the minimum age kicked in
and the years of service to 25,
2020 years of service from 20
years to 25 years, uh, kicked
in. Um, so that is something
that we do see as far as a
change. People are either uh
deciding to retire later or
they're waiting till they meet
the age to receive the full
subsidy or maybe they're jumping
onto their spouses or
significant other's plan, uh,
for the time being until maybe
they decide to retire. But we
are seeing
that decrease. Um, we're also
seeing as far as what's
contributing to that is our
members aging into Medicare. Um,
so many of those are moving from
the pre-medicare side into
Medicare, where we continue to
see we've actually had growth on
our Medicare side as we're
comparing 2014 to 2019, we saw
that almost close to 7000 that
it grew, and then when we look
into 2019 to 2024 that we're
about a little over 1200 as far
as growth into our Medicare
plan.
Um, some of the questions that I
know came up last time too was
what do we see as far as
disenrollment, you know, maybe
they're going into the
individual market or picking up
something else on their own.
Well, when we look at some of
the past years as far as the
disenrollment, and this could be
on any of our contracts, whether
it be medical, dental, vision,
life. We do track all of those
as per contracts, but we do see
for 2021, we had about 411 that
disenrolled. In 2022, that was
about 5:32, 2023, it was 560 and
2024, as far as looking to
today, we're about 200.
89.
Now, where we actually see a
much larger number as far as
members who are discontinuing
the benefits, um, unfortunately
is having to deal with the fact
that we are a retiree plan and
many of our members do stay on
this plan until uh the time they
pass away. And so when we
actually look at some of those
numbers to see what could be
impacting some of our
enrollment, when we look in
2021, we had about over 1400
members that we process death
claims for.
In 2022, we had over 1300,
2023 over 1300 and 2024, we're
currently at uh 1,093, so we can
see we actually see more people
as far as where their contracts
are ending is actually a result
of unfortunately the, the
passing of the members who are
on our plan as we do have a wide
range of members who participate
with us all on to some members
who are in in over the age of
100.
Now, as far as what that looks
like for members who are newly
enrolling, while we're still
seeing that our numbers are
above that as we look at 2021,
we had about, uh, over 2600 who
enrolled 2022/1900 2023/1900 and
currently to date over 1400. So
we are still seeing more members
who are participating with us in
some contract or some form or
another, whether it be medical,
dental, vision, or life, uh, but
we can definitely see where some
of that movement occurs, uh,
based on some of those
discontinuations. So I hope that
does address some of the
previous
questions that came out of this
meeting from the prior IPAC
meeting, um.
And more than happy to, to, to
definitely address any more that
we may have uh in the future.
Uh, moving on to slide 8, we did
see some changes with our
benefits. Uh, we did go through
an RFP process. I know that was
one of the questions that was
being asked as we were kind of
going through the negotiations
and kind of wrapping them up,
um, as they went, most went into
effect on July 1st, um, but as
far as our pre-medicare, we
continue to offer two different,
uh, medical plans with Blue
Cross Blue Shield and
Presbyterian, and we offer a
value HMO and a PPO plan.
Um, as far as our Medicare, uh,
previously we had 9 different
options, um, as we had 8
Medicare Advantage plans that
has actually been reduced down
to 5, with one supplement plan,
uh, part of this reduction did
have to do with that inflation
reduction Act where the coverage
gap went away. A lot of our plan
tos had a coverage gap. So when
they made this adjustment and
change, uh, these plans were not
necessarily, uh, as viable and
so we really looked at the plan
one options that we had.
In regards to our voluntary
benefits, we've uh Delta Dental
did remain with it. Uh, but we
did have the addition of a new
dental plan with Blue Cross Blue
Shield, giving a little bit of
choice to our members and as I
can show a little bit later, uh,
the option of cost as well.
Um, and then once again, we
continue to work with and this
was something that we had
previously had, which was
standard for our life insurance.
As we move on to slide number 9,
I won't get into too much
detail, but, uh, there was no
planned changes and we did see
as far as increases of about 2%
for the retiree and spouse and a
3% increase for the uh dependent
children. And this is
information that is we're going
on the road and going to many
different cities around uh New
Mexico. We're making sure to
inform our members uh of the
changes and as well as the plans
that are.
to him, uh, because this is the
time that they would have to
switch to a different plan
should they choose.
As we continue to move on to
slide number 10.
This gets a little bit more into
those Medicare plan changes. A
lot of the changes that I was
talking about as far as with,
uh, you know, the funding
mechanisms that these plans were
getting. So we're seeing a wide
range as far as what those
increases were through the RFP
process, as well as through the
inflation reduction Act, where
some changes in the uh
prescription benefit as well as
even some of the risk scoring
reimbursements that they were
getting and star ratings. Um, so
we can see on this for our
supplement plan that did
actually uh stay intact where we
didn't have any medical changes,
but there was a 2%.
increase similar to our
pre-medicare, but for our
Medicare Advantage, we have a 0%
all the way up to 40%, 42%
increase. So we did see one
Medicare Advantage plan that had
a rather large increase. Um,
this is gonna be a lot based on
looking at their own internal uh
claims history, looking at the
inflation Reduction Act that
they are projected to their
actuaries and underwriters as
well as based on some of the
star ratings and uh risk
scoring. Um, but once again, we
do have many plans that had a
much lower increase. Uh, we had
one that's a 0% that remained at
0%.
dollars through Blue Cross Blue
Shield as an HMO and we offered
a new Medicare, uh, PPO plan
through Blue Cross Blue Shield,
uh, which is $45 and for retiree
who's receiving the subsidy
would pay $2250. So it's a great
option that was being provided
to help uh give an alternative
or if they did see a high
increase on their current plan,
this was an option that they
could go to to still receive
access and save on some of those
dollars.
Moving on to slide 11, this is
in regards to our voluntary plan
changes. We did see some slight
increases um with these plans,
um, as we look at the vision,
there was about a 6%, so it went
up, uh, just a touch, but when
we look at our, our dental plan,
we know what Delta Dental under
the basic, there was a much
larger increase, um, but with
that, we did provide that choice
I was talking about before.
Which is not only allowing for
maybe a different carrier, but
it's also helping to uh provide
a lower costing option. So
previously without the dental on
the basic plan, it was 1962 was
the cost. It went up to 2404,
um, but with the new option, it,
we now have one through Blue
Cross that is $19.98. So, uh,
when you look at the plan, if
somebody does want to stay
closer to the premiums that they
were paying under Delta, they
could actually make the new
selection under Blue Cross and
there would just be a slight
increase of sense on the.
$1 for, for that, for that plan.
Uh, we do see it on far as a
comprehensive. We do know where
that went up as well for Delta
Dental. But if we look at the
other options through Blue Cross
Blue Shield of $38.46. It's
actually a decrease to what
Delta Dental was offering, uh,
in the current year of where
it's at $40.03. So, uh, some
good options for our members
that at least have choice, still
receiving the same benefits, but
actually having the opportunity
for premiums that remain, uh,
close to where they were at.
If we move on to slide number
12. This is in regards to our
investment performance, uh, just
looking at some of the different
time periods that we look for
the one year when we look for
retiree healthcare as far as our
net, it's the 8.17 is where we
came in at. That's gonna be in
the comparative performance
right below those uh bars that
are that are color coded. If we
look at 5 years, we were just a
little bit over 7% and for the
10 year mark, we were at 6.43.
So we are close to that 7 year
7% that we really kind of gauge
ourselves on of trying to attain
and taking
to a lot of our different
solvency models and actuarial
assumptions.
Um, up on top in the top right
corner is the asset allocation
or target allocation. I bring
this up because I know in the uh
last uh IPAC meeting, there was
a question in regards to
liquidity, um, and looking at
our different plants, so you can
see these are the different uh
pools of investments that are
made available to us through the
state Investment council. Um, so
with that, the, the ones that we
have are really on top, uh, from
the US large cap index to the US
core bonds is where we do have
more of our liquid as we get
into the private debt market,
will return.
real estate and private equity.
A lot more of these are gonna be
a little bit more ill liquid or
they're gonna have some lockup
periods before we can actually
ask uh access those dollars. So
I just wanted to make sure I
brought that up because I know
there were some questions in
regards to the pools of funds
that we had, uh, last time.
Uh, helping us though with those
targets, uh, we've done biannual
asset allocation reviews, uh,
previously, which I know
Wilshire, I did one in 2023.
They confirmed that their 7%
targets seemed to be reasonable
and currently we are working
with Nikita who is doing some of
our ongoing evaluation and we'll
be assisting us as we continue
to uh evaluate those targets and
where we're trying to achieve
and when we need to make
adjustments.
Moving on to slide number 13 in
regards to our solvency update,
um, I know I presented in July,
but that was based off our old
solvency. This one is the
updated one, right after the
July board meeting as far as
changes that were adopted, which
is that 2% that we saw in
pre-med uh pre-medicare
population, as well as our
Medicare supplement population,
um, and then it also looks at
the removal of our MAPD 2 plans,
and then it's taken into account
the new Medicare Advantage plans
as far as Blue Cross Blue Shield
and some of the changes that we
Yeah. So we could see when we're
looking at as far as our uh time
period where we begin the
deficit spend that's in fiscal
year 2035, which is that red box
in the middle. This is something
that we always try to make sure
we stay cognizant of and
ensuring that if we can avoid
deficit spending, uh, we really
want to make sure we maintain
that as we continue to work on
our trust fund as we continue to
work on lowering our unfunded
liabilities, uh, not only for
this program but for a lot of
the employers who are
participating with us, um, which
we can, we can talk a little bit
more about as well and on,
a later slide. Uh, we do take
into a lot of the medical trends
and our assumptions to look at
our solvency. Uh, once again, we
are projected beyond the 30
years, um, based on many of the
assumptions that go into place,
um, but we'll continue to
monitor that deficit spending to
ensure that we can kind of uh
Push it out as much as possible.
On slide number 14, I just
wanted to show this all of its
updates as far as continued, um,
really, I won't go through every
line here, but these are just
some of the actions. I know it
presented the last time, but
this is just a really important
piece of kind of our story at
the retired Healthcare
Authority, as well as the
members. There's been a lot of
actions that have taken place
either for actives uh
contributing either more from
their active pay to the
employer-employer contributions,
and then even our retirees are
seeing changes, uh, where we've
made, uh, a different, uh, uh,
taking different actions.
lower some of our costs to
really help ensure the, the, the
funding of this program,
ensuring it's gonna be around
not only now but in the future
and making sure that we continue
in a positive way to uh continue
to grow with the, the, the funds
that we have within our trust
fund and, and like I said, once
again lower that unfunded
liability. So I've listed many
of those there, um, as, as we
have previously, as that's a lot
of the different actions that
have been taken over the years,
uh, through different leadership
as far as directors as well as
the board, uh, who's worked very
diligently.
Um, and slide number 15 gives a
little uh idea of the historical
contributions and currently what
we pay today, it does show from
the inception of 1990 when we
started receiving those
contributions all the way to
where we are today, uh, where we
are at the 1% and 2% for our
non-enhanced members that's been
in place for about 12 years now
for enhanced retirees, that's
the 1.25 and the 2.5 from their
employer, which has been in
place for 12 years now, so
that's been part of the
contributions that such as
myself as an active employee
that I would see deducted.
anybody from my staff would be
paying in that 1% and then the
employer would pay that 2%, uh,
which is part of one of our
revenue streams that does go
into this program.
As we move to slide number 16.
This is in regards to one of the
actual evaluations that we use
and the tool that we use to
really look at other
post-employee benefits, and it
really takes into account where
we stand as far as with our, uh,
liabilities as an OPED program,
um, right now, these are some
preliminary results that we are
reporting on. We're waiting for
this to be finalized through act
actuaries, um, but I wanted to
make sure that we're staying
abreast of all the different
changes that have been taking
base, taking place, especially
at the federal level. We want to
make sure that we're monitoring.
to see exactly where our
liabilities are and what that
means even to our funded status,
uh, but we could see that for
our total op pay liabilities,
there is a slight increase with
some of the changes that did,
did take place as well as some
of the assumptions that we
calculate, uh, so that did go up
a little bit to where we can see
it's now at 3.3 versus the $3.0
billion for our net OPEB
liabilities taken into account
what is left after we look at
our, our assets. It went up from
the 1.70 to 1.79, so we did see
that slight increase in regards
to.
Tonette Oi liabilities, uh, but
with our funded status, we still
saw a positive movement, uh,
where we had previously been at
44%, which we had seen was
already a, a move in the right
direction from previous years of
33 and 25, uh, we actually see
right now currently, um, and we,
we do hope to get this finalized
that we're standing now about
46.73%. So, uh, a little bit
smaller gain but still moving in
the right direction even with
some of the changes that have
occurred, uh, out there.
Um, how this really plays in as
far as really moving and
continuing to grow our trust
fund to assure that not only it
helps with the sustainability of
this program, um, and making
sure that we can grow it to and
hopefully maybe the investments
can help offset some of these
costs. It's also a big piece in
how it relates to our employer
groups, uh, any of our unfunded
liability does get allocated to
those employer groups, and so
they do have to report that on
their financial statements. Uh,
we do know where in some cases,
you know, the pension system
similar to us, when they start
looking at some of those costs
of those
that can impact them on their
bond rating. So we're trying to
be very cognizant of, of this as
well and wanting to make sure
that we can continue to lower
those unfunded liabilities, uh,
not only for the program and our
members, but also from these
employer groups that are
participating, uh, just as an
example, just looking at a few
of the ones like the city of
Albuquerque has about 7.5
million. City of Santa Fe is
about 1.6 million, uh,
Albuquerque public schools would
be about 12.8% in the state of
New Mexico is 27.3%. So, uh,
that is part of the work we
continue to do is trying to
reduce that.
Moving on to slide number 17 in
regards to our trust fund, um,
we can see that 10 years ago
where we were at 377 million,
uh, to a lot of the hard work,
some of the sacrifices that our
members have had to do that are
currently participating or even
the contributions that have
slightly gone up or rule changes
by active members have all been
things that we've worked as a
group to really try and help
sustain this program for now in
the future and that really is
reflected in this trust fund as
we see some continued growth of
that 377 million to where we
stand today.
At a new high as as far as
September at $1.573 billion. Um,
so that's something we
definitely want to make sure
we're protecting with all the
different advantages, uh, that
it brings to this program and,
and helping with sustainability,
helping with our employer
groups, uh, which brings us to
slide number 18.
Um, slide number 18 is a
legislative proposal proposal. I
believe everybody would, would
receive that there's been a
draft, uh, that I believe has
been distributed to you. Uh,
this is once again to file a
joint resolution for the New
Mexico Retied Healthcare
Authority, uh, Benefits trust
fund to be recognized and
protected under the New Mexico
constitution. Uh, this is
similar to our pension programs
as far as PEA and ERB that do
protect those funds as well.
We're just looking for the same
thing of being able to ensure
that that money is protected for
the beneficiaries who have been,
who have been
Putting into this program since
back in the early days from 1990
when they started making those
employer contributions for
retirees who are putting
premiums into it, um, as well as
the additional dollars we may
receive from, from the different
sources. We want to make sure
that this is being protected as,
as it starts, now stands at $1.5
billion. Um, currently there is
some language in the statute,
you know, it's talking about
some of the benefit as far as
being modified, uh, we would
continue to look to the
legislature for any assistance
when it comes to as far as the
revenue in setting the employee
and employer contributions as by
statute, that is by the
legislature who does determine
that. So we do continue to hope
to work with the legislature
when the time does come that we
need to revisit that, but that
is not something that we are
asking within the, the, the
resolution. The resolution is
specifically just to that trust
fund that we're looking to
protect. Um, I know there was
some concerns a little bit about
the liability being passed on to
the state through that
resolution, we are not asking
for any of that liability. We're
simply asking to protect the
fund. Uh, I think it's
actually been drafted a little
bit more friendly, uh, compared
to the previous one where it did
talk a little bit about the um
uh but providing additional
funds to make sure that we were
adequately provided for. That's
been a portion that is no longer
in this new draft to make sure
that it is strictly focused on,
uh, this particular uh trust
fund that we do have at the
retired Healthcare Authority.
Um, and we just want to make
sure for all the New Mexicans
that have been participating
and, and, and being in this
program as beneficiaries that
this continues to uh be be be
held for them, uh, in any
situation and, and, and giving
that authority to the board uh
to use appropriately as well.
Um, I do know we will be asking
for endorsement on this
legislation from this committee
as well, and I look forward to
addressing any questions on the
very last slide, you will see my
contact information as well as
information related to my
organization. And with that, Mr.
Chair and committee, uh,
I do stand for any questions.
Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you very much,
members, uh.
I was Representative rim.
Uh, thank you, Mr. Turin. Uh,
let's go back to page 13.
And I'm looking at your
projected deficit period.
So what if the legislature
proposed either 50 or 100
million infusion and they just
handed that to you. What would
it do with, with that? Do you,
do you know or have you looked
at that option? Uh, Mr. Chair,
uh, Representative, we have
looked at it, in fact, last
year, I actually uh submitted
for a one-time request of 150
million, and we've kind of
looked at the longevity of what
effect that would have, um, kind
of looking really not just at
the one time infusion of the
doll.
but how does that help with our
investments in the compounded
interest. And so that's where we
were looking at. And so I was
kind of projecting it over a
fifteen-year period. I don't
have the exact amount that it
was projected, but we do show
the positive effect that it
would help. And I can't remember
if it would actually solve us,
uh, make a solvent, um, at 100%,
but it definitely continues to
track us in the right way. Um,
but if there is a particular
number that we'd look at, I'm
sure we could work with our
actuaries and really determine
that, um, to see what that
amount would be and how it
would, uh, over time, not just
what we put in, but what the
growth would be to offset.
had that.
And Mr. Chairman and
What if you, um, did a 1%.
Uh, contribution increase and
let's say uh 0.5% of the
employer in 0.5% of the
employee. Have you looked at
what that would do to that
deficit period.
Uh, Mr. Chad, Representative
Reh, um, we did not looked at it
recently, but I will say
2 years ago, we were actually
asking for only 0.5% that would
have been split up between the
employee and employer. Um, we
knew with just even 0.5%, it had
a big impact on our group. Um,
while we do know and we
appreciate, uh, from the
legislature as well as well as,
uh, you know, through, through
executive branch with the
increases that we receive in
pay, that does have an effect on
us when the salaries go up, but
it's a percent of a percent that
we're getting. Uh, so it doesn't
have a direct correlation when
we do have such as a, a 0.5%
that would have been coming from
the employer.
It would actually make a, a, a
much larger dent within our,
our, our solvency period. Um, I
do apologize, I, I do have
numbers on that, more than happy
to share. Don't have those with
us, but those are options that
we have looked at and more than
happy to bring any of those
options forth.
Uh, Mr. Chairman, and it may be
Good do, um, or like that
proposal, you know, to, um,
To the committee, so that, you
know, the committee members have
that knowledge as we go into the
next session, but those are my
questions. Thank you.
Thank you, um, Senator Neiber.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Having just gone through the uh
arduous process of selecting a
uh
Met a gap or a advantage plan.
I, I sympathize with anybody
that has to go through that
process, but if I, if I see
this, uh, uh, the title New
Mexico retiree Healthcare
Authority.
Does that mean that for
Retired, uh,
Employees of the state, they
don't have to go through the
process I went through and, and
that this
program will allow them to, to
receive those uh uh
Very
Medicare supplement plans
through this program instead of
having to go out in the open
marketplace and, and look at the
various things and try to make
decisions is, is, am I
accurately looking at what
you're, what you're doing.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Senator Diber,
that is correct. We are offering
options to our participants. So,
uh, essentially they're not
having to go through this alone.
We, we do require though they
have to pick up parts A and B
through Medicare still, uh, but
we are offering the different
plans, whether it be the
see-through advantage, which
does come with prescription
benefits Part D or even the
supplement plan which we most
closely resemble a part G plan,
uh, within Medicare. So we're
able to provide that guidance,
uh, we're able to assist them,
not knowing what their personal
circumstances are is everybody
has different healthcare needs,
financial needs.
But we are offering a variety of
plans that can assist them based
on those needs, which includes
the different networks, some
that are also within state and
some nationally. Um, it also
helps with, uh, you know, as far
as our members having a little
bit more access as an employer
group plan, uh, sometimes
there's additional access they
may get to certain networks, uh,
that may be, you know, some
other members not, so it, it is
an added benefit for our members
who are with us. Uh, we are
assisting them, we're helping
them and kind of guiding them
through the process and helping
him with choice.
And Mr. Chair, I would assume
that you get almost 100%
participation then from uh state
employee retirees, uh, as
opposed to having to go through
the process that I went through
with, would that be um
accurate assumption on my part.
Uh, Mr. Chair, uh, Senator
Neibert, uh, unfortunately, I
would not say it's 100%. I do
believe some of our members, uh,
which we would always want our
members to uh continue to see
what's out there to be educated
shoppers, you know, knowing the
arrangements. Uh, we have seen
some members that sometimes do
choose maybe to pick an
alternative plan, uh, that is
out there on the market. Um,
that is, uh, I don't think uh
very many, but in some cases
maybe based on their age, maybe
based on it, they may be able to
get a, a, a lower premium. But
what we try to also inform on
those.
Make sure that they're looking
at the total picture of not just
what that advantage plan is,
what's the cost of it? What's
the cost of the Part D plan. And
what do you pay out of pocket
when you go to access it. So
sometimes, uh, some of our
members may decide to go a
different route, but I can tell
you, I also see many of those
members who had a follow-up open
enrollment meeting, uh, are
talking about how they get back
onto the plan, uh, because there
is a little bit of ease knowing
that we're helping to work on
their behalf and, and, and that
they still have selection and
choice to switch every year.
Um, and knowing that as far as
on the, the premiums and the
plan design, uh, we're, we're
really trying to find different
options for them.
Um, Mr. Chairman, I, I would
encourage all state employees
too seriously consider, uh, uh,
the, this benefit and I really
see it as a, as a benefit that
the state's providing to the
employees, uh, not only during
their working uh years, but, uh,
one that uh occurs after their
retirement and um I, I would, I
would think that you would be
getting close to 100% if they
really
knew what the process was
because it was not an easy
process, nor is it a cheap
process. Uh, it's rather
expensive to do it, uh.
Through the private sector and
having to
Make those decisions. So I, I
truly hope that the employees
see this as a real
Benefit of value being an
employee of the state of New
Mexico and, and serving the
state, its citizens for a number
of years and, and I hope they
look at the, this being a, a
real value to them that the
sustains them after their
retirement. So thank you for the
presentation. Thank you, Mr. Mr.
Chair, Senator Dibert, thank you
for those words, and I agree we
hope to be one of those benefits
that helps to attract and retain
people, as I know that's been a
conversation for New Mexico. Uh,
we hope to be a component of
that does that as well. So thank
you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you,
Mr. Keeper. I am
I have a couple of questions.
You made reference to the
liability being handed over to
the state.
Um, and Mr. Tay, I believe
that's what the proposed
legislation would do, whether
you ask for it or not, the state
would become responsible for the
3.3 unfunded liability, $3.3
billion not that I am suggesting
it's not worth it. Um, this is
an important benefit.
And protection for our state
retirees, um, but I think we
have to recognize that that
would happen, and I'm wondering
if we have any data, Mister
Chair, on
how it might affect the state
bond rating, or if there would
be an effect.
Is there any way we could find
that out?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Figueroa, I do want to just make
a couple little tidbits on that.
So what would be, um,
essentially assessed to the
different groups would be the
net OPEB liabilities, um, and
with that, as far as the 1.7,
uh, you know, billion dollars,
it does get allocated to all of
the employer participating
groups. So, uh, the state is one
component of that that's gonna
be affected by the bond rating,
but it's also gonna affect any
of our counties or cities who
participate with us, uh, with
that, when they have to put this
on their financial statements.
It can definitely affect their
bond ratings, so it is something
we, we want to make sure that we
continue to lower, uh, it does
get reported on a yearly basis,
but if this program did go away,
that is probably those
liabilities that are gonna be
taken into account and where do
we get those dollars from?
Mr. Chair and director, yeah, I
think that's my understanding
that right now all the
individual entities are sharing
that liability amongst them on
their own financial reports, but
with the proposed legislation,
it would not be on those
entities anymore, it would be on
the state, we would be taking
that on, um, and correct me if
I'm misunderstanding. I just
want to be clear.
That that is what we are
agreeing to take on.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Represent
Figueroa, um, this is actually
only protecting that $1.5
billion. There is nothing tied
to as far as enacting any laws
or preventing any laws from the
legislature in regards to any of
the funding mechanisms, that is
not in here. This is strictly
just saying that the $1.5
billion cannot be diverted. It
cannot be borrowed from, it
cannot be loaned from. It, it
is, it essentially stays with
the program and it stays under
the administration of the.
board. That is the only thing
that this proposal is bringing
forth is just ensuring that that
money is there, because that
money really does help offset
those liabilities that you're
correct, you know, that that
would be 3.3 billion if we
didn't have that trust fund
that's bringing it down to the
1.7. So we really wanna make
sure we're protecting it and
that it is solely being used
with this program and this
entity, uh, but as far as any of
the other arrangements, uh, we
would continue through our
statute to work with the
legislature and looking at ways
that we want to continue to
Uh, you know, bring this, the
solvency up within this program,
but that would be separate.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Understood, Mr. Keefer the
legislature would still
Set in control employer and
employee contributions and all
of those pieces as we do for
parent and ERB, um, there is one
line that is different. I pulled
up the
Article 2 of the Constitution to
compare to this piece, and I
don't know Mr. Chair, if this is
an appropriate time to ask.
Question about the legislation.
That's being proposed.
that would be fine.
OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, page
2, section C.
The existing article 2.
Uh, legislation has an
additional sentence that
pertains to Pyre ERB that you
did not include in this
proposal, and I'm just wondering
why.
It's line 20, section C.
Um
With respect to Peron or B.
The Constitution now reads the
legislature shall not enact any
law that increases the benefits
paid by the system in any manner
or changes the funding formula
for a retirement plan unless
adequate funding is provided.
Um
Why did you choose in your
proposal, leave that out.
Mr. Chair, represent Figueroa,
uh, when we looked at, uh, this
proposal, uh, we also took into
feedback and information that
was provided not only from the
last session on the previous
resolution that we had put
forth, uh, we do understand we
are different from the pensions.
We're a little bit different as
far as how they provide their
benefit, they pay out through a
pension. Uh, we have a lot of
changes as it relates to
healthcare, uh, some of them
through the healthcare
purchasing Act, some of the
different mandates that we get.
Um, but when we looked at that,
uh, particular, uh, line, uh,
which was included last year.
Section C on page 2 at the very
end of that paragraph. Uh, I did
talk about the, the enacting any
law that would uh essentially um
alter the funding for the
retiree healthcare, and there
was a lot of concern that this
was essentially uh locking in
the state, um, in having to
cover uh those unfunded
liabilities, um, not to say that
we still wouldn't work very
closely with the legislature as
it states through the through
the through our statue, uh, but
we understood that by putting it
into the constitutional
protection, it would really
limit that latitude of the
funding formula and so we wanted
to make sure that we were really
looking at the trust fund,
really looking to make sure that
we had that protected and we
figured we continued to work on
the funding side, uh, outside of
this Constitution, uh, with the
legislature, um, because I know
that was a concern of many.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
Very well, representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Um, and
for all intents and purposes and
transparency, I am a recipient
of this fun, so thank you for
that. And you guys have provided
really excellent
Services throughout my career as
a city planner, and as a
retiree, um, and I just wanted
to mention, and I think, um,
Senator uh Figueroa brings up
some.
Excellent questions. Um, and I
just wanted you to clarify cause
I think I know the answer to
this, but I wanna be certain,
um, so ERB and uh PERA are both
quasi-governmental agencies, and
is that the case with this group
as well?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Barrego, yes, we, we are to a
board that uh we, I report to
myself. That's what I thought.
And that's why you're proposing
this legislation as sort of a
protection like a constitutional
amendment protection of the
trust fund itself. Is that
What I'm understanding here, Mr.
Representativenego, yes, uh,
this is the joint resolution
that we are looking to present,
uh, so that we could have it
protected in the Mexico
constitution that we would like
to take to the people for the
vote. And that's why
Just so I understand when you're
saying that it's only the
And I forget the amount you said
1.5 million or billion over 1.5
billion billion, right.
Um, is what you're looking to
protect.
In this, in this legislation.
Mr. uh, but I, yes, that is
correct. We are really focusing
on the $1.5 billion that we do
have in our trust is where we
want to make sure we're
protecting that, um, solely for
the organization of the
beneficiaries of this, OK, and
Mr. Chair, just so you know, um,
in 1998, the, the uh para had a
similar um uh constitutional
amendment, I think it was
constitutional Amendment 4, I
think it was.
And I was uh unpaid lobbyist, by
the way, back then, um, to get,
to make sure that that
legislation was enacted and it
was really at the time of
protection for any governor or
Legislator to not be able to
access that money, and this is
kind of a similar
Similar situation, am I not?
correct in that, Mr. Chair, but
I go, yes, this is a similar
action that we're looking to
protect our
our fund which I very much
support, Mr. Chair, just for the
record. Thank you.
We are asking now.
Just asking for an endorsement
and this is on.
Legislation
228945
1 essay.
And it will move.
motion for that.
Ri
Yes.
OK.
So now I'm gonna ask for
everybody's vote. Morego
Cynthia, yes.
Um, Castiliano Ambrose is
absent.
Figueroa, Natalie.
Yes.
Iyoto Daniel is absent. Martinez
Allen absent.
Senator Neibert
Representative Ream.
absent
Theo Lopez, absent.
Serato
Absence annex, absent.
Rebo Caballero absent, uh,
Senator Gonzalez, yes.
Uh, Representative Allison? Yes.
And Representative Alcon is
absent.
So we have 6 yes, 0 now.
Very well.
Mhm.
7.
Um, Representative Alcon is
absent, and he was our 7th.
Oh
Who did, did I miss somebody?
You miss me.
I'm just.
Oh
Uh, yeah, it's uh Senator
Rodriguez is not.
Just
Very well, we'll go with 6
members voting affirmative or
endorsement.
And uh
Members of
This will concludes our.
Agenda, uh
I want to thank everyone for uh
Being in this committee,
especially the staff of
Very, very much appreciated for
all the work that you do.
And uh with that uh.
Thank you again for being here
and to serve in this committee.
Motion for German.
So moved Mr. Chair with
gratitude for your leadership.
Thank you.
Mr. Chairman.
Happy Thanksgiving, everyone.
OK.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and
committee as well. Appreciate it
all. One short question uh that
uh in open enrollment and when,
uh, so we do have it on November
15th is when we're asking for
all the information to be sent
to us, yes.
Thank you.
Great.
