Good morning. Um Madam Co-chair
Madam Vice Chair. Linda Lopez,
State Senator District 11, which
is the Southwest Quadrant of
Your turn. Senator,
Representative,
Oh, Good morning, Madam Chair. I
am a representative of the AL
I will pretend this six, which
is part of similar and Meckley
County.
Uh, my district I have, uh, nine
chapter houses the whole P, Zuni
and I have a lot of fun
morning, Madam Chair Committee,
Benny Shindo and
The senator for District 22.
Good Morning, Madam Chair. Good
morning, everyone. Good to be
here this morning. It was a
lovely drive from Albuquerque
House District. 68 Glad to be
here, everyone.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
Madam Vice chair. I'm
representative Liz Thompson
House District 24, which is the
northeast Heights of
Albuquerque, and I grew up in
Crown point.
And it was a nice drive up
because it looks like they're
finally gonna open La Bajada
Hill, you know?
Thank you, madam. Chair and and
Committee. I'm Bill Souls. State
Senator from the Las Cruces
area. Uh, the closest of the
tribes, pueblos, et cetera, is
the Fort Sill Chea Warm Springs
Apaches, uh, which are nearby.
They are now officially changing
their name from just being Fort
sill. And so I was very pleased
to see we're going to be
visiting down to the hot area,
but it'll be September. It'll
start to cool off, but it's very
nice to be here. Thank you,
madam Chair.
Good morning to everyone. I'm
Nancy Senator Nancy Rodriguez
from Santa Fe District. 24. And
I have been in this committee
for 29 years. So good to see
you. Thank you.
Good morning. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I am Terra. Jamil. I am
from, uh, district 38, Dona
Sierra and Socorro counties. I
was raised on the Ala Good
morning, Madam chair and
committee members. I am Anthony
Ellison. I represent District
four.
They represent nine that
chapters and four communities.
Thank you.
Good morning, madam Chair
members of the committee Martin
Zamora.
House district. 63 covers the
south half of Curry north half
of Roosevelt Al Debacle,
Guadalupe and Good Morning chair
and vice chair, members of the
committee and the audience.
In those viewing. My name is
Patricia Roybal
Caballero. I represent house
District 13, which is the far
Southwest Quadrant of
Albuquerque. And I'm a proud
member of the Piro Mano Tiwa
Indian tribe, which is the, uh,
historical present tribe in Dona
Ana and Las Cruces area. Thank
you so much.
Uh, good morning, everyone. I'm
Let's go ahead and go out to the
audience. Uh, which
I cherish.
We'll go out to the audience.
Lead for Indian affairs, miss
All of you guys dearly now
representing UN M. I'm the
associate director.
Good morning, madam Chair
members of the committee. Sure
What's the old farm it out?
Good morning, everybody. I'm Ray
to Foya. I'm from Kki,
representing the New Mexico
Indian Affairs Department.
Good morning.
Uh, James, regard
Here here in interim and and a
Allison. You know those reading
this Good morning. I'm
representative Samoa's wife,
Debbie.
She She forgot to tell you. She
is what city
Over the city.
Yeah.
You think you madam chair good
to the Indian Affairs Committee
and those online and there's a
lot going on. It's quite a few
pages for a work plan. Um, but I
send it to all the the stuff
that's going to speak more to
those that are that are here. Um
And move on.
So let's go ahead and begin with
an and then, uh, we'll also
Thank you, Madam Chair and Madam
vice chair. So looking at our,
uh, proposed work plan and
meeting schedule. Uh, we have
four PRI sort of topics and
subheadings underneath those So
starting with the first it's
state and tribal relations. Uh,
you can see that at the bottom
of the first page there, uh,
essentially, uh, presentations
from Native American liaisons or
similarly tasked individuals
from various state agencies. Uh,
we have some issues. Uh,
Cheating tribal relations
regarding uranium mining and
cleaning those up funding for
tribal capital projects. Uh, in
update on the missing and
murdered indigenous women and
relatives task force that will
come from the attorney general's
office. Um, an update on tribal
gaming and alcohol on gaming
floors.
Uh, meetings with, uh, Veterans
Services Department to address
tribal veterans needs, Uh,
various presentations from the
Indian Affairs department
dealing with water
infrastructure and other
environmental issues.
I have a report from the
Department of Transportation.
uh, looking at construction and
roadwork on tribal lands. Uh, an
update from the secretary of
State regarding Native American
voters, alliance and tribal
election issues. Uh, and as you
work through that list on that
second page, you can sort of
reach through those. Those are a
variety of topics dealing with
this general issue of state and
tribal relations.
Um, moving on to our second
general topic. It's economic
development that starts on Page
three. Most importantly, we have
two subheadings under there.
Broadband access on tribal lands
and an update from the Economic
Development Department and
Indian affairs and perhaps
workforce solutions as well.
Um, our third main topic is
education. Uh, you'll see first,
uh, some familiar lawsuits, so
hopefully some updates on where
those stand. Uh, I have
preservation of Native American
languages. Uh, an update,
perhaps from the New Mexico
Athletics Association regarding
students eligibility to play
sports. Um, we have a topic
there on Native American teacher
retention and increasing access
to Native American teachers. Uh,
as well as, uh, promoting
culturally rele.
In early learning programs.
Uh, our fourth main topic of
consideration here. Our annual
reports from executive agencies.
Uh, these are presentations.
Many of you have heard before.
um, but required annual reports
on particular topics. Um, I have
first, uh, report from the
office of the state engineer in
the Interstate, Uh, stream
Commission. Those again are
dealing with a handful of
lawsuits and other particular
issues. Um, I also have a report
from the Indian Affairs
Department again.
Um, again, looking at, uh,
collaborative acts. Uh, what the
agency is actually doing and
what the department's priorities
and init initiatives will be for
the upcoming year.
Um, so we have four general
topics state and tribal
relations, economic development,
education and reports from, uh,
executive agencies. If anyone
has any specific specific topics
that you like to see addressed,
I'd be happy to take note of
those and try to get those
integrated into our agendas on
the very last page of your work
plan, you'll see some proposed
dates, uh, and meeting
locations. We've just started
talking about those meeting
locations, They probably will
change.
A little bit, but I can tell you
that we will be visiting the
Fort sill. Uh, Apache this year.
we'll spend some time in the
Shipwreck Gallop area, as well
as a few of the other northern
and southern pueblos. So if
there's somewhere very
particular you'd like to meet,
Uh, let me know. Uh and I'm open
to any suggestions, Uh, any of
you may have to contribute to
this work plan.
Thank you, Nicole. Let's uh
begin with Liz representative
Thompson.
Thank you, Madam Chair. One
thing that, um I have big
concerns about is the rate of
expulsion of Native American
special ed kids in particular.
Um
It's mainly one district in the
I'll just leave it at that.
Thank you, madam Chair.
To representative
Thank you, madam Chair.
Over the weekend.
We spent the weekend in
Mescalero.
And, uh,
And talking with some of the
people there.
Uh, they have a little bit of a
concern with, uh, what is going
on with the Ford sale Apaches?
Are they now?
A recognized New Mexico tribe,
part of the 23 recognized
tribes.
I don't think so. And the people
down in Mescalero are saying
that
Uh, they don't approve of what
they're doing in the dimming
area.
So
To include them in our
discussions and to have a
meeting.
Wherever
Uh, the venue that it use is
gonna be
Are we setting ourselves up to
be put in the middle of a fight
that we don't want to be in?
That's my question, Madam Chair.
Ma! Madam chair, So I can't hear
what y'all are saying. Should we
get on the speakers? And so we
can all hear what the discussion
is. OK, thank thank you, madam
chair on that point.
Thank you. I did I I'm having
difficulty hearing too Sorry.
Um So on on that, representative
Alison, um
They do have a seat at the
table.
Um, with the all of, um, so that
part is that they have been
accepted into the, um
The council.
They're not. Oh, I thought that
they did have sorry. I thought
that they did have OK I miss Oh,
I know who has it. Sorry, Isla
del Sur.
It's Isle del Tor is there OK? I
met I so but there is a great
deal of contention.
Um, that exists right now, and
it's not just, um, with between
the Mezcalero tribe.
And Fort Sill, But it's that
entire region of which my tribe
is also involved. So it I don't
know whether it's an issue.
Madam chair of being set up for
something, but I think that out
of respect for the contention
that exists and until it gets
resolved, it probably would be
best to avoid being in the area
and exposed to that type of
potential. I'm not saying that
it is or that it will occur, but
Just
Wouldn't resonate, I think in a
positive manner, So, uh, that
would be, um
My recommendation is that we
avoid, um as much as possible,
unless we make that day and that
are those days and that
discussion that primary
discussion. What are the points
of contention? Um, what do we
need to resolve? How do we bring
in the entities? I don't know.
But it I will tell you that the
contention is, um, growing day
in and day out and Senator
Rodriguez
Madam chairman. I just wanted to
clarify what the question
originally was, but I think the
the what clarified and if I may
just a lab to make sure that
we're we stay within the focused
question that was asked the
question that was asked was, Is
this tribe in different terms?
Is this tribe recognized only at
a federal level and not the
state level? I think you brought
state so I I don't know and can
lead on that. But I just wanna
thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Senator.
Souls. Thank you, Madam Chair
And you know I'm an advisory on
this, so I don't have a an
actual vote on that particular
issue.
But since I've been in the
legislature
For itself has been a recognized
tribe federally has been
recognized by the state and
continues to be and I don't
think that that is within the
realm of this committee to to
get into the middle of that,
which means they need to
continue to be treated like
every other tribe, Uh, and group
in the state. Uh, the others who
are complaining about that
That's a federal issue as to
whether they're federally
recognized, but they are
officially recognize.
In the state of New Mexico. They
are officially recognized at the
federal level, and I don't think
we should be discriminating or
not going there because somebody
else claims that they shouldn't
be they are and will continue to
be both at the state and at the
federal level, and they need to
be treated like others. They've
been fighting. Uh, this
misinformation.
And you know, trying to to get
them discredited in the entire
12 years that I've been in the
Legislature, and it continued to
to work within the state and
building things and I think it
would be a disservice to
suddenly say, oh, some other
peop. Some people say that
you're not legit. Therefore,
Yeah, We're just gonna stay away
from it. They are ours.
Thank you.
Senator Lopez.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair I
just wanted to read for the
committee as well as those
watching. Um, a statement that,
uh,
Explicitly will say about the
status of Fort Seal here in New
Mexico.
In April of 2014, the New Mexico
Supreme Court unanimously ruled
In favor of the forts. Apache
tribe requiring Governor
Martinez
To recognize the tribe under
state law.
And include the tribe in the
annual state tribal summit.
OK any more comment.
Senator.
That really did not clarify. My
question. Are there New Mexico?
I recognize, try and because the
reason why I'm asking is
because, like, for example, the
linty bill, the Indian education
When we have legislation that
are lined out, saying it's
supported by the 23 Indian
tribes of New Mexico.
I don't think it includes the
Fort Seal Apache and
If we approve any legislation, I
think they could very easily
throw a wrench into the whole
mess.
That's what I think we should
try to avoid.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Uh, thank you, madam Chair.
Yeah, This is a A tough issue.
Um
They are federally recognized.
Um, We also have a similar
situation with this, You
mountain They own 100,000 acres
of land up by Shiprock.
They've never, you know.
You know, they are federal
tribe. They have that much land
within the state of New Mexico
as their reservation.
I. I guess the question you know
for me and and this is probably
going forward.
I mean,
There's not I don't think
there's any tribal for seal
tribal people in living in New
Mexico and now in that area.
Maybe a handful.
But I I don't know. I mean, um
you know when we include them in
other things, you know, I It's
just
I know they're there for
economic development purposes.
You know, when you have a
handful of kids
Uh, And of course they don't
speak their language and you
know it. Just it just
Muddy the water, I guess for
others, and and I it just And of
course they're relatives are at
at Mescalero Pache. You know
they were asked
Back then, if they wanted to
stay in Fort Sill, Oklahoma or
come with the Mescaleros, you
know T to Mexico and those dire
direct relatives that chose to
That come to muscular
With, you know, they came here
and so I think those relatives
are more upset. They chose to
stay in Oklahoma.
And the rest of them are here
and now for economic purposes.
You know they're making their
way here and I remember they
tried to set up a a gaming
facility down there in the in
the early two thousands and
Governor Richardson shut that
down and so forth, so
It's an internal fight. I don't
you know, Um it's Yeah, it's
hard to do because these are
You know?
Both fellow recognized, right.
You know, their homelands now is
in Oklahoma, and there are other
relatives. Homeland is in
Mescalero.
If you think about Mescalero,
they're made up of 33 different
bands of, uh uh, Apaches. Not
just, you know.
Mescaleros and so forth, So I
think that
You know, so
You know, I I've been deferring
to the Mescaleros because
That's their right. You know, as
a tribal sovereign
Because they have, you know, uh
Their relatives within their
within in exterior boundaries
of, uh them living with them.
And and so
Complicated issue, but I just
throw that out there because,
you know
Even though you know through the
Supreme Court. Whatever that is.
That you know the state will
recognizing, but rather they're
Brothers and recognize him as
another question.
And respect. Madam chair and
members of the committee at
So we're hearing two different
Opinions here, right? So then
Uh, Madam Chair and and Senator
Lopez.
In in what you read a while ago
off your phone.
Was that, saying that the New
Mexico State Supreme Court
Said that we have to recognize
Fort Sill.
On a federal level or on a state
level.
Madam chair. Um, the statement
that I read is that
The again the New Mexico Supreme
Court in 2014.
Um
Required Governor Martinez to
recognize the tribe.
For seal.
Um, under state law.
And to include the tribe in the
annual state tribal summit.
So in New Mexico, Um we are to
recognize Fort Seal.
To be included it. It's just
from the statement that I have
from the the Supreme Court.
And and Madam chair and Senator
Lopez is is that still under
litigation or
Or where does that sit?
Um
Madam chair if the Supreme Court
issued
a
A decision.
Then unless it was it taken
further up. Um
The latter as I call it up to
the United States Supreme Court
or the Court of Appeals the
federal level then that would be
I. I don't know if it was taken
up any further, but
At this point, our Supreme Court
ruled, and that was in 2014, and
they're the final authority.
In the state. Um
Litigation. But again, they
could have appealed it and that
I don't know.
Okay, so I. I wonder if Madam
chair if anybody else in the
committee knows if it's been
appealed or not, or
Madam chair. I don't think so.
Madam Chair, but the question of
federal recognition That's not
an issue. They are federally
recognized tribe. You know,
they're their headquarters is in
Oklahoma at Forts Hill, Oklahoma
And and, uh, Madam Chair and and
Senator Sino,
Uh,
How How does it work amongst the
tribes in the pueblos of the
state rules? Is that what
What
Is the decision or
Or we're saying that there's
some infighting amongst the
tribes.
About
Oh, and and why they should be
recognized Why they shouldn't
and all that.
So
You. You, you You have a lot
more.
Knowledge about this than I do
so.
Where would we
Where would we sit as a
committee? You know that? That's
a tough one. You know, Uh
It's a you know, it's it's a
tough one. You know, in terms of
federal recognition, their
federal recognized ripe
You know whether we recognize
him as a state, you know is
another issue, but you know they
did appeal to the Supreme Court.
Back in 2014 and in the Supreme
Court did rule in favor that
they should be recognized.
Uh, II, I guess how? How much
Whether it's carte blanc just
like everybody else that has
been here for a long time.
Or whether it's limited in
certain areas. I haven't really
I don't know what you know, Uh,
because
You know?
It's hard, you know it. It's
it's hard to be able to
Support it, but
When their relatives and their
direct descendants in the state
of Mexico that live here.
Or at odds with them coming in
that that's the hard part.
That's the hard part and Madam
chair and and and, uh, senator
and and I've been hearing that
Since I started serving
So it it just and and I You know
some of these answers that I'm
getting are kind of what I
might. I've accrued to knowledge
about it, but it's just, uh
It. It is interesting to hear
you say that.
What does recognition mean?
What? What does it mean is if
it's not broke down into details
And everything else so
Thank thank you, senator. And
thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Representative. I would
like to just say that it is a
complicated issue.
And I think, uh, Senator Lopez
your statement. They are to be
included in a trial. Um,
officially, I'd like as I
understand. There are honorable
members and because I am a
Navajo woman many years and so
they are not so with that I'd
like to little and then back to
Thank you, Madam Chair. I think
we have kind of gone too far in
the weeds. The question from
Representative Allison is should
we get in the middle of it by
host by having a meeting hosted
by them. We're not saying
they're not gonna be invited to
the tribal summit. We're not
saying they're not recognized.
We're just saying maybe at this
point. It's not a good idea to
get in the middle of it. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
What I wanted to add to this was
the
Acknowledgement that they are a,
uh, federally recognized tribe.
Uh, I respect that.
Um
Uh, but as, uh, was also
provided by, uh, Senator Lopez,
Their headquarters is based in
Oklahoma. Their administration
offices are based in Oakland.
So that, um, that is I
Just want a understand that they
have, um, that's what I wanted
to
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, representative Thompson for
hitting it, Right? Right on
what we're supposed to be
talking about. And and thank
you, representative little as
well. And Senator Schendel for
recognizing, um
Our family and and
From which many of us are
brothers and sisters of the
Meske little tribe. We as my
tribe, we recognize our
sisterhood, Our brotherhood, our
lineage. Our ties are
descendancy, um in in the state,
and, um
And with
Families that we have
In Mescalero tribe as well.
Um and
It's an uncomfortable madam
chair discussion to be having
Because, um
Who are we to decide who's
recognized and who's not
recognized if you have a
history.
And we have all of us have
Shown our histories in the state
and in the region very clearly
and some of us date back.
You know who knows? Time
immemorial. That's why our
tribes refer to us in our
present as having been time
immemorial in this area.
Um, It's unfortunate that we
have to live with a big
government and little government
and in those confines of
discussing recognition and who's
recognized and who's not amongst
us, Madam Chair we know our
histories and we know our our
lineage is lineages. We know our
ancestral, um
Ties, and we know uh and we
don't have these discussions.
necessarily. It's only when, um
What has transpired in the last
couple of years.
Um, that's made it
uncomfortable.
Out in the open and in the
public, as Senator Shindo has,
um articulated and it's only
because
The friction has been created.
Um, by
A lot of different details that
we don't wanna get into, and I
think that's the what would we
would be facing? Um, if we were
to
Um, hold a meeting. I think we'd
have a hard time.
Um, dealing with the points of
contention.
And um and
Terms of
My tribe, for example, Um, we've
had
You know, we're the only ones on
the federal recognition rules.
No one else has been on the
rolls. We are
However, um
We've been, um obstructed from
pursuing further by one of the
tribes that's appointed
contention here, so it's
uncomfortable.
And we need not get into that
because there's legalities and
all kinds of other issues, uh,
that are on the table reference
to that, But I think that, um,
represent Thompson's correct and
that we need to just move on.
and acknowledge the fact that
it's been expressed honor and
respect.
Comments that representative
Alison brought to us concerning
What? He, uh has recently
Um then.
In discussions with or
Heard from, and, um we just
Move on in the most respectful
way that we can in
acknowledgment of all of our
ancestries as they relate to the
state of New Mexico. Thank thank
you, Madam chair and in the
discussions very
Very informative. Very
interesting. Uh, I do believe
madam chair that we did have a
meeting at Fort Sill a couple of
years ago.
I remember very well talking
about
Uh, taxes. Uh,
Talking about a
Vaccine program for wild horses
and using a machine to vaccinate
and make the MERS uh, sterile
and
And, uh, I remember that
meeting. Uh and I remember
touring the store.
That they have in their in the
the land that they have there
where they wanted to put the
casino.
I I'm very appreciative of
anybody across the states.
That invites us to their place.
To have an an intermitting. Uh,
I don't believe that when we do
that.
We are
They're just to represent them
in a certain manner or anything.
It's it's
It's an invitation from them to
their
To their, uh, land to their home
to their place.
Uh, where they live, and, uh,
welcoming the
Legislature. Legislators to
Have a meeting there and
Uh, I wanna say a big thanks to
Fort Sele for inviting us. And,
uh, I hope everything works out
and, uh,
We don't
Look at this in a political
sense more more, in a sense that
We're being invited to a place
and facilitate us and
And I'm very appreciative that
of that from from Fort Sill and
And anybody across the state of
New Mexico that invites us.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative,
Representative. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I went to the, uh,
Secretary of State's website
Maggie Tulliver and under a
section for voting and
elections.
She lists the 23 rec, federally
recognized tribes in New Mexico
counties.
And number.
Number 22.
Is the Fort Seal Apache, so they
are listed as part of the 23
tribes.
They are listed as number two
number 22 and Navajo is number
23 so
Fort Lewis or Fort Cle Apache is
listed.
I wish I would have. I had never
seen this before.
But I now know. Thank you. Thank
you, Madam. Chair, Senator.
Souls, Senator, Senator. Thank
you, Uh, again since I've been
on this, and I think the Supreme
Court ruling is is very clear
that they are a recognized group
here since I've been on here.
The rotation of where we visit
has always been that we go to
one of the three Apache nations.
Uh, we go to jar I think last
year is Mescalero. It's
backcourt. SS turn. Uh, we have
done that. We've been to Port
So I believe three other times
that I've since I've been on
this committee. It's now that
time again. Um I don't think in
any way that this is, you know,
getting in the middle of
something more than having gone
to Mescalero last year was
getting in the middle of this.
Uh, I think it's recognizing
tribes that are recognized by
the state and as the Supreme
Court has indicated
And and I don't mean this in
kind of a negative way. But when
we talk about their headquarters
are in another state.
I believe Navajo headquarters
are in Arizona.
If I'm not mistaken, and so,
Yeah, we really can't be using
that as a reason. They as I talk
with the Fort sill, um and
again, they're adding circa a
warm springs. Which were they
actual, Uh, inst areas that they
very much are bringing people
back into New Mexico as they're
able to, with economic
development and other things
that this is not just an
economic endeavor, but it really
is trying to establish a
foothold so that there's a place
in reason.
Their people to come back. Thank
you, madam Chair.
Thank you, Alison.
I thank you, madam Chair.
I think the reason why the
Mescalero and she leadership
approached me.
Was because if Fort Seal really
wants to come back and be
claimed, as part of the
relatives of the Mescalero, then
they should consult with us and
live with us not want to
establish another reservation
away from us.
Um, the leadership said that
there's a lot of difference
between muscular hia and the
Arizona tribes and the Fort Sele
are part of what he said was the
Chewa Apaches and their
relatives are in Arizona and all
the muscular leadership is
saying if they want to work
together, let's work together.
Let's let them come to us, and
we decide where they move.
I think that's the main point
that they were trying to
express.
Thank you, madam Chair.
Thank you, madam Chair members
of the committee.
So nationally, the Native
American doesn't matter what
tribe nation Pueblo whatever.
Um, urging that prepress out
there.
So I do not see why in this
state, especially that we're
trying to discriminate. Um, just
as far as just trying to decide
to have a meeting there.
Seen a lot. Um, these past
couple of days. This campaign
year. Um, you've seen the
violence. We've seen the
protests. Uh, I think they're we
need to set an example.
Thank you, madam Chair.
So with, uh, hearing all the I
made a suggestion that, um, but
then we
For I've never been to Fort
Sill.
Uh, projects. Um, firsthand.
That we
What were we saying about the,
uh, September 4th to the sixth.
I'm gonna work with staff about
changing it, or, uh, leaving it.
Maybe two days. Well, what you
is in, uh, Oklahoma?
That's Aquila flat, cause we
have shipwreck in Gallup, Akila
flats cause for sales in
Oklahoma. It's a long way.
Yeah, we I, I You know, we've
been there.
Um, meeting down there, Tax man
over there, mister. Uh, Rivera
would know.
Uh, we had our big tax tribal
tax discussion down there the
last, But yeah, That's just my
just OK, let's move forward. The
meeting dates and locations,
Representative Little Madam
Chair, the northern, uh,
Northwest. Um
Representatives, but there's a
potential impact of abandon and
uncapped oil wells. Um, and the
impact um to the I don't I was
looking through to see if that
might have been, um, included
somewhere that I might have
missed, Uh, the closest I could
find was number 10.
Uh, item number 10, but it's
just a regarding Chaco Canyon
and not not specifically the
Anything pertaining.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair, I. I, um would like
to ask, and I couldn't find any
particular. Um
Letter or number where this
might be part of, but I think we
would be very helpful for us to
get a presentation on tribal
energy development, especially
in the renewable energy.
I under I attended a summit.
Um and I heard from we have all
heard from a number of tribes
around the state that have, um,
very vigorous.
Um
Energy development going on and
they share their projects. And
that was just really I opening
for me because I thought there
was just two or three tribes.
Madam chair, Actually, they
multiple tribes around the
state, so I thought we could
have a maybe, uh, maybe the
applicable place would be under
economic development because it
is energy development is is
economic development in the and
that's how it was presented by
at the summit, and it was the
summit.
Led by sovereign energy groups,
so maybe they can help
coordinate maybe with Nicole,
The sovereign energy group could
help if you accept it if we
accept it as a topic, um, could
help coordinate. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Uh, yeah, madam. Sure. I'd like
to request. Uh,
Put it on the agenda for Are we
at that point now or are we
still under? OK? Uh, for the
In the, uh
July meeting.
He's a shipwreck or a gallop.
Uh, the tribal, uh, language of
compact schools.
Although they went to the
Senate, and then it died on the
house, So I just wanna have a
discussion and, uh
About that going forward, so you
can put that on the front end.
Because August 2nd is our feast,
and he
So if, uh if you guys wanna skip
away from the meeting, but no,
I'm just kidding
You coming ham us for our our
feast Day, August 2nd, So, uh,
I will not be there. Uh, I might
be there on the first day.
31st. Maybe the first. I'm not
sure, but that's kind of close.
But, uh, August 2nd is our free
state so
But definitely if you can put me
on the first day agenda on the
31st for that.
Education. Thank you, senator.
And I believe, according to
staff for the July 31st received
a phone call from the university
who are interest Springs
chapter.
Is all guided us to their
chapter during that.
Senator Lopez.
Ah, thank you, madam Chair.
I was, um
And and it could be maybe
Blended in with number 10 on a
just a suggestion or or it also,
just depending where, um you all
would like
But there was an article um
That I had read.
That was, um
From New Mexico political report
and it was an interesting
article about um, the oil and
gas production company that
petitioned the state of into a
waste disposal Well,
That was located in the
northwest corner of the state.
And I know that the land
commissioner, um has a specific
Uh,
Area of law such that she could,
um
In other words, she's part the
The state Land Commissioner is
part of this type of
Change.
And I was wondering if maybe
that could be a presentation for
us, Um in many parts of the
state, especially in
So I didn't know Madam chair if
that would be a consideration.
Um, cause it also relates to
economic development without uh,
request.
Representative Zamora. Madam
chair. I didn't quite hear
Senator Lopez that that a water
well was gonna be turned into a
waste.
Um, Madam Chair Representative.
What it was, is that it was, um,
a request.
Um, to turn a water well into a
waste disposal Well,
Um, in the northwest corner of
the state.
And it uh apparently, it's on a
plot of state land surrounded by
tribal and federal property.
And the state Land commissioner
does have purview over approval.
and apparently that there was
And request for approval was not
made to the state land
commissioner until I guess late
in the process, so I just wanted
to hear what process
You know? What does the state
land Commissioner have purview
over and was it followed through
or whichever
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Senator.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I
totally forgot the second point.
Um
UN under sea education. Uh,
number three preservation of
Native American languages I'd be
interested in knowing in that
presentation who? However,
however, we structure that, um,
getting a feedback from, um the
presenters on how well the state
agencies are coming into
compliance with the Language
Access Act.
Because there's a lot of
interaction between, um the
tribes.
Um, the department in Affairs
Department and all the other
departments who have to be in
compliance with the act, and I'd
be interested in knowing how
well that's
Coming out, rolling out and
whether they are in compliance
and what we need to do to try to
spark additional fire. Uh, to
get them in compliance. Thank
you.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair. I
was, uh, just wanted to
piggyback on representative
Thompson's request about looking
at the number of of Children
that have been expelled. But
also I've heard of, um families
that were then who went to
speak, uh to administration, who
were then offered trespassing
citations, so they were then
pulling their Children out all
their Children out of the
schools.
Thank you, Madam. Chair one
additional piece I'd offer for
consideration is an update from
aging and long term care
regarding, UM services service
delivery to
All citizens, but specifically
towards um
So,
Thank you very much. Um, Before
I go on, let something slip
here. I was looking at the, um
Update on tribal gaming and
alcohol and gaming floor is
number five on the front page
And for a moment, I thought, um
are we going to be discussing?
Um sports that just so we can
get an update to see And maybe
if,
um or if you feel it's already
within the tribal representative
Zamora thank you, madam Chair
members of the committee. One
thing that we seem to
To forget about time and time
again till school safety.
Uh,
Like to see something addressed
as on on school safety and and
What we're doing across the
state, uh, to make these schools
more secure.
Uh, not only
Uh And you hate to say the word
and even talk about it, but
school shootings.
But, uh, school safety
concerning drugs.
Uh, seems like since we have
Legalized marijuana and
Made technology available in
In Vapes and stuff.
That, uh
That have THC in them seems like
and I've heard it.
For my own grandson.
And it really bothers me.
At the age of 14 and in the
eighth grade.
Telling me when I picked him up
from school.
Saying.
Ah, But do you you'd be
surprised.
How many kids are vaping before,
during and after school?
And
When it comes to education.
We're not gonna do a good job
educating our kids.
If they're
Being exposed.
To be high at school at school
all the time.
And it's a real serious issue we
have in our state.
Uh, I know that
And MED is, uh,
Doing some primary work on
testing.
Uh, effluent waters coming out
of schools.
And I know one of the first
reports I heard is that they
found
Cocaine.
Uh,
What's the new drug that's
killing everybody. The fentanyl.
That they found cocaine
fentanyl.
And other drugs in the effluent
coming out of a particular
school.
So to me.
We ought to be addressing those
issues and and how we go about
School safety and and I think
that concerns
Not only school shootings and
keeping these
Schools safe and
The drugs that are in the
schools nowadays and and the
technology and
And everything else that has
I would say promoted that
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Representative Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair on Page
two. Number eight. A report from
the Department of
Transportation, the Navajo
Nation.
DT and, uh
BI, a
Tribal roads and construction
When we have that presentation,
can we have an all together so
they know how one another is
hindering the other party?
Because I get a lot of calls
from New Mexico DOT saying. Hey,
we need you to help us again.
In, uh, talking with Navajo DOT,
So I think it would be good to
have all three of them give a
joint presentation. Thank you,
Madam Chair and I would like to
add
So I
Thank you, madam Chair members
of the committee.
There was a bill about, um,
bringing the state board back
What State Board of Education.
In some states. They did some
importantly, see some of the
outcomes. Um, was it really
helping the schools or not?
Especially if they are BIE
schools are being left out of
the the loop with some of the
money security for schools, Um,
that, you know, we expect the
federal government to to come
forward, but that's just what,
uh, salary parity is taking our
It's hurting the schools. Um
Thank you, madam Chair.
OK, Collin successes.
Kudos.
Challenges.
OK, we have a congratulations.
Maybe we have a joke of the day.
Oh, that's that's not me. But
many of you have watched my
granddaughter Athena grow up.
And she graduated from pre K and
James.
Hey, with that, I believe, uh,
vice chair.
Madam chair members of the
committee. They
Did the, uh to July water line.
I hope that's um I don't know if
we would like an update or just
to see if there's any other
community.
Vice chair included a water line
update to Haji, but we're in
Gallop waterline pipeline and
its representative, Little Madam
chair. Thank you and my fellow
committee members, Uh I was at
the snap summit yesterday. Uh,
in Albuquerque Runner, Food
Bank.
And one of the topics that came
on. I was quite familiar with it
received a lot of information
about eligibility for food, and,
um, that people were not going
hungry in our state.
So one of the things that, uh,
came to light yesterday that I,
um I acknowledge I do I have
little information on in
relation to snap apparently on
there is a program the federal
food distribution on Indian
reservations.
That provides whereby food is
provided.
However, the recipients who live
on tribal lands must choose
between that and snap benefits.
There were many in the room that
were surprised by this and so
and it would it. It was raised
during a discussion on on, um
equity.
Uh, around the country and
specifically in the state of New
Mexico. So I'm I would offer
this as if I. I thought I was
pretty well aware of some of
these, uh, programs, but I don't
know them all. And I thought it
was, uh, information and update
A segment if you will, uh, to
just to discuss this. I did
check with, uh, the state, uh,
income support division staff
were there and, uh, they
expanded a little bit more to
me. But I'm seeing some
confusion. Some some, uh uh,
faces that also indicating that
we don't um, expressions that we
may not so that would be one
that I would like to add and
thank you.
Thank you, Representative Little
Madam Chair if I may, Uh Madam
chair and and and members of the
committee represented
Representative Little
Another issue that's going on
around the state with the food
banks.
Is Roadrunner Food Bank.
Is trying to take out three
other food banks in the state of
New Mexico.
There's eastern.
Uh,
New Mexico Food Bank.
And there's a food bank in
Gallup, and there's one in
Farmington.
That they're trying to muscle
out of the state.
If you look and I'm not aware of
what goes on in Farmington, or
what goes on in Gallup.
But if I look at my food bank in
eastern New Mexico
And all the little detail work
that they do to get food.
Not only to airmen.
But every other people
That need food assistance in the
state.
We have recently put a a food
bank location in in Cannon Air
Force Base, Believe it or not
that our country
We have airmen that
Or are in need of food.
But for Roadrunner Food Bank
To go throughout the state and
send letters to these other food
banks and telling them that they
are going to take over their
regions.
To me is just totally wrong.
We have worked hard in eastern
New Mexico.
To upgrade our food bank. Our
storage
But But you, uh locations, Uh,
In different parts where they
were needed.
The micro management that we
have put into our district.
Is intense.
And for somebody
To come in and say we're gonna
take over your area.
And and think that they can
micromanage what we do.
Where we're at.
And we see our own citizens. We
see our own needs and
everything.
To me is just absurd.
And I think every legislator
ought to be aware.
Of what's going on in the state
with with road runner food Bank
and how they're trying to muscle
other food banks out.
I don't. I don't think that's
right. I think we ought to work
together.
And not against each other and
trying to take over each other's
Uh, territories. I guess you
would say.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you. Members of the
committee.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chairman. Thank you.
Representatives more.
Because, um, some of those
nonprofits that do come into our
areas you know, especially
My district. You know that
that's essential work.
And for someone to come in and
compete against him, and they're
competing for state funding,
too, And that makes it even
worse because then you're
spreading the money then because
they'll have to put some over
here and some over there and
building that foundation for
that particular issue. Um, it it
doesn't happen quick enough.
So I. I try to intervene
sometimes and try to make sure
we're not overlapping to make
sure that we're being a little
more well rounded, but it it it
is an issue of someone coming
in, and, um, competing for that
year.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh,
On the calendar for the October
30th to November 1st You have
the pueblos in San Felipe?
Are they just placeholder? Or do
we have actual imitations from
them? Or we just
Wishful thinking. Presently they
are placeholders. OK, I. I just
got a text from a
One of the former council former
governor from Santa Ana Pueblo.
That they would like to host us
and they're right there.
Vernon Leo. Along a We
25 so
Thank you.
And Senator Hall.
Vice chair, Madam chair. Do you
just want to remind people that
about their Wi Fi that we must
have, um
Access to Internet especially if
we're gonna allow public comment
in the for, UM, Committee's
gonna move to different venues.
Um that we we make sure one of
those venues does have, uh, room
All right. Hearing no questions.
We will work on the agenda
Tales. Uh, send invitations.
And we
thank you so much for that. And
thank you for running the
meeting. Uh, ways very, very
gracious and very calm through
the whole thing. Um, I just have
a question on the dates for the
Aquila Flats meeting that we're
gonna have you mentioned it
could be one day, two days or
three days because they've been
carved into the schedule already
for the summer. And, um, I just,
um, wondered if maybe after
Nicole takes all this back well
as we're adjusting our schedules
for the OK, So let me tell you
what I'm thinking for.
September 4th, 5th and 6th.
Or a Kila flats. I'm thinking
that we could
Go to a Kila flats for one day.
And then make our way back up.
Man. Another potential thing is
there is a wonderful Museum of
Native American art and things
that silver City at, uh, Western
New Mexico. There.
Uh, which is that whole area
from prehistoric times to the
more recent, uh, native peoples
that were living there and you
know that might be a nice field
trip up in into that area and
some of the research that
they've been doing into the the
primitive tribes that were
living there and and the baskets
and bowls and and history.
So this is another potential.
Opportunity. Uh, Senator you
wanna put set up a campsite near
the hill of wilderness or
somewhere in there? Let's go.
I think everybody big game,
right? You guys all camp out
here.
A little.
Where
OK?
All right, Madam Chair. I just
thought of something and it just
hit
Um
The, uh, I we attended a
meeting.
And I think it was with the
forced service was at the Forest
Service.
For for service. Um
Bureau of Land Management. There
were several entities there.
In the southern part of the
state.
Where around, Um they they were
talking about.
Discoveries and their
anthropology.
Um, work in that area. The
research and all of that work,
and it was amazing what they
have discovered around the White
Sands area.
And, um
How they are engaging the
tribes.
In, um, trying to not only
identify but to close the gaps
in historical findings. So I'm
thinking that a presentation by
them if we are in that area
would be very enlightening
because then we really will get
the the history. Um, the
descendants.
And the relationships.
As
They are being archived in the
national, uh, archives that will
help with some of the previous
discussions that we had. I think
it would be very enlightening.
So those entities inviting them
to perhaps make a
