Um, just, uh, well, let me, so
this is uh Navajo Nation, the
Indian Affairs Committee is one
of the committees that travels
to many of the tribal nations.
Pueblo's and
With this particular
Committee,
I think we're we're very
privileged in our state to have
a, have it exist.
So, um, we will go forward. If
there are no objections to the
agenda or any additions to it,
we will move forward.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Good
morning again, everyone. I
appreciate you all being here.
Um, thank you again and I would
like to welcome you here to our
Community of Tohatchie, Tohachi
chapter, uh, we, we are, um,
situated here at the base of the
Tuska Mountains here in
Tohatchie. Uh, we are a part of
um District 14, which is
comprised of 5 chapters.
There's Tohatchi, Nachiti,
Mexican Springs, Twin Lakes, and
Coote Canyon. And um um we just
want to acknowledge that and
acknowledge um all of those that
are present with us this
morning. I took a few names down
and um I, I wanted to, um,
Uh, just give you that little
information in regards to um
what I have to say, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Um, so just a little bit of
housekeeping on the microphone.
You'll need to turn it off every
time so we don't get um feedback
so we'll go through
introductions and then we'll
come back to you guys as we move
forward and since we don't have
too many people in the audience
will go very briefly out to the
audience, um, first, so we'll
start on this side with um.
Y'all get no time if you would
just.
Um, briefly introduce yourself
and what entity you're with?
Said the Navajo Nation, uh, this
is my district, uh, the district
consists of 5 chapters.
Nadi to the north, Tohachi here
in Mexican Springs, Twin Lakes,
and Coyote Canyon. I want to
welcome you here as well. I
think I've met most of you, uh,
at some point in, in Santa Fe
or, or around the state. But now
welcome to our community of
Tohatchie. Yeah.
Hi, good morning everybody. Uh,
welcome to Tohatchie. Uh, my
name is Pernell Halona. I'm a
former Councilor delegate for
our group are here, our team
here, and, uh, um, I just wanted
to say welcome and uh uh hope we
get everything taken care of as
we need to and look forward to,
uh, moving forward with our
community. Thank you.
Well, welcome to Tahatchie. My
name is Keith Hillock, uh, I
want to thank all the staff from
Tahatchie. What a beautiful
place you have. This is my first
time here. Uh, I'm here to
represent Hosi Academy and uh
I'll introduce you all a little
bit later on, a little bit about
Hoho Academy.
Uh, good morning. My name is
Arvin Trujil and I'm with
Government Affairs for the
Navajo Transitional Energy
Company.
Morning.
Good morning. My name is
Kortasha Upshaw. I am also with
Navajo Transitional Energy
Company out of Farmington, New
Mexico. Thank you.
Oh
Good morning, Shanan I, I
appreciate everyone of you that
are here, and this is a big
thing for the our area here. I'm
just nosing around to see what's
going on. That's it thank you
much.
My name is Lilian Barney.
Yin um She Kevin Mitchell, yeah,
my excuse me I'll go but his
chain
send out Jenny that achenela.
I'm here today as a community
member. I'm also um going on my
14th year with the Gallup
McKinley County School Board.
Um, thank you all, um, for
coming out to Tohatchie. Um, I
hope we have a very productive
meeting and um safe travels.
Thank you.
Good morning. My name is Darryl
Baili and I'm a community
member. I vote here in Tochi.
Good morning. I'm Delphine
Pitsilli, a community member,
and I also am on the clipsy.
Thank you.
Levon Bennali, uh, here,
longtime president. It's good to
have all of you here today.
Thank you for coming.
Good morning. Uh, my name's Joe
Little. I'm unpaid staff
assistant to representative
Little.
Yeah, good morning everybody.
She, uh, Jeanie, Muskin, and
share. I'm the AMS here at
Tohatchie chapter. I like to
welcome everyone that's here
today. Enjoy your day and my
plan is they change but
but at the sun.
Good morning, everyone, um.
Good to see all of our Indian
Affairs committee here. This is
the first time, I believe that
um we had this group here, um,
as long as I've been here, I'm
also a staff and, um, I just
wanna thank, um, the committee
and our community for coming
out. My name is Janice Begay.
Thank you.
person
Yeah, I know.
Good morning.
I'm not even a staffer for
Patricia Real Caballero state
representative
OK, thank you, and we will start
here with our, our committee
members with um.
Representative Royal Caballero.
Thank you. Good morning, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
those in the audience and those
viewing you speak a little bit
closer to the mic because we
have the air conditioner going,
so or have it turned up. Thank
you. Thank you, Madam Chair, and
good morning, all the members of
the committee, those in the
audience and those viewing. My
name is Patricia Royal
Caballero. I represent House
District 13, which is the far
southwest quadrant of
Albuquerque, and I'd like to say
that I'm very glad to be back
here in Tohatchie. We had some
very
Good meetings previously. I've
been on this committee since I,
my first term.
And I'm a proud member of the
Beetle Manzo Tiwa tribe out of
Donana County. Thank you.
Oh, maybe that way
that they be she uh Bill Sheri
Yoha, uh Tota Denishah and for
those people that really speak
Navajo, I said I'm Bill from
Farmington.
Go ahopa
Go a hope,
uh, I am Charlotte Little. I
come from the Pueblosa San
Felipe and Taos. I represent, I
live in Albuquerque and I
represent House District 68,
which is in the northwest corner
of Albuquerque. Uh, thank you so
much for having us here. Very
glad to join you all.
Bye.
A deepen be
thank you, uh, so much for
having the
Indian Affairs Committee, uh, to
come here and be present with
all of you.
My name is Martha Garcia.
In Schlin.
She saw it in in.
And uh it's good to be here,
this fine morning is a little
bit smoky, but hopefully we'll
have some rain to have that
cleared up pretty, pretty soon
here. I think we're all uh
wishing for that since we're in
a very drought area in this, in
this place and maybe people that
have come from the south, uh,
east of New Mexico brought rain
with them so we can enjoy that
also. Thank you.
Good morning. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I'm Representative Lara
Cadena. I come from South
Central New Mexico, a district
in Donana County, um, I
represent parts of Las Cruces
and the historical communities
of Tortuga, San Pablo, and Mesa,
and I'm grateful for this, um,
delicious breakfast. I love
donuts with sprinkles. I don't
know who brought those, but
thank you and then I'll have a
little healthy yogurt too, but
I'm grateful to be um sharing
space with you today and look
forward to listening and
learning. Thank you for having
us.
It's you as you thought but
she's you, uh, greetings, um,
Senator Benny Schenifer, Avis
Pueblo.
It's a beautiful drive. I drove
up yesterday through Torreon,
Pueblo Pintado, Crown Point, so
it's a nice, uh,
Nice, nice drive yesterday. So
anyway, uh, thank you, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee. Good to see all of
you and uh uh good friends out
there, Lavon Benali, for family
long time.
Good morning. I'm Bill Souls,
state senator from Las Cruces
area where the beautiful Oregon
Mountain Desert Peaks Monument
is, uh, thank you for hosting
us. It's always so beautiful
driving through this area. And
similarly, I came kind of the
back way through Crown Point and
miles and miles of just
beautiful open country and
things like that, much better
than driving on the interstate
and things, but again, I
appreciate the, the warm welcome
this morning and all the
committee members. I'm glad to
be here. Thank you, Chair.
Representative Buck.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Madam
Vice Chair, good to see you.
John Blockhouse District 51,
State Representative, I'm in
Otero County. Pardon me for all
the
feedback. I mean Otero County in
Alamogordo, uh, so quite a
drive, but it's always beautiful
to come up here and see this
part of the state and so I'm
really looking forward to seeing
everything that we're going to
see and talk about. So thank you
so much, Madam Chair. Thank you,
Madam Vice Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Madam Vice Chair, uh,
Representative Stephanie Lord,
I'm from the East Mountains. I
have the beautiful East
Mountains on the other side of
Albuquerque and speaking of
rain, I hope you get rain, but
not the rain we just got. We had
golf ball sized hail for 30
minutes flooded her house,
destroyed our roof, unbelievable
damage it did up there. But we
got water, so that's good and
I'm on a well, so I understand
the importance of water. Uh,
thank you for having us out here
because it's very different to
talk about this at the
Roundhouse, but to actually see.
It is so much different. So
thank you for having us out
here.
Good morning, Madam Chair.
have the
Presenters, um, I'm Angelita
Mejia, state representative from
Chavez County.
Thank you for having me here.
Thank you Madam Chairman and
vice chair. I am Debbie Serrean.
I represent House District 21 in
Bernalillo County. The Manzano
High School area, if you know
Albuquerque, um, it's great to
be here. I've never been here
before and, um, the chair talks
about it all the time, so, um,
it's great to be here. Thank
you.
Good Morning, Madam Chair and
Madam Vice Chair. I'm
Representative Liz Thompson. My
district is, um, in the
Northeast heights of Albuquerque
District 24. I have Uptown and
Winrock in Albuquerque, but
I'm a Crown Point girl. I grew
up in Crown Point. I've been
coming to Tohatchie since I was
in
Elementary school and for sports
events and but I realized when I
drove to the chapter house, the
only place I ever went into
Hatchie was the school. So, so
it's nice to see the rest of
Tohatchie here these decades and
decades later and thank you so
much for hosting us.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, my
name is Antoinette Sadil Lopez.
I'm originally from Valencia
County. I grew up in Los Chavez,
um, and so, but I actually
represent um the southeast of
Albuquerque, the UNM area CNM
area, and the base, um, area. So
that's, that's my district and
I'm very happy to be here. um,
and I'm looking forward to
To learning and having dialogue
today about the issues.
Thank you, thank you.
Madam Chair.
Good morning, Yachi Aha shakes
and not Jennylokia Anibain
Nana tachinida ash daal
adoto yahoo
uh uh he, thank you, President
Bitsily and uh vice president
Rogers for hosting our Indian
Affairs Committee meeting here
today. It's really nice to be
here.
And I was born and raised in
Crown Point, the community that
Senator Souls just drove through
about 45 miles east of here. And
just want to thank our council
delegate, uh, Mr. Note, for
joining us. And then, of course,
Pernell, it's good to see you
and Keith, uh, we're, I was
looking at your business card.
Where's the principal? I'm just
kidding.
Awesome.
And just want to say good
morning, Mr. Trujillo, uh, good
to see you from, uh,
The nation.
So with that, just want to say
good morning, Madam Chair and
colleagues. Thank you. I
represent House District 5,
McKinley, San Juan County, 15
Navajo chapters in eastern
Navajo Agency, East Gallup, and,
uh, lots of San Juan County
roads and bridges.
Good morning, everyone. I'm
Nicole Waispack, uh,
representing the Legislative
council Service and on behalf of
our two other 3 other staff
members. We also have Roberto,
Sheila, and Paul, who are all
helping this meeting happen. And
thank you so much to our hosts
for having us.
Thank you, yeah.
Madam Vice Chair, I was looking
right at uh my brother Kevin. I
wanna say thank you for joining
us this morning.
Our school board member with
McKinley County.
Thank you. Thank you, Madam Vice
Chair.
J. Shannon Pin tell you Keanni
kitschini ish chin
and um those are my two major
clients and from this area, my
mom's side, I would say on this
side, going all the way towards
the windowRock is a lot of my
family are the Keani side of my
family. The Kilichitney side, my
dad's side is probably from here
going up all the way up towards
Tolina along the highway. A lot
of the, um, members here are
related to.
in some way, some fashion, some
form, um, because my great,
great.
And my great great grandpa's,
um, our family out here with,
uh, Chief Manuito and the
brothers and the sisters, um,
that they were brothers and
sisters too are related to me in
that line. Uh, we still have
more members of, of the family
just let alone me with my own
graduation, um, sent out close
to 300 invitations.
My residence is um directly
north of here, on the other
housing, that's where I live,
um, as we go through the tour,
you will see this is our main
government facility as far as um
getting services and having
Um, issues and meetings here.
I'm a little bit, uh, with my
throat because yesterday
evening, we got a call about uh
fire along the highway 491 just
north of here.
Someone setting fires along the
highway.
So we were over there, my
brother and I took off. There
was already community members
there, Mr. Plummer's family was
over there, um, there's no
aggression either because some
of these fires were set in front
of homes that were directly, um,
next to the highway and at the
turnoffs, and it was several
areas going out almost to
Nashchiti, which is about 15
minutes from here and then there
was another one, I believe out
here by Mexican Springs.
And we do have reports of that,
um, in different areas along
highways, so there, there's a
big concerned um.
Because we know strongly that
it's uh it's, you know, out of
hate. I, I don't even, I can't
fathom what other uh would uh.
Have someone to, to, to go that
far, um.
To set our nation on fire.
I heard our people in that way
versus having a storm, which is
an act of God.
So, I just want to put that out
there so that my community
members know and report and if
you see anything suspicious, get
on the horn right away. I'm very
thankful to those in the
community that were there along
with the new come Fire
Department that came down to to
assist, but also that is the
other thing with jurisdiction
because they told me, well, just
between that fire and the next
one where we, we have our
livestock and stuff and a lot of
my family members live, um,
That's where the county line is.
And they said, well, we're only
going this far.
Because that hill right there,
that belongs to McKinley County.
And it, it is.
Um
Well, one of the biggest things
for us was that we don't lose
another family's home because
last year in the fall we did
lose a uh one of my aunts lost
her home to fire, um, just right
in that same area where the DOT,
the New Mexico Department of
Transportation building is right
there. It was not even to you
guys probably a block from it
where they set the fire and it
came along the highway down, I
would say maybe about 0.5 mile.
So, um, we just want our
community here to, to
understand, to be on alert in
that manner because we are in a
little bit of a drought
situation and if the conditions
are right, it would have quickly
got out of control.
So they will go, we will go
through the tour, um, they will
go through a
Short, um, presentation here we
do have representative Abada
that has joined us and anybody
else walk in that I missed. OK,
I'll have a representative Abeda
introduce herself, um, but I,
uh, represent District 14, um
District 3. This is District 14.
So this is my home all the way
to the Four Corners area,
Shiprock, um, just outside of
Farmington, you come along uh
down Highway 491. I don't have
um newcom.
Synasty.
And
Mexican Springs, but Mexican
Springs does not, uh, there's a
section here that, uh, there's,
um,
Little section of the highway,
but all the way down 491 into
Gallup, half of Gallup is my
district, so when I go to
Albuquerque, I go to these
meetings, um, this is where I
leave from, usually into
Albuquerque, so it's always 2.5
hours for me to get to those
meetings. And I'm trying to look
around. I'm like, I think souls
might be our farthest and a
representative Kadena farthest
one south out down in the Las
Cruces area that have joined us.
So thank you for coming. I'm
sorry we didn't have an airport.
for you, but we did have a
landing strip that, um, I think
it was a doctor used back in the
day in Park his playing over
there, part of the old highway,
um, it was, I think it was
during the summer that he would
come in, um, but a lot of the
members here in um elders here
were joining us, um.
See me grow up, seen a lot of
us, so, as we were little in the
community, um.
Through through the years. So,
um, welcome, welcome to Tohachi.
I am very, very thankful you are
here and um.
Looking forward to showing you
our community and what we're,
what we're, our needs are and
what we're trying to do and um.
Right now, uh, I
This is my home. I knew I was
gonna come home and be home, um,
I mean, you think it's just the
house, but for me it's the whole
area with the mountain here, um,
my, but my father, my mother are
are my father and my mother are
both up there camping and a
couple other family members, but
What we did back in the day
before the highway kind of
interfered with the livestock
with grays down here and then we
would take him up there during
the summer. So when you talk
about over grazing, it was not
really something that was not
thought of the, the, the people
here really thought about it and
um
But with the highway there, it's
not easily transverseed now as,
as we move forward. So I, I mean
I could go on and on and on, but
um, I tried to tell my leaders
here not to.
But, um, representative Abeda,
which you please introduce
yourself. Yeah.
Thank you, Chairwoman Ye Bennet,
good morning. My name is
Michelle Abeda and I represent
District 69, which is comprised
of 6 counties. I traveled here
this morning from Toaille,
that's where I reside with my
husband and my children and it's
my first year in the House of
Representatives and I'd like to
say thank you to the chair for
organizing this meeting in your
home community. Thank you and
good morning to our committee
members and staffers, uh, the
community members here to.
Apatchy and also the community
leaders yeah and I apologize. I
got caught up with the burrito
lady at the turn off over here.
We had a great conversation and
I have a nice warm burrito that
I could not pass up, so thank
you.
Thank you, Representative, and
even to our leadership here out
of the members here, uh, how
many of you, this is your first
time here to Tohachi.
OK, and I think the rest of you,
um, the last time we were here,
I believe was in, I think 2017,
um, my grandfather had a, had a
meeting here in um
President, uh, Julie Badoni was
uh president of the chapter at
that time. And a lot of my, um,
Yeah, my, my, my, my family are
in leadership as these two. So
we'll move on and um through the
week, don't hesitate to ask
questions, members, and
Mr. President and Vice
President, you may begin.
OK, thank you.
Good morning everyone again.
Appreciate um this time here.
Again, uh, legislators, state
representatives, senators, Madam
Chair, Madam Vice President,
Madam, uh, vice chair.
Uh, my name is Elvis Batilli.
I'm a chapter president.
Uh, sitting next to me is my
vice president, Madam Vice
President Lee Rogers. Uh, we
welcome you again.
We welcome you that are here
that are in the.
The back room here that I cannot
see right now.
But um
Uh,
I was going to acknowledge, uh,
some folks here that are, that
are present with with us in the
building but uh they already
introduced themselves and um I
just wanted to um acknowledge a
couple others. I wanted to
acknowledge our summer you
students that we have here as
well that are that are working
with the chapter. I want to
acknowledge our senior center
supervisor, which we'll meet a
little later this morning. And
um we also have uh our public
employment.
uh workers that are also here,
but they're out in the field
right now, I believe, so, uh,
we've got a good team of
administration, um, Maria
Ellison, CSC, uh, AMS was Jeanie
Musket, and uh Janice Bga is our
um uh office specialist and I
want to acknowledge uh Carlene.
Carlene as well she's our, our
lead cook and the helpers that
she has and they're preparing
the food for y'all for our noon
lunch. So we want, we want to
acknowledge them and thank them
for that. So, anybody else that
I left out? I just want to say,
um, uh, you know, welcome, um,
what I have before you in your
green package here is, um, I
just want to bring this out real
quick.
Um, there's a
There's a list, um, that says
tohachi chapter projects. It's a
front and back page.
This is the information that
we'll be covering on the tour.
There's, I believe, 16 listings
there. We're gonna briefly cover
this in that particular order as
we tour the community of
Tuhatchie and on our tour, we're
gonna do a real quick brief walk
not walk over, drive over and
walk over at these locations. So
this is just for your
information, take notes and
whatever you need, OK? This is
what this sheet's for and then
the next one.
um
There's a copy of the Tahatchie
chapter history. The community
history.
And this reading will be
provided to you by, uh, Madam
Vice President Lee, uh, when I
give her the mic, uh, the next
one you have is a, another
package that shows, uh, our red
Willow farm.
Our red Willow farm, the map and
location.
And there's also a history that
goes back to 2000, 0, it goes
back way back even to 1868.
But the information that we
provided to you is a little bit
of history of the project and
the infrastructure that we have
that, that we have, um, uh,
there at Red Willow. So this is
what you have in your green
package, OK? That's, that's for
your information. I just wanted
to let you know that. So take
your green pamphlet, booklet
with you and um we'll, we'll be
um providing all the
information, uh, on our tour.
The first thing we're gonna be
doing is going out building here
when we do leave is um
recognized as
Compound facility area and what
we have here and we're gonna
take a short brief tour of the
senior center, which is next
door to us, and then after that,
we're gonna leave and uh go go
in our vehicles and uh take a
tour around the community, OK?
Um, with that said, um,
I just want again, thank you.
What I'm gonna also do right now
is, well, um, our, my vice
president's gonna be, well,
she's presenting her
information. I'm gonna show you
a couple of slides or pictures
that I've taken, um, for your
information about some of the
things that we're doing here at
Tohatchie, and it's very short,
short information. It's pictures
of our, our local community and
what's going on and what we've
been doing. I have tons of
pictures, I tell you that I have
tons of stuff.
And I just cannot bring it all
down to a few, I mean, there's
just so much, right? Just like
our phones, we have all kinds of
selfies or whatever and you just
can't pinpoint, you know, your
favorite. So that's just the way
it is with our chapter. There is
so much that we're doing.
There's so much happening, not
only in the previous years, but
what's going on now and what's
going on in the future. So just
wanted to let you know that this
is uh a very busy time for us.
As, as you all know, things are
happening at the federal level
things are happening at the
Navajo Nation level and so forth
so and it affects us here as
people at the local chapter and
it affects us and with our
elders, our seniors, our
veterans, and even our, our
group, our, our committee
members, our committees that we
have here, such as community
land use plan such as Redd
Willow. Uh, we have our, our
veterans, so
These are things that are, um,
you know, that we have here at
our local chapter and, and, and
you know, there's other chapters
that also have these um uh uh
organization, local
subcommittees and so forth, but
this is what we have here for
Tohatchi. So again, thank you
all for being here. Um,
If there's any questions that
you may have for me or my vice
president, uh, we can, we can
take those as we go out on our
walk or throughout the day, OK?
Pull me aside and, and whatever.
So again thank you this morning
and I'll turn the mic over to um
Madam Vice President Lee Rogers,
and I'll, I'll, I'll get ready
for the pictures, OK?
Oh, good morning.
Yeah I've been bustias being and
Benito Atohachi.
Good artsy.
Dajon
she had
thank you for coming here.
They took up all my time so I'm
gonna have to speak really fast.
All right, you do have this in
your packet. I know you can
read, but I think it's really
nice to put a voice to it, so
here we go.
Tohatchie.
In Navajo, it is called Tuhain,
which means water seepage but
loosely translated by some as
scratching for water.
In northwestern New Mexico, as
you found yourself here this
morning. We're at the
southeastern end of the Chisa
Mountain range. You will find
the red Willow Valley where the
community of Tohatchie is
located.
The Tohatchi chapter land area
encompasses flatlands, mass,
arroyos in the lower terrain.
Gray hills, Rocky hills dotted
with juniper and pinon trees are
found in the higher zero FedEx
zone where a family was afforded
a power line extension a decade
ago.
As you ascend higher summer
sheep camps were to be found
among the ponderosa pine and the
oak trees with multiple watering
sites for livestock and dry land
farming.
Upon return from the infamous
long walk, the tragic long walk,
the red will of valley was first
settled by Hain Nadazi's ban.
The higher ranges of the Thua
Mountain were settled by the
maternal family of Chief
Menuito. He lived out his days
with his 3rd wife and has his
resting place in Coyote Canyon.
After 1868, a government sub
agency was established in
Tohatchi. Tohatchie was a
rendezvous point for ancient
peoples, and it remains so
today.
Our ancestors established a red
willow farms in 1870. The first
trading post built on the
reservation was constructed here
in 1871.
In 1895, Lan was withdrawn for
the construction of Tohatchie
boarding school dormitories,
dining hall, and a clinic was
built as years went on.
Sadly, the first clinic burned
down in 1928.
The first Catholic Church was
built in 2001, followed by the
Christian Reformed Church in
1910.
A reservoir was constructed in
1935 and rehabilitated in 1954,
later known as Cheska Lake Dam,
making it possible to send
controlled irrigation water to
the red willow farms in 1938, a
second trading post was built at
Buffalo Springs.
In 1948, El Paso natural gas
plant was constructed 7 miles
northeast of Tohatchie. This
installation brought in new
technology, jobs, and a place
for social activities other than
the Tohatchie boarding school,
it was also the place to go to
see a show at El Paso.
This facility was replaced with
a reduction size unmanned
compressor plant in 1992.
High tech equipment and pumping
units now only require visits
from the company 3 days a week.
In 1952, the Tohatchi chapter
house was built and renovated in
1989.
The Tohatchi chapter was
recognized as a local government
entity on December 5, 1955.
The Tohatchie post office
started operation in the old
Tohatchi training post, then
moved into Mr. Nakai's family
store.
The government saw a need and
built a small red brick building
circa 1960 where it operated
until half a decade ago. Now it
is located at the corner of the
Tohatchie loop and Chesco School
intersection.
The 108 bridge was first built
around the summer of 1975 and
since has undergone repairs.
Though it's still needs
attention.
The senior citizen center was
built in 1978.
A 14 acre landfill was finally
closed in 1990 and replaced with
a solid waste transfer station.
The Tohatchie Health Center was
completed in 1994.
It is staffed with a basic
health team to to treat acute
and chronic ambulatory problems
and refer patients to other
levels of care.
Educational services are the
main economic activity,
infrastructure developments
occurred in cycles between the
1950s and the present time.
Thank you, uh, but I mean
Schlotz and I don't know
a basin,
um, Belaganda.
I just set my client at the end.
Sound all fancy, huh?
Thank you, madam.
Chief Manley told his mother is
my great, great, great
grandmother.
So I'm the last of the Michelin
land, uh, uh, in my family line,
um, and then my nieces carry on
from here, so, and she's in my
family too. Thank you.
OK.
Cash and I, Madam Vice President
Lee Rogers, thank you for that.
Let's move on to um a few
pictures that I'm gonna show you
here.
This picture here is um a group
photo.
Of our
Farmers
Heavy equipment operator.
Our workers
Our farm board members I did not
mention earlier that um,
Before I became president, I
was, um.
The Red Bull Farm president for
4 years.
And
We replace this red will farm
sign that you see.
Uh, with the current.
One that's there right now.
I wanted to just point out to
you all that.
The foundation and the basic
work of.
Our dream to do what we want to
do down at Red Willow and to
Provide
What we
could do
To help finalize and finish.
This project when I was in
office there.
Or here actually.
And I want to thank these guys
that are out there, men and
women.
Um, this is just a few of the
folks that I worked with.
And what we, what we've done.
And the hard work that it takes.
To be a farmer
To be out in the field to do
what we have to do.
And it takes a group of people
like this to organize,
coordinate, to initiate.
And to plan
And to demonstrate
What, you know, we are capable
of doing.
And the reason why I mentioned
the red willows because we go
back as far as 1868.
How we were established here in
our community of Tohatchie.
And what we started out with.
We are farmers. That's who we
are.
And this location in Tohatchie
is what
Um, why we settled here.
But that goes back into much
storytelling.
But I wanted to acknowledge.
That, you know, these folks were
and still are a part of the
community.
And doing a lot of work
continuously.
As we move on,
There's a group picture.
Of a recent hiking project that
we just did.
These are our staff, our
students.
And folks that came out for a
hiking project that we have
here.
And I want to thank them.
And this is a, a basic
foundation and initiative.
For our wellness and health in
our community so we can.
have this available for our
people, our community, as you
all know, we have problem in, in
health and issues concerning
And this is just a start.
Of what we are doing for our
community and I want to
acknowledge these kids, these
are
A couple of staff myself, our
summer students in one community
member.
And I want to thank them for
joining us on this particular
day last week.
This is one of our hiking
trails.
That we have in the community.
And this is uh what we did at
that on that day.
And here's another photo of
them.
I also want to mention also our
Navajo Nation EMS. We just
talked about our fire situation.
We talked about
You know what, what the needs we
have in our community.
And these folks are willing to
help us. They're willing to work
with us.
They did a, a, a project here a
couple of months ago.
And not only does EM EMS team.
Need to be acknowledged.
But they are part of, um, are
going to be a part of our
community. You'll see that as we
take this on our tour.
So I wanted to let you all know
that these folks are a great
group of people. They are with
the Navajo Nation.
And I want to say thank you to
them. I did contact the
supervisors that we were going
to be here today.
This is the red Willow pump
house that we have on site.
This is where our, our, our, our
water well comes from.
This is an enclosed small house
building that we have on site.
Here's the new sign I mentioned
earlier.
We have now
The other thing that we have
going is.
Our bike
A bike trail project.
These kids
These students from Tuska
School.
It came out one day and said,
hey,
Mr. President,
Is there anything we can help
you with?
And I said, hey, you're
You're darn right. I need some
help.
Can you guys pick up some trees?
Can you guys move some rocks?
Can you guys do what just
whatever you need to do.
I want to let you all know that
we have students and kids like
this in our community that can
that are capable of coming out
and doing.
What they'd like to do and what
they'd like to enjoy.
And this is what they did with
us that day.
And I wanted to acknowledge
them.
And we also have a bike trail
project that we're, that we've
initiated and that's ongoing now
for our trai community and this
is one of the, one of the little
stories that I have for you to,
to let you know.
This photo here
Is there a group of um students.
Uh, fish and wildlife stuff.
Farmers
Out at Red Willow.
Again, these folks are
Part of the initiative to, to
regroup.
And to start continuation,
continue our project at Red
Willow.
And what they wanted to do is
continue.
That that dream that we have.
With our chapter
And the project that we have.
So I wanted to let you know and,
and to acknowledge these folks.
And here's a little bit of
planting that they did.
Again, I think this is the last
photo I have for you right now.
Our summer students that we have
working here.
I took a photo of them. We
recognize we recognize them and
acknowledged him.
And just to let them know, hey,
you know, you guys have done a
good job.
Come back
And whatever experience you have
here at the chapter.
We want you guys to take that
with you and, and to help your
community and help the people
someday.
And that's what I have with
this, um, uh, this morning's
presentation.
I have plenty of other
Um, photos that.
I, I think, um, I think we're on
time and I wanted to say, um,
thank you for this.
Cash and I
Like yeah, Mr. President,
do we have any other chapters,
um, from District 14, um,
leadership that would like to
come forward.
You may have some time up here
at the
The microphone so this is
separate from public comment.
This is really about the, the
chapters, um, in District 14 in
this area and we will move to
public comment after that for
those that have signed up on the
public comment sheet. This will
be an opportunity now and then
um as we go forward if other
people show up, um, they will
have another opportunity at the
end of the meeting, so please
introduce yourself and welcome.
I turned the um the
Person pushed that and then it
turns red and make sure you turn
it off after. Thank you. Good
morning, Yat A. My name is Ella
Wilson, and I'm touchingdo
tochini but she chi
my che is uh Tabaha and my
father's Nali mynali is Kia Ani.
He's from Kinliche, Arizona. My
mother is from Twin Lakes, from
Bahasa chapter where I am
currently at, um, I grew up
basically in Tohatchi, going to
school here since grade school,
first grade, all the way to
graduation. I won't tell you
what year I graduated, but, um,
my mother was the uh school cook
at Tohatchie Elementary. Louise
Wilson, and she retired and uh
my father worked for the al.
Fossil natural gas company plant
that the they spoke about and we
lived there, um, but, uh, I
wanted to be here today because
I
Basically grew up here being in
school. I went to Saint Francis
Church, um, for catechism and
also knowing the community here
and some of the community
members. I just wanted to see
who was here because I wanted to
give back to my people. I want
to know more about the chapter
level um involved at Bahasa
chapter in the community land
use planning committee, and I'm
learning about what's going on,
um, with the land, what we can
do with
our resources. This is only my
2nd year, but it's very, very
interesting. I didn't know this
exists, existed. I was more
involved with law. I was a
former prosecutor for the Navajo
Nation DOJ for 23 years and I
retired 3 years ago, 4 years
ago, and um I still practice in
Navajo courts to give back to my
people, the elderly and the
orphans and people that don't
understand the justice system.
So, uh, but, but that.
That's why I came here to learn
more about what's going on in
Tohatchie. It has changed. I
come back now and then to visit
and to see who's here, but I'm
thankful for all you leaders who
made the time and journey, you
know, um, some sacrifices were
made for you to be here and I'm
thankful that you came and I
wanna thank you, Shannon Pinto.
Um, I saw your rise from being
the um starting in your position
after your grandfather passed
and now you've um grown so much
and I'm.
Thankful we have the leaders to
represent us, that we need to
let our voices be known. Thank
you.
And pull down before you go um
lip C. Could you describe that a
little bit to our community
because I know they heard cluby
but it was not um.
with the acronym or what they do
exactly. Just very briefly. Nota
is also our council delegate.
Um, he attends our meetings. I
didn't even know this, uh,
community committee existed
until I showed up for one of the
chapter meetings, which I never
used to go to, but it's about,
um, the community of Twin Lakes,
New Mexico, the boundaries, what
do we have as our resources.
What can we do to improve our
community and um the, the
finances we have, we have
projects, we assist the chapter
in any developments from the
ARPA money that was there to um
improve the homes, improve
services for the people. It
takes a long time and also right
now we're working on a community
uh cemetery.
Finding the land for it in that
area, um, who else has family
plots in the area.
Also looking at the old chapter
house that um that needs to be
demolished so we can put maybe a
teen center, a place for our
youth to, you know, to, um, be,
have recreation activities. Um,
we also, um, work with the
senior citizens and helping
them, you know, what they need,
what are their needs, what do
they need for their homes? Do
they need, um, their bathroom
additions, do they need and even
their extension line.
conditions and um those are the
basic areas like Highway 491.
We're trying to get the, the
lighting, um, where it stopped
around, um, what is that? TNR
all the way through to Hachi and
further we're looking into
getting that lighting because
that's a dangerous highway, and
you know, other areas, those are
the main ones that I, um, can
think of.
You and.
So
when you guys came over on the
way, you've probably seen a big
fenced area and that's uh in
Lake's Chapter House, but that's
the newest chapter house, um,
most of the district 14 vehicles
when they asked for a vehicle
for our seniors or any kind of
travel. It's housed over there.
It's not because of the security
issue with um some of the
vehicles, so it's not like they
get to really they have to go
over there and get the vehicle.
to come and and utilize it for
our chapters and
The old chapter house that there
was asbestos in it, so that's
why I needed abatement. I did
put money in for demo I, but
it's still standing, um, we do
have.
Since COVID when our
Families have these gatherings
to receive donations for the
deceased and the families, uh,
in some instances, though, those
buildings aren't accessible to a
certain point or you have to pay
for it, which also seeps into
the funds and they'll just set
up on the roadside right there,
um, in the parking lot across
the way. So it's a um
We, we do need a little bit more
in that sense. And if you notice
in here in this chapter house,
um, as far as fire suppression,
um, and that's why when you look
at the date of how all these,
most of all these chapters were
built around that time, and they
do need updating, so, um, but
we'll go a little bit around
here with our chapter president,
but, um, thank you for your, is
there any other district 14 or
other chapter representatives or
leadership that would like to
speak.
No. So I have Mr. Keith Hillock
with Hozhou Academy that I'd
like to bring for because we
have students from this
community that also commute into
our um been to Gallup for, for
school, although we do have um
education facilities here, but
to give a brief um brief on
that, and I think he might be
able to, uh, for those staying
in Gallup might be able to show
the school over there. um, Mr.
Hillock.
Turned the little person presses
it turns it.
Hello
Why hello there, my name is
Keith Hilllock. I'm with Hosi
Academy, uh, 7 years ago, we
started Hosi Academy classical
education right here in Gallup
and uh later on for those of
you, do you, uh, are staying,
some of you may already know the
founder is a principal is
Julieanne Hilllock. She's my
wife, and she'll introduce you
all and tell you all about Hojo.
I'll give you a little brief
description, hoping to entice
you to come. Uh, we will have
between 850.
50 to 900 students, uh, this
coming year.
We've, uh, that would be
approximately a little right
around 500 native children
attend, we bring them in from
all over. We are the only
charter school with our own
transportation department, um,
and we will be always fighting
the state for bosses and to help
with that, um, that's one of my,
my biggest pet peeves, many
needs, um, but, um, we get a lot
of national recognition lately.
Uh, some of you may know that
Robert F. Kennedy came to.
our school, um, years ago around
COVID, my wife started a a
health program and also the
presidential, um.
physical education council at
JFK put out and we, we focused
heavily on, uh, not just
classical education but the
physical matter as well. Um, I'm
gonna let her dive into some of
that with all of you, and we
have been told that they're
going to try to pilot our
school, uh, nationally is part
of the uh Robert F. Kelley's
presidential council for
Physical Fitness but for health.
Uh, some of the maha stuff, um.
Some of you had an opportunity
here on this, uh, panel that
comes to DC with us and, um,
we're gonna be uh hopefully
continuing down that path and
you could always look us up at
Hoso Academy.org, but you all
have a card that got put in
front of you and if you don't, I
will give you one. We are at 515
Park Avenue.
And um
You're all welcomed once I find
a time, Mrs. Hillock is when I
take you in and give you a
little bit of tour and tell you
a little bit more about Hosi
Academy.
If there's any questions I can
answer. I can't answer too many
academic ones, but I can give
you some things that are going
on in our school, um, if anyone
has a question they'd like to
ask me, I'm here to answer it.
No.
The
Thank you, Mr. Hillock. Um, I
was one of those that was able
to go with the students to
Washington DC and it's a great
group of kids, great group of
children, um, but a lot of
history. I mean, if you go up
there, we know that there's a
lot to learn when you go up
there and it was very um
impactful. Some of them, it was
their 2nd trip, but one of the
things too is that the
academically, um, are able to
qualified to go.
But
Since I've been in the school
has really grown, um, the visits
I have taken and many of um.
So my family members are
actually employed there, so, uh,
well actually one of them was my
babysitter back in the day and
she was the bilingual teacher
there now, so it's uh
you could say it does educate
our kids want to go to school
despite what some people say
here about attendance, um, those
issues outside of with home and
family is, it can hinder some of
that attendance, but it's not
that they don't want to go to
school in that sense, but thank
you for the work you do, Mr.
Hirlock and um, thank you for
joining us.
OK
You're welcome very much. Thank
you. So we will move into public
comment. I have a list here.
I have um.
Yeah,
um, just to give a heads up, I
have Mr. Arvan Trujillo,
Cortesha Upsa. Did you guys want
to speak? OK, and then I have
Doris Benali, uh, Mr. Mitchell,
and Oscar Desoy and Franklin
Sandoval, but we had a couple of
members that just joined us, um,
but I know uh Representative
Roybart Caballero, did you have
a comment you'd like to make,
and then we'll go to Zamora and
Charlie for introduction.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I wanted
to, um,
As our
committee members and
And everyone um to please hold
the Mescalero Apache tribe close
to our hearts.
I understand that um from some
texts and emails I received,
there are uh fish hatchery.
was completely flooded out close
to $2 million worth of economic
development, um, prospects were
lost and several Mescalero
families lost their homes.
Due to excessive rains and
floods that unfortunately
touched the uh reservation
yesterday. So if we could just
hold them close to our hearts
and do what we can, uh, to help
support that community, uh,
during this time of, of loss,
their loss, it's a tremendous
loss. We were just some of us
were just there, uh, last week.
We weren't able to visit the
hatchery, but we received an
extensive report, um, Madam
Chair and our committee, uh,
concerning their, uh, hatchery
and how well things were going
for Mescalero and so um I told
them that I would.
Relay their needs um to us today
and to whomever I can relate
that to thank you very much,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Zora,
would you like to introduce
yourself?
You
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee and
Everybody in the audience for
having us here today. It's a
beautiful place to drive into. I
never had been here before.
Uh
And there was just a little mix
up on my, on my schedule and.
We showed up a little late.
But, uh, glad to be here today.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Charlie.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um, vice
chair and committee. Good
morning, Yatea Bene Shea Angel
Charlie Yanishleanish le.
Kissani Bashishin,
akaine dehache and Kissane de
Chaella.
Um, I represent Senate District
30, which includes the public of
Laguna, the Pueblo of Akima, the
Pueblo of Isleta and Alamo
chapter. I'm a citizen of the
Pueblo of Laguna and from my
mom's family were from um the
Pueblo Pintado area. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator Charlie. uh,
Mr. Trujillo, would you like to
come up and
So with public comment, we don't
really ask, we're not going to
ask any questions. We just have
them give their, so they're not
having to sit all day with us,
so thank you for joining us.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. Again,
my name is Arvin Trujilel, and
I'm a, I'm here uh with uh
Navajo Transitional Energy
Company.
Uh, we are a Navajo owned
company, an LLC.
With the Navajo Nation focused
on energy development.
And economic development within
the nation.
The reason I want to come and
briefly meet with you is to
really extend an invitation to
you.
I'm working on a couple of big
projects myself, uh, the first
one involves Ntech itself.
And I would like to extend an
invitation to come and visit our
operations.
We are a significant economic
impact driver for Northwest New
Mexico.
We generate about $340 million a
year in economic, uh,
Impact
Both on the reservation and off
the reservation.
I think it behooves you to come
and see one of the major
industries in Northwest New
Mexico.
We have approximately we uh own
Navajo mine where 7% owner of
Four Corners power plant.
We, there's a approximately 700
employees with both operations.
86% of those employees are
Navajo.
These operations in the past
have basically generated the
Navajo middle class.
And right now you see many who
are retired with 401ks and
enjoying life because of their
employment with either Four
Corners power plant or Navajo
mine.
Or even San Juan mine, which is
closed.
So I want to extend an
invitation. I can work with, uh,
your legislative adviser to look
at that.
And really focus on what we
would like to show you because
we're doing a lot of different
things. We are involved in coal
right now, but we're also
looking at alternative energy.
We're looking at the development
of a solar facility, a natural
gas facility that would support
that the necessary transmission.
To begin to look at generating
power for uh the northwestern
portion of the, the state as
well as wheeling that power to
other parts of the southwestern
portions of the US.
And so that's one area and again
I want to extend an invitation
for you to come and see our
operation, see what we're doing
as a part of that. The other
project that I'm involved in,
and I'm hoping that we will have
more information is the four
corners, uh, rail freight
railroad project.
Right now we're finishing up
phase one, we're getting the
feasibility done, the final
report will be coming out on
that. We want to share that
information with you.
Because again, the next phase
will be looking at phase 2,
which is through a, a Chrissie
Grant of $4 million. We're
hoping to get the environmental
impact statement completed
through that phase and also
begin preliminary con uh
construction or design for the
railroad project and a actual
route has not been determined
yet. That will be determined
through the EIS process.
So again, major projects that
we're working on here in the
Northwestern portion of the, of
the state. I think it behooves
you again to come.
Be educated on what we're doing
here.
The kind of projects we have and
the type of impact that we have
with the Navajo Nation, as well
as with the state of New Mexico,
Madam Chair, thank you. Thank
you and Cortasha, I'm sure, will
you be speaking to, or is he
that's part of it.
And uh my name is Portasha.
OK, thank you.
We will uh Doris Sinnali. Do you
like to come up?
And then you press that little
person there too, and this will
light up red and then.
turn it off.
OK, thank you. I still use smoke
signals. My name is Doris
Sinnali. I'm a homesteader here
in Tohatchie. I'm 74 years old,
so what I'd like to do first is
welcome all of you to Tohatchi,
you young ones, you young ones,
please keep your strong voice.
In Santa Fe for us.
Work on your house bills. We
have representatives from
Tahachi that constantly writes
our house bills for us.
Sometimes the fun and reverts
back to Santa Fe.
And it's not your fault, it's
our fault, the people.
So keep writing them, keep
writing the bells for us.
Get so good I'll give you my own
personal bills.
Our community here, you've seen
a lot of housing.
These homes are built by Navo
Housing Authority.
We're not rich.
Our homes are called projects.
You know, like they're doing.
In Chicago?
So when they're turning to
hachi.
Keep your eyes peel.
That's my youngest son's
expression.
But anyway, um,
Again, like I said, keep your
voice strong for us in Santa Fe,
please, because we will see
evidence we will see your voice
with our growth that comes on
intohachi.
Also
On your way back, I'd really
like to encourage you.
Spaway is our only
business site here that sells
gas.
And every time we fill up on our
When, when we fill up.
We're putting the money into the
New Mexican fuel tax expense.
Meaning 491 where you came in on
should be in perfect condition.
You probably notice you're
gonna, on your way back, you're
gonna see new paved asphalt.
Thank you for covering up our
golf course.
When you're going over, turn on
your cell phones a lot of you
like to take pictures when you
get 16 miles from here, you're
gonna come to JB Tanner's.
You're gonna go over on the
overpass, have your cell phones
on and start taking pictures of
the cattle guard coming down,
that's been like that for 2
years, 2 years.
A lot of us commute from here to
Gallup, 30 miles, snow pack ice,
that's a safety issue. That's a
safety hazard that's New
Mexico's puppy.
They need to fix that. So when
you get back to Santa Fe, all of
you stampede into the
transportation commissioner's
office and raise Cain, you can
borrow my cane later.
Don't go in there like laughing
hyenas.
OK.
Our community.
Um, we have permit.
I'm a um probating my mother's
permit right now. She lived to
be 102.
We strongly object.
On 491 on the east side.
To this railroad coming in and
this gallop water project
because we love our land. We
don't like this land grab. Are
these um RMUs that are processed
through the Navajo Nation.
So one more thing I'm gonna
encourage you I spoke this to
the governor 3 times.
Stop sending our money to Winder
Rock.
You send our money from New
Mexico to the Navajo Nation, we
don't see any here in New
Mexico.
And we desperately need to see
our funding come back.
A novel turn when we walk as you
can hear the jingle in your
pockets where elders now we
don't live here and we don't
hear anything.
So anyway with that Senator
Pinto.
Thank you. You're following your
grandpa's footsteps, keep that
voice, keep being a leader, not
a follower.
Representative John
Representative Johnson, they say
that to you because you're, you,
thank you for coming to our
chapter meetings, repetitiously
and a planning meetings.
And keep doing what you're both
doing for us on District 14.
That's all. Thank you.
Thank you.
I have um Mr. Kevin Mitchell.
Press that little person with
the look at the, in the, you
know, went to the got it. OK.
Thank you and good morning
again, everybody. Um,
I would just like to first off,
you know, thank all of you for
your votes in the funding for um
Um, construction of schools
within New Mexico.
Um, you will be touring the new
high school that's being built
here in Tohatchie, um, which is,
as of today is hitting probably
almost um 78 million $78
million.
Um, with
53 million of that coming from
the state. Thank you guys.
13 million.
is coming from Gallup McKinley
County Schools.
And we've also added an
additional $11 million a little
over a million dollars, um, for,
um,
Over and above adequacy.
Which is a big problem in our
rural areas, um.
We,
I know that the funding formula
is based on student count.
But a lot of times,
Within changes within a year or
2 years.
You know
Our um population within our
school district can increase and
then our schools are too small.
Therefore, you know, we are glad
that got McKinley County did
have the extra money due to
impact aid, which you guys all
fought for. Um, Mr. Bill Souls,
thank you for all you do for
education, you know, um.
As a former school board member,
um, you know, um.
The fight. Um, so thank you so
much for all you do for um
public education.
Um, I also wanted to give a a
thank you to, um,
Our Senate Senator Pinto, um,
who
Um, graciously gave, uh, money
to Gallant McKinley County
schools. I believe that's
supposed to be used towards, um,
Toing high school. So thank you
for that as well. So we will
have additional funds to
increase, um,
A portion of the new Tohatchi
High School and Representative
Johnson, thank you so much for
Um, the past few years you've
been, um, giving money to
Gallant McKinley County schools,
and we do appreciate that, you
know, because we went a long
time without um seeing or
receiving any money from any of
our representatives.
Um, but within this last two
years we've seen our
representatives and senators
come through. So thank you guys.
I like to like to think um
Senator Shundo and
Representative Johnson for the
House bill 194 and Senate Bill
163, um, which was our cultural
expression, um, at graduation
ceremonies, which allows our
students to wear their um
traditional um regalia during
graduation without um any
controversy. So thank you guys
very um very much for that. I
appreciate you all the work and
efforts that you put into this,
um, within our
state. Um, I did read in the
paper yesterday that um,
I don't know how true it is, but
um, uh, like there was $612
million that is being withheld
from the educational system here
in New Mexico.
So I asked you to continue to
work with our um
Our state are
National um legislators and
senators.
And
fight for that money, continue
to fight for us, and, you know,
and for sure, Gallup McKinley
County will stay in the fight as
well as, as well as the New
Mexico School Bir Association.
Thank you.
Thank you and we have Oscar
Dezoi.
is.
So the button with the person's
body, press that.
The button tail turns red.
Oh,
OK.
Thank you.
I want to welcome everybody to
the Tohatchie community. I know
some of you as one of the
leaders of the New Mexico level
and Michelle, I know Michelle
Shannon.
Uh, Wanda Johnson.
And uh others, it's a new face
for me.
A lot of times our leaders are
talking on the radio and
campaign and saying we're gonna
help you with as much as we can
to the community. And the main
promise that
People that run always say is, I
will be there and I will
represent you.
So thank you for representing
us. Thank you for talking for
us.
And the main thing that I came
here for is
There is McKinley County.
And there's a Navajo
reservation.
And state police and the
sheriffs are giving citations to
our Navajo people and others.
And giving them state citation
where the Navajo Nation is.
Navajo reservation.
So they're giving them the state
citation instead of the Navajo
Nation citation, and they're
not, they are doing this.
So we sent, I sent an email to
some of you leaders, so I don't
know if you picked it up and if
you read it. And so far I
haven't had received any
response from that. There, that
needs to be looked into and that
needs to be corrected, and then
a lot of times, uh, state police
and sheriffs don't know what
cross commission is within
McKinley County. That's the only
place where you have to be cross
commission and in order to come
onto the reservation to either
prosecute somebody.
that a criminal or others.
That's the main thing. And the
next one is there.
Our judges
And at the same time there are
minimum uh ages.
That uh you introduce
And at the same time,
Uh, we encourage our young
children to go to school to get
educated, to come back, like
some of you have done that to be
our leaders to talk for us, to
be the ears for us, to be the
eyes for us.
At the state level where other
people don't know us where other
people don't see where we live
at on the reservation where our
houses are at, where our
livestocks are at.
So that's the other part that
I'm gonna talk about is many,
many, many minimum age of
judges.
And at the same time, there's a
legislation that has been put
in.
And at the same time, the other
part that I'm gonna talk about
is uh the railroad.
There is gonna be a railroad, I
hear and uh Al Henderson is the
one that came to this chapter at
the time when there were COVID
that was going around at the
time and I talked to him, I
spoke with him back in the
1970s. That was put before us at
Twin Lakes chapter and on this
reservation that they were gonna
run a rail from right alongside
of where I lived at, and I
opposed it.
And at the same time, people are
saying that we're gonna have
jobs uh when they run the rail,
but I don't see no, but there's,
I don't see a lot of people
working in Gallup alongside of
the rail railroad tracks. I
always see one person sitting in
a train, and the same time, we
don't have anybody working
alongside at the same time,
there's a lot of you travel
across this 491. A lot of our
people and other people,
communities, schools, they right
living alongside of the
roads
And at the same time,
If they build a railroad.
And if there's any toxic
chemical.
That a train turns over, it's
gonna kill all of us.
You know, back in the earlier
times, they, I did a, I looked
into the coal, the grades of the
coal. There are some coal that
are very dangerous.
And there are others that are
not.
So for that reason, we oppose
the rail that's gonna be put
alongside of 491 because
I don't want to be sleeping
there and the train is going. I
don't want to fall off the bed.
And at the same time we have
children and other people that
are gonna be taking their
children to school and they're
gonna be parked there, they're
gonna be going to work, and
we're gonna have to wait for the
train to pass by. So that's the
other. Maybe it's a good team,
but the other side of the place,
they're gonna be making money
and at the other end, they're
gonna be making money, not us.
The other thing that I brought
before the time when they were
doing uh research was.
Before I was born before all of
us were born.
There is a gas line that runs
through the Navajo Nation.
We don't even get a penny out of
that gas line.
Then there's TGNE that went
across the Navajo Nation. We're
not even getting one penny out
of it right now.
And then they ran the water.
They're running the water from
San Juan to Gallup. We're not
gonna get even a penny out of
it.
So, there's something wrong
there.
So we're not getting a piece of
the money.
So, that's the reason why for
me, I'm opposing it.
And I'm pretty sure there are a
lot of the other people that are
alongside, living alongside of
the road are also opposing it.
So I hope you think about this
and going back to the, where you
worked at.
And uh Benny Shando, I always
see his name too. He's sitting
here, I tell you, sign.
And thank you for all of you
showing up to today, and a lot
of times people say this is my
turf. I went to school at Tora
High School. A lot of times way
back in the 1970s, I was pretty
well known here and everybody
wanted to hug me and everybody
wanted to, my signatures because
I took the team to the state
tournament.
And there are some real good
leaders like Senator John Pinto,
he really helped us out and a
lot of ways.
Not only just one piece, but I
think to the fullest and the
other person that really helped
with the detox center, the
alcohol and Drug Abuse Center in
Gallaway's Edmunds.
Ed Marios and Marshall Plummer
were the only two that wrote The
Horse and the meal from Gallup
Heritage Center to Santa Fe.
And that's what Edmund Hus did,
fighting for the five-fingered
people that have been affected
by alcohol and drugs. That is a
real hard working person. He was
threatened also.
From Gallup, people that are
owning the liquor stores, they
told them that they're gonna
kill and kill his whole family,
but he never gave up.
He was that type of a fighter.
So I'm hoping that all of you
are that type of a fighter also.
And I wanna thank all of you for
coming out and the people that
invited you to come out from
Tahachi and other areas. Thank
you for coming out and have a
safe trip back home. Thank you
for listening to me. Take care.
Yeah, thank you. I have Franklin
Sandoval.
like to speak
Good morning. My name is
Franklin Sandoval. I'd like to
say welcome all of you to.
The
The Community at the bottom of
the hill.
It's a beautiful place.
And
Come, I didn't hear as to how I
know what the Indian committees.
Pretty much about
It's a body.
It's a body that represents.
Indian communities in the state
of New Mexico to the state of uh
to the governor and those that
represent each part of the
districts in the state of New
Mexico.
Welcome to Tehatchie. I'm a
resident of Buffalo Springs. I
read past your residence every
now and then and I see you over
there, I say, when you're gonna
build something over there. But
anyway, welcome and good
morning.
I have 2 comments I don't really
want to address them as
concerns.
But
My first comment is, um, public
safety.
Public safety.
And I see that we have our
council delegate here.
And
I see that it's a really big
concern here on the reservation.
And I, I've heard comments about
cross, uh cross commission.
Of, uh, county and state
officials to enforce the laws, I
would presently say right now
the uh highway um that travels
through here for uh 4 lane.
Divide it, it's good to see it.
I traveled it when it was a
two-lane, I traveled it when I,
we traveled to the Shiprock Fair
and we had, there was no culvert
you took a dip and we enjoyed
that traveling through those
arroyos and a quick pace. It was
like riding a roller coaster,
but those are stories we share
with our children now, and they
ought to benefit what we have
today, and I'm good, uh, it's
good to see a, a 4 lane highway
through here all the way.
Yes, it could see some
improvement, but I'm not gonna
complain about that. Thank you.
Thank you for all of that. Going
back to public safety.
It's good to see a county
sheriff travel the highway, we
know we have one that lives here
in the community, so I don't
know how much of a threat he
imposes on the public here
everybody probably recognizes
him and says that, you know, he,
he just lives at Tohatchie, so
he won't do anything, but it
doesn't matter.
We see, uh, the state police.
Travel up and down all the way
up to uh towards Shiprock, and I
know they have a few inspection,
uh, for heavy motor vehicles,
and it's good to see that
because you do see some of the,
uh,
Traveling public slow down at
the sight of them.
I've heard that word cross
commissioned since the early
1980s and we're still here
today.
I've heard the word boundaries,
that's as far as they go.
You know, we don't need to be
working on.
Words of that nature in a in a
committee or the public's
comment as to how we can work on
these issues we understand the
underfunded that police force
here. I don't blame, you know,
that it takes, I don't, I, I
don't get upset with them that
it takes them maybe 45 minutes
to an hour and a half to answer
a call here in the Tohatchie
community when they're traveling
from a covered area south of
Gallup that they have to come
to.
It's something that I think
maybe the committee can go back
and the Navajo Nation look at as
to how we can work on.
Using the word cross commission.
We need to see that enforcement.
I'll give you a little bit of
story in order for me to get at
least a quick present quickly
responding police response to my
problem at home at one time.
Was that I had an individual in
my, uh, residence area and he
was throwing rocks at my dog, so
I felt that as a threat, so I.
Call 911, not 1911. I called the
uh dispatch office in Crown
Point and spoke to them that I
have an individual here that's
threatening my family. I had two
granddaughters that I was
babysitting that day and I felt
a threat. I told him, lock the
door and I told them that I, I
think I'm gonna have to get my
rifle out and go out there and
address the matters because I
don't, I'm, I'm, I feel that I'm
being threatened. I believe that
when the uh dispatcher sent that
word out, I saw the state police
responding in 20 minutes.
I saw um.
22 state police units, finally,
another county unit and finally
the Navajo police. I don't blame
them. I just see the amount of
coverage they have to take care
of here on the in our area south
of Gallup, but we took care of
the problem.
I would like to see a little bit
more.
Of Gallup independent headlines
saying that the committee is
working on a cross commission
with the Navajo Nation.
To, to, to take care of that, I
mean, that's our number one
problem how else are you gonna
enforce drugs? How else are we
gonna take care of, uh, a drug
problem that we have. I saw your
agenda here and I know that.
It started
Your, your first day was
somewhere up north.
OK.
But today is to hay. Tomorrow's
Pinedale and the as reviewing
your agenda and I didn't see too
much of what I, my comments
would like to be about.
But that is something that I'd
like to see that you, the
committee here, you know, look
at and let's, let's take care of
this. I mean, since the early
1980s cross commission is
becoming an old term now let's
make it an active, an active
part of what you all can do for
our community here. We need
that. We definitely need that,
as we heard, we had to have a
Newcom fire department come down
and address the fire issue we
last night. It was only a half
mile from where I live. I saw
that.
But
It's something that needs
addressing.
And I think that you as a
committee can work on
legislation to take that to the
governing board.
And speak about it with the
governor. I just saw the
headline yesterday in the news
that the governor was talking
about New Mexico being one of
the highest rated states in the
nation for juvenile crimes.
Not only does Albuquerque Santa
Fe, Las Cruces have that. We
have that problem here on the
reservation too.
And but that's for the Navajo
Nation to address so that they
can seek the assistance from the
state of New Mexico, Arizona,
and Utah.
To help the Navajo Nation. We
can't do it on our own, unless
we arm ourselves.
I think that what they used to
say that old word uh Indian
justice.
So,
That was my first, my second
comment is, um, we all heard of
this, um, big beautiful bill.
Um,
I'm a Republican. I'm an
American Republican. I'm not a
Trump Republican.
So I don't follow that
bandwagon.
My concern is the federal
funding that's gonna affect the
education program here in the
state of New Mexico we have a
representative from the states
uh from the McKinley County
School Board.
You know
We could talk about building
schools, we can talk about
improving, uh, schools, the
system, but we need to look at
what's going to happen to the
state of New Mexico when that
funding is going to hit the
state.
Oh
I have grandchildren that attend
Gallup McKinley County schools.
And I think that that needs to
be looked at and start a
planning process as to how.
The committee may start
addressing that to the governor.
And also all the other
representatives in the state of
New Mexico. Thank you.
Hm
Thank you.
So we'll have another round of
public comment later this
afternoon, um, that's the fry
bread alarm if you're wondering.
It's uh around that time, so
we're gonna get ready for the
tour. Now those that want to
drive the uh representatives and
senators. Oh, we got, um,
Senator Lopez joined us. Would
you like to introduce yourself
before we move forward?
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
Apologies for being late this
morning, uh, Linda Lopez, state
senator, District 11, the
Southwest quadrant of Bernalillo
County.
Thank you. Thank you for joining
us and uh don't worry, it's uh
Navajo time.
So with that, um, if members
would like to join other members
in their vehicles, but what I'd
like to have is um one of our
leadership in one of the
vehicles, so, uh, allows some
room for one of our local
leaders or someone to accompany
you to so they can answer
questions as we go around, but
we will start here at the
chapter with the walk around
tour, I believe, um, where's my,
um, I, I think that my, uh.
President and vice president
went to tend to the fry bread,
uh, so.
We'll start here with a walk and
then we will move out to the and
get in our vehicles and um I'll
probably lead with my truck. I
think most of you have seen my
white truck. I still, I still
have it, so we'll um go out here
and go off to the left here but
do take your packets because it
does um have some information in
there and don't hesitate to ask
any questions to um those that
are accompanying you, and I
think I can accommodate 1234.
in my truck with me if you pick
you.
However, um, but we will start
here with the chapter house and
then take a little walk around
in our um
President and vice president
will lead us in that. So would
you like to give a short or?
Beat you out there or you want
to start?
out here on this side to the to
the OK so this is this way is
west that ways east.
North, south.
We'll meet over here on the west
side of the um area here, so,
um, as we move forward, thank
you.
a very short.
OK
My apologies, um, I didn't sign
up. I didn't realize there was a
sign up. I'll make this as short
as I can, um, from the
standpoint of Navajo Nation
Council, I mentioned earlier
this morning that there are 24
Navo Nation council delegates.
We represent 24 districts, uh,
throughout the Navajo Nation. We
do have 4 sessions every year.
We start the summer session on
Monday, and those usually last a
week. Uh, we also have 4 major
subcommittees like you all have,
uh, your subcommittees.
And we go around the different
chapters and meet with uh the
committees, uh, communities as
well. Navonation exists and
covers 27 million acres, and
we're almost half a million in
numbers. So this is a very, very
large reservation, a very large,
uh, uh, a tribe, and some of the
things that were talked about,
um, they are, there are issues
and uh there's a lot of things
that we deal with. I noticed
that you have another meeting on
Friday.
uh, some of these issues I might
try to get over there to
Pinedale and address some of
those issues with you. Uh, we do
have the economic issues, uh,
when the funds come into the
Navajo Nation, they have to go
through a process. Any external
funds that come to the Navajo
Nation to the chapters, they go
through when rock the child, the
164 process first before it can
be sent down to the, the
chapters. We are federally, uh,
we are federal lands.
We are trust lands and uh and in
that regard, we are um um uh the
line is held in trust for us as
Navajo people by the federal
government, so we deal a lot
with the United States Congress
as well as well as the states,
uh, we deal a lot with the US
government. I just want to get
that clarified.
Um, in terms of these, uh,
external funds that come in.
Um,
one of the things that was
mentioned was the school
systems. I would like to get
some uh help uh with one of your
subcommittees with a better
assessment plan for the state of
New Mexico. Our students here in
McKinley County, San Juan
County, they are lagging way,
way behind, uh, in academic, uh,
evaluations and so forth. We do
need help with that. Highway 491
and 391. Um, I think, uh,
representative, um,
Allison in the last uh
legislature tried to uh pass a
bill for $5 million. That was
gonna help our, our Highway 491
and 43371.
I'd like to bring that back. I'd
like to have that brought back
up to the legislature that this
coming year. Uh, there's a
number of other things that I'd
like to address, but I know
you're pressed for time. I, I'm
pressed for time, so I won't be
able to be at 10, uh, attending
the tour with you folks. But
again, I want to welcome you
here to New Mex or to Tohatchie
and a safe trip home and have a
good day today on the tour. Uh,
welcome to Tahatchie.
Senator Pinto, thank you. Thank
you.
OK, meet outside on the side,
um, so the tours use, um, really
for the legislators and then we
will return back and then we
will have lunch. Thank you.
