Good morning, everyone.
Good morning. Happy Friday.
And let's go ahead and reconvene
our meeting.
We are now going to begin agenda
item number 10, Tribal ready TR.
Empower empower empowering
tribal digital and data
sovereignty.
So that presentation will be
provided.
The
names
via Zoom and I'm gonna have them
introduce themselves and begin
the presentation.
Because I believe they changed
their uh presenters.
So with that, uh, we're gonna go
ahead and give you the floor.
So
All right, good morning. Good
morning. Can you hear me? Zoom.
OK.
Good morning. Can you hear me?
This is Joe Velandra.
Yes, you can hear me. All right,
good. Just
uh it's a it's a different
camera camera angle than I, than
I expected. uh I want to first
of all thank you for inviting us
to, to participate this morning
in your legislative hearing.
It's a great honor for tribal
ready to be here. I'll introduce
myself and then I have two
colleagues with me, and yes, the
presenters or the, the people
from Trave Ready on the call are
different from the agenda that
that was provided to you.
My name is Joe Velandra. I'm a
member of the Rosebud Sioux
Tribe, uh, and currently live
and work, uh in uh Washington
DC, mostly, and also spending a
great deal of time in Las Vegas,
Nevada because we have 3
grandchildren here, so, uh, I'm
getting the benefits of the
desert and the and the east
coast, which is, which is quite
a contrast, as you can imagine.
And also just by by way of
background, I, I had the great
pleasure of of living
working in Albuquerque in the,
in the mid 80s for about 3
years and it remains one of the
one of the great places, one of
the great times in my life, and
I, I enjoy every moment I get to
spend back in New Mexico, uh,
every chance I get. So again,
thank you.
I will allow the other two, I
will ask the other two
participants to introduce
themselves to Jason, if you go
first.
Jason, can you hear me? Yeah, I
can hear you. Lolo Ma. Good
morning. This is Jason Kroitiwa.
Uh, I'm a Lea Pueblo and Hopi.
Uh, I live in the Phoenix metro
area, uh, but go back home quite
a bit, uh, both to aleta and to
Hopi. Uh, it's a pleasure to be
with you all here this morning.
I'm the business development
manager with Treble Ready, um,
and also support communications
and marketing efforts as well.
So it's uh great to be here with
you all. Thank you.
Um
My name is Tom Villandra. I am
the chief of staff here with
Tribal Ready. I'm also a citizen
of the Rosebud Sioux tribe, uh,
live and work now just outside
Ann Arbor, um, very excited to
be here today, very honored to
be here, so thank you very much.
All right, thank you very much.
We, as you can tell, we have
staff all over the country. We
have the great, the great.
Privilege of working with the
tribal nations from Alaska to
Massachusetts, New Mexico,
Arizona, the Great Plains, um,
Michigan, uh, we have, uh, as
you know, there's a great need
for for broadband connectivity
in Indian country and in
particular in New Mexico, and we
have found that the demand is
heavy and the understanding of
the tribal issues is is still
relatively small, so we're very
happy to be here this morning.
Tell you about Tribal already
and to talk about some of the
other other uh issues that
As we see them now, I'm not sure
if there's, I can't see if if
you have our slide presentation
upper dots. I can't see it on
the. So I will
Sort of roll through what I
believe we're going to talk
about this morning, but I would
also, and of course you always
have the privilege to stop me
and ask me a question or just or
to slow me down or uh to stop me
from going down a rabbit hole if
I start to do that because some
of these issues I will tell you
I feel quite passionate about,
uh, a little more about me. I've
been working in and around
tribal governments, tribal
issues, tribal economic
development for over 40 years.
Um,
I'm the elder of the team right
now, uh, and uh have a uh
Seeing the importance of of
connectivity of of broadband
since I was the chief of staff
of the National Indian Gaming
Commission back in the early 200
in the mid 2000s, 2005 to 2008,
saw that it was coming in since
2008, since leaving the gaming
commission, I've spent a great
deal of time and effort trying
to realize some benefit for
Indian country when it comes to
connectivity and thank goodness
uh the uh the
The amount of funding that's
available through the federal
government now is beginning to
address the needs, but again,
I'll come back to that. I, as I
said, sometimes I go down a
rabbit hole because I really
feel quite, quite passionate
about this tribal reddy's
primary mission.
It's a broad mission, but it's
one of the most important ones
that in Indian country as far as
we're concerned, and that's
advancing tribal sovereignty to
unleash the full power and
potential of native communities.
Uh, uh, we're focused on
supporting native communities by
providing resources and
expertise primarily in the
broadband area right now, but
we're also are talking about the
importance of
Broadband as the command and
control structure for other
utilities that tribal
governments provide, so water,
sewer, power, uh, with, with uh
an extensive broadband, uh,
connectivity network on any
given tribal reservation, the
command and control allows for
for economies of scale and other
other ways for the tribe to
exercise its sovereignty by
providing those kinds of
utilities, all kinds of
utilities to tribes. There's no
other
And then he quite liked tribe
already. There are some other
tribally owned entities out
there, and we try to work with
work and cooperate with them
wherever we can. What
distinguishes us, as I said, we
have people all over the country
from Alaska to Massachusetts and
elsewhere is is our people and
our relationships. Our people
are are connected to their
communities. Many still live
there or live where they were
born. Our years of industry
experience also helps tribes to
access relationships that help
create the most sustainable
cost.
solutions available. Um,
Uh, we are a native owned
company. We're owned by our
employees and we have 11 tribal
investor, we are 90% owned by
native individuals, native
people, uh, and, and, and the
San Pasqual tribe of of of uh of
Kumea Indians in in in Southern
California,
um, uh, our board of directors
are all native individuals, uh,
and are
Senior management is over 80%
native uh people. So, uh, we are
native focused. We understand
the issues that Indian
communities uh uh uh face when
it comes to economic
development, infrastructure
build infrastructure management,
anti-infrastructure.
Operations. What we do, as I
said, is, is we provide
infrastructure and operational
solutions to tribal nations. Uh,
the core problem, and I know
this committee understands it
very well, is the historical
neglect of vital broadband and
utility infrastructure that has
left tribes without the
foundation to have access to
vital services and
opportunities. Our vision, as
I've said before, but I want to
continue to reiterate is to is
to help build high speed
broadband so that it reaches
every native.
Community, making sure that that
that tribes control their
destiny when it comes to the
future and access to information
services, and economic
development, health care, all
those things. So we've created a
company, Tribal Ready, that is
already delivering on our
vision. We are providing
services or we provide services
in the following areas. We do
planning, we help tribes plan uh
what they're, what their needs
are, what their development.
look like we help them find the
funding, be that grants or other
types of funding that's
available. We also act as the
prime contractor. We work on the
deployments. We help build out
the networks as a as a prime
contractor again with our goal
being working closely with the
tribe to make sure that that the
money that is available goes as
far as possible. And lastly, our
long-term business model is to
um
It's to help tribes operate the
infrastructure that's purchased,
and it's important to us that
tribes, at the end of the day,
own the infrastructure that's
that's built with, with the
money that's available today and
that they own the operations
that is taking advantage of
those er of that infrastructure,
very important, as we said, as I
said before, because our, our
mission is to support and uh a
tribal sovereignty, and to make
sure that for the long term, the
tribe's own and control.
That infrastructure, uh, just a
bit of history and I again, I'm
sure that the committee is well
aware, so I won't, I won't
belabor it, but, but
historically, the incumbent
providers in any given tribal
area, be it New Mexico or from
my home, South Dakota, have
received lots of money uh from
various sources, the federal
government primarily, but yet
tribal lands have not seen the
type of service increase, the
type of connectivity that would
enable them to have
over or to participate actively
in um in the digital economy.
This became abundantly clear. in
fact, painfully clear,
tragically clear during COVID
when telehealth was was not
very, was hardly available
because the connectivity issues
were so bad that other types of
education and learning were were
very difficult as you, you all
know again, I'm not telling you
something that you don't know,
you know, the, the, there was a
a solution to try to use
hotspots or go.
Sit next to McDonald's or some
other place that had free Wi Fi
just to do your homework. That
brought home very starkly the
the the challenges that that
Indian country faces. In fact,
um, there's some uncomfortable
facts that go along with that
Indian country.
has the lowest rates of
broadband service by any
objective measure. The FCC
reports that 99% of housing
units in the US urban areas have
access to broadband service, but
only 65% of similar housing
units and rural Native American,
Alaska Native lands have the
same level of access. 73% of
non-rural Native American areas
are covered by at least one
terrestrial fixed broadband
provider. However, only 46%
The rural areas are covered by
have that same sort of broadband
coverage. That gap is is is huge
and it's impactful and it's
something that Trave Ready is
trying to address. Further, the
The the BIA has reported that
barriers to broadband deployment
in Native American communities
include a lack of financial
investing.
immense geographical areas as
you well know, and in New
Mexico, the, the land areas of
tribal land can be quite large,
quite have, uh, have, have
substantial topographical
challenges and also, and lastly,
and something that should be on
everyone's mind are the complex
and burdensome regulatory
environments that are that are
required to build out
infrastructure anywhere, but
certainly on Indian land.
Um,
The the funds that are provided
that have been provided by the
federal government begin to
address the, the, the funding
issue for key infrastructure in
Indian Country, but it's only a
beginning, as again.
As you know, uh, the, the
federal government set aside as
part of the broadband build
approximately $33 billion for
tribes to have exclusive right
to in two tranches of funding,
the treble broadband
connectivity Program 1 and 21
has been mostly awarded, about
$1.6 billion for infrastructure
construction, uh, uh, round two,
we understand it to be announced
sometime in the next month.
There's again about
Another $800 million there for
construction
that's great, not criticizing
really, but just it's a start.
It's not the end of the game.
Uh, we're hoping that tribes
will be able to participate in
the broadband equity access and
deployment program to some large
degree, uh, although that's
dependent on on every state, um,
and some of the requirements and
some of the obstacles that
tribes face in accessing BE
funding
or
financial
Uh, and, uh, for example, and
again, I'm trying not to belabor
any of these things because
you've been gracious just just
to give me time here, um.
Many, and I'm, I'm not saying
that the New Mexico Broadband
office is doing this, but many
broadband offices as part of the
funding vehicle are are part of
the pre
Qualification for uh for B are
requiring uh tribes to provide
information that they probably
don't have or that they don't
have access to or that they
don't have the resources to
gather for themselves, so
additional help from the state
broadband office for tribes to
gather the pre-qualification
information is great and in
particular that's mapping
information. Uh, you may have
heard about this. The FCC has a
uh
broadband map that they call the
fabric that they've spent the
last
2+ years gathering data from a
variety from every source they
can find to put broadband
serviceable locations on that
map. That's key for Bede because
if the broadband serviceable
location BSL is not on the map.
It cannot be funded under the
law. Uh, the problem tribes have
is tribes as you undoubtedly
know, have a deep seated
mistrust of the federal
government and providing data to
outsiders that may
their community or may be taken
and used for purposes that the
tribe didn't consent to or
doesn't understand how it could
be used that way. That's the
case with the FCC fabric map,
the FCC engaged a
An outside contractor called
Cost Quest that in the contract
every bit of data that the FCC
collected went to Costquest and
became the property, the actual
Property of Costquest to be used
as they see fit going forward in
order to access that data tribes
have to obtain a license from
Costquest. Now again, it's a no
no cost license, so I'm not, I'm
not saying that Costco is trying
to profit off the tribes that
way, but the fundamental problem
is the maps lack uh
in huge ways, in large ways they
lacked the data that tribal
communities have, so I always
say that, you know, if you go
look at Rosebud, for example, my
grandmother's house may not be
on that map. My auntie's
auntie's houses may not be on
that map, and if they're not on
that map, the state using bead
funding cannot cannot give money
to connect my auntie or my
grandmother's house to or to be.
It's, it's a problem, and it's,
it's
Something that the state
broadband offices are aware of
and I, and many are trying to
solve, and I won't speak
specifically to New Mexico at
this point because I'm not
familiar enough to tell you what
they're doing, but I know that
they're very aware of the issue
and I and and I, I assume and
hope that they're trying to find
solutions for tribes, uh.
With, you know.
Facing those problems. So, um,
You know, the bottom line is
that there are, there is funding
out there, but tribes need need
help with uh with resources,
with
Um,
Accessing those funds uh to make
sure that they get the full
benefit and and have
theopportunities that this
funding brings uh and and and is
intended to provide for tribes.
So, uh, that was a little off of
the, off of the the presentation
that we sent to you, but I think
it was, I believe it's
important. I, I, I, I'm certain
you're aware of these issues,
but I wanted to bring them up.
Now, one final issue I touched
on it briefly.
I began to talk about the FCC
fabric is is tribal data
sovereignty.
And that is, in order to, uh, we
often say, and it's a quote from
from the native author of I
Deloa Jr. in order to be
sovereign, you have to act
sovereign. So the data that
comes from tribal communities,
uh, tribes guard very
Carefully, uh.
As they should. that they want
for historical cultural and
other reasons. There's a reason
to protect that data as
sovereign governments they have
every right and every reason to
want to protect that data and
make sure that it's used only
for the benefit of the tribe.
So, uh, there, there is efforts
uh advancing now that a tribal
already supports to um uh
advanced tribal data
by having tribes adopt their own
uh laws and regulations about
how data can be used, how it is
accessed by the trial or from
the tribe, and that uh other uh
regulatory schemes that those
that propose to use the data of
the tribe have to go through and
we're finding that that is most
effective when it's in
partnership with the state where
it's possible to do that in
partnership with the federal
government in particular the
BIA, which is the trustee, uh,
Uh, that acts as a trustee on
behalf of the US government, and
we think that that it's an
appropriate role for the BIA to
play as the as the touch point
as the liaison, the keeper of
the of the keys, if you will, on
behalf of tribes so that as the
federal government wants or
needs to have access to tribal
data that they that that that
shield of the trustee protects
the tribe and that that is the
vehicle or the the
Forum in which those issues can
be resolved, so I bring that up
just so uh you're aware that
there is discussion about that.
There is drafting going on of a
model ordinances for tribes to
to adopt, and, and something
that
Yeah, uh tribes being uh
Uh, so many tribes being in the
state of New Mexico will
undoubtedly become a topic for
this committee down the road
once these networks are built
and they're robustly being used
for economic development, health
care, education, and all the
things that they're intended to
be, um, to be used for, uh, so,
uh,
One of the and then and then
finally, and then I'll, and then
I'll stop and I'll be happy to
answer.
Any questions that you have, uh,
the, the things that we do is
circling back to tribal already
and what we do, you know, our
model is to build, operate,
train, and transfer.
So we want to build, we'll
operate on behalf of the tribe,
trained tribal tribal members to
to take over the operations and
then transfer those operations
to the tribe. It's important, as
I said, because we believe in
that and our mission is to
support tribal sovereignty that
we do that. Uh, we have gone
through the last two years of
vetting, questioning, putting.
Trust is strategic partners over
the coal so that we're bringing
what we think are the best
people to work with Indian
country to build out these
networks to operate the networks
because it's one of those things
that it's so technical, so
Uh,
Intense in terms of what it
takes to build and and get an
operating ISP up up and running
that you need the best people
you can possibly have to do
that. And so we have gone
through and and found our
trusted partners and we bring
those with us when we come to a
project and forever.
We are community focused, that
we want the best for the the
native community whether it's on
the Arctic slope in Alaska, a
Pueblo in New Mexico, uh, one of
the tribes out on Martha's
Vineyard in Massachusetts or any
place else that they happen to
be. This is a community solution
that has to be community
centered and we really look at
it that way, as I said, we are
all or
Most of us are tribal members.
We respect that and we want to
advance the benefits and and the
mission of the tribes first and
foremost. So I'd like to thank
you for your time. I hope I
didn't bore you with some of
the, some of the rabbit holes I
tried not to jump fully down,
but, um, but we, I, I get
passionate about this, and
again, thank you for the time
this morning to address you.
Thank you.
Any other team members.
That would like to provide any
comments?
Uh, Jason or or Tom, do you,
would you, do you have anything
you'd like to say?
Sure, I would just, uh, can you
hear me? This is Jason Kroua.
Um, yeah, we, you know, Tribal
Read has been doing some great
work, um, and especially in the
state of Arizona where I'm
located. I do a lot of uh
Um, interaction between our
state government here with the
governor's office, uh,
specifically the Arizona
Commerce Authority as along with
the uh governor's Office of
Tribal Affairs, keeping them
engaged with uh the work that
we're doing with Arizona tribal
communities. Um, I work quite a
bit with tribal leaders, uh,
specifically in Arizona and some
within uh New Mexico as well.
Uh, just keeping them abreast of
what re already has been doing,
uh, engaging the tribe.
And having uh provide some
consultation to tribes that are
not sure exactly how to navigate
some of these complex, um,
You know, um,
Programs that are coming out
from the federal government, be,
you know, being the top one, so
the organization is great. It's
it uh has like Joe said at the
very beginning, it's very
diverse in terms of tribal
backgrounds from the various
employees standpoint, um, and
it's, but at the same time, uh,
we all understand Indian
country. We all have backgrounds
and experiences working for
within our own communities for
Indian country and um being
The ambassadors and conduits and
um helping, you know, tribes in,
in our communities navigate
through um through things and
trying to keep that sovereignty
intact, making decisions that
are in the best interests of the
tribe. So, uh, I just like to
add those comments. Thank you.
Thank you. Any other, any other?
No, I think that's all. Thank
you.
OK, committee members.
question
Senator Schendo.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for the presentation,
uh.
I know you talked a lot about
strategy and all that, uh, what
specific tribes are you guys
working with currently in
Arizona?
So do you want to take that or
do you want me to go ahead, go
ahead. No, no, go ahead, uh, uh,
Jason. So currently we have an
agreement uh and that we're
working with the Arizona
Commerce Authority and the State
Tribal Broadband office. So,
Honestly, we're, we're engaging
with all 22 tribes at this point
that which the 22nd includes uh
Zuni Pueblo as they are
recognized by the state of
Arizona.
So with that consultation, we
are working uh with the state to
engage tribal communities and
tribal leadership, uh, to
understand, uh, if they're going
to be, and correct me if I'm
wrong, Joe, but uh completing
the beat application, uh, it's
a, it's basically a consent to
move forward with those
communities with the state to
identify those tribal
communities to be part of the
process when the B funding by
the state of Arizona is
distributed to.
The communities. Mm, OK. So, uh,
so you don't have any specific
tribes that you're working with
directly, you're using the state
as a vehicle for part of the
interaction is, am I correct?
We have been asked by some
tribes to engage directly and
that is our agreement with the
state that we can represent them
in this process. However, if the
tribes are needing additional
support, they can reach out to
us and we've had uh at least 3
communities at this point, um,
ask for assistance directly with
Treveready.
Uh, yeah, cause when you talk.
And if you have the state
involved you know there's always
a conflict, inherent conflict
between, you know, what the
tribe wants and what the states
I'm just curious as to that
dynamic.
Well, you've
identified one of the challenges
certainly, but um it's a, it's a
challenge, I think when, when
the issue is defined, uh.
Properly, that is that that is
surmountable, and that is
understanding of the
fundamentals of how the data is
used. I always sort of use the
example that
Most all of us have, have cell
phones and we access some social
media through our cell phones,
uh, on a daily basis as we
access that social media, let's
just use Facebook as an example,
you know, they gather every
tidbit of information about us
that they can so that, you know,
later on if I looked at an ad
about a briefcase, I'll get 1010
ads about a briefcase the next
time I log into Facebook, things
like that, and they make money
doing that.
So just fundamentally from a
commercial point of view, uh,
All of us should exercise more
control over how our data is
used. I think that's a
fundamental issue that's being
debated right now or has been
debated for years and is coming
into focus, but that is an
example of data sovereignty of
tribes
use their inherent sovereign
governing self-governance, um,
to tell companies like Facebook.
If you want to use our data,
there's a cost to that or
there's a threshold of
regulatory.
Uh, scrutiny that has to that
that has to take place. That's
an example of of tribal data
sovereignty that is probably has
some common ground with the
state in it, you know, the the
and
And the federal government for
that matter, so you know that's
probably the easiest easiest
example, but certainly you're
right, if, if the tribe.
And try to, uh, would want to
take a more extreme view that
that may cause uh you know, some
rub between the state and the
tribe and the federal
government, but I think in
general once the once the issue
is or the issues are defined
properly, there's a lot more
commonality in how data should
be used, how it should be
protected.
OK, I appreciate it.
Thank you, Representative
Little.
Um, good morning and thank you
for the presentation. Um,
following, uh, Senator
Schendo's.
Line of questioning of
questions, uh, from that, it
occurs to me
to ask how many tribes
specifically in New Mexico, but
if there are none, can you
identify tribes that have not
only established but maintain
their own internal servers and
data systems.
Oh, that's a good question. I
don't know that I could, I could
give you a comprehensive answer.
I know that most tribes aspire
to that of the 19 pueblos and in
particular Navajo, they, they
certainly all aspire to have
that sort of uh control, uh,
and, and operating and
operations for their uh network
uh and we've talked to
Uh, if not on 19, pretty close
to all 19 about about various
issues and we're in an ongoing
discussions with, with a large
handful uh to begin working with
them right now we're not
currently working with any, any
specific tribe in New Mexico,
um, so the answer to your
question specifically instead of
just going to is I don't know of
any that have have achieved that
goal yet, but I know that they
all aspire to it.
Thank you.
would be, are there any in the
country that have achieved that
goal, Madam Chair.
Yes, there are, uh, I think, uh,
one example in Arizona would be
Gila River, uh, the Hillary
River tribe in Arizona has, has,
uh, accomplished most of that. I
won't say all of it, uh, the
Cheyenne River tribe in South
Dakota has again accomplished
most of it, but not all of it,
uh, and they
There may be one or two others,
but I don't, I don't, not, not
specifically aware of that.
Thank you. That's very helpful.
Um, I appreciate your response.
Um, if I may, if I may, um,
also, um, add to that, uh, at
the recent National Tribal
Telecommunications Association
meeting that was held um last
week, uh, it was shared during
that presentation um from the uh
NTTA chairman, uh, Godfrey and
who is muscular Apache that um
there are 14.
Uh, communities that currently
have telecommunication, um,
Tribally owned telecommunication
companies uh within their
community, um, out of the 500
plus federally recognized.
Thank you.
Thank you. I appreciate it.
Thank you, Madam Chair. That's
all the questions I have.
Senator Rodriguez.
Thank you, Madam Chairman. Good
morning.
the speaker, I don't recall your
name, but thank you for your
presentation. I do have just a
little bit of a point to
elaborate on here having to do
with the, the title for the
presentation, which is
tribalready empowering tribal
digital and data sovereignty,
and I guess it seems to me that
it would behoove you to, um, uh,
to, to work with, uh, tribes
primarily and
Determine, a system by which you
as a starter basically a system
by which you can protect your
data sovereignty first put
together the whole comprehensive
system and then use that as a
starter as you submit proposals,
uh, either to the state or or
federal or wherever you would be
presenting your, your proposals,
but, um, it seems to be a little
broad right now, um, as to who
the stakeholders are.
And uh I know it's intended to
empower tribes, but is it
really, if we don't have or if
you don't have a proposal that
is fully incorporating tribal
sovereignty then it becomes a
little bit easier for other
governments to infiltrate um the
uh the year sovereignty and in
your tribal goals, and so, um, I
just wanted to, to bring that
up, um, and maybe you already
have that st.
and proposal as a starter, but
since we don't have it here
today, Madam Chairman, I, uh,
I thought I'd bring that up, so
thank you, thank you very much
for that. I appreciate your
comments and and and and you're
absolutely right. There is a
growing effort uh from tribal
Ready, the the uh
Uh, the law school at Arizona
State University has a specific
program related to tribal data
sovereignty that they're working
on to put that, put that legal
framework together and the
consistent philosophy that would
that would back it up. So, so
it's in the works, but you're
right to point it out and, and
we're all trying to do several
things at the same time, but
this is a priority, so I'm, I'm
certain in the next uh next few
months, uh, this will begin to
be
Uh,
Further debated with an Indian
country itself because as you
well know, uh, not every tribe
agrees on everything at at the
first.
First time through it, but we're
all talking about it and I'm
certain that you'll see those
specific uh proposals and and
guidelines here in the next the
next several months.
Yes, thank you. Thank you,
madam.
Response. It is, um, imperative
as, as you stated in different
words that a consensus be
reached amongst tribes because
that is, uh, a situation that
we've encountered where, you
know, part of the tribes may be
for a certain system, the other
tribes may not. So I'm happy
you're working on all that so
that we can ensure that we can
provide the best, uh, digital
data system that is available.
Thank you so much.
Thank you, Senator.
Uh, thank you for your
presentation and uh thank you
for this introduction to your
program and your work.
Uh, perhaps, um, we can schedule
you for another presentation in
the future where we could um
have you present in person it's
kind of hard to uh hear a
presentation, uh, over Zoom
without really knowing, uh,
seeing a voice to face. So with
that, we just want to thank you
for your presentation and we
look forward to our continued
work.
Thank you very much. We'll be
happy to come back anytime.
Thank you. Thank you.
Thank you. Yeah. Bye-bye. All
righty. OK.
To our last agenda item, agenda
item number 11, an update from
the healthcare authority and I
believe our presenters are here.
Thank you for joining us here
today.
Please introduce yourselves and
uh feel free to begin. Thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Members
of the committee, I am Kierra
Ochoa. I'm a deputy secretary
with the Healthcare Authority.
You had toe, good morning. My
name is Shelley Begay. I'm the
Native American liaison with the
healthcare authority.
Thank you, Booju. I'm Teresa
Ballinger, Native American
liaison with New Mexico
Medicaid.
Mr. Chair, I just want to, uh,
acknowledge that everybody has
received their presentation.
Thank you, Madam Chair, sorry.
OK. As part of the healthcare
authority, uh, as you may know,
we always start our
presentations and our
deliverables with our land
acknowledgement. So before we
start, on behalf of all the
colleagues at the Healthcare
authority. We humbly acknowledge
we are on unseeded lands from
our original peoples of the
pueblos, Apache, and the Dant
past, present and future with
gratitude, we pay respects to
the land, the people, and the
communities that can
to what is known as our
beautiful state of New Mexico.
Before we begin the heart of the
presentation which um Shelly and
Teresa will present to you. I
wanted to provide an overview of
the healthcare authority since
we are a new department in the
state, as you all know, um,
having, um, absorbed our
division of health improvement
or um just uh DDSD and uh our
employee benefits from other
state departments. The
healthcare authority has a
mission to ensure that all New
Mexicans attain.
highest level of health by
providing whole person cost
effective, accessible, and high
quality health care and safety
net services. Although we are
the healthcare authority. I feel
passionately about that part
about safety net services. I get
to oversee income support
division, child support
services, and have the privilege
of working with our tribal
liaisons, and I feel that the
connection between those safety
net services and the health care
is really core and essential to
what the healthcare authority
does. We do have a vision.
that every New Mexican has
access to affordable health care
coverage through a coordinated
and seamless health care system,
which again includes those
social determinants of health,
really, of course, until every
community in New Mexico is
healthy and well. No community
in New Mexico is healthy and
well.
Our goals in the healthcare
authority.
Or to improve um and leverage
our purchasing power and
partnerships to create
innovative policies, models of
comprehensive health care
coverage that really improve the
health and well-being of New
Mexicans and the whole
workforce. We feel really
passionately that we're
supporting our employees and
building the best team in state
government, not to be
competitive, but we really want
to be the best, best place to
work in the state of New Mexico.
A little competition never
hurts, right? Um, we really, um,
work to honor
Our employees' continuous growth
and wellness, um, as best we can
because we're only able to take
care of our community members if
we're taking care of ourselves.
We really take very seriously
our mission and goal to address
health equity by addressing
poverty, discrimination, and the
lack of resources so many of our
communities face. We want to
build a New Mexico or every
single person thrives. We are
seeking to provide and implement
innovative technology.
Data-driven decision making to
provide unparalleled convenient
access to services and
information, and of course data
is really important, um, but,
you know, some of the most
important information we get is
just from talking to people in
community and how are they doing
and what are their stories of
navigating our healthcare
system. So, um, I don't want
that last bullet to sound too
wonky. We still want to hear the
stories and the lived experience
of everyone because that's an
important data point.
As well. And with that, I would
like to turn it over to Shelly,
who will tell you more about how
we work to strengthen our
relationships with our, our
tribal partners in the state of
New Mexico.
Thank you. um, here at the
Healthcare Authority, we work
with 23 of our Native American
populations, um, but most
importantly, we're also
respected and give a lot of
guidance to any of our 5074
tribes that call upon us to have
some detail about how well we
work with our tribes. Um, we're
kind of the guiding entity in
respect to not only Sitka and
how we work with our
Tribes, but here at the
Healthcare Authority we have 4
pillars of strengthening our
relationships with tribes. Our
aency's intent is to continue to
serve be a collaborative
resource and a partner to New
Mexico's 23 tribes, nations, and
pueblos. There are constituents
in our communities we have
devoted much of our resources,
much of our attention, and the
importance of ensuring that we
are able to answer to our
constituent concerns our
representatives are
Senators' concerns, but most
importantly our tribal leaders.
In doing so, we have identified
these four pillars in which we
have done so.
We want to prioritize our
tribes, nations, and pueblos
regarding the available and
upcoming state funding.
We want to provide opportunities
through our communication
practices so that we are
sustainable in supporting our
tribes and their efforts to
address health care disparities
and additional resources in
their communities. We want to
promote tribal health equity by
recognizing and respecting
self-determination.
In doing so, they, as far as our
tribes and our tribal leaders
give us guidance on how best we
should work with them. We want
to ensure that their safety net
concerns and the benefits
available are prioritized to
these tribes, nations, and
pueblos. We want to continue to
build trust in relationships
with our 23 tribes and be
visible in the communities and
connecting directly with our
constituents and tribal members.
We want to provide agency-wide
training to our all of our
agency staff and ensuring that
they understand the facets of
CIA, the importance of
establishing these uh important
relationships with our tribes
and have a better understanding
of state and federal obligations
and working with our tribes,
nations, and pueblos.
The next part I'll be talking
about our Native American
Medicaid population and who we
serve in the state.
As you can see, our Native
American enrollment in New
Mexico.
is around 137,0697.
Some recent data as the 2022 has
our New Mexico tribal population
at 233,214.
And roughly 60% of our Native
American population has uh been
enrolled in Medicaid.
Since 2024 July, we have
launched turquoise turquoise
care.
With outreach and engagement
that focused directly on
ensuring that our Native
American constituents and our
members and our tribal
communities understood the
importance of staying on
Medicaid.
Since July 1st, we have a
contracted with 4 different
managed care organizations,
these managed care organizations
are Blue Cross of New Mexico,
Molina Healthcare of New Mexico,
Presbyterian Health Plan and
United Healthcare. The important
piece of uh doing Medicaid
education and outreach is to
ensure that our Native American
constituents understand the
importance.
But also be aware that within
these contracts we have required
Native American staff to
continue to be of service, uh,
and these tribal liaisons that
directly work within the managed
care organizations to ensure
that they speak the language.
That they're representing the
tribal populations and that they
are working directly by
providing education outreach,
and any and answering any other
constituent concerns.
For individuals that are not
enrolled with managed care, that
is our fee for service
population.
These individuals are a special
populations and also are
entitled to, uh, the Medicaid
services as well.
These individuals I like to work
with, uh, not only through our
Indian health services, our
tribes that are providing uh
health care services, our tribal
programs so that they're also
aware of the coverage and the
differences of what it means to
have managed care organization
and also fee for service
coverage as a Native American,
you may or may not be aware that
they are not required to enroll
with a managed care
organization.
But the important piece of that
is that they are aware of how to
utilize the provider network and
the services that are available
to them.
These individuals get a basic
Medicaid type of coverage.
If you uh look at the next
slide, you'll see our Native
American enrollment.
We had peaked during the time of
COVID.
And our tribal, uh, I wanna say
our uh benefit providers within
our PVCs.
That work directly with Indian
Health Services.
Our, uh, individuals that
enrolled during our, uh, public
health emergency, did everything
to ensure that these individuals
had coverage.
So we saw, uh, our Medicaid
enrollment peak at that time.
And what you see before you is
since the ending of the pandemic
and the public health emergency,
we had 11% drop, about 16,000
Native Americans that were
disenrolled in Medicaid because
as we were redoing Medicaid
application eligibility. We
found many, uh, individuals went
back to work and we're making
above the income guideline.
So our efforts as we continue
through the pandemic was to
ensure that we provided the
education, the outreach, and we
had worked with our Bewe Native
American team who provided the
state exchange-based
information.
To date, we want to thank our,
um,
be,
uh, PVCs and those are are
benefit uh people that work
directly within our healthcare
facilities at Indian Health
Services and tribal 638. Those
individuals who are trained and
certified by the state of New
Mexico to ensure Medicaid is
available and offered at any
point when they enter any of
their services. That's an.
opportunity for us to extend
Medicaid coverage if there was
any type of changes from the
last time that they did their
care.
I'll move to the next slide.
So as we continue to look at
Medicaid expansion and tribal
communities, we continue to
focus a lot of our effort to
increase Medicaid enrollment.
And health care coverage for our
Native Americans.
Teresa, myself, and
collaboration with our tribal
programs continue to have what
we call these uh IHS days in the
community in which we have work
to bring uh IHS staff that do
Medicaid enrollment.
Uh, income service, the um,
division ISD staff so that
they're able to join us in
travel communities and we're
bringing the services to those
tribal communities last year, if
you see the ISD in the, in your
community events, those are the
areas where we saw a lot of our,
uh, Native Americans that were
disenrolled from Medicaid.
We also did turquoise care
outreach events and at those
events, we also had the support
of Income Services Division.
And we also had the support of
patient benefit coordinators
from Indian Health Services to
provide and engage in
collaboration and keeping our
Native Americans on Medicaid.
In addition to working directly
with Medicaid expansion, uh,
I'll talk a little bit about the
creation of our Native American
technical advisory committee.
Um, I also want to just bring
one final thing on this slide to
your attention. Uh, we're very
proud that we have created a new
tribal charter, and the tribal
charter, uh, we had our first
meeting in August, August 27th,
2025. Uh, I'm sorry, 2024 and we
hosted our first meeting in
Gallup. We had a number of
participants that were invited
and during that.
Meeting we created an
opportunity to meet with our
tribal entities, our patient
benefit coordinators or Indian
Health Services and our tribal
638 clinics.
Uh,
to invite them to a round table
where they will have an
opportunity to give us guidance
on how best to work with them,
to answer any constituent
concerns, and then of course in
a mutual concerns that they saw
within their communities. And so
uh we will be planning the next
meeting for November.
I'm moving to slide 11 and just
a quick overview of the 11:15
Medicaid waiver.
As you see before you, we
submitted our Medicaid
demonstration waiver to CMS and
We had 16 to 17 different
proposed initiatives. To date,
these are all of our initiatives
that have been approved.
Even though we're looking at a
general population, a lot of
these, uh, specific services are
also going to be working
directly with our tribes that
are interested.
We have continuous eligibility
for children up to the ages 6
years and younger, and this is
in hopes that we don't have any
children under the age of 6 drop
off of Medicaid. We know that
it's a complication for some of
our families. We've heard
through uh communication that uh
Medicaid enrollment for this age
group, age range usually does
not change from time to time, so
we were approved to have that.
The next is Medicaid
reimbursement for home visiting
for pregnant and postpartum
individuals uh we're taking a
great initiative in ensuring
that we can reach out to these
individuals who, um, are not
receiving the required and the
most important services both
during postpartum and during
their pregnancy.
We also have a supportive
housing expansion. We want to
increase the support to these
individuals that need the
housing expansion.
Well, they are receiving their
services, uh, that are required.
We also have a community benefit
slot in this, uh, new initiative
we have added 1000 slots to
these individuals that need home
health care, long-term care
services.
We have also expanded to include
legally responsive individuals
as caregivers, and this has been
a great benefit to most of our
individuals that, um, are being
taken care of by family members.
This will allow family members
to continue to care for those
individuals that need the
services.
Um, as I move on, I, there's a
couple of that. I just want to
focus in on justice involved for
90 day pre-release services, and
this is an initiative that both
Teresa and myself and our
Medicaid division is really
working on we like to, to expand
these services to our tribal
entities right now we have 11,
um, tribes that do have juvenile
and correctional facilities, and
most importantly, this is the
population that has the most
need. We understand the
difference
The challenges with
transportation, receiving
benefits, continuity of care,
and so.
Work has begun to reach out to
the tribes and get their level
of interest and engaging and
ensuring that this population
has transition services upon
release.
We also want to focus on home
delivered meals for pregnant
members, and this is for
individuals that are
experiencing gestational
diabetes. We want to ensure that
baby's health and mama's health
is also taken care of.
We also want to look at and we
will be working with home
delivered meals for community,
uh, benefit, long term, uh,
individuals that are receiving
these services are eligible for
up to 2 meals a day, and this is
for dietary restrictions.
Um,
Finally, the most important and
The one benefit that we are
working directly with our tribes
we had uh much consultation and
if you uh with our tribal
entities, our tribal providers
and if you move to slide 12, you
will see our introduction to
traditional health care
practices.
As we are all aware, the
conservativeness of New Mexico,
um, is taken into much respect
as we move forward.
We have, um,
Talked a lot with our tribes. We
have given every opportunity and
we have welcomed every
opportunity for our tribes to
engage with us and have been
most respectful in receiving
their guidance, their concerns
and also recommendations on how
to roll out this benefit.
For the past 10 years.
Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services has engaged at
a national level, uh, doing
tribal consultations with, uh,
all of our tribes and receiving
feedback and guidance on a
pathway for reimbursement as it
has been requested.
By three tribes, as being the
4th through a demonstration
waiver. So today we have 4
states, Arizona, New Mexico,
California, and Oregon who have
submitted waivers requesting for
reimbursement.
New Mexico has been selected to
engage in this first cohort.
Since 2022, HCA and MAD has
engaged in two tribal
consultations and 5 listening
sessions to obtain feedback from
tribes again, with respect,
To honor traditional practices
we opened an opportunity to our
tribes to give us guidance on
how sensitive.
And how we should proceed in a
respectful manner.
In August of 2024, ACA submitted
a state proposed framework with
tribal feedback to CMS and I'll
run through that on page 13.
So as you see our draft
framework, we wanted to be all
inclusive and a lot of this
feedback, as I mentioned, was
received by our tribes through
tribal consultation, whether as
written.
Testimony written statement of
how they wish for us to receive
or if it was through our formal
travel consultations.
The state of New Mexico elected.
To have a covered population to
every individual that was Native
American and eligible to receive
services through Indian Health
Service, Tribal 638.
And tribally funded programs.
We understand that that
importance of including
traveling Iran programs needed
to be included.
We wanted to ensure that this
type of coverage and
reimbursement was open to
individuals, uh, including our
children, and that is our
children's health insurance
program participants, so, uh,
these individuals are also
eligible.
When we look at eligible
providers.
This is an opportunity for any
of our tribal health facilities,
our Indian Health Services and
our tribal Iran programs to
participate.
This is a voluntary program.
And by every means we
respectfully acknowledge.
And
Encourage our tribes at their
wish to either move forward or
remain out of this, uh,
implementation.
We want to ensure that eligible
providers who participate are
employed.
By Indian Health Services,
tribal 638.
And urban Indian organizations
which here in New Mexico is
First Nations community health
source.
The delivery system, of course.
would be traditional healthcare
practices would be available to
both.
Fee for service and individuals
that were enrolled with managed
care.
And any Medicaid members at any
of our participating facilities.
When we look at the
implementation funding.
Subject to appropriation of
funding.
By the New Mexico legislature.
There has been a request for
5.75 million and ensuring that
there's these.
Reimbursements to implement the
traditional healing
practitioners benefit.
Uh, would go to support these
Indian health services, tribally
ran programs and tribal 638
health clinics to create their
own individual program that's
respectable to their community
members.
And of course, um,
Guided by their own leadership.
And I do want to close with that
um particular slide to say that
um we are continuing to provide
and working through a robust
communication and outreach
education plan.
Uh, in ensuring that
If any interested tribe in the
future would like to join in
this benefit that they are
welcome to do so again, it is a
voluntary program.
So as we move forward and I
close this session, uh, on our
work in Medicaid.
Uh, please be aware that we do
have a Native American technical
advisory Committee. This
committee is very responsive to
how New Mexico Healthcare
Authority should be working with
our Native American populations.
This which we refer to as Nyak
began in September of 2012.
The design of this committee was
to ensure that tribes, nations,
and pueblos had the opportunity
to meet with Medicaid leadership
to address topics of mutual
concerns and interests regarding
Medicaid.
Nayak is comprised of tribal
appointees and often tribal
leadership, Indian Health
Services, and house uh HCA
representatives. Our meetings
are held quarterly and minutes
are posted to our ACA website
and also drafted and sent it
sent to our participants.
Our representation has grown in
the past uh few years.
And Teresa and I continued to
work with our teams to ensure
that we can get additional
tribes at the table. Here's a
list of all of our tribes, and
we say thank you for
representation uh Pueblo of
Laguna Pueblo of Nambe, OK
Owinge.
Pueblo pires, Pueblo San Felipe,
Pueblo San Eltafonso, Pueblo
Santa Ana, Santa Domingo Pueblo,
Pueblo of Taos, the Navajo
Nation, Fort Silllapache,
Hickory Apache, and Mescalero
patchi.
At every opportunity these
representatives bring forward
what their specific tribal
communities need in health care
and what we can do better at the
healthcare authority.
As you see, FY 25 goals put
together by these, uh, entities
representing their tribes was to
continue to increase behavioral
health services for Native
Americans. Increased Medicaid
reimbursable opportunities.
And you'll hear a little bit
about that in our next
presentation. Increase the
number of long-term care options
and ensure that we increase and
retain our Native American
population on Medicaid as long
as they're eligible.
And with that, I do want to hand
it over to Teresa Bellinger, our
Medicaid tribal liaison to talk
a little bit about our rural
healthcare delivery fund.
Thank you, Shelly and good
morning. It's an honor to be
here today.
I wanted to uh slide 16, put the
mic,
oh.
Thank you.
I wanted to talk about the real
healthcare delivery fund, which
I understand the legislature had
a big part in this, and it has
been a successful funding
opportunity for our um tribal
programs.
Last year, the um
Rural health care delivery fund
was established,
um, to create high quality
healthcare services in urban
areas, urban and frontier areas,
I mean, rural and frontier areas
of New Mexico.
And $80 million from the general
fund appropriation went toward
this uh fund. Um, there were 5
grantees from tribal programs,
uh, they were breath of my
heart.
Birthplace.
First Nations community health
source,
Laguna Healthcare Corporation.
The pueblo of Perri
The pueblo of Peries and Fort
Defiance Indian Hospital and in
just a moment I will share
details of how those monies were
used.
We also um were given an
additional $46 million in
funding.
In 2025 to get the rural
healthcare uh program going
again and so we've been busy
outreaching to our tribal
communities as well as our
um
Tribally run programs to get
services to rural and frontier
areas of New Mexico.
Um, we had an education webinar
that took place on September
18th and the funding recipients
will be announced in October and
November.
Breath of my heart birthplace in
Espanola, New Mexico, was one of
those awardees last year and
their goal what they plan to do
is to, um,
Execute a comprehensive plan to
significantly expand expand
midwifery services, focus,
focusing on our indigenous
population, um, and midwifery
student programs as well as peer
support training.
This, like I said, is located in
Espanola and their goal is to
address the gaps in health care,
especially in Ri Riba County.
Laguna Healthcare Corporation
was another grantee.
They've expanded their um.
Tribally run healthcare center
to additional 10 hours a week,
so, um, at their care center,
they're adding um 2 hours
Tuesday through Saturday, uh, to
their clinic hours so that
people who are working, going to
school, etc. um, or have
transportation issues can attend
the clinics, um, into the
evening as well as on Saturdays.
And the services they're
providing are pharmacy
laboratory, radiology, social
services, public health outreach
purchase and referred care.
As well as um medical
appointments.
I'll go to the next slide.
Um,
First Nations community health
was another one of the grantees.
They found that during COVID,
they went out and did outreach
to rural and frontier areas of
the Navajo reservation,
vaccinating people and providing
medical care for areas such as
Torreon, Pueblo Pentado that did
not have access or
transportation otherwise.
So under this grant, they are
going to uh implement a mobile
health.
Service a van to provide
accessible health care to uh our
vulnerable populations in
McKinley and Rio Riba County.
Where, uh, the lowest life
expectancy rates in New Mexico
unfortunately occur.
Uh, next slide, Pueblo Picqueri.
They have really had developed a
robust.
Uh, plan to improve health care
in their.
Very rural and frontier area of
New Mexico.
We have partnered with them and
are working with them to develop
primary care services with the
nurse practitioner and certified
nursing assistant, uh, they want
to be providing dental care,
behavioral health care, and
emergency transportation up in
um Rio Riba and Tos counties in
that area of the state.
For their neighbors.
And then for defiance Indian
Hospital.
was another grantee. They are
enhancing their healthcare um
practices by establishing an
office in the Gallup area during
COVID, they had this office open
and we because of the overflow
that IHS was receiving of
patients they were able to see
additional uh patients and
address COVID concerns and it
was very successful as a
result, they
Um,
wanted to develop um this
initiative to offer this.
Additional medical office there
and provide an array of medical
services and supports to the
community, our Navajo community
and Shelly and I met with them
last week and they are planning
with this award money to in the
future, open up appointments for
um specialty care visits like
endocrinology, oncology, out in
the Gallup area which currently
doesn't exist. They have to go.
Albuquerque very often for those
services, so we're, we're
delighted to be partnering with
them on this very important
initiative.
OK, um.
OK, yeah. The State plan
amendments, I'm going to go over
that really quickly, um,
on page 23.
We just want to take a moment
and share with you all the hard
work we've done with our tribes,
Pueblos and nations in New
Mexico, we through our NATA
meetings we've heard their
concerns. We, one of those was
our um community health workers
and community health
representatives, or CHRs have
been requesting that Medicaid
reimburse them for some of the
care that they provide in their
communities.
We submitted a state plan
amendment and the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid did
approve that State plan
amendments, so we are now in the
process of developing a
reimbursement mechanism for our
CHRs and CHW's in New Mexico,
uh, for the health care they
provide in their communities.
We also, I'm very proud of this
Laguna Pueblo, as you know, has
their um.
Rainbow Care Center and for a
very long time, they were uh
reimbursed at the fee schedule
rate.
By the MCOs.
We submitted a state plan. They
reached out to us, Laguna Puelo
reached out to us and asked if
we would help them get the
enhanced Medicaid rate.
Successfully, we were able to do
that with their help and um.
The daily reimbursement rate
tripled from what the MCOs were
paying. We are now paying them
the OMB rate per patient of
$1,7719 per day. Previously they
were receiving around 250 a day
reimbursement. And these are
100% federal.
Pass through dollars.
Um,
Indian Health Service, the spa
21-0001.
Back in 2022 during COVID, one
of the pueblos reached out to us
and said, Can we please have a
tribal consultation
on OMB reimbursement, which is
significant.
For pharmacy.
And we worked on that and I'm,
I'm happy to say our secretary
Carrier Mary Hill was so
supportive of this. We submitted
the state plan amendment to
provide the OMB rate for
reimbursement for pharmacy, uh,
for prescriptions at our tribal
63 days and IHS facilities that
has taken place and is ongoing,
so they now receive $719 per
prescription, um.
That is filled at IHS Tribal 638
facilities.
Continuous Medicaid eligibility
as Shelly mentioned earlier,
that's a win for us having our
children 0 to 6 remain on
Medicaid and not risk losing
coverage, uh, for not, for the
parents not renewing or whatever
they have continuous coverage
for the 1st 6 years and that
just as re-entry waiver we're
really working on this one to
assist our, our, um.
Individuals that are leaving
incarceration and need Medicaid,
need medication, needs services
the day they're released and we
have been able to get that going
and provide care coordination to
them up to 90 days prior to
release.
So those are just a few positive
things that we've been working
on at the medical assistance
division. I want to turn it over
to Shelly for some behavioral
health updates.
Sure. Thank you, Theresa.
Um,
As, as we are all aware of
behavioral health is a main
focus and also a big concern of
ours and providing the much
needed services to our role and
even our urban and Native
Americans of New Mexico.
Through the state general fund,
uh, we have supported our Native
American tribes and designing
their own traditional culturally
appropriate services that would
address behavioral health in
their communities.
Through many of these services,
individuals and families are
participating, uh, directly in
their communities and through
this grant funding, we have
allowed and support our Native
American tribes to continue to
provide these culturally
relevant services.
And 2 FY 24.
We expanded our state general
fund and through uh your
support, we expanded the number
of service providers from 6 to
9.
Here's a breakdown of the $1.23
million state general fund and
special appropriation to these
specific tribally ran programs
and tribally specific programs
and providing direct behavioral
health services.
We have 2E consultants who works
directly with our children,
whether our children in state
custody, but also our children
that have behavioral health
needs and also family needs.
We work with First Nations
Community Health to ensure that
their award amount is centered
around the current traditional
healthcare practices and also
traditional healing services
that they provide.
5 sound of all India pueblos has
a component in which they reach
out to the 55 tribes in this
area, but are also inclusive of
our urban Indian population and
providing behavioral health
services.
Hojou Center for Personal
Enhancement, which is located in
Gallup, has been a continued
partner and providing not only
Medicaid for behavioral health
services, uh, but also has been
a recipient under this program
to extend those services. Has
Comprehensive Health Center has
designed various programs that
are traditional to their
population.
Uh, through language programs,
art therapy programs. We have
Poston and Associates LLC who
has focused directly on ensuring
behavioral health services 988
is culturally sensitive,
appropriate, and has designed a
Native American behavioral
health handbook.
That uh has been recently
released to our travel
communities, our partners, and
also our recipients. We have
tota Behavioral Health Authority
up in northern New Mexico in the
Four Corners area.
Who has designed a program that
incorporates traditional healing
and also any other type of
behavioral health services for
our Native American,
specifically our Navajo
population.
Albuquerque area Indian Health
Board, uh, is also a recipient,
and they've provided uh direct
children's services and that are
focused on behavioral health
needs. And finally, we have ZUNY
youth enrichment project, uh,
this specifically, uh, program
is designed to work directly
with the children within ZUNY
and get them connected, continue
the traditional supports and
incorporate many of the
traditional components and.
behavioral health needs in their
community.
And with that, I want to say
thank you. I welcome your, we
welcome your comments, your
questions and um I will end with
that.
Thank you. Thank you for your
very thorough presentation
representative block you.
The floor
Thank you, Madam Chairman. Thank
you, thank you all for the
presentation and I appreciate
it. I think that's it's good to
see progress and I think that's
what you're doing, especially
with the tribal liaison and
everything. It sounds like you
were doing hard work, so I
appreciate that. So Madam
Chairman, I just had a question
about on page 26, talking about
the Native American services
programs. So I see some of these
like, like 2E consultants LLC
Poston and Associates LLC. How
many of these are for profit
entities, Madam Chairman.
The ones that you listed on the
page, not all, not every single
one on planet Earth, but I guess
if you, if you're so inclined.
Well, the, uh, Madam Chair,
thank you, um, Representative
Block to answer your question,
the TUE consultants is a
nonprofit, and that's who we
well, wanted to reach out to and
ensure that we gave
opportunities to many of our
tribes that were directly
working with their communities
and so, um.
That entity is so uh Passon and
Associates, glad to say, is a
member of the Sandia Pueblo, and
is one of our consultants to
provide direct uh education
outreach and guidance through
consulting with our tribe. She's
very vetted in the community and
it's nonprofit.
Stephanie Pasta, yes.
Thank you, Madam Chairman. Thank
you for that, and I think that's
super great that these are
members of the actual tribes,
and that's, that's important,
especially because you do want
that buy-in and I think that's,
that's what we're looking for,
right? We want to make sure that
the money stays in the community
and builds jobs in the
community, which is what we we
really want. So, Madam Chairman
and uh all you great folks on
the panel. Uh, so I'm wondering,
are we looking at increasing
this funding number in the next
few years.
Because I mean, it is kind of
low just from the initial
numbers, but is this just, just
currently what they're asking
for. I'm just wondering if it's
enough, Madam Chairman. Madam
Chair, Representative Block,
I'll attempt to answer that. Um
I think that, you know, it's
always great to have more
funding. It's always great to
have more general funding, um,
but, uh, one of the big changes
that we've made at the HCA
recently and and thanks in large
part to the Affordable Care Act,
is that more behavioral health
services in New Mexico are now
covered by Medicaid dollar. So
about 74% of all behavioral
health services in New Mexico
are now being covered by
Medicaid and of course we get
that great federal match there.
So, um,
We've done some organizational
changes within the HCA as well
where BHSD, the Behavioral
Health Services Division and the
Medicaid division are under one
director or Medicaid director
and um it was really at a deputy
level and that helps us really
think strategically about
behavioral health funding, um,
so that those numbers are real
low, but when you look at the
numbers going into behavioral
health in New Mexico backed by
that Medicaid dollar. It's a
lot.
Higher.
Great. Thank you, Madam Chairman
and thank you for that that that
cleared it up for me. And then
last question, I'll be quick, I
promise, talking about page 9 of
the medic the Native American
enrollment numbers. You said
they went down, I believe, in
over the last year. Is that what
I understand? So, Madam Chair,
and uh
and the deputy secretary and
All you all great folks, I'm
wondering.
Are we tracking where these
people are going when they're
leaving Medicaid? Is it, is it
like they can afford to buy
their own healthcare versus just
dropping off and not being
insured at all? Do we know what
the numbers look like from that
16,000, how many folks found
other plans and then how many
folks just chose not to get
Um
re-enrollment, Madam Chairman.
Madam Chair, Representative
Block, uh, as these individuals
drop off of Medicaid, we are
notified and our system is set
up to give a referral to uh the
BW New Mexico exchanged for
continuity of care.
Um, many times through these
cabinets in your community
events and also through the ISD
in the communities, uh,
situations change and we're able
to catch these individuals who
may then qualify for Medicaid
and have an opportunity to look
at coverage of care based on
their income, but we do have a,
a referral system to our state
exchange.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair and
thank you for that. I guess my
my point on that is let's just
say I made a.
I mean it's like $15,00999 a
year and I'm barely above that
133% or I think it's going to
138% this next year.
How do you make sure that that
person stays insured if you
don't track that until the end
of the year when you file your
taxes. I'm just wondering, how
do you track that? How do you
make sure people don't get
forcibly taken off? And I know
that's another question, but
that, that is my last question,
Madam Chair.
But
Madam Chair, um, Representative
block, Teresa Bellinger would
like to answer that question.
It's it's a great question and a
and a and a big question.
Good morning. We, um, have a
really great working
relationship with Be Well New
Mexico. We have tribal liaison,
Miranda So, who goes to many of
the outreach events with us to
offer.
For those individuals who are
over income for Medicaid, be
well as an option. And
amazingly, most, according to Be
Well, most of the individuals
that do apply are especially our
Native Americans.
Their co-pays are are their
premiums are extremely low. I
mean a few dollars. So yes, a
few dollars, so they're a great
resource. However, for our
Native American population.
Buying insurance is not um it's
a hard sell because they feel,
you know, they have certain
feelings about the uh government
providing our healthcare, so,
but be well has been a great
resource. There's two different,
um, stipends that people can
apply for to minimize the cost
of those premiums, so we work
very closely together.
Madam Chair, Representative
Black, I'll add on to that
because I think what I
understand you're asking is sort
of person by person, how can we
know, you know, if people are
insured, if they're OK. And
frankly, we don't yet have a
great tracking system for an
individual tracking, but we are
working on um a new implementing
a uh a system that will allow us
to figure out um when people get
what they need, essentially, you
know, when they enter our
Programs and when they leave,
this is similar to the question
we talked about at the Health
and Human Services Committee. So
that big project, what are
people getting when they come
and get state services, and when
are they sort of OK and getting
either private health insurance
and in some cases are going into
be well as individuals. We get
those aggregate numbers from B
well, but of course those don't
take into account if people got
private insurance or if, you
know, more unfortunately they
just became uninsured. We won't
really know.
If they just became uninsured
because they um were disenrolled
um because they didn't renew
until they hit the healthcare
system again. And then we can
see, oh, there was a gap in
their coverage, but they were
still eligible for Medicaid by
income, you know, they, they had
to go to the hospital and then
the hospital folks re-enrolled
them. So it's a variety and I, I
do agree we have a great
relationship with BW, but not
everybody goes in to be well,
right? So some people go into
private insurance. Some people
unfortunately,
non-insured. The continuous
enrollment for children is a
wonderful way of ensuring, you
know, that we don't, um neglect
at least those children 0 to 6,
and that folks don't really have
to worry about when they put in
their renewal packet or not
within the 1st 6 years of their
child's life. But we have more
work to do in terms of that sort
of the life cycle of being on
Medicaid, getting off Medicaid,
if you will.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
I will stop there, but I have
like 10 more questions, but I
appreciate it. Thank you all so
much. I appreciate it.
Thank you, Representative
Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you for the presentation this
morning. There's a lot of good
information and having been
involved in the house sale for
oh gosh, many, many, many years,
um, it's uh, and staying
involved on health boards as
well, uh I'm watching the
evolution taking place and uh in
more ways, more often than not,
it's a very positive experience
and I'm watching other
communities.
Taking those steps to move
forward and take on uh the
responsibility of providing
health care to their
communities, uh, in the best way
that they can do so. So one of
those is, Madam Chair, the
Medicaid eligibility because um
The funding that comes back is
very often used to continue to
enhance services that are
provided or to maintain them. So
it's, it had been a while and I
think Representative Block for
asking about the um uh
eligibility rate, uh, if you
wouldn't mind, if you have this
number available. I understood,
Madam Chair, that it is 138% in
2025, 138% of the federal
poverty level.
Can you put that in terms of
numbers for me in uh
specifically, uh, a family of 4,
what would that be?
What, what is the, that, that,
uh.
Amount that a family can earn.
Thank you, Representative
Little. I, um,
Actually couldn't give you a
dollar amount at this moment
because I don't have the chart
in front of me, um, but we will
certainly get you that
information.
Madam Chair Representative
Little, it's, it's about 40,000
for a family of 4, I believe, is
that more or less, but we can
get you those exact numbers and
it breaks down, of course, by
family size, I think, um, you
know, it's, it's a pretty low
number. Um, so it's really
important that we have other
options for folks when they, uh,
especially when they just make
$1 more, right?
Yes, uh, uh, thank you, thank
you for that uh response. Um, on
page 14 I was curious as to uh
you described the composition of
the NTA and they are appointed
most of them are appointed by
tribal leaders. I just send the
representatives HCA
representatives. Um, so I
represent Albuquerque's or
Berlio County's northwest, uh.
Uh, Northwest Bernlio County
and, uh, the Albuquerque area,
the, uh, in Bernallio County, we
have, as you know, well over
70,000 Native Americans that
live in and around the area, if
not more, I suspect that number
has increased, but, uh, how are
they represented, uh, how is
that representation, um.
Established on the board.
Thank you, Representative
Little. Um, a couple of ways we
had on the committee Linda
Sunstone, who is a First
Nations, um, CEO and she was on
our um NAC committee. So she has
a good feel of the pulse of the
urban Indian population program
and then Indian Health Service,
we included them in our, um, on
our Native American technical
Advisory Committee because
They serve, of course, a large
portion of or of the urban
Indian population in
Albuquerque.
Right, thank you, uh, Madam
Chair, uh, just a couple more
questions, um.
On page 14 you were describing
also one that caught my eye as a
supportive housing, oh, I'm in
the wrong page, but uh, you
described the supportive
housing, and then later the
expansion. Can you tell me, can
you elaborate a little bit on
what exactly that is?
Supportive housing.
Um,
A couple of different things.
The support of housing is a
program to get people, homeless
people off the street and into
affordable, um,
Homes. This is in our larger
communities certainly like
Albuquerque because um, um, we
know the need is very great. It
is a pilot we're launching it,
um, I, I don't have the number
of how many slots there are, but
that is in Albuquerque and I
believe in Donana County as
well. We are, um, trying to
get.
people into housing.
At an affordable rate. And then
the other expanded, um,
availability of community.
Benefit slots. I'm not sure if
that was what you were talking
about as well. That is a program
that keeps our elders uh out of
nursing homes and in to stay in
their community to get the
support and care that they need.
We added 1000 additional slots
in the last year, um, and we are
trying to get the word out that
this is an option for people,
even if they're slightly over
Income we have income diversion
trust programs to get them the
care because we know they're
happier and the, it's more cost
effective to keep people in
their community with some
services, uh, that can maintain
them there.
And Madam Chair represented a
little, if I just might add um
to the supportive housing
question as, as Teresa says,
it's affordable housing, but
it's also housing supported by
case management. So for formerly
homeless people, um, you know,
sometimes on site case
management in the, in the
facility, the home, the
apartment building or home that
they're living in.
Thank you, thank you so much.
That's um that's a great
service. Uh, I, I'm very happy
to hear about that. Um, so just
one clarifying question on the
keeping elders in home, which I
think is really, um,
Beneficial to them and their
families. Uh, does this include
retrofitting homes as well, or
are these the other services,
ancillary services like nursing
and behavioral health, I can
just come to the top of my mind.
There's a list of services that
they can budget for one of those
is the home modifications, which
is $6000 last year it was 5000.
We raised it another $1000. So,
um,
They can use that at their
discretion for home, home
remodeling or modifications, um,
they can choose
for, uh, some of the services
adult day health, a day program,
personal care, respite, um,
emergency transportation.
Um,
Some of the therapies. So those
are a list of the, uh, services
that they can get under that
agency-based community benefit,
which is for our seniors and
disabled so that they can remain
in their homes.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Um, one final piece, uh, and
it's uh.
For the benefit of the, uh,
tendency to, uh, chapter that
was here yesterday, I believe
you're still here today. Yes, I
see them out there. Um, my
question was, as they move
forward with their plans to, um,
uh, build and provide their
health care, expand their health
care services that they
currently have. I'm wondering,
um I'm interested in just making
a connection with the two of
you, uh, can you see Joe, it
seems like.
There would be some real, uh,
benefits and wondering if you'd
had the chance to, if you hadn't
had the chance, I would
encourage you to do so with the
uh CEO there, Derek Watchman.
Absolutely. Yes, thank you,
absolutely. Our rural health
care delivery fund, uh, for this
year we've had one Native
American community.
One pueblo applies, so there's
money there and I will
definitely get in touch with
Kenyan C Dohajlian that. Yes.
Thank you, Madam Chair. That,
uh, that's the end of my
questions.
Thank you, thank you,
Representative Little.
Representative Allison.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I like what I heard about your
introduction. You're all looking
forward to a healthy New Mexico.
I couldn't agree more.
And you're also working on
affordable health care coverage.
Which I also like.
When I was still employed before
I retired, I had really, really
good health care insurance. And
then after I retired, I
maintained my coverage for a
year before I had to be dropped
off.
And then I started using the
services of the Indian Health
Service.
In my community, the nearest
facility was Shiprock IHS.
So I went to Shiprock IHS for
Um, just a few things. For
example,
They provide the bare minimum,
the bare minimum coverage. Like,
for example, if I had a
toothache.
They would either recommend
filling a cavity or pulling the
teeth.
Those were the two options we
had offered by IHS.
If I wanted to go.
Let's say get a root canal.
Or have a bridge or even have or
don orthodontic services, I'd
have to go to a different
carrier who accepted uh various
healthcare coverages.
So
I don't know how much uh well,
before I go any further, I just
got a notice from your office
about um
Updating my enrollment update
with the HSC. I used to be with
ERISA Insurance as a as a state
legislature.
And I know the price that was
offered from your MCO covers
cover ers.
Blue Cross Blue Shield, United
Healthcare.
There is no way a retired person
can afford their monthly
premiums.
How are you working on it to
reduce those monthly premiums if
you're looking forward to a
healthy New Mexico with an
affordable health care. Are you
working with them? Do you have
any control of reducing the
Uh, recommended coverage prices.
My first question, Madam Chair.
Thank you. That's a good
question. Uh, Madam Chair,
Representative Ellis San. uh,
thank you for your kind words on
our efforts in response, uh,
Our Native Americans,
individuals tend to, uh, confuse
Medicaid and Medicare.
And a lot of the outreach and
education that we do, uh, is to
ensure that a Native American
under Medicaid.
Does not have copays.
And so under turquoise care,
those individuals are not,
again, not subject to a
co-payment.
And we do have recipients that
do get Medicaid, what we call
dual coverage, Medicaid and
Medicare.
And you're Medicaid, as you
know, is a pair of last resort,
um,
IHS will also be a pair of last
resort.
And as we work with our managed
care organizations for that
co-payment, which is Medicare.
Uh, it's important for our
tribal affairs departments with
every MCO to make sure that they
provide that education between
the difference between Medicare
and Medicaid, uh, ensuring that
as a Medicaid recipient, there
are no co-payments and that's
very hard for our tribal
population to comprehend because
our retirees and individuals
that no longer qualify for
Medicaid are subject.
To Medicare and they do have
those co-payments, um, we do
have our patient benefit
coordinators and our uh PED
determinners. These are
individuals that also work with
providing any type of additional
coverage that would help them
pay for those premiums and
qualify for our additional
Medicare programs that would
allow for these coverages to be.
Paid by the state. Now, again,
those are income qualified, but
there's a big distinction and
this continued education and
outreach has to occur so they
know the difference between the
two and all. Madam Vice Chair,
um,
Represented Allison.
We have such a fragmented health
care system where different
people at different ages of
different populations are told
different things about how they,
where they need to go and how
they need to.
Frankly, jump through this soup
or that hoop to get what they
need, and that's not what we
want. Um, I think the formation
of the health care authority,
the intent was that, um, you
know, one of the main intent was
that with our purchasing power,
with our expertise on purchasing
health coverage for all New
Mexicans. We might look at where
those gaps are for every member
of the state and to see what
innovative policies we can bring
to fill those gaps and that's
That's a system change, you
know, as, as Shelley said
between Medicare and Medicaid.
It's not only tribal people who
can't keep it straight. It's
everybody who can't keep that
straight. And so I think, you
know, that's a really key area
that you're talking about for
elder people as they transition
into new phases of their lives?
How do we ensure that those gaps
get filled and that they don't
have the stress of having to
cover a co-pay suddenly that
they never had to cover. Um, so
I think part of what we've done
with the employee benefit group,
um,
Which is for state employees and
then, you know, that one year
that you had, um, would be
really to look at can we get
that benefit for all state
employees and and early retiree
and retirees who are still using
that to be as robust as it can
be. Um, we have the healthcare
Affordability fund as well,
which, um, you know, is, is a
very robust fund that allows us
to think about how to fill in
gaps, and I think you've
identified a very, very
important gap, and we can look
into that and bring it back, you
know, to the leadership to
think.
about that for people who are on
Medicare who are not getting
fully covered. Thank you.
OK, um, another experience that
I had, Madam Chair, was, uh, I
was in severe pain with uh my
knees.
And after several.
Injections at the IHS, they
finally agreed that I needed a
knee replacement.
But the IHS does not offer
special specialty, uh, doctors
like that, for example, knee
replacement.
I went to several places, well,
at least 4 places.
And uh Shiprock HHS told me
well, if you find one, we can
help you pay for it throughract
Health.
I went to the 4 places and 3 of
them said, we're sorry, we can't
help you, but IHS never pays
their bills, so we can't accept
you as a patient. I finally
found a doctor at UNM that did
my knee replacement. So just for
your information that contract
held at NDA Indian hospitals do
not always cooperate with their
patients.
And then, uh, I saw on one of
your slides you had a turquoise
care outreat event.
Scheduled for Shiprock Chapter
House.
And uh
Well, the 1155 waiver be
explained at that event and when
you do get it scheduled, can you
notify me so I can be in
attendance at that event?
Madam Chair,
Madam Chair, Representative
Ellison, uh, absolutely, we
would love to have you there and
also um bring any attention to
any concerns from your
constituents. I do recognize um
a Senator, uh, Pinto that she
does attend, um, but that, that
event is really in partnership
with Indian Health Service and
so we, uh, put that up along
with Indian Health Service on an
annual basis and so.
Uh, that typically comes around,
uh, I wanna say open enrollment
time, so we capture both our
elder populations and our
Medicaid populations, and I will
send an invitation to you. It's
November.
Oh, I was just reminded it is
upcoming in November.
OK, Madam Chair, thank you for
that, and I look forward to
meeting you in Shiprock. I have
other questions, but my last
question is on your last slide
on traditional healing services,
does that include traditional
ceremonies.
Madam Chair. Madam Chair,
Representative Ellison, I want
to say yes, um, that particular
reimbursement.
is designed by our tribes and
those uh practicing facilities.
As we move forward and
implementing this reimbursement
model are providers will have
and we encourage them to create
a model that works for their
community. It is unique to their
specific needs, and they will
design that based off of their
own practices, and so, um, we
encourage that, yes.
OK, Madam Chair, thank you, Ms.
Begay. I look forward to seeing
you in November. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Shannai. Uh, Senator
Rodriguez, thank you, Madam
Chairman, um, and good morning
to Kira. Thank you for your
work. Yeah, it was nice to see
you last time too. Glad you came
to work with the state and of
course Shelly and uh Teresa,
thank you. Um, just a little bit
of, um, information because I
know we're getting, uh, close
to, uh, it's not lunch already.
No, it's 11:38. Um, a little bit
of information on the Medicaid,
on the supplemental that we're
talking about that
representative um Ellison.
And was talking about, um, you
know, those people that are not
on Medicaid, but
Medicare only, um, have
approximately, if you're
retired, for example, but you
have to have, you have to have
the Medicare at 65, as we know,
and then Medicare only pays up
to 80% as we know of some there
are some copays and other
things, but then you need
insurance to cover the
additional.
20% at a minimum and so to get
that insurance we all call it
supplemental insurance and so
some state employees that have
retired from the state through
the retiree Healthcare Authority
can purchase that additional
supplemental insurance, um, and
if not from there, there are
many out there that that are
trying to, to get people to buy
their insurance, some good, some
aren't, but just that being
said, madam.
Chairman, I guess one of the
things that I think about is
that the supplemental insurance
that.
People have to pay is close to
$300 a month, just supplemental
alone, including the vision and
the.
And the dental, which is not
very much the most most of the
$300 supplemental again this is
for the 20%, um, is, is very
high when you think about $300 a
month and then, of course,
Medicare deducts 170 or
something like that. I don't
remember. That's what you pay
for Medicare and plus that 20%
coverage from supplemental. It's
$500 a month for insurance. And,
and you still have copays and so
um
Happy that Representative
Allison brought it up because
for people on Medicaid, um, I
mean, they're gonna be even less
able to pay that additional
supplemental coverage. So
anyway, thank you. I'm, I'm not
asking for a response. I'm just
mentioning that because I have
so much I was happy that
Representative Allison brought
it up, but just a quick question
and yes or no, and maybe a
little bit of an explanation so
we can move on having to do with
Medicaid and the expansion that,
I mean just a few months ago.
Um, I don't know if it's been a
year or more time goes by, but
the Medicaid expansion that we
had covered and and help through
through the federal government,
um, basically expired that
additional amount. And so there
were a lot of people that were
left without having Medicaid
coverage and so did they ever
get enrolled again, um, they had
to reapply or, um, and I don't
remember how many, but there
were thousands of them that were
left without Medicaid, and I
don't know if it impacts.
At tribes, I'm sure it probably
did too, so tell me a little bit
about briefly did they get back
on the Medicaid rolls and or how
did, what happened there?
Just briefly, Madam T, that's my
final question.
Thank you, Madam Chair and thank
you, Senator Rodriguez, I think
you're referring to the
unwinding where we had so many
people on Medicaid during COVID
that qualified and then uh I
think a year later the at
federal level said we had to
start taking people.
Because we kept people on
Medicaid during COVID, whether
they their income changed or if
they didn't apply for Medicaid,
we kept them on, but eventually
the unwinding happened and we
had to, had to start removing
people who were overcome or
never renewed their Medicaid. I
can tell you that.
We have worked with tribal
communities even um.
Urban areas such as Albuquerque
to get those folks that need
that coverage back on Medicaid,
um, we have had health fairs. We
like Shelley said earlier, we
bring the income support
division into the communities.
There are people that come to
these health fairs, they will
wait all day. We've seen it
happen at San Felipe Pueblo, for
example, if they know they can
meet with an income support.
Division worker, they will stay
and wait and they're very
successful because sometimes
people uh lose their Medicaid
because they, they didn't
understand a question or
something, but when we ask
tribes to uh hold uh income to
support in the community of that
people come. They want to get
back on their their benefits,
not just Medicaid, but SNAP and
L heap and that and if they know
they're gonna get seen that day
by income support.
Division they wait and it's been
successful. In fact, they said
they see more people coming to
these events than they do going
into their offices.
All right, thank you, Madam
Chairman. I just wanted to make
sure we're helping people
navigate through the bureaucracy
of the system. So thank you very
much. That's all I have.
Thank you, Senator. Senator
Schendo.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for the presentation.
A lot of information, uh.
Before I get specific about
native issues,
I know this is a
A new agency.
How is that going?
And you got a lot of tasks ahead
of you because you're emerging
other departments and, and so I
want to hear how that's going
because there was a lot of
discussion in our debates and
whether
Anyway, Madam Chair, Senator
Shenda, thank you for the
question. I have to admit that I
am new since January, so I have
only been, I don't have a lot to
compare things to, but, um, you
know,
we have it's been a little bit
of a rugged thing with some some
technicalities like people's IT
access from departments that
came from Department of Health
and we've had a team helping us
manage the transition, um, you
know, we, we've
A few bumps in the road. I would
say though, overall, it's been
really positive. Um, we're super
excited to have these new team
members to help us at the HCA,
especially from our Department
of Health, you know, it just
makes so much sense to my mind,
for example, that we have
division of health improvement,
the same division that is tasked
with um, you know, regulating
our facilities in the same shop
that we have Medicaid and
everything else, and there's so
much more natural communic
and collaboration that happens
because we're under one
umbrella, um, you know, the same
is true. I mentioned with the
employee benefits group, we're
doing an actuarial analysis of
employee benefits to see are we
getting the best, you know, deal
for state employees on and, you
know, our, our public pays our,
our um salaries, you know, and
healthcare. So there's a lot of
like synergy between those two
things, um, and then of course
our DDSD um group that is
So important and so important
that we are coordinating and
making it seamless, you know, it
was that seamless idea. Are we
seamless yet? No, we are not
seamless yet. Um, but I've
learned so much, you know,
myself from the um involvement
of all these divisions, and I'm,
I think the leadership is very,
very committed to hearing from
everyone, to getting their
feedback on how the transition
is going, and also, um, you
know, just assuring people who
are new to the agency that um
they're pers
their expertise and their needs
are very important to us. So,
I mean, it's a subjective
answer, but I would say uh.
Pretty well, and I would ask
every one of you to talk to
every employee that you can at
HCA and see if I'm right and if
I'm, if I'm not, you tell me.
Thank you. I appreciate that,
you know, I know it's a new
agency, but it's also trying to
bring all these various entities
together and one of the things
that I think was part of the uh
the debate was, you know,
creating a purchasing power for
all these entities that are
independently doing some wrong
things. So I'm hoping that that
down the road as you report to
the LFC and others, you know,
that we will see.
The benefit from all of these
efforts that are happening and
so forth so I appreciate that,
uh, going back to uh on the uh
native issues and so forth, I
know that you're a new entity a
couple days ago we also had a
presentation done by the, uh,
the county and the tribal, uh.
He folks
You know, I'm looking at their
goals and objectives, and I'm
reading your goals and
objectives.
I mean, there are certain things
that
That I see are very obvious. Can
you uh
tell me a little bit about how
your work distinguishes what
they're trying to do and, and,
and compliment, vice versa. I,
I, I think us as a body, you
know, probably need to have a
better understanding because
that entity has been in
existence for many years, and
then you're new and then uh you
know.
Give us your perspective.
A long version. I got all
afternoon. I got nowhere to go.
Madam Chair, Senator Schendo,
thank you for that question. Um,
The name is new. Some of the
design is new, uh, your tribal
liaisons have been working with
the tribal health councils that
I believe you're referring to,
and there's uh 11 to 12, I
believe, um.
We have been working with the
tribal health council
leadership, not only to attend
their meetings, to provide
presentation and and include our
contractors such as a managed
care organizations to
participate in their meetings.
Um, they have shared their
agenda. They have shared their
goals and their initiatives and
a lot of, um, like you say, are
similar to ours to ensure that
we provide health care services.
To our rule and frontier areas
to address the behavioral
health, the specific needs
around suicide awareness,
alcohol issues, uh, drug abuse,
um, some of the things that we
see rise in our tribal
communities, uh, the goal of
our, uh, as I presented recently
in, in Farmington is that we
have a collaborative effort to
address and to share resources.
Share ideas, best practices,
because these individuals also
work in the communities that
represent on that council.
And also bring to our attention
where there are gaps in
services, we cannot be
everywhere at once, but, uh, the
resource sharing is one that has
been appreciated and I, I'm open
to working directly with, uh,
the leadership from the tribal
health councils and they are
very, very supportive and
welcoming, and they have been in
communication with us so that we
continue these efforts.
Great. I appreciate that and I
was hoping to hear that because
I think, you know, there's a lot
of things need to cover there.
You guys have a certain area
that you're covering, you have a
certain area and I'm hoping that
you guys are collaborating
because I noticed on the list of
uh the tribal health councils.
I mean, I think 99 pueblos have
them and then uh I think the uh
Thasley group and then on your
uh technical advisory, uh, you
have 45 tribes that are part of
both. They're, they're with the
uh health councils as well as
your uh whatever you call it,
an attack or whatever, N A T A
C. So, so, so it looks like
there are obviously those tribes
are in both uh conversations and
so forth which is good to hear.
So I just wanted to get your
perspective and I think you know
we're watching how all of these
things play out because
certainly, you know, uh,
resources are always an issue,
and if we can best leverage our
resources and the work that
needs to happen on the ground
because they really are on the
ground level, uh, and, and
hoping that that's feeding up to
some of the things that you guys
are doing as well. So Madam
Chair, thank you. Appreciate it.
Thank you, Senator Vice Chair
Pinto. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Members of the committee, thank
you for your presentation and
especially with the senator mic
is still on. I get a lot of
feedback on you.
Thank you for the work you do
and especially working for with
our tribal, you know, uh, not
tribes, nations or pueblos
because that trust in that
relationship is very essential,
especially when we talk about
everything, health care. I
trusted you to do your work. I'm
sure, I hope you guys um get
some time,
especially when you talk about
healthcare, it entails a lot, a
lot of work and it sounds like
it's been very diligent in that,
so I appreciate that.
And there's anything else we can
do, I understand you do have a
budget.
Hopefully it's not.
Go to become a shortfall, um, do
overestimate it a little bit
just in case and um you have my
support in that sense, but thank
you very much for all you do.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you.
Thank you, Vice Chair, and thank
you colleagues for your
questions and comments, and I
just want to thank you for your
presentation.
I believe I missed uh Molina
Healthcare event in Galup.
I'm not sure, did I?
Thank you.
Madam Chair,
Um
Johnson
The managed care organizations
have a robust outreach and
education, um, plan, strategic
plan, uh, so there's going to be
much more opportunities to
engage with Molina Healthcare.
Molina Healthcare does have an
actual office. It's a resource
center and that's I'm, I'm
thinking that's probably the one
that you're talking about where
they did their uh reopening. So
it was there during COVID. They
did a reopening, um, and
That facility or that office is
located in the Rios Mall, which
is a great location because many
of our tribal members go there
at a particular time during the
month, so, um, and I recognize
the smiles, but I, you know, it,
it is, uh, it is, it is a
practice from our managed care
organizations to be in those
tribal communities where that
community is most represented,
so, uh, much more events and I
will relay that.
Comment and information to the
managed care tribal teams.
Thank you. Please do keep me on
your list of and your email list
and then I am just so thankful
that we are, uh, looking at a
specialty care.
And uh our rural areas, so much
needed, uh, although Gallup does
have IHS, we also have the
community health.
Hospital, we have Reho with
McKinley Christian Healthcare
Services. We have the Gala VA
satellite clinic, and we also
have the New Mexico Cancer
Center in Gallup, but we still
do struggle and lack, uh,
specialty care services. Our
people drive to Farmington. They
drive to Phoenix, Albuquerque.
Grants for those services and
then I'm also very pleased that
we're really thinking and
working hard on our behavioral
health services. I think that
every committee meeting that
I've been through over the
summer, behavioral health
services has been on top of the
list for us to work on as a
state. So with that, I'm just so
pleased to meet you and.
Thank you for your presentation.
OK
Madam Chair may, just before you
hang up.
Sure. I just forgot to mention
something and somebody else
brought it up, so it triggered
it in my mind just quickly, you
know, the tribal health
councils, uh, Kira and, and
others here. Um, I get lots of
emails and literally lots like 4
or 5 a week. That's in the last
3-4 weeks, and they wanted a
meeting and so on and I know
that the funding for the tribal
health councils goes to DOH, but
it's so little and, and it's
hardly anything for them and
then when it does.
It doesn't seem to be getting
released from DOH for the tribes
or for the health councils in
general. And, um, the question
that I have is, do you work
together with uh DOH, um, in
any, any kind of collaboration
to see if we can get this
coordination better to help the
tribal health councils.
Madam Chair, Senator Rodriguez,
um, I, as a former health
council coordinator from Taos.
Um, I have a passion for health
councils and tribal health
councils are very important. As
you mentioned, DOH is
responsible for the funding for
health councils, but the
concept, you know, behind health
councils is right aligned with
our mission, and I know
Secretary Allen and Secretary
Amijo are in very close
communication about our mutual
goals. Um, I personally am
working on a project related to
um representative blocks.
Question about, you know, sort
of what happens to people, how
do we get to know they're OK.
Um, and I think that there's a
lot of opportunity for us to
coordinate with local
governments, tribal health
councils, tribal entities, um,
as well to
Really identify from that ground
up perspective what a community
is lacking in terms of
specialists or other gaps, um,
hear from them and then support
them as much as possible, I
think one.
It's all related and I, I'm
sorry, I could, Senator Schendo
go on and on, so I'll try not
to, chair, but, um, you know, I
think that the reimbursement for
the community health
representatives and the
community health workers is
really key in relationship.
These are the folks. These are
the assets of New Mexico. These
are the people who help people
and just will not let go until
they have helped people. If our
healthcare system supports them
and if our tribal health
councils include their voices
and include their perspectives
as they so often do.
Then we're sort of, uh, cooking
with gas, you know, we, we can
really get something done
because we're taking their
expertise, we're listening to
it, and they have the tools they
need to just.
Get people what they need, um,
and they can tell us this is a
gap, this is, that's a gap. And
if we have a system that really
looks at that we can help. I
think there's funding
opportunities on the individual
basis through the healthcare
authority on the individual
provider basis and on the
community basis through the
Department of Health, and I
don't know Shelly or Theresa if
you wanted to add to that in any
way.
Uh, Senator Rodriguez, real
quick, I just want to mention
reference to the, uh, CHR CHW
reimbursement, that is an
absolute collaboration with
Department of Health.
And so that is um our testimony
to collaborate with DOH and
bring those reimbursement
opportunities because that is a
program that is, uh, oversight
by DOH. So definitely an
opportunity for us. Thank you
for that. You know, we just
don't want him to shut down.
They came before the LFC or
before finance. I think Senate
Finance Committee, I think it's
been a while, um, to truly plead
because they were literally
going to shut down. They didn't
have any more money left.
And uh they got a little bit,
but it hasn't been released and
it's like long overdue that it
is. They're just basically
idling there waiting for that
little bit of funding. So thank
you for that, for your work,
Madam Chairman. I won't keep you
longer.
All righty. Thank you. Thank you
so much once again, thank you
and have a great day.
So now we're gonna move on to
public comment. We have Doctor
Carolyn Morris signed up. Please
come forward.
Good morning. Can you hear me?
Good morning. Can you hear me?
Good morning.
um, Doctor Morris and I have
been a practicing um
psychologists.
And uh tribal communities for a
majority of my life and I have
worked for an MCO and I have
worked in Arkansas, so pretty
much I know about the health
disparities and inequities in
small tribal communities.
Today I come.
Because I represent my
community, my community members
that I work with. I'm very
passionate about meeting their
needs.
And
I feel like sometimes their
needs are not heard or or not
met. And this is related to
Turko's plan.
And the care coordinate uh or
the uh managed care companies. I
know, um, Turrow's plan has been
around since it started
recently, but before there were
managed care companies that were
providing, um, Medicaid related
services.
And I was sad to see that one of
the MCOs that really helped the
tribal communities left and it
was, um, they weren't contracted
with again, but now we have to
reestablish relationships with
most of the 4 MCOs. You need to
know.
About
The lack of care coordination
activities in tribal
communities. This is a concern.
If you're gonna contract with an
MCO.
They need to be out in the
tribal communities asking our
members, how they can provide
services.
Let me backtrack a little bit.
Um, I'm here with my leadership
team, the board, executive
board, and I want to um have
them be recognized, Kimberly is
the um board chair and Lester
and uh Harrison, they're board
members.
And I represent their community.
I work in their community as a
psychologist and as an advocate
for all Native Americans that
struggle to understand care
coordination.
What does that mean?
If you need to get your Medicaid
documents completed.
I would assume that a care
coordinator from one of these
managed care companies would
help fill out the documents, but
they don't.
That is on the ground that's
happening.
And we've had several struggles
with our members.
Either they needed um higher
level of care when they're in a
crisis situation. They're
talking about suicide.
I've had to go through various
levels of talking to leadership.
For them to approve the
services.
That shouldn't be.
And you have to sit on the phone
for 10 minutes before somebody
comes back with you.
And we don't even know who the
care coordinators are for the
managed care companies.
I want to know, I want to have a
face to face interaction with
those individuals, so I can pick
up the phone when I'm working
with a patient that's in crisis
and say, can you help me here?
What can we do?
Because my job is to help that
patient that's right in front of
me. And your job is to help me
coordinate a plan for a patient.
That is not happening.
So I implore you to do, to do
something find more about.
What care coordination
activities are being done and
managed care plans.
And I know I've worked in a
managed care organization. What
care coordination is, as you
know, our Native American
population, they don't speak
English. They don't know how to
dial a phone sometimes, right?
They're made to sit on the
phone, dial one, dial 2, and
they're running out of minutes.
You tell me, is that culturally
sensitive. No, it's not.
So we need to change our ways,
figure out different ways, how
to help our community members,
especially the elderly.
We talk about, we care for the
elderly, but what are we really
doing to help the elderly
population. There are grandmas.
And we, we lack long-term care
services.
Services that could help our
elders stay at home.
I heard about some of the
programs that, um, my
colleagues, they're my
colleagues spoke about, but I
didn't know that was available.
So there's a lot of
miscommunication.
And only certain people know the
information.
Maybe there needs to be a
newsletter or a blitz.
To all tribal communities about
what is available, what are the
opportunities.
To give to all tribal 638 and it
in-house services. We're 45
minutes away from Albuquerque,
but we don't get a lot of the
information.
And I have to seek it myself in
order to help.
The members that I serve.
They're precious to me. You have
to do everything that you can do
to help this person that is
sitting in front of you.
Luckily I work with a
well-trained physicians and
myself as a psychologist doing
crisis intervention.
I have to do, I have to be, we
have to be Jack of all trades to
help our community members.
And
Let's be innovative.
And I'm gonna offer a
An innovative idea.
That you can think about
funding.
As you know, a lot of our um
substance use disorder patients
and mental health patients do
not have jobs. They're
unemployed.
I would like to get funding from
non-niche as we call Navajo,
work.
Compensated work therapy
program.
For tribal communities. They go
in treatment and then they work
halftime.
That's an innovative idea that
that is being done with the VA.
Veterans Administration. It's a
best evidence-based practice.
So to be innovative, to do new
things to employ our people,
that would be great. Thank you
so much for listening to me and
um I like to hear more about how
we can contract with the managed
care companies. I know I'm being
told that I need to get off the
phone, but this is important to
me and like transportation, how
can we be providers? So thank
you everybody for listening to
me.
Thank you, Doctor Morris.
We did afford you a few extra
minutes, so thank you. All
right, next we have on Zoom, we
have Nat Dean. You have 5
minutes for public comment.
Can you hear us?
Um, thank
Madam Chair, can someone say
something so I can tell if you
can hear me.
We can hear you 5 minutes.
Um, thank you very much, uh,
Madam Chair, uh, vice chair,
members of the committee and
members of the public. My name
is Nat Dean. Dean, I am a person
with multiple disabilities and
I'm a disability advocate, and I
think that a lot of things I was
going to mention did get
discussed in the most recent Q&A
that not everyone can get on to
Medicaid, that there will be
people who will be on Medicare
and some will be dually eligible
for Medicare and Medicaid.
I myself am not eligible for
Medicaid and with the Medicare
premium, the supplemental plan,
plus the Part D, which is
prescription, and I have no
vision and no dental. It's $5000
a year in premiums, but it makes
a difference. It's hard to
afford, but it makes a
difference.
I noted when uh CBCS
community-based coordination
Solutions presented on Wednesday
that there were some concerns
that their services are not
readily available to uh Pueblo
or native populations and found
that a very concerning, um, I
also was very distressed when
And I know I'm not native, but I
was very distressed when the
prayer closing.
Um, at the Pueblo of Zio was
interrupted before it was
completed. I don't think that
that would occur when a prayer
or a pledge were made by another
entity, and I, I just found it
very disturbing.
Um, caregiver shortages are
really, really tough. A lot of
individuals are told, get your
own caregiver, we don't have any
staff, but not every person who
needs caregiving is going to
have what we call natural
supports, which is a friend or a
family member available to
provide that care to them. So I
think that what Doctor Morris
also mentioned is, how do we
connect
The people in need to others who
can help those needs be met, and
I want to compliment the
Healthcare Authority and Income
sport division that the whole
time is really only 2 to 3
minutes, and that's been a very
heavy lift whereas before it
might have been an hour or 2
hours. Um, crises make it more
difficult to apply for a variety
of additional programmatic
supports. There is a program for
non-Mdicare, um,
Excuse me, non-medicaid eligible
that may have Medicare called
New Mexicare
and E W M E X I C A R E and that
can provide up to $1400 a month
for a friend or family member to
provide care. There are some
income restrictions, but it's a
much higher asset and income
allowance and for Medicaid, and
it's a program not very many
people learn about.
Unless they call aging and
long-term services or the aging
and disability Resource Center
and noted asked the question. I
wanted to bring up one more
thing, and thank you, Madam
Chair, Madam Vice Chair, members
of the committee that the home
modification allowance is only
once every 5 years.
Once every 5 years, and it went
from $5000 to $6000 but that's
still only once every 5 years.
Very similar to if you need a
very
Um,
Expensive piece of medical
equipment, it's unlikely that
Medicare or Medicaid will
replace that any more often than
once every 5 years, unless a
piece of equipment completely
fails.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair,
members of the committee. This
has been a amazing 3 days.
Thank you.
OK.
Uh, committee members,
colleagues, Madam Vice Chair,
guests in the audience, the
community of Talay.
Mr. Plitero, Mr. Setario, Doctor
Morris, everyone who presented
ma'am, madam, sister.
Everyone cooch,
thank you for coming, everyone,
uh,
Who's dialed in, um, have a
great day, and we will see you
at our next committee meeting,
uh, the end of.
Uh, in Santa Fe in Santa Fe.
