So,
but it's always a blessing. And
if there are no other
announcements or any um that
will be our only change today as
um on the agenda.
So the announcements from any or
any questions from committee
members, we will move forward.
You may begin, Mr. Foster.
Thank you. Good morning, Madam
Chair, members of the committee.
Thank you for the opportunity to
talk with you today about the
improvements that the agency is
making to our implementation of
the Indian Education Act.
Um, I, I have worked with you
with, with many of you in the
legislature over the last
several years, but for those of
you who don't know me, my name
is Gregory Frosted and I'm
assistant secretary of Education
at the Public Education
department. With me today is
Deputy Director We Becky from
the Indian Education Division,
and, uh, Secretary Padilla
unfortunately could not be here
today and sends her regrets, she
is with the governor at a
cabinet in your community event
in Silver City, yeah.
Uh, likewise, Assistant
Secretary Winiko is also
unavailable today as she is at a
tribal meeting um this morning.
But I'm very pleased to be with
here with you today. I'm back in
some of my old haunts. I am an
Atsa from Crown Point High
School, uh, where I taught for 9
years, um, before moving into
Gallup and working as a Gallup
Bengal at Gallup High School,
and then also uh at Gallup
Central office.
I did, I left Gallup and came to
work for the public education
department where I've been for
the last 11 years and have
really enjoyed, again, having
time, having the opportunity to
work more closely with the
legislature over the last 3
years.
And uh during that time, uh, we
have consistently heard from
Pueblo's tribes and nations
about concerns with how the
agency is implementing the
Indian education Act.
Specifically, the PED has heard
regularly from a variety of
stakeholders that tribal
education departments need more
funding. They need
non-categorical funding. They
need additional time to spend
funds.
They need a reduction in
reporting burden, and they need
greater sovereignty in spending.
Having heard consistently about
uh
Having consistently heard this
feedback.
That
Public Education department
decided to consider what changes
can be made in the
implementation of the Indian
Education Act to improve
outcomes for Native American
students. And in collecting that
feedback, it, it really started
with the government to
government Indian education
summit this past fall.
And then there was the fall
tribal education alliance and
the meeting of the All Pueblo
Council of Governors in both the
fall and winter.
The agency also met specifically
with President Boo Nyrin over
this past winter and the Indian
education division also sought,
um, feedback or input on the
monthly calls with tribal
partners over the winter and
during meetings of the Indian
Education Advisory Council in
both the winter and spring.
All of that input together, the
agents that the agency collected
was used to draft a change to
6352, the in New Mexico
administrative code, which is
the rule on implementing the
Indian Education Act.
And once that draft was created
this past spring, the PED again
sought input on the rule draft
from tribal leaders and members
of the Indian Education Advisory
Council.
And then throughout the formal
rulemaking process, additional
public comment was sought
through email and during the
public rule hearing.
This month, the Indian Education
division at the PED has released
guidance on the changes and has
provided technical assistance on
the required implementation
plans over multiple calls with
tribal education departments.
Again based on feedback with
tribal partners, the guidance
was revised to allow for
professional development and
other expenses that were
previously unallowable.
And now I'm going to hand the
presentation off to Deputy
Director Wes Becky to talk more
about the specific changes that
have been made to the the rule
on implementing the Indian
Education Act. Thank you.
Thank you and good morning
everyone.
We were able to successfully
codify many of the changes that
tribal leaders from across the
state were seeking first with
respect to funding.
The Indian Education Act ruled
now explicitly states that the
allocation-based awards to
Pueblo's tribes and nations will
include a base amount as well as
an amount based on student
counts with an additional factor
for students with special
special needs, those with IEPs.
Um, we moved away from a
reimbursement model for these
allocation-based awards to the
tribes. It is now a direct flow
through model, which will reduce
the administrative burden that
our tribal partners were
encountering with our division
grants, especially in years past
because we had 9 different
grants coming out of the Indian
Education Fund. So that's all
been consolidated into one
allocation-based award and then
a separate competitive award
that I'll mention briefly later.
Um, another big change is the
fact that grants won't revert.
Um, this has been a big ask for
years, and it allows for longer
term planning, avoids the
spending scramble that we often
see at the end of the fiscal
year and truly allows our tribal
partners to engage in some
thoughtful, meaningful spending
without rushing to spend down
dollars at the end.
Um, we still do require
reporting.
Reporting from our Pueblo's
tribes and nations.
What's in the rule now is
consistent with what the
division has been expecting of
our tribal partners in previous
years. Mid-year reports, end of
year reports, quarterly
check-ins with division
leadership, myself and Assistant
Secretary Juanico split the
caseloads load of the pueblo's
tribes and nations, we each take
half and meet with tribal
education department uh
directors and sometimes with
tribal leaders to discuss
progress on grant activities, so
that remains the same. We also
now require and that Pueblo's
tribes and nations develop an
implementation plan.
To demonstrate to us how they
intend to spend those funds.
And finally, we will be seeking,
excuse me.
Uh, financial reporting just to
ensure that spending is indeed
aligned to the provisions of the
Act and consistent with the
allowable cost lists and the
prohibited cost list included in
the guidance documents, all of
which has been vetted by our
Office of General Counsel to
ensure consistency with state
law.
And finally, another significant
change is the fact that we've
expanded the grantee pool.
In years past, our division
grants went to LEAs and to
Pueblo's tribes and nations and
some of the colleges and
universities. We've now brought
in
Excuse me.
BIE schools into the fold.
Which is an exciting, exciting
change, um, and those entities
will be eligible for the
competitive awards coming out of
our division in the next month
or two.
All these changes, we hope will
lead to increased autonomy and
empowerment for our tribal
partners. It's exciting to see
what could happen within the
communities with respect to
collaboration between various
departments within a tribe, for
example, Assistant Secretary
Juan Eko and I were visiting the
Pueblo of Pierre just a few
weeks ago, meeting with our
governor and their tribal
education director, and we were
hearing about how Pierre and.
to use some of our grants
funding in the coming year to
weave in their agricultural
program. So even their health
services program, even to take
some of the apprenticeships they
have for mechanics and
construction or the trades and
braid that into some kind of
formalized education program
that our funds could then
support. It's truly exciting,
and we think.
Providing that
That opportunity, this mechanism
for Pueblo's tribes and nations
to, to really maximize their
internal resources will lead to
increased student outcomes.
Finally, along with the internal
work that we could see from
Within the communities, it's.
The way the, the rule is written
the way our guidance is written
for, for these grants, we could
also see
Partnerships developed, new
partnerships between a tribe and
an LEA with other external
partners, we envision.
Um, the tribes across the state
working closer with PED as well.
Obviously because of the
reporting components, but then
it's also an opportunity through
the implementation plan for us
to better connect our tribal
partners with the resources
available at the PED. So it's
truly an exciting time and we're
looking forward to the changes
that lie ahead.
Thank you
Thank you, Deputy
Thank you, Deputy Director.
Uh, so to close out our
presentation this morning, I
want to drive home a few key
points. One, that during this
administration, the funding for
Indian education has moved from
the the several millions of
dollars to $30 million annually.
That's a really big increase.
That graduation and, and I did
just on the way here, I was
asking for the most up to-date
preliminary data that we can get
on uh Native American graduation
rates and uh
and uh literacy outcomes as well
as um Gallup McKinley County
School outcomes, and both the
preliminary data definitely
shows that we're seeing
improvements this year over last
year. So we're moving in the
right direction.
And 3, that the public education
department has closely worked
with Pueblo's tribes and nations
to improve the implementation of
the Indian Education Act
specifically to provide for
greater tribal sovereignty.
To respect the cultural and
linguistic expertise of tribal
education experts to streamline
fiscal processes and reduced
administrative burden and to
allow for greater flexibility in
expenditures and for more time
to make sure that there's more
time to spend the funds.
And on the final slide you'll
notice that Assistant secretary
Juanico's contact information is
there. She is pleased to answer
any questions that you have and
Madam Chair, you have my contact
information, as do many of you,
and I have business cards as
well that I'm happy to pass out
after this session. And with
that, we are happy to answer any
questions that you might have,
uh, and thank you very much.
Thank you, thank you for your
presentation, Representative
Little.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair, Vice
Chair, and, uh, good morning,
everyone. Um.
Thank you for your presentation
this morning. Um,
Uh, I have, um, so I have a
couple of questions. Um, in
relation to, uh, I'm, I'm glad
to hear about the things that
are happening that changes are
going to be.
Implemented, but I am curious,
uh, in.
The reporting requirements I
totally get that why those are
required. Um, however, I'm just
wondering the detail that's
being requested the presentation
of how the money is going to be
spent, the accountability of
that I think is all very well
and good, Madam Chair, but I'm
curious as to if I'm not
mistaken and forgive me if I'm
speaking in very broad terms,
Madam Chair.
Um
But it's my understanding that a
lot of these.
These initiatives that have been
taking on by Pueblo's tribes and
nations have been because those
were not available. The students
did not find them available in
the districts in which they were
attending schools. So
Along that line, I'm wondering
if our school districts because
we had this conversation
yesterday.
For the dollars that are funding
that's sent to the school
districts there it does not seem
to be
There appears to be a perception
of a disconnect between the
dollars that are coming in going
into the school districts and
that those services uh that are
targeted for students are.
Not quite be matched and in
terms of reporting, my question
is, Madam Chair, are those
reports being required of the
districts to produce, if we're
looking at accountability, is
that
Is that also required of them? I
mean, and I'm talking as an
individual, a representative who
is who's uh my
Area of expertise is not within
the education realm, except that
as a parent and having worked
with tribal governments in the
past.
Um, and.
Uh, that's one of my first
questions, Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, so the
And, and Deputy Director Rizbeki
makes sure
You correct me if I say anything
wrong and please feel free to
add anything additional that I
may leave out as well, but the
The reporting requirements are
not changing for school
districts. So what we were
really talking about in terms of
the changes are those changes
for tribal entities and but in
terms of school districts, they
will still complete applications
and um and provide traditional
reporting.
Um, Madam Chair, then does that
traditional reporting include
the conversations with you about
approval for the types of
services that are going to be
provided.
Yes, madam Chair and
Representative, so yes, that in
terms of um that they have the
school districts and charter
schools will present a plan for
how they want to spend the money
that will be approved by the
district, a traditional
application as well as
traditional reporting, um, and,
and they will also continue to
go through the request for
reimbursement process. So
whereas the the tribal entities
will not.
Thank you for enlightening me on
that. I appreciate that. Um,
secondly, um, and I, I know that
others have questions, so I'll
have one more, um.
You mentioned, and I'm glad to
hear it, that you have evidence,
uh, you're seeing indications of
Native American students
graduation rates and those other
areas, prove that you're seeing
improvements, you said. And what
I'd like to know is, I, I would
appreciate actually some data,
some details about that
information. Uh, I would like
for me anyhow, um.
I would like to see the entire
picture, not only how much are
they improving, but where have
they been at? It helps me to.
See
The type of progress that we're
making, where we might not where
this progress might not be, be
realized in the community.
And this comes from the
experience of having a
And education.
Line officer, come to my
My pueblo, um, and request a
meeting with our leadership,
letting us know that they wanted
to kind of just appeared one
day. I got a call to come
upstairs, please, and join us. I
was overseeing the education
department at the time.
Madam Chair, and as that was
happening, uh, again, I, this is
not my area of expertise, but I
was supporting the, the manager
who was the education director.
So we have a report that's laid
out in front of us and it's an a
fan shape.
And as it's laid out to us.
Uh,
it's being described to us as
our students are here. Here they
are, they're doing much better,
much better, and it's like, OK,
as opposed to what this was as
the last, I think this was the
3rd or 4th grade testing period.
And so, um, and uh they're much
better, much better, and it,
that's, while that was
encouraging, Madam Chair, what I
did not see, we did not have the
opportunity, as it was presented
to see the rest of the story.
So we asked.
If they would unfold.
That spreadsheet and it was
about this long and well, yes,
our students, if this was an
example where students were
about maybe 1/3 of the way
there.
The rest of them.
We're here.
On the far left and of the
margin.
And so,
A
While it may be challenging to
present and as, as
administrators, that was sad to
see, but
In order for education
department director to assist,
to help. We needed a full
picture.
Of where we were at.
So that's why I'm asking for the
rest of the information, um.
I, it may already be provided in
that fashion, but please forgive
me if I am outside of that, um.
Of the body that would see all
of that information, but if I
may ask to have it shared with
me and maybe some others who
might be interested, that would
be.
Very helpful for me to get a
better picture, uh, Madam Chair.
Um, I
I think those are the two main
questions that I had and um
thank you very much and thank
you again for the information.
And Madam Chair and
Representative, the, uh, as I
said, the, the data that I
received is very preliminary.
We're actually still in the
process of receiving data from
the school district at the end
of year data collection period
goes, we'll finish this week,
and from then it still takes us
some time to um to.
Review, analyze, and make the
determinations on where, well,
um,
To run the statistical analyses
that are needed in order to
produce our results. So that's
still probably a couple of
months away, um, to have the
full picture, but we will be
pleased to provide it to the
committee or to you specifically
once that data is available.
Thank you, Representative
Little. Representative Thompson.
Thank you, madam chair, and
thank you. So I'm looking at
page 3, the first bullet, um,
Just lots of red flags, so.
The the funding goes directly to
the Pueblo tribe or nation
government or it goes to the
schools that have those kids in
them.
The Madam Chair, the funding
goes directly to the tribal
entities, yeah, not, not
necessarily the tribal education
department, but the Pueblo
tribal nation themselves. And so
Madam Chair, is this, is it
designed more for out of school
education or is there supposed
to be coordination with the LEA
in, in the areas.
this funding supports what the
tribal needs around education in
the Pueblo tribal nation and is
not necessarily related to a
school district activity. OK,
because I was getting, I mean,
like Berna Leo has so many
pueblos and, and I wondered how
that would, uh, it'll be
interesting to see how.
So are you gonna set up
parameters of.
Um
Acceptable uses of the money or
is it so there will be some
parameters.
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, yes, there are,
there are specifically called
out allowable and unallowable
uses, yes, um, and, and
generally it is just again what
the what our legal team said,
these are expenditures that are
allowable under the Indian
Education Act, and that's what
this funding is meant to
implement. OK. And then, Madam
Chair, will there be any odd, I
mean, it, it.
Between the state government and
sovereign nations, will they,
how, how will you audit, how
will you, how will you?
do that.
So there, uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, there's not
formal auditing, but there are
quarterly reports that are due,
and then, um, so, and it really
starts around an implementation
plan. So there's a required
implementation plan, it's not an
application every, the funds
will flow, but the
implementation plan says we
intend to spend on these things
so that we can, we all have a
shared understanding of what the
funds will be used for and to
make sure that they are again
allowable uses and then the
quarterly reporting with a
Check in at the, at mid-year and
the final year check-in as well
to make sure that things are on
that the that the spending is on
track for those allowable uses.
Thank you for, and then my final
question, and
It may seem like it doesn't fit,
but special education.
Uh, how, how was, how was, how?
What does this, how does this
help kids with disabilities on
the nation's uh tribes and
Pueblos.
Uh, Madam Chan and
representative, so definitely
there is additional funding for
students, uh, who have IEPs, uh,
in terms of what each Pueblo
tribe or nation may need that
will vary depending on the
Pueblo triber nation, and I
don't, I, I can't say
specifically it will support
these specific activities that
will vary. And then, Madam
Chair, I think my last question,
how is it determined the amount
that each um.
Entity will receive and is
there, is there additional, I
mean, is there additional
funding for kids with
disabilities? I mean, is it kind
of like the funding formula in
terms of how of the money that
they get or is it a flat rate,
how are, how are you gonna
determine who gets how much
money.
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, so, uh, for the
base amount.
The awards, the previous awards
were considered and then
Uh, calculations were made to
determine how much do we need in
a base award to make sure that
Each Pueblo tribe and nation
would not see fewer
significantly fewer dollars in
the coming year than they have
in past years, uh, that, that,
um.
That provided the base award and
then the, the rest of the
funding is used for on um is
just a per pupil amount for all
students and then, uh, again,
it's a double award, a double
student amount for a student
with a disability, so they would
count as a 2.0.
Thank you so much. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Thompson. Representative
Fernandez.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, and
again, thank you, uh, to our,
uh, assistant secretary, um,
for, for this.
Uh
Presentation. I'm just thinking
about like the schools that are
in in my in in my district, you
know, I, I have a private,
private schools like uh public
schools. I have charter schools
and then of course, I have a BIE
schools.
And so, um, I, I really
appreciate the, the, the vision
to to ensure that there's a.
Funding available for our.
Bureau of Indian Education
schools, um, especially in
moments, you know, that are are
happening right now when there's
a lot of uncertainty at the
federal level and, um, and, and
the reality is that, uh, the,
the, the funding that our BIE
schools, um, are, are, are, are
being threatened and so I, I
appreciate um that aspect and,
and just, um, will that process
uh, that I, I, I guess that's
something that I would like to
understand more about, uh,
whether it's, it's.
In a separate meeting to get
that understanding how BIE
schools can, uh, what, when is
the appropriate time for them to
uh to go through to, to seek.
Some of the dollars that would
be available, um,
My, my question, uh, Madam
Chair, is on
Uh, the administrative burdens.
Uh, um, we often have.
Uh, with our public schools. I,
I did talk to my, um, public
school.
Administration and, and they,
they
told me that um one of the
things that, um, that, that
they're wanting to, to implement
is um
Madam Chair is, is, is, is to
have hoons.
At our schools.
And uh and, and, and assistant
sector Hogans are are.
traditional homes that we have
here and uh and in order to
To maintain that cultural
relevancy and, and also, uh,
a place of learning, um.
For, for the, for the students.
Uh, my question, Madam Chair,
is.
Or
Would, would, would public
schools be able to apply for
funding to
Or, or tribes seek funding to
build Hogan's.
At, at the public schools, uh,
at, at the public schools and,
and my second question is,
Well they'll be additional
administrative requirements.
To, to treat these hoons like
classrooms where they're,
they're subject to numerous, uh,
you know, like, do, do they,
will they have to have desk
where they have to have fire
alarms, where they have to have
windows where they, you know,
uh, will there be requirements
for these hoons, uh, that
receive public funding. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chan representative, thank
you for the question. So, um,
Most grants don't allow for
construction, so I'm gonna ask
the deputy director if he's
familiar with the requirements
around this particular grant.
Thank you, Madam Chair
Representative.
Yeah, I'm, I believe I'm of the
same opinion as Mr. Frostad.
This, I think this would be
considered capital outlay, and
that is a prohibited cost with
the allocation-based awards.
In years past, what I've seen
from
From House Bill 2 is that there
are typically some
Different
Uh, appropriations made for
capital?
And perhaps that could be an
avenue to explore, but as far as
the allocation-based awards from
the division, um, they're
focused on services for
students.
Thank you, Representative
Representative Blunk.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Thank you both for being here.
Uh, a few questions just
finances when it comes to what
each student is getting.
From the big pot of money,
because I know it's it's like an
80/20 rule I believe or
something, so.
Additional to whatever the base
amount is, I guess in the
education committee, I believe
it was, we had questions of the
Assistant Secretary or deputy
secretary regarding that. We
didn't really get many answers
as to per pupil, what are we
getting at the Navajo Nation,
for example, versus a smaller
tribe or pueblo like Zia or
Pierre. So can you tell me per
pupil what we're getting on the
Navajo Nation versus Pierre and
other places, uh, like
Mescalera, for example, and is
there a big disparity? Because
from what I saw online, it
looked to be a very big
disparity.
There was a lot less per pupil
on the Navajo Nation, for
example, versus Za Pueblo. So
how do we reconcile that? And uh
can you just go a little bit
into that for me.
Sure, um, Madam Chair and
Representative, so the, the per
pupil award is the same
regardless of where the
individual is, but yes, if you
take in the total, uh, of the
base plus the amount per student
that would change the average
amount per student, but in terms
of a student amount, it is the
same student amount for Navajo
Nation or.
Any, any of our other tribal
entities uh of our smaller
tribal entities, and you're
right, um, if you average them
out, the amount for Piqueri
would be very different than the
amount, uh, than the average
amount once the base is worked
in, but that's the purpose of
having a base award is to make
sure, uh,
Not only is there enough of an
award for each tribal entity to
be able to maintain a a a true
program, but also, again, as I
mentioned earlier, to make sure
that we're not going backwards
on any of the awards for our,
uh, for the tribal entities, um,
we wanna make sure that they
programs that are already
established are not required to
roll back based on on the new um
On the new system of awards.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you for that, uh, Greg. So
I, I do get it. I see the
numbers, it looks like 100.
$8.94 without IEP and then 2
1788 with IEP but then
additional to that, if you
factor it in, I think the Navajo
Nation, they get total maybe
about, I think it's 200
something.
For non IEP and then 600
something for IEP that versus
the pueblo of Zia, for example,
I think they're getting like
$11,000 per pupil with IEP and
then 17,000 per pupil non or
with
Non IEP. So I'm just trying to
figure out, that's like a huge
disparity, you know, hundreds of
dollars versus 10s of thousands
of dollars. How do we reconcile
that equitably because we may
say we need to stand up these
programs at Za Pueblo, for
example. But what about kids on
the Navajo Nation? They're only
getting a few $100 versus tens
of thousands of dollars per
pupil. How do we reconcile that
when it comes to those dollars
going down to these communities,
Madam Chair.
Madam Chan and representative,
so again, the, the award for for
larger tribes is larger, uh, the
Navajo Nation, uh, receives the,
the largest award because they
have the most members, um, but
again,
Not, not equal. We're not
striving for equality, we're
we're striving for equity in
making sure that our smaller
tribes still have a large enough
base award to be able to to make
a substantial difference in the
outcomes of those students. And
if we did it only per pupil and,
and again, or Piccari having
these very small populations
would not end up with a
sufficient amount to be able to,
um, to really make a difference,
and that's what the, I mean,
the, the
goal of this award is really to
try to, to affect real change in
these communities for these
students and um there, you need
to have a substantial award to
be able to make those sorts of
changes. Thank you, Madam Chair
and thank you, Representative,
but I, I'm sorry, I missed your
secretary. Undersecretary or
assistant secretary, but I, I
get it, but how, how do we
measure that? I, I guess I'm
trying to figure out how do we
measure viability of a program
because on the Navajo Nation,
there are way more schools.
But
They also have the exact same
needs in each classroom, so a
student who has special needs in
a certain classroom at Via
Pueblo likely has similar needs
to those in a similar classroom
on the Navajo Nation. And so how
do we measure who is viable
enough to get more money, and
that's kind of why I, I really,
I'm trying to figure out why it
seems like bread crumbs on one
end and then a huge gift on the
other end.
Madam Chair and Representative,
we definitely don't look at the
award, uh, that's being given to
the Navajo Nation is bread
crumbs. Uh, we definitely feel
that all of these awards are
significant and in, in terms of
how do you decide, that is what
we went through the process of
stakeholder engagement with, uh,
and which was, as I mentioned,
uh, a year-long process after
having already been receiving
feedback in the prior years, and
that is how we, uh, we ended up
where we did with the 8020.
split.
All right, thank you, Madam
Chair, and, and then last,
Few round of questions, I
believe when it comes to this
specifically, how did we get
people to these meetings to give
public comment because I know in
many rural places in New Mexico.
We, we need to do what we can to
get the word out. So did we just
speak with tribal leadership, or
did we reach out to individual
community members on the local
level and reach out to see what
their views were when it came to
the funding amounts because it's
much different to talk to a
governmental entity versus the
actual people who were on the
ground brass tacks.
Regular Joe's like me. And so
how did we ensure that every
single individual had the
opportunity and we can't say it
was on the website because a lot
of people still don't even, even
have water or electricity, much
less Wi Fi. So how did we get to
those individual communities to
get the word out, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair and Representative,
so generally the stakeholder
engagement has been at the
leadership level with Pueblo's
tribes and nations, uh, however,
there are opportunities as well
with the, um, for instance, with
the rulemaking process, we do
advertise in the newspaper as
well as online, and we did have
a variety of stakeholders, not
all of whom were uh were tribal
leaders attend our rule hearing
as well and, and provide
feedback.
OK, thank you, Madam Chair, and
deputy director, did you have
anything you wanted to?
Oh yeah, that,
uh, Madam Chair Representative,
I would just reiterate a system
fro frostadt's point that
We try to engage in the
consultation process, and
that's.
That process be happens between
executives. We trust that the
tribal leaders of their
communities understand the needs
of their communities, Assistant
Secretary Juan Eko and Secretary
Padilla made a concerted effort
to consistently engage tribal
leadership, governors, and when
appropriate tribal education
directors in various settings
and as assistant secretary Frost
had mentioned, there were
opportunities for public comment
during the rulemaking process,
and there were opportunities for
people to hear the plan and
get a sense of what's going on
at the Indian education summits.
So it's, it's truly
demonstrating a commitment to
that tribal consultation
process.
That guided what we were doing
with our engagement. Thank you
so much, Mr. uh, Madam Chair,
and both of you. So I, I get it.
I mean, I understand when it
comes to the leadership, like,
for example, I'm sure there are
people in all of our districts
who
didn't vote for us, but we won
by like 51% of the vote, you
know what I mean? So I just want
to make sure that these
individuals in the communities
are indeed getting voices at the
table, and if they don't know
when the meeting is, so for
example, if I look at the PED
website, it's kind of difficult
for me even to find when the
next meeting is going to be and
where you're going to be and,
and what time it's going to be
at. And is it Zoom, is it in
person? Can I join via
telephone, for example. So I
just, I think when it comes to
tribal input, I want to see, in
my opinion, a lot more on the
ground.
I want, I want you to go to
every single pueblo, every
single tribe, the Navajo Nation,
and go literally to as many
people as possible to get input.
And I know that may be
expensive, that may be time
consuming, but this is a big pot
of money, and I want to make
sure that we are indeed getting
it out the door equitably in the
most equitable fashion, and I
don't know if that's the way
that we have it now with the
80/20. So I'll just leave it
there, but thank you so much for
the answers. Thank you, Madam
Chair. I don't know if you have
anything to add, but please,
thank you.
No, just thank you. Thank you.
We appreciate it and we
definitely, we, we have
collected a lot of feedback and
want to thank all the leaders
and community members who have
provided input and feedback on
this process because it really
was a lot and we appreciate the
time that people took on that.
So thank you and, and more is
always better, yeah.
Thank you. Thank you,
Representative. Representative
Royal Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, um,
I want to thank Representative
Bla for your line of questions
because um it's incredibly
important you brought them up
before LESC and um other
meetings and I have the same
concerns, and I think we
mentioned it before about the
80/20 split about the
perception, at least at this
point, Madam Char it's
perception until we're able to
evaluate more
critically with data and with uh
transparency. So right now we
have to take your word for
everything and um.
Do I need to sit closer you get,
before you get a little bit too
deep into your discussion cause
you were just talking about what
representative block mentioned.
We have some student workers
here that we pulled out just
very briefly that we would like
to very quickly um have a quick
introduction if you would all
stand and introduce yourself,
um, there are student work group
from here that was uh uh that
they talked about yesterday, so,
um, please go ahead.
Introduce yourself and maybe
what grade level you're in or
what school.
Hello everybody. My name is
Tariq Yazi. I am Tabu Ojala loge
but she
she now you need the chilla, and
I am a 3rd year, 3rd year
student at the University of
Northern Colorado up in Greeley.
I am a college student.
Hm
Yeah, the Jay and Marilla.
I am a first year undergrad at
uh Utah State and Blending, and
I'll be doing welding.
Uh.
Um, my name is Jayden Steen and
I'm in 9th grade and I go to
school at Mau.
Uh, I don't know my clan.
I don't,
um, a novelibushniche
um, I'm in 9th grade and I'm
going to Myamira.
Yeah, Megan Yazi initia.
So Ajala loge basin
and that should chase and not
Janineda Chanella. I'm gonna be
a junior at Wingate High School.
Uh, good morning, everyone. My
name is Hadley Day, uh, I'm from
Albuquerque, New Mexico.
share how they did this year to
a dale.
Um, good
morning, Yateshikero Sir Trinity
and
I'm going to be a sophomore this
year and I'm gonna try to get
into Gallup Academy and after I
graduate high school, I want to
go to film school.
Yeah dehini hao and Kiyani. um,
I'm gonna be uh in 10th grade,
sophomore, going to a UNM Gallup
Middle College High School.
Yeah Ariana Garcia initia discla
init just not buses to talk but
I that clona
and I am a 4th year at Wingate
High School, and after high
school I want to be a welder.
Yeah, Teslagoitia Hatzo in
a
Bahache that touching that Kani
dashina.
Um, my name is Shaylago. Good
morning, everybody. Um, I'm
gonna be a senior this year at
Wingate High School.
Oh,
no.
Yeah, yeah Shakedoli and shit
my clients are to
Aishwaaatilaota de Chanele and
I'm going to school at Wingate
Middle School.
got a Michaelaen Bowman.
Uh, I don't know my clan.
Was it?
Oh, I go to um 9th grade and I'm
in Miami.
Hm. My name is Lana Ozzy. I
don't got no, I don't remember
my clients and I'm going to be a
sophomore at my high school.
Thank you, everyone, for having
our students introduce
themselves. They are working
here at the chapter house during
summer youth employment in the
world of work program, they're
learning life skills, community
development, community work
around the chapter and uh we are
proud of them and happy that
they can experience that
program. Thank you for
introducing yourselves.
Thank you.
Thank you, uh, Representative,
hold on.
I'm sorry.
Oh, how many total did, do we
know how many total?
It was 35.
like.
OK, that's all right.
But yeah, yeah, yeah.
For the students that just came
in or just uh have you
introduced yourself, your
cleansing your school or what
grade you're in.
Oh, hi, my name is Elioi. um, my
clients are Tobajna Aja
Nashlikani buses to
uh.
I go to my mirror and I'm a
senior.
And um
to it.
Yeah Bene init. I don't know my
clan, but um, I go to school at
on Mira. I'm a freshman, so
yeah.
Hello, my name is Dennison
Vicentia on my plans.
Yeah
Junior at my high school.
Um, hello, my name is Chantelle
Burnside. I only know my first
two of my clans, which is, um,
Tolini,
Michelin, um, the
Um, in Tabaha, but I go to
school at through and I'm a
senior, I'm gonna be a senior
this year, and what I like to be
after I graduate is a travel
nurse.
Um, hello, my name is Rashawn
George. Um,
I don't really know my clans
that well, but I went to school
at SDIS.
Hi, my name is Adrian Henderson.
Um, I don't know my client, but
I'm going to school win game.
My name's Elijah Sosi. I don't
know my claims. I'm 15. I go to
the in what I want to do after I
graduate is try becoming a
doctor.
Hm
Um,
yeah, she
she she
began and share adona Shinii
najinnilo Tain
nice as you're touching it that
should this dane
Um, yeah, she she she
began and share adona Shinii
najinnilo Tain
nice as you're touching it that
should this dashi
and I go to school at UNM in
Albuquerque and I my plans are
to go into early childhood
education and teach the Navajo
language.
Thank you guys.
Thank you for joining us and
thank you for um indulging us in
that. Um, we will go back to uh
committee here, a representative
Royal Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
before they leave, I just wanna
say thank you also very much for
your hard work. You will
accomplish all your dreams.
Thank you. So going back to um
I'm not gonna repeat, but I do
support the line of questions
that uh represent a block race
because they are of major
concern and um that was one of
my questions was, um, not always
the assumption is that at the
leadership level, the leaders.
can represent.
However, I welcome the day when
we can have the actual teachers,
parents, um, assistance all
educators at the local level,
uh, present to us because it's
their mindset and uh their
viewpoint in terms of
implementation, uh, in terms of
whether we're adequately and
sufficiently providing the
funding but also the education,
um, that is needed at their
level.
And how they're assessing it, so
I think it's important for us to
hear that. And so I, again, I
thank him and that was one of
the questions that I had is, is
how are we going to have that
represented.
Uh, to us so that we can feel
more assured and um.
And secure with what we're
doing. And, and right now I have
a lot of questions. Um, I wanna
make sure that, Madam Chair,
that I heard correctly in terms
of the um the reporting process.
Do the local tribal entities.
have to report to the local
school districts, and then the
local school districts together
with the tribal entities report
to.
Uh, submit these reports to PED.
Madam Chair and Representative
No, the, um, the awards to the,
to the tribal entities are
between the tribal entity and
the public education department
and do not involve.
The school districts or charter
schools.
So thank you, so, um, then the,
the tribal entities report to
PED.
Um, Madam Chair and
Representative, yes, so they do
report uh.
They provide an implementation
plan, uh, to receive their
award, and then they report on
how that implementation plan is
working quarterly and with
meetings at the midyear and end
of year, yes.
Madam Chair, thank you for your
response. That's where my
concern is. I have a
I have a concern about the big
brother approach.
That we continue to take.
When it comes to um
This type of, um,
Awarding reporting, um,
And in it
In my view,
Doesn't
How would I say this, doesn't
protect or respect.
Or honor
Uh, tribal sovereignty.
In my view,
If
Funding
is going to be based, and that
was uh uh I have to get a little
bit more clarity on the funding
as well, is going to be based on
um
What you said
It was gonna be based on the.
We have to acknowledge the fact
that we're trying to make up for
generations and generations and
generations of inequality and
inequity.
As far as
The relationship that tribal
entities have had historically
what not just our state but with
the nation, so it doesn't make
sense to me that we continue to
replicate the very systems that
have been responsible for those
inequalities and inequities, and
we still take that, Madam Chair,
big brother approach that we
have to be measured.
Uh, in our reporting.
By, um, a system.
That we've been
Up against and not having had
um.
Uh, equity and so.
In reference to that, my
question is how does this
amendment
And what you've presented to us
today, align with the key
components of the action plan.
That are being.
Right now incorporated.
In the response.
To the courts reference to Yasi
Martinez.
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative, so that the plan
has not yet been developed,
right? We're just now in the
beginning state, the, the
Martinez Yazi response plan is
required by the courts is um
We are still in the stakeholder
feedback stage and hope to very
soon uh again work with our
contractor Lanel to receive as
much feedback in communities
around the state as possible.
Um.
And in terms of how we are
addressing the, uh,
My
Some of the concerns around
Martinez Yazi raised by the
courts, really, we are providing
As much sovereignty as we can
around these funds. There's, um,
the tribal entities have a
significant, um, we have
changed.
The process. In the past there
have been requirements around
requests for reimbursement. So
the funds were available, but
tribes had to tribal entities
had to spend the funding first
before being able to be
reimbursed. And that was uh
That process has been removed,
so adding again, now the funding
is available upfront. Yes, we,
we, there is an implementation
plan to make sure that we are
being, uh, appropriate stewards
of state funding, but we really
have, uh,
Increase the amount of
flexibility and sovereignty over
the funds at the, at the tribal
entity level.
Thank you, Madam Chair. It's
still, um,
It still is problematic because
you don't provide sovereignty.
No entity in the state
government provides sovereignty.
Sovereignty is
Owned by tribal entities and
only they dictate.
What is sovereign to them.
And only they dictate.
What in their um
Sovereignty dictate what
It is important and what is
deemed um
Critical for
For their own existence, so I, I
would just be careful about some
language that we provide again
going back to my concern about
being big brother approach.
Um, to what, how we do things
because
My next question was going to
be, how does the reporting
requirement.
Impact
Protect, honor and respect
tribal sovereignty, but you've
pretty much um
Answered that and I'm, I'm not.
I'm not pleased with it because
I think we're still coming from
an angle of um
Again, I, I
Big Brother approach, even
though you state that on
whatever page that is, um, that
this amended.
Amendment was done in direct
input from tribal leaders,
tribal education directors and
the Indian education advisory
council, it still doesn't
The, the report and the
amendment.
And what we're hearing today is
not coming from them.
So I'm not assured.
Of um whether we're
We're complying with our um
respecting your knowledge of
tribal sovereignty, what that
means. And so going back to the
key components of the action
plan. I understand the plan is
still in the works, however,
these 9 components are to be
worked into this comprehensive
plan and one of the Madam Chair,
two of the points directly uh
talk about strengthening the
capacity of the PED.
In order to be able to, um, and
there's a whole list here to
acknowledge, um, but not only
rely on a data system that
public that we are able to
publicly monitor the progress of
Um, how we're working with
implementing changes to the
Aussie as per the Yazzie
Martinez. So for me that
That is of, of uh major concern.
Because, um, this should be the,
the core of how we are
addressing or moving forward,
not waiting for a plan, but
understanding historically what
was res um
Dictated by the court or
original court order and then
the subsequent as to what that
means. And so I think that Madam
Chair, I think the PED and is
still
I, I'm not in the best place.
In terms of really understanding
and entrenching, um, what I
believe is important in terms of
being able to create the
institutional change that has to
be created in order for us to be
able to get past.
What we're seeing today. So
based funding based on previous
awards to prevent that that set
up to ensure that we're gonna
prevent uh prevent less coming
in and building a pond. I, I get
that.
Excuse me, um, but it still
doesn't address representative
block's concern about how that
translates in terms of um
Not equality, but equity in the
split.
Because that's an important
point. So that really has to be
addressed. And then another um
Question I had has to do with um
The 3rd bullet point on that
other page on key changes to the
rule and ensure ensures shared
accountability.
Can you describe how
What that shared accountability
is from your viewpoint.
Sure. Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, uh, in our
viewpoint, we want to make sure
our accountability is making
sure that state funds are not
misspent. That's what our
accountability is and uh
accountability for the awardees
will be that, um,
That they are
That they see outcomes for the
students, that's, that's the
outcome that we would like to
see in the end is uh improved
academic outcomes for Native
American students.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and how
are you measuring that? What's
the, the, um, what is the
measurement, um, what is the
measurement tools that you're
using we're gonna institute in
order to measure.
I try
Uh, our tribal entity telling
you this is, this is what our
goals are. These are what our
objectives. These are our
timelines. This is how we view
the outcome.
And if you disagree with what
the tribe is telling you, and
that's not under your shared
accountability, then.
What happens next.
So we don't have specific, um,
we don't have specific
performance targets for Pueblo's
tribes and nations, um.
Deputy Director, do you want to
talk a little bit about the
implementation plans and what
those include.
Sure, thank you, Madam Chair,
Representative, everything you
described in your list just now,
that's the implementation plan.
It's determined by each Pueblo
tribe and nation. They are each
entity will identify their
needs, their, their goals for
their programming, the outcomes
they intend to hit, and then
during those quarterly check-in
meetings and the mid year
reports and the end of year
reports simply reporting on the
self-developed plants.
And then we work with them.
evaluate what's working, what
isn't provide any advice that we
can connect our tribal partners
with various divisions and
bureaus within the department to
provide further service if
necessary.
Madam Chair, thank you for that.
Um, so will the tribes be able
to determine their own outcomes,
their own, how they measure
their outcomes and determine
their satisfaction with whether
their outcomes have actually um
Met their objectives.
And will you trust that the
tribal entity is stating that to
you without you coming in and
saying, but wait a minute, it
doesn't measure up to what we
have set up as the standard.
And if that occurs, then what
happens?
Madam Chair, Representative,
that kind of standard.
Doesn't exist for our grants.
Um, every
For the allocation-based awards
in previous fiscal years.
Elie as well as Pueblo's tribes
and nations have determined what
constitutes success for them.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I
understand that uh with
reporting to the legislative
education study, um, interim
committee, we understand that
there is in the process, at
least this is what I understood
PED, um, evaluating a particular
um approach to
Um, delivering education in
general.
And you're constantly evaluating
and there's been in the
education committees during the
regular legislative session,
considerable discussion around
um the various approaches that
PED is taking.
These approaches, in my view, as
an educator, as a policymaker,
having been in this position and
having worked in education for
all these years. My evaluation
is that those are standards, and
those are standards that are in
direct conflict with the
cultural language.
Um
perspective mindset, and
Culturally and linguistic
relevant education that tribes,
nations, and pueblos as well as
the Hispanic population have
Poundered and said these
standards don't work for our
populations. So already, Madam
Chair, we have a
Um, a conflict of viewpoints of
philosophies of mindsets of
approaches.
How is that gonna get mitigated
is my concern. This is not just
about amending the Indian
Education Act in terms of
funding.
But it also is implying
Through its process that we are
then also um
Entering into the entire way in
which we deliver our education.
Versus what public education.
Uh, is viewing as the standards
that must be put in place in
order to be measured across the
board, so Madam Chair, I think,
I think that um.
I think that
I'm not gonna get the responses
necessarily that we're looking
for, I'm looking for here, and
that's fine, they're gonna be
continued to be raised at the
LESC level and uh
And, and then we're gonna have
to continue to ask the hard
questions here at our level, um,
as we see this unfolding and as
we receive feedback from our
tribes, nations, and pueblos
directly from those that are
educators at the levels that
That we believe that we need to
be receiving the responses from
and their evaluations and their
measurements from, and I think
they are in the better position
to report to us or answer the
questions that we um have. So I
will move on, Madam Chair, and
and wait for um how this unfolds
and thank you, thank you.
Thank you, Representative.
Representative Serana.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um, and
thank you for your presentation.
It's always good to hear from
you. Um,
I'm not gonna, I'm not gonna
repeat anything. John asked or
Representative Block did it
eloquently, and I think with the
numbers we were talking about,
it's, it was extreme differences
and it's almost shocking to see
how, how that works and how it
was came up with, but I agree
with everything he said, so I
would jump to Albuquerque
Journal today. It says, um, on
page 4 it says, we are on track.
APS Yazi Martinez students
surpassed math proficiency goals
for school this school year. So
that's
a great thing to hear that they
are doing well because you know,
math is the most important
subject there is, right?
Um, so it's good that they're
that they're doing better. Um,
I'm hoping they they raise the,
the level of what they find is
is um proficient, um, the
district is 30 and, and they had
16% for for Yasi Martinez, but
they're at 16.6, so that's
great. Um, I, I just think that
the, we're on the right track
and um with we were talking
about the money yesterday, the
money coming in will help
starting with our youngest and
moving up and it's and we're
seeing um great results. Um,
I forgot what I was gonna say
next.
Oh, let's see, um,
Oh, proficient, uh.
So that wasn't it.
Turn, um, oh, as far as the
federal government,
so we're I
can I say something?
Because
The Indian education Act dollars
are very different than public
school dollars.
And I just want to make that
distinction because we're moving
in a very different direction
with the line of questioning.
But manager it's your question.
I, I just
So I think what
Sean and
brought up, yeah, let's finish
our discussion. You are on the
list, so go ahead, sir.
OK, so as far as federal money
cuts that are coming down, how
are they gonna affect this
advancement in in our student
success in um the Yazi Martinez
case.
Um, Madam Chair and members of
the committee and
representative. So, uh, right
now we have uh about $45 million
that are impounded that would,
that we had anticipated would
flow through us and go to
districts for their use. Much of
that is in the area of
professional development, uh,
much of those funds were used
for professional development in
the past and um
It's, it's not gonna move us in
the right direction, uh,
schools don't have a lot of
flexible fund. Most of their
funding is tied up in staff and
personnel and to find money to
be able to provide things like
professional development can be
difficult, and those are some of
the funds that we, um,
That the federal government have
impounded, so um we're we're
definitely nervous about it. Um,
and we'll uh continue to monitor
and, and look at what those
results are, what the results
are on the ground for for those
impoundments.
They come out here.
Thank you, Senator Shchino.
So
Thank you, Madam Chair, and uh.
I'm sitting here listening to
the line of questioning.
And I don't agree with
Representative John Block nor
Representative Caballero.
As a former tribal leader of my
tribe in 3 terms before I became
a senator.
I take offense to Mr.
Representative Block that I
don't represent my people.
When we are given the authority
to represent our people and we
go to a government to government
relationship. We are speaking on
behalf of our entire tribe.
We have many conversations with
our tribal directors,
Going to every community member
in our districts in our pueblos.
That's exactly what he said.
that I think,
but anyway.
I'm gonna make a distinction
here because I'm getting a
little upset around here.
But each tribe in Pueblo, the
way our leadership is selected
is very different,
as we educate, yeah,
that's exercise of sovereignty.
Yeah, yes, but that's every
tribe has a way of electing its
people, but it's an elected
of Indian education money, we
have been fighting for this.
Since representative
Representative Begay introduced
a bill.
20 plus years ago.
This money is directed to
support tribes and government
entities.
To support the education
programs.
I don't think there's an
argument about where who is it
supporting it's about the
distribution
that's exactly why
this formula has been developed
to this point, input by tribes.
The formula is never gonna be
You know, we're we're trying to
get equity right now. So,
um, Mr. Frost, madam. I've got
the floor,
madam
we have.
Um, we have evidence of
documentation that every tribe
nation in Pueblo approves of the
distribution.
Do we know that?
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, so
Feedback was feedback was
gathered. I'm not saying that
everybody agreed to 80/20. What
I'm saying is that this is a
conversation at the tribal
level. Give, let me give you an
example. Pickeries Pueblo, their
population is probably less than
400 people.
If we go strictly by numbers.
They're gonna have probably
what?
$40,000.
What are you gonna do with the
community?
To support your kids. That's why
there is a base.
To ensure that every tribe at
least have some level of
capacity to do what they want.
We have many kids, Burling high
school is using an example.
We have kids from Cochiti Santo
Domingo, San Felipe, Santa Ana,
Sania to go to uh Burley Public
Schools. When these kids come
home.
They travel coachingly probably
is the longest.
Almost 30 minutes.
When they get home,
There are no programs for them
to do.
If there's programs at the
Burnley High School.
Kids don't have transportation.
This funding is to allow tribes
to do community-based activities
to support their kids.
If Navajo Nation, Education
Department says we're gonna have
an after school program in
Shiprock so kids at Shiprock
High School, Kurtland Central or
wherever they, when they come
home, there's activities for
them. This is not about
Supplementing school districts
for their programs.
This is about education
departments taking on their
sovereignty to say this is what
we know is gonna work for our
community and that is what we're
advocating for. That is what
this funding is for.
It is not to supplement public
education. Maybe there's
something that they can partner
in ways, but this is up to the
tribes to come up with their own
plans.
To design them and implement
them and come up with their own
evaluation strategy, how they're
gonna define success. So I just
want to put that out there
cause, you know, I, I, you keep
hearing this debate.
And I've been hearing this for.
You know, I've been a cabinet
secretary in 2004.
We've been having this
discussion.
And really making progress and
we're always gonna have
conversation about numbers.
But that's not the point. The
point is, how do we create
programs in our communities
that's going to take care of our
language, take care of the
things that are important for
our communities.
And I just want to make that. So
I appreciate what PAD is doing.
Because I think it's a hard, you
know, task, you know, trying to
get 23 tribes to agree on
something.
I think you're almost there. I
appreciate the work.
You know, representative uh
assistant secretary Juanico his,
her, his father and I went to
school in Saint Catharine's, you
know, and all the family were
well, and I know she's committed
to the work.
And devote it to the work.
And making sure that she's
taking input from all the
tribes.
And I think we're getting close,
so I just want to make that
comment because I think, you
know, we can get caught up in
all these little things.
Uh, and so forth, but this is
having to support tribal
government.
Education departments because
the Navajo Nation Department of
Education doesn't receive enough
money and they have the ability
to now to create working with
their own respective
communities, things that can
work for them.
And so, thank you, Madam Chair.
Representative Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I really
appreciate it. And you know
what, I'm not going to be
brought into defending myself.
When I'm literally showing what
the numbers are. According to
this sheet from the PED, the
Navajo Nation gets $4.5 million.
Pierre's Pueblo gets $856,000.
There are a significantly larger
amount of students on the Navajo
Nation, and that's something
that we certainly need to
reconcile because you can't say
it's equal or equitable when it
comes to the numbers going out
in my opinion, and so there,
there is a discussion to be had
about representation, but no one
today has said that the
president of the Navajo Nation
or the delegates do not
represent their people, nor has
anyone said the governors of the
pueblos do not represent their
people.
The only comments that have been
made, Madam Chair.
Are that individuals
I want them to have their voices
heard, because they're the ones
who have the students in the
schools. They're the teachers
teaching the kids, and I would
like to hear from them. So
that's all I have, Madam Chair,
but I don't think there's
anything to defend here. Thank
you. Thank you, Representative
Blanc.
Representative Abeda
just on that point, Navajo is
more than New Mexico, so if
you're looking at the entire
Navajo tribe.
It's, that's just New Mexico.
Yes, ma'am. So, yeah, the
students, number of students
according to what they have
here, 25,784 students on the
Navajo Nation, and they, they're
getting 4.5 million for all
those kids and members that
that was one of the things I was
gonna bring up is where's, you
know, in the presentation or I
know Mr. Frost that you, you
were brought in at the last
minute, but that information is
not conveyed, you know, during
the presentation, it'd be nice
if it was in there, then I
I don't think we would have some
of these questions, um, as they
could actually see the numbers,
but here we go. Representative
Abeda.
Thank you, Madam Char. Thank
you, Secretary and Assistant
secretary, um, and thank you to
my committee members for the
conversation and the
perspectives. I'm coming to you
as an 8-year school board member
for tribally controlled school
and coming just to talk from the
perspective of being a Navajo
education leader, and I know
there's another one on this
committee with that experience
as well, so uh what I wanna say
is that I, well I do appreciate
the
Secretary Juanico's work, I
think there there is some truth
to the fact that the Navajo
voice about education and
representation is missing from
the conversation. In my 8 years,
I don't think we've ever had any
consultation at our level. We've
never been able to talk with
anyone. Um, it's always been.
Go through the main Navajo
Nation Bonagrin or Dodi and
sometimes that voice isn't
unified. It could also be going
through the health education,
human services committee, so the
three voices there are not even
unified, but if you look at
Togele, they are right next to
Albuquerque, very far from the
nation's capital, but advocating
for their education, their
programs, and I had a sidebar
conversation with Senator Pinto
about
how we advocated for early
childhood programs because the
federal Head Start programs were
not adequate. They were really
non-existent. We did not have a
bus. The building was
deteriorating. Our children
would go maybe for an hour, then
they would leave, so we took it
upon ourselves to get, um, it's
written authorization if you
will, from executive Navajo and
legislative Navajo to say, yes,
you have authority to go ahead
and advocate for yourselves, and
we entered into a state
preschool agreement, and that
was the way we were able to
revive preschool early childhood
education in our community,
which helped, but with that
being said,
understanding how Navajo
operates under every
administration because it does
change. Sometimes education is a
priority and sometimes it's not.
And right now I don't think it
is. They have been trying to
find a superintendent for years.
They've had interim
superintendents. I'm not sure if
they found one now.
But it's been a difficult, a
difficult past few years with
any advocacy that way, so we've
taken it upon ourselves and to
go directly to the state and
talk to whoever we can, whether
it's our senator Sheno, um, our
former representative are now me
opening those doors and those
conversations, but I do believe
that Navajo is is in a
Every administration is in a
different transition of how
they're going to prioritize
education and who will get to
speak for it. I, um, in, in
good, good, good manner envy how
our pueblo relatives can
advocate for their education
because it's a smaller community
and a quicker way to talk with
their, their constituents and
their community members on
Navajo, it's just not like that.
And I feel that a lot of the
voices are not heard.
the resources don't get to us in
time, um, we don't get, uh, we
just don't have that input. And
so when I hear about the
consultation that you have in
your, your slide show. I think
if, if the state office
understood how Navajo government
changes through.
Every administration and who's
advocating is it councils
education committee, or is it
going to be executive through
Doty, or is it going to be the
schools themselves or the boards
that they create, that would
help tremendously and that's
just the, the reality of my
constituents on the Navajo side
is that it's always changing,
but as the representative, I do
my best to take their concerns,
work with whatever senator is in
who's representing them because
my district's large, it's 6.
counties. I believe I have
Senator Pinto, Senator Charlie,
Senator, um, Sendo and Senator
Munoz. And so wherever that
school lies, whether it's grant
school, BIE public school. I'm,
I'm making sure that I look to
see who I can best talk to, but
I do see that in my 8 years, I
never had a consultation with
anyone when I was working with
the school and um even with our
tri
school boards, nothing.
It, it's just not existent, so
I, I, I worry and I'm concerned
about, I understand you're
looking at who represents Navajo
and they're going to speak. But
there's a definitely a break in
communication. But I do
appreciate the partnerships that
our community has with the state
for early childhood preschool
programming. My children have
all gone through it. It's been
such a success and it's still
thriving, it's still going. And
I appreciate the work that
Senator Schendo did to make sure
that those preschool programs
can have adequate cultural
competency and relevancy in the
curriculum. That was fantastic.
So I, I just want to comment to
that, but also offer any type of
support I can to use whatever
experience I've had to help
Secretary Wanico or you all or
even invite you out to our
community just to provide that
opportunity to see how it works
and, um, that way we can build
upon those ideas. Thank you.
Thank you and look forward to
coming to your community.
Thank you. I have Representative
Royal Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I, I
wanted to just emphasize that
this is the real reason why I
emphasize every single time
sovereignty, tribal sovereignty,
to recognize honor and protect
and um respect the fact that
tribal sovereignty is key here
and um and ensuring that tribal
sovereign, those tribes,
nations, and pueblos.
actually are um
Or
That the PD is ensuring that um
This is being honored.
100% and that, that means that
we have to look closely at um
Things such as the graduation
rates, test scores, college
enrollment, and we have to be
able to measure why some tribes,
nations, and pueblos are
performing the way they are
performing and lack of, and so I
just wanted to make that point
that that's really important and
across the board, final point
across the board, those of you
that follow the LESC committee
across the board. These are
questions that are asked of
everyone across the board.
not just about our tribes
nations and Pueblo's leadership,
but across the board we have to
ask some hard questions about
whether in fact educators at the
all levels, their voices are
being presented to us. Thank
you, madam. Thank you,
Representative Garcia.
Thank you very much. um, very
interesting.
topic to discuss here. I'm a
first year, um.
Representative, I came in only 2
days left of the last session,
and I was on the education
committee and what I'm hearing
here, we hurt there also, and
there were many questions that
were asked, and they can it got
me thinking, why are we in this
situation? Is it, uh, knowing,
uh, I'm a member of the Raymond
Navajo, uh, who, which is a uh a
satellite community of the
Navajo Nation, and when I look
at
That, I think that if, if the
tribes were receiving these
funds. I'm an education but a
school board member since 1976
on and off, and when I think
about it, I have never heard
Navajo Nation come out and say,
you know, this is the amount of
money we received and it's going
to go to these um the schools
and uh I don't know how you can
identify which school you're
gonna help because you
where is that even within just
gallop itself, there are many,
many schools, high school, mid
schools, and elementary, and
then outside of that in McKinley
County, there's so many more
schools that are out there, then
you go up to San Juan, and then
you go into Berna Leo and even
as far south as Megalena and
Secorro, and you have students
there that are members of the
Navajo Nation, but I myself have
never heard any anything.
about uh
The type of fundings that the
tribes received, that was my
question to do the tribes get
these directly? And yes, I guess
they do.
And you're talking about
implementation plans. I don't
know what Navajo Nation is
deciding what what they're gonna
do. And uh now as a
representative, I would like to
see those implementation plan
and how effective are they
because they're doing the
reporting back to, to you and uh
I need to make sure that there
are accountable, that they are
transparent in everything that
they say they're going to do in
the implementation plan.
And knowing ah how Navajo Nation
operates. I come from a school
that's um federally funded, but
it's a community controlled
school and uh we know, I know
that we have to be accountable
for every dollars we receive, we
have to be, be transparent to
our stakeholder, the parents,
the students, and the community.
And yet in this case, I don't
see that. I don't see, uh, maybe
there is accountability.
maybe there is transparency, but
how far does that go? Maybe just
around Wind rock, and that's all
we know Monday the committees
and therefore, I'm very much
interested in seeing the
implementation plans and uh how
effective they are if we can't
maybe there is transparency, but
how far does that go? Maybe just
around Wind rock, and that's all
we know Monday the committees
and therefore, I'm very much
interested in seeing the
implementation plans and uh how
effective they are if we can see
uh this is what has been done
and this is where it's at. It
would be uh something that we,
we can see and if it's not, uh,
if we're not being accountable
at different
levels the pueblos, the tribes,
and what can we do to help them?
What can we do to uh move these
programs forward because when
you have standards and condition
attached to those funds, uh, it
makes more sense to whoever is
going to that they have to abide
by those, and if they don't,
they are consequences for, for
not following those standards
and conditions that are placed
with those funds, and it would
be something that we
Uh, I would like to see how, uh,
be happening, uh.
But
You cut me off.
Not yet.
OK. Um, so, uh,
So in order to uh really
implement the education Act and
the plans that goes with it, uh,
we have to uh consider what is
happening now and what can we do
to improve it from the
legislative level, and we're
very much concerned it's just
not only me, there's many other
people, and I'm glad that um
representative block brought out
some serious questions that uh
that was on my mind.
Because we heard that at, at our
meetings under the education and
we needed to to see uh uh we
needed not only to be fair, but
to be equal in how those funds
are being distributed. Uh when
we get funding from the federal
government, there is a base that
everybody else smaller tribes
are not left out. They get a
base funding and they uh add on
to that and it should be like
that.
The, um
Uh, the education is being
provided at a fair and equal
level and
And
I don't know what the formula is
like.
But what we're hearing. And
based on that, uh, I guess
that's one of the things that I
don't like, I just see that
implementation plan because our
tribe is not uh providing that
to uh to the people. My second
question is, do you have local
control here, empowers local
control to design and implement
education programs.
If uh local control in our
community is for the school that
we're at and
We have totally control over
everything, but when it comes to
public schools under the Navajo
Nation, it's the vast and
massive and who, who is the
local control? Is it the parents
at these different schools are,
uh, do they have a say so in
what's going on? Or is it just a
Navajo Nation,
excuse me, trying to implement
local control. That is one that
I, uh, and what are they doing?
to design and implement
education program. The other one
is, uh, I've already talked
about accountability that has to
be in place and we should as a
legislator be able to see that
and, and know that we are on
target with with the Education
Act. I'm aware of it, uh, that
it was implemented or it was
enacted and then it was
implemented because I have a
person that uh is from Raymond
Ava that uh used to
to be on, um, the director of
Indian education at one time,
and she has talked about it, but
at that time, I was more
concerned about my uh
The tribal school that we were
operated and not paid attention
to the public school, uh, so
even within the public school, I
see uh if we're gonna be working
together, we need to be working
together on, on the concerns
that the stakeholders have.
Yesterday and uh uh previously,
we've heard that constituents
are not allowed to speak at
school board meetings, and
that's a very big
Concern, and that shouldn't be
the case and uh and if we're
gonna be working together and uh
we're being refused to talk to
anyone, then that's a big, big
issue, and that I'm just
bringing that to your attention,
uh, and because many of our
students that travel not only,
um, I know that like, uh, the
Navajo Nation for you have to go
at least 30 miles to gallop to
go to.
School at the high school there,
that's the only high school from
that vicinity and, and, and I'm
sure other schools are like that
and of course the boundary is
also another county lines is
another issue that has come up.
So based on that, um, Navajo
Nation has a lot to deal with,
but we don't know, I don't know
uh what they're implementing. So
I just bring that to your
attention. Thank you.
Thank you, you can respond.
Thank, thank you, Madam Chair
and Representative. So, yes,
when, when we're talking about
local control, really what we
mean is Pueblo tribe and nation
control, right? It, and for the
Navajo Nation, that is, it is
very large and may not reflect
uh
Extreme like Pinedale, uh, it
may not reflect the, the choices
or desires of Pinedale.
Constituents.
Oh, no, I was, that's where we
are today.
Thank you. Representative
Johnson.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
colleagues, and uh presenters,
um, I just wanna
I appreciate everyone for their
comments and discussion and um I
wanna to dovetail representative
of Beta's testimony, which is
where my request is going to
come from is based on yesterday,
a lot of our community members
and our leaders requested of us
as representatives, legislators.
And senators to be directly
involved in our children's
education, livelihood and growth
to the best of our ability. I
mean, they literally pleaded
with us, please continue to be
involved in every step of the
way of our children's education.
So based on those requests. I
wanted to talk about your plan
for quarterly check-in.
Your quarterly check-in
meetings. What is your plan to
involve us.
In the process, and the progress
and um involve the parents,
grandparents, and community
members. Are you going to rely
on school boards, and then not
just to implementation plan, but
budgets, audits, are we spending
the money accordingly, and this
is my concern because oftentimes
we're left out of the loop.
We start off really good.
With the funding, implementing,
and we go along, and then we
fall off the train. And then um
we bring you back and you
present, not you, but you know,
in general, and then there's a
nice presentation, a beautiful
PowerPoint. Everything is said
that we want heard, but then
back home.
Uh, where the work is done.
Um, it's not how it should be.
Um, our students may not be um
doing how they should be doing.
Plans may not be implemented.
The money might be accidentally
spent somewhere else. Those are
just wild examples, but you
know, you get my point.
So, um,
That, that was, that was my, my
question and my concern.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Representative, uh, it, it is a
very difficult needle for us to
thread, uh, allowing for for
respecting the sovereignty of
Pueblo's tribes and nations and
their ability to use the funds
in a way that they see fit while
also um making sure that we also
respect our responsibility for
um
Use of public funds in a
responsible manner and our
accountability to um to the
legislature as well for, for the
use of funds, um, but I, I'll
hand it over to Deputy Director
Rizbeki to talk in in particular
about the, the process for the,
the quarterly check-ins and
reports.
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative.
Quarterly check-ins in the past.
Have consisted of brief meetings
that last anywhere from half an
hour to 1 hour with the
applicants of the grant,
typically a tribal education
director. We sit down and review
the status of spending down of
the grants, we ask for updates
on
Proposed activities, how that's
coming along, we offer any
support that tribal education
directors may need, and then we
just repeat that process 4 times
over. The mid-year report, as I
mentioned earlier, does a
similar thing. It's a little bit
more robust. We expect an
identification of whether goals
by the tribal entities were met
for particular activities to
share the number of students
that were served to share
specific outcomes that were
reached for the quarterly
check-ins.
forward since this, since this
is a new approach. It's vastly
different from what we've been
doing before. We do intend to
keep a similar structure, but
those meetings will be more
robust just because of the
nature of the increase in
funding, the broader scope of
work that'll happen in certain
instances, like with Pierre, as
I mentioned at the beginning of
the presentation, how they're
braiding together different
departments to offer services to
students at the community. So I
could envision.
Longer, more detailed
conversations, certainly.
I have not heard talks.
Of involving external partners
in those conversations, that's
something that happens with IED
internally. We do our best to
collate data, gather information
on the effectiveness of
programming, present that
information to Assistant
Secretary Juan Eko, so she then
in turn could present it to
Secretary Padilla, who could
then bring it to you all for
evaluation. Um, I think it is
important to reiterate the
distinction that Senator Schendo
made earlier.
Um
Between these various
jurisdictions and authorities
that that we have at play.
These grants are intended to go
directly into tribal communities
into the pueblos into Navajo
Nation.
What happens in the public
schools, it's related, sure, but
that's, that's a whole another
set of reporting requirements, a
different funding stream, a
separate grant from our
division, and there are
mechanisms in place to promote
parent involvement, parent
feedback on two particular
elements in particular that are
significant in the Indian
Education Act, the mandatory
needs assessment, as well as the
systemic framework, which is,
which is essentially the
plan, LEA's developed to address
the needs that were prioritized
in the needs assessment.
During the development of the
systemic framework in New Mexico
administrative code. It says
that districts should should be
collaborating with local
partners to develop those
frameworks, so.
We have mechanisms in place on
the books to, to address the
concerns that you all are
expressing in public schools,
but it's important to keep in
mind that, again, this is.
We have different.
portions, different entities,
different different
jurisdictional areas that we're
all talking about at once. And
so with this particular grant,
this 80/20 split, the 850 base,
$850,000 base amounts that are
going to the tribes, please keep
in mind we're focusing on tribal
communities, tribal education
departments, and if they.
So decide to loop in a different
department at.
The tribe, wonderful. If the
tribe is in contact with a
charter school in the area, or
perhaps a district that serves a
high number of their students,
that conversation can occur,
some kind of agreement can be
reached, definitely, but.
Again, there's a whole another
set of mechanisms in place to
address what's happening in
public schools directly. You
just wanna reemphasize that,
that distinction. Thank you.
Thank you. So it's incumbent
upon us partly to.
Keep up. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative. I
know you're not responsible for
this presentation, but I think
what just happened here really
shows about how much the PED has
communicated with our
legislative body, um, excites
those in leadership about this
particular, um,
Implementation to the Indian
Education Act. Yesterday we had
Yazi Martinez here and they had
some of the key components and I
think this lawsuit kind of
pushed some of this, um,
Press I used to, to meet these
expectations of the Indian
Education Act and in that too,
there's these 9 components that
they we were given and not have
I ever really seen how, how
we're um
If that was something that's
been addressed and that's what
we really wanted to address
today, not this, but this is
what came before us and if
there's still questions about it
from our legislators then I,
when you, when we want to say
it's been fully vetted or put
through. I, I, I question that,
especially when we're, we're
having to look up the
information ourselves online
instead of it coming when we
know um it should be presented
to us.
This
I have an obligation, um, as an
elected official, and I don't
just represent our Native
American community, and that is
where some of this questions
about accountability come in,
uh, and we want to know and make
sure it's there because if we
really want to come down to the,
to the numbers and all of that
and we could go all the way back
to find out how much our tribe's
Pueblos and nations put into the
state budget. How much are, how
much tax we put in and really do
you
distribute the money in that
manner, but that is not how it
works. That is not how our
budget is so uh so complex now
that um but it's in my eyes too,
it's, it's taxpayer money in
some sense, even with our Native
American, um, constituents, they
pay taxes too.
So that part of the
accountability, um, questions I
can see as relevant, um, but I
don't.
I know there's that line fine
line of the sovereignty in which
we don't question the programs
they are willing to implement,
but we are responsible for
putting that funding there
basically.
So I think those are relevant
questions and if you put all my
students in one room, all our
students of New Mexico in one
room and you'd start telling
these numbers you think they
would be OK with it, saying,
well this is you as a student
because you're a Navajo student
because you're part of Navajo
Nation. We are seeing that way.
This is what you're, what we're
going to help you with your
education with as far as
cultural, the cultural aspect.
I know part of this is on us,
but part of it too is on our
nation to come forward and also
communicate with us, but we are
New Mexico legislators. If that
is something that is lacking,
that is when you have are then
go rent for delegate or
something in the nation and you
will have access to that
information, but it's incumbent
upon us to have that um
collaboration, but if that was
really um something that
happened in this government to
government.
um,
And they think it
Still is not totally there or
else we would probably be able
and kind of be notified as it
trickled down. This is what
happened in there, or this, but
the last thing I got from my
nation was they were not happy
with these numbers. And that's
why I asked, well, where's the
evidence of, of who was OK with
it.
And that base amount funding
when this first came forward,
that was my question because of
Pierre. I was very concerned
about um a small pueblos and I
was the one who's like there's
no, there's nothing here that's
gonna help our those that are um
are smaller tribes because in
that sense too, they weren't
even getting enough money to do
any problem even hire a teacher
in that sense. Um, but they,
that's what you need, you need
somebody to do the job, so I
understand what the, the base
fund.
But
um if those questions aren't,
are there, I think the
legislature, our members have
the right to have those
questions answered and someone
who's able to, and I know it's
not all you do, you don't have
all the answers, um, but if PED
is through the Yazy Martinez
asking Lano and West said to
take upon themselves to have
someone else create this, I
wonder about the capacity of
this particular.
you know, how are we as sharing,
um, when we say, well, the BE
BIE schools too will be
eligible, and I know that was a
big thing to advocate for, but
To have not to have some of the
information now in school
starting, um.
with the technology today, I
wonder where we are really,
where's our infrastructure stand
if we're not getting some of
this back in a timely manner,
um, why is it taking so long
because when we talk about
testing scores and trying to
evaluate our students and our
performance too. Our students
already move on to the next
grade level before they get any
input, their their schedules are
already done too by the end of
the year for them to.
go on to the next level, they
probably haven't even received
their grades in that sense or a
true evaluation of where they
stood in their um math, math or
reading, and we pushed them on.
We see some great statistics,
but I think some of that too is
to allow that we allow school
choice that we allow the charter
schools that if they're not
getting the services they need
in one school they go to
another. I have not seen any
data on that, um, especially
when we talk about discipline in
those areas and um.
We are chair was uh back today,
Mr. Munoz to um
talk a little bit too about
where the responsibility some of
this accountability and
responsibility lies um when we
talk in terms of the lawsuit
that was there and that still
pans over us, but until I see
some real documentation and
really we want to have a
consensus, um,
I don't think we would be at
this level where we're having
this debate here in this um
In this realm in this committee,
so um for those members that are
here and those that are
listening, I mean, I still have
some questions too, um, but I
think bridging that even with
our BIE schools right now with
what's happening nationally is
very essential because we will
still have students that might
not have, we might not really be
able to see how they're
performing and if the BIE
schools end up in the real
situation with funding, um, to
the point where they
clothes, all of a sudden, will
our public school system be
ready for that influx of
students that will
Basically bombarding um envelop
our our classrooms and then we
will see another gap in our
Students' records coming in to
make sure our students are, were
able to meet them where they are
when they come in, um.
It it's, it's really hard to.
To kind of fathom where we're
headed in education and even
with the suit of the withholding
of funds in education, um, what
is that gonna do detrimentally
to our, our, our students, but
I'd really like to make sure
we're doing the best make the
best choice for our Native
American students making the
best choice for our other
students, so they're not having
to
And uh reteaching or learning
stuff again if they're not there
at school because of some of the
issues that they, they carry,
um, that they can move on and
we're not hindering any um to
really meet the Constitution
that we have for our, that we
have in our state. So, um, thank
you for your
for you being here and filling
in, and I think that you really
be able to understand um how
important it is to us, to each
of us, that we meet, that
education is one of the basis of
raising up our communities and
even our lowest students we talk
about the top and the
graduation, but really have we
talked about that 1% or those 3
students that didn't graduate,
what was it that they were not
able to do, but we, we want to
celebrate our
successes in that way, but I
hope we understand that even
that one student, and I've been
told this too, they said if you
can just help one student, um,
that is enough. Um, and some of
our eyes as teachers, we want
all our students to succeed. So
it's, it's a tough thing to, um,
Not get emotional or not have
the um
The the heist, we know how heist
the stakes are, so, but thank
you, thank you for being here.
Thank you, thank you so much,
Madam Chair, and I, I, I wanna
appreciate that you're
recognizing the um the risk if
the BIE schools are closed,
there is a significant risk that
we would see an influx of
students and, and need to figure
out how to meet their needs, um.
In, in the system that is not
currently ready to accept them,
uh, into or um.
And also I wanted to mention
that in terms of testing, the
data does come back quickly. It
gets to, to the families and the
schools quickly. It just takes
us a while. We have to get all
of the data at the end of the
school year from the districts
to make sure that we know what
grade level the students are,
um, so that we make sure that
they're not tested out of grade
or uh also, for instance, to
make sure that if they're taking
the Spanish test, they're
eligible to take the Spanish
test. There are a number of data
cleanings that we have to go
through before we
released the final results, and
that's why we're just at the
preliminary results level at the
moment, but we'll definitely
have that available in the
future and we're happy to come
back and present that, um, and,
and
Any, anything else you might
want us to talk about, uh, at
your committee. Thank you so
much. Thank you. And would you
like to make a closing
statement.
Uh, Madam Chair, I just
appreciate the opportunity to
speak in front of you all, um,
the Indian Education Act is
complex, it's multifaceted in
our division is making a
concerted effort to teach as
much as we can about the
intricacies of it. There's a lot
of changes happening at the
division moving forward into
fiscal year 26, grant funding
definitely that has been in the
news. It's the big focus, but
we're also recommitting
ourselves to enforcing.
Um, the requirements that exist
in statutes for districts that
qualify as historically defined
Indian impacted. There's 30
districts for FY 26 that have
this designation, and we're
going to be working diligently
to ensure that they're in
compliance, that they're
engaging their tribal partners
as they should be, that they're.
serving their students.
Through the plans that they
identify that are required by
statute. So again, thank you for
the opportunity.
And hope you all have a pleasant
afternoon.
Thank you. And um, Madam Vice
Chair, would you like to close
out there your chapters.
Um, thank you, and we'll
probably have closing comments
from our chapter here, but thank
you so much for talking to me.
Madam President Sarah, would you
like to
Say closing remarks on behalf of
Pinedale chapter and close us
with a prayer, and you can sit
up there where, um, yeah, thank
you.
that
OK.
Good afternoon, um, Madam Chair,
thank you for giving me the
floor.
I want to thank everyone that
came here to let us know what's
going on with the Indian Affairs
Committee. It's very interesting
from what I heard and how you're
outstanding comments are coming
to us. Thank you for thinking
about our community. Thank you
for coming here to Pinedale.
Um, I'm a Sarah Jackson and
Uh, to sinnado um.
Now Bonnie does ache.
As you know, we always
introduced ourselves by our
clan.
And I'm from here originally and
um my dad used to be a vice
president of the chapter here.
Uh, I'm going on my 2nd, 2nd
month of being a, a chapter
president. So I'm just learning.
And I want to say I appreciate
everyone here. And like I said,
it's really good to hear your
comments and to know that you
are working for our students.
That's what we like to hear. And
I, I, I was listening in and I
found a lot of things that I
would like to look at.
and research, uh, because I'm
also a school board member at
Wingate High School.
So she had long, thank you very
much for being here. I'll just
say a brief prayer.
Father, we thank you for staying
with us for your blessings and
we're thankful for your
blessings that you gave us.
