Client relations and
Third party or
extends communications. Thank
you. And then Francesca Moratti,
she's our communication
specialist in special projects
coordinator.
So we were asked to be here to
present to you today on the
severance tax permanent fund, so
hopefully you have the slides in
front of you, and I'm gonna be
starting on page 2.
The 7 tax permanent fund at the
end of August was valued at $9.9
billion. And so I have listed
here a handful of things that
I'm going to go over over the
course of this presentation,
including the history and
background of the permanent
fund, it's distributions to the
general fund, the investment
performance over time.
The economic target economically
targeted investments that this
fund is allowed to make, as well
as uh closing on the forward
looking outlook for the fund and
discussing the potential for the
permanent funds, both land grant
and severance tax included to
really become a leading source
of revenue for the general fund
in the future.
So starting on page 3 with the
history and background.
Um, this slide covers how the
severance taxes are collected
and then deposited into the
bonding fund and then ultimately
making their way into the
severance tax permanent fund.
So, the permanent fund was
established in 1973 and the
intent was to save uh any
severance taxes that were not
used for bonding and to invest
them into a fund.
So the severance tax itself is
one of 3 production taxes that
we have in the state, the other
two are the school tax and the
conservation tax, but the
severance tax uh is uh levied on
oil, natural gas predominantly,
but also other natural resources
including copper, potash, etc.
and it is uh levied on these
resources as they are severed
and sold from the lands in New
Mexico, and it's for all lands
both state.
And federal.
So the mechanics of how it works
is the severance tax revenue is
collected, then it first gets
deposited into the bonding fund.
And there it is used to either
issue new debt or to service
existing debt.
And by law, there's some
limitations on exactly how much
of that severance tax revenue
can be used for bonding. So the
first limitation says you have
to look at the current or prior
year revenue, and then it's
limited to whichever is the
lesser of the two. So if, say
for example this year if um
production is up or prices are
up, and there's expected to be
more revenue collected this year
than there was last year. Then
the law says only look at last.
year's revenue and that's what
we're going to bond against. So
any difference in that lesser of
would be something that would be
extra revenue that could end up
being deposited into the
permanent fund. But then of the
revenue, either that lesser of
current or prior of that amount,
the law also says there's a
certain percentage of that that
can be used for bonding and then
the rest must be deposited into
the severance tax fund. Now,
back when this fund was created,
so pre-1999, that limitation
was 50%. So half of all
severance tax revenue would go
into the permanent fund, half of
the, the severance tax revenue
could be used for capital outlay
projects. Now, over time, as
more funding was needed for
capital outlay projects, there
were changes to that statute
which then increased the
percentages of how much
severance tax revenue could be
used for bonding. At one point,
it reached as high as 95% in
2005. So at that point, only 5.
of revenue could be deposited
into the severance tax fund.
Most of it was being used for
bonding. Now, there was some
restructuring done in 2015 to
start bringing those percentages
for bonding back down. And
that's where we are today.
That's been fully phased in and
so now the amount that's
reserved for bonding is 86.2%.
The remaining 13.8% is what is
deposited into the severance tax
permanent fund. And so, uh, the
mechanics again, basically
twice a year in June and
December, whatever money wasn't
used for bonding or debt service
gets swept from the bonding fund
and then transferred over to the
severance tax permanent fund.
Now, uh, there were also some
additional uh mechanisms that
were put in place by the
legislature in, I believe, 2019
and 2023, which said set minimum
amounts of how much needs to be
sent from the bonding fund to
the severance tax permanent fund
as a way of codifying your debt
service savings from using cash
funding for capital outlay
projects. So in 2019 and in
2023, and also again in
2024, the legislature decided to
use its general fund excess
revenue for capital outlay
projects instead of bonding. So
the way that you codify those
debt service savings in statute
is to say the amount of money
that would have been spent on
debt service payments is instead
now going to be directed into
the permanent fund over the
course of 10 years. But to keep
in mind that still comes out of
the same pot of money as in it
still comes out of the severance
tax revenue, but essentially
It's a minimum that says at
least this much severance tax
revenue has to be deposited and
then it's gonna look at all the
regular formulas for how the
bonding fund can issue new debt
service and any remainders that
are not used for debt service is
then going to be deposited into
the permanent fund.
So on page 4, we can look at
what those inflows historically
have actually looked like. And
you can see a really big
difference in between the last
two years and the prior 20
years. So for the 20 years prior
to 2021, the entire amount
collectively that was deposited
into this bond was about $1
billion. But then if you look at
2022 and 2023, you see something
completely unprecedented
happening. And it has to do with
the spike in
Oil and natural gas prices that
occurred following the war in
Ukraine that really jumped up uh
the amount of severance tax
revenue that was being collected
overall. So if you look at this
chart sort of in the middle at
the top on the natural gas, oil
and natural gas taxable values
by fiscal year. You can see that
from FY 21 to FY 22, the taxable
value of oil and gas, so between
production increasing and prices
spiking, the taxable value
of oil and gas more than
doubled, but then that statutory
limitation that says
What you can use for debt
service is limited to the lesser
of prior or current year, that
means you are limited to how
much money was collected in a
very low collection here.
But a ton of revenue came in
from that spike in prices.
So all that additional revenue
couldn't be used by law for
bonding capacity. It had instead
to be swept as a windfall into
the permanent fund. And so
that's where in 2022 $1.6
billion was deposited just from
that mechanism of how the law
limits the revenue. So it really
is an example of windfall
revenue being captured for
permanent fund savings, which in
essence is the, the purpose of
the design for saying the
lesser.
Current or prior fiscal year.
It's to make sure that windfalls
are not accounted in future debt
service.
And then a similar thing
happened again in FY 23, where
there was another big increase
in the taxable value of oil and
gas.
And therefore, that limitation
on lesser of current or prior
meant another big deposit into
the fund. $1.5 billion was
deposited in 2023. Now that
number does include the $475
million appropriation that this
legislature made to the
permanent fund, uh, in 2023 is a
way for additional savings. So
that combined with the uh debt
service limitation. So two big
deposits in those two years, but
they're really
anomalies, so they were a
function more or less of the way
that that statutory formula
works and is unlikely to result
unless there's again really big
unexpected price increases,
you're unlikely to get those
kind of windfall distributions
into the permanent fund from
this mechanism, but we'll talk a
little bit in a few minutes
about different mechanisms that
this legislature has passed for
the permanent fund to get
different sources.
Of inflows, and I'll go over
that uh later on in the
presentation.
But turning to page 5,
This slide describes how the
severance tax fund distributes
revenue into the general fund.
So originally, uh, only
investment earnings were
deposited into the general fund,
but that changed in 1996 when
there was a constitutional
amendment, so now it's 4.7% of a
rolling 5-year average that gets
deposited directly into the
general fund that is unearmarked
revenue so it supports state
budgets broadly and not for any
specific.
purpose.
And then you'll notice too that
because it's based on the
rolling.
Prior 5 calendar years for the
next fiscal year distribution,
what that ends up doing is for
your FY 25 distribution you can
see on the graphic here, it's
determined by the rolling
averages between 2019 and 2023.
That's actually an important
function of how this formula
works because it means going
into the legislative session
that determines the FY 25
budget, which was January 2024.
You already know exactly what
the distribution from the
permanent fund is going to be,
which means the revenue is or
the um
Budgeting from this permanent
fund is based on actuals and not
on estimates. So unlike other
sources of revenue where it's,
say for general fund, personal
income taxes or for oil and gas
revenues, whatever the budget's
built on for the upcoming fiscal
year is based on some estimated
amount that we think's gonna
come into the state. But for
your permanent fund
distributions, you know exactly
what that's going to be, so it
makes it much more reliable in
many ways than other sources of
general fund dollars.
Turning to page 6.
There's another important
function that this distribution
mechanism, this formula for how
it sends money to the general
fund, uh, works, and that is it
reduces the volatility that you
see in any individual given year
and where you can really see
that show up in a historical
example is through the great
financial crisis. So in 2008,
the value of the permanent fund
itself actually lost 32% in one
year.
But you'll notice that in that
year, so in FYO8, the
distribution from the that
permanent fund actually grew by
about 3.5%. And then the
following year, it actually grew
by 8% and only in the years
after the great financial
crisis, when your other sources
of general fund revenue started
to recover, was that impact of
that big dip in the value of the
severance tax permanent fund. It
was smoothed and spread out over
later.
fiscal years.
And so what you have is during
the peak of a crisis,
particularly a crisis in
financial markets, you're not
getting the immediate one year
volatility that the fund has.
Flowing through to the
distribution, so your
distributions are more stable,
and that helps the general fund
overall when other sources of
revenue might be experiencing
big declines that your permanent
fund revenues are either
remaining relatively stable or
in this case in the financial
crisis, even increased during
that time.
And there was actually a study
that LFC has put out in 2019 and
then updated again in 2024, that
shows that permanent fund
distributions on an annual basis
are among the most stable or
least volatile revenues that the
general fund has. On page 7,
We're gonna look at the
severance tax performance or the
severance tax permanent fund
performance. One way to look at
that is in relation to the land
grant permanent fund. This is a
question that we get relatively
often.
In terms of growth of the land
grant fund versus growth of the
severance tax fund and why did
they look so different and you
can tell on this chart that the
land grant permanent fund has
grown more significantly over
the last 30 years than that of
the severance tax fund. So one
of the immediate questions is
why is that the case?
And although both funds have
benefited from strong financial
markets after the great
financial crisis and large
inflows, uh, particularly for
the land grant fund.
Um,
There's some key differences uh
in between these two. And
despite the land grant fund
having a larger spending policy,
so you're as you're aware, the
land grant permanent fund has,
uh, on average the 6.1%
distribution from the total fund
value, whereas the severance tax
fund distributes 4.7%. But even
though the land grant
distributes more as a percentage
of its value, it's grown faster,
and that's for two reasons. The
biggest reason
is inflows. The Lagram Permanent
Fund receives more money
annually than the severance tax
fund, and I'll show you a chart
that uh illustrates those two.
And then there's also a
difference in investment. So the
land grant permanent funds asset
allocation does not require any
particular investments in New
Mexico economically targeted
investments, whereas the
severance tax fund does allow
for that, and there's a
performance difference and we'll
walk through that too in the
next couple of slides.
So first on the next slide,
On page 8.
This illustrates the differences
in those inflows historically.
So this is one if not the
primary reason why the land
grant fund has grown at a much
faster rate over time than the
severance tax bond. And you can
see in this uh roughly 20 year
history, just the the difference
in size and scale between what
gets deposited each year into
the land grant fund versus what
has been historically deposited
into the severance tax fund.
And so that's allowed it to grow
at a much faster pace, but this
trend may actually be changing
with some of the new um
legislative changes that you all
have made to send additional
money into the severance tax
permanent fund, we might, um,
moving forward, be able to see a
much similar, a more similar
rate of growth than we have in
the past. And I'll go over that
in a few minutes.
Next on page 9, we have uh the
overview of the economically
targeted investment. So this is
the 2nd reason why the severance
tax bond has historically
performed differently than the
land grant permanent fund.
So there are different statutes
that allow for severance tax
fund dollars to be used to
stimulate the economy or uh
produce job creation or business
growth in the state. So one of
those is the New Mexico Small
Business Investment Corporation.
This is actually a requirement
in statute that says 2% of the
value of that fund has to be
invested in the SBIC. Now, these
are uh basically your meat and
potatoes.
Economic development here, it's
your small business loans, so we
do, we, um, issue those loans
via loan partners and uh they
serve hundreds of businesses
across the state, uh, with very
low cost loans uh for their uh
business startup.
Uh, the next, uh,
ETI that we have is the small
business recovery and Stimulus
Act. This was passed after the
pandemic in 2021 or in 2020 and
updated in 2021. It basically
allowed for up to $5000 million
from the severance tax fund, uh,
to be issued to small business
law or in small business loans
at a very, very low interest
rate. Now, NMFA actually
administers this program for us
and even though up to 500
million was allowed the
Actual amount that was um issued
was roughly 160 million is what
ended up actually being deployed
out of those dollars, um.
Based on the the demand from
businesses seeking to apply for
these loans after the pandemic.
And then on page 10, we have the
3rd economically targeted
investment. And this is the
largest one out of the severance
tax permanent fund. It's the New
Mexico private equity program.
So statute allows for up to 11%
of the severance tax fund to be
allocated to New Mexico private
equity, uh, business
investments. Now, right now, we
have a, a 9% target in our asset
allocation, though we are
allowed by statute for up to
11%.
And this is uh one of several
programs that actually exist in
the state to help New Mexico
startup companies. So there's
two other programs that are
listed here on this slide. One
is NMFA's venture capital
program. There was $500 million
appropriation to NMFA to help
with impact investments, um, and
focusing on serving serving uh
underrepresented and minority uh
focused venture capital funds.
And then there's also the uh
economic development departments
and the uh state small business
credit initiative, so SSBCI that
was federal dollars about 74
million both in equity and debt,
and that was spread out over
several years, and this program
is run in collaboration uh by
NMFA with EDD and it also has
less of a focus on financial
returns and more of a focus on
economic development.
Now, we coordinate with both
NMFA and EDD on these
investments, um, and able to
share our sort of lessons
learned along the way.
And they go a really long way in
diversifying New Mexico's
economy, but because it focuses
more on those um
Uh, on economic development than
on returns, you notice a big
difference in terms of
investment performance where,
say, if those dollars were
invested in our national private
equity program, which has seen a
12.2% investment return uh since
inception, those returns are
much lower in these New Mexico
ETIs and you see that show up in
the performance difference
between land grant and severance
on the next page.
So
On, say for example, the 10-year
performance difference on page
11.
Uh,
Land grant permanent fund
returned 66.88% net of fees,
whereas the severance tax
permanent fund returned 5.78%
net of fees, so that's almost a
full percentage point
difference. And you'll also
notice the difference show up in
terms of ranking among peers.
They're in the the bottom corner
of that chart.
And so what this really
highlights is the trade-off
that's made when the permanent
fund is directed to make these
economically targeted
investments. And this
performance difference is not
just the lower return that is
experienced through the ETIs
that are invested in, but also
the opportunity cost of
allocating those dollars to
higher returning assets.
And one of the reasons that the
legislature has chosen this
trade-off really is the goal of
helping to diversify New
Mexico's economy. And we can see
on the next slide how the New
Mexico private equity program is
attempting to do that.
So this program has actually
been in existence through since
about the 1990s, and its
structure has evolved over time.
The the core goal is laid out
here in law. You can see that
section 727 514.
It's uh in the findings and
purpose, were really the goal of
this program is technology
transfer and commercialization
from the national labs.
So we've really worked over time
to refine how we approach this
New Mexico program, but
retaining this mandate for uh
tech transfer and
commercialization that's in law.
And basically what that means is
we're looking to focus on New
Mexico's strengths, specifically
hard science and frontier
technologies, and that's um
basically,
Making sure that technologies
that our scientists are pursuing
here at Sandia, Los Alamos, UNM
and the other universities, um,
are
Uh
Focused on through this program.
Uh, that includes things like
quantum sciences, next
generation computing, advanced
manufacturing, climate tech,
etc.
Um, and we're really looking to
match our New Mexico scientists
and our founders with
entrepreneurs in this space,
that can really help them pursue
successful startups, uh, as they
move their technologies, say,
out of the lab and then be able
to commercialize those um
And
Moving forward. Excuse me.
Uh, now moving forward to page
13, you can see different
commitments that the council has
made.
Over the last two years, really
looking to expand the number of
VCs, um, uh, that are looking at
deals in New Mexico. So we've
made commitments of over 660
million over the last few years
into 18 different venture
capital funds. Many but not all
of them are from out of state,
but this is a way to bring
national dollars into the state
and focus on building out
companies here in New Mexico.
So next on page 14.
Looking at these two different
goals for the severance tax
permanent fund. One, again, that
economic diversification which
we're hoping to achieve through
these economically targeted
investments. Um, but the other
is, is revenue replacement, and
I really want to focus on just
for a minute on the difference
between these two things. So
when we talk about economic
diversification in the state or
the need for economic
diversification.
One of the things you could look
at is just the hard figures on
what are we diversifying away
from. And usually when we mean
economic diversification, we
mean let's diversify away from
oil and gas. We need to get the
state less dependent on oil and
gas, which looking at the
economy, the mining industry
itself is less than 3% of total
employment in the state. And
it's about 10% of New Mexico's
GDP, which means 90%
50% of New Mexico's GDP is
generated from something other
than oil and gas. So what does
this tell us? Well, it tells us
that economic diversification
alone can't necessarily solve
this issue of overdependence. So
what are we talking about when
we say overdependence? What
we're really talking about is
revenue, and you can see here on
the chart on the right hand
side, general fund revenues
dependent on the oil and gas
industry, which as of the most
recent revenue estimate.
From the consensus revenue group
for FY 24 was over 35%.
And that is expected to come
down over time, but still well
over 30%.
So when you have an industry
that is less than 3% of your
state's employment, less than
about 10% of your state's GDP,
but more than 30% of your
general fund's revenue. What you
have is a revenue issue, and it
needs a revenue solution because
economic diversification alone
can't solve that problem. It
can't make up that gap by
itself.
And that's really where the
severance tax permanent fund
comes in, and you can see this
on page 15.
Senate Bill 26 really did a lot
to help address this revenue
problem, and that is capping the
amount of oil and gas related
revenues that the general fund
can receive and then sending
those for investment into the
severance tax fund, so you can
take those windfalls that you're
experiencing now. Invest them
for the future, redistribute
those dollars back to the state
later and be able to capitalize
on that over the longer term.
So ideally, when oil and gas
revenues start declining more
over time, your permanent fund
investments are growing over
time, so that they should help
offset each other either in
whole or in part, where you're
basically trading your more
volatile oil and gas revenues
today for your more stable
permanent fund distributions in
the future.
And it also serves a variety of
other really key benefits for
the general fund. One, just
reducing that volatility as
we've seen before, these
permanent fund distributions,
they vary less from year to
year.
So you have much more stable
sources of revenue into your
general fund. It also really
helps to simplify revenue
estimating. So if you look at
this chart here on the left-hand
side.
The variability from year to
year in oil and gas revenues
and, and I distinctly remember
being a a uh economist here for
you and on your consensus
revenue estimating group and the
challenges that are involved in
trying to predict how much oil
and gas revenue the state was
going to get before we started
to have these stabilizing
mechanisms in place. And I, I,
it is very much a challenge and
from one quarter to the next,
um, there could be big change
big swings in prices, and that
would change the outlook for
what could be budgeted in the
next fiscal year and then there
was
Uncertainty on whether or not
those dollars would actually
come into fruition from one year
to the next. But by introducing
these stabilizing mechanisms.
The amount that goes into the
general fund is much more
predictable, much more stable.
So you can see
Say from FY 24, which is where
the cap is, uh, the SB 26 says
the general fund can receive the
amount of oil and gas revenue
from school tax and federal
mineral leasing that it received
in FY 24. Anything above that is
either going to get distributed
to the permanent fund, the
severance tax permanent fund, or
distributed through another
stabilizing mechanism into the
Early Childhood fund. But either
way, the general funds going to
get what it got in FY 24, as
long as there's that much
revenue available.
And the current estimates from
your consensus estimating group
is that oil and gas total
revenues from those sources
should end up being much higher
than what was received in FY 24,
but that won't always be the
case.
There's an expectation that over
time, those revenues will start
to come down, but you don't want
to base your everyday budget,
your growing budget between now
and 20 years from now on
revenues that may not be there 2
years from now. So instead,
taking those excesses, saving
them, depositing and investing
them, and then redistributed
them back to yourself in that
future. So as oil and gas goes
down, those revenues go up.
And the predictability for the,
for the general fund is that as
long as the total amount
collected was more than what was
collected in FY 24. The general
fund knows exactly how much
money it's going to get. It is
much more predictable. Your
revenue estimators now have a
very easy time in predicting
what is going to be the oil and
gas distribution into the
general fund. It's essentially
as long as the estimate is that
more money is going to be
collected and what was collected
in FY 24, then the general fund
is going to get its FY 24.
Now what becomes more volatile
is what's going to be deposited
into the severance tax fund,
what's going to be deposited
into the early childhood fund,
but presumably you're taking
that volatility and you're
putting it into funds that can
deal with volatility, because
again, as we showed the
distribution mechanism says,
let's take the five-year average
and distribute a percentage of
that. So that year to year
volatility is smoothed out.
So you're taking volatility out
of the general fund and putting
it into a fund that has a
distribution mechanism intended
to deal with that.
And over time, that should help
stabilize oiling or stabilize
general fund revenues overall
and reduce that dependence on
oil and gas.
And seeing that reduced
dependence on page 16 here.
This is a slide that you all
song in in July, but it has been
updated from the most recent
long-term consensus revenue
estimate that was put out in
September, so earlier this
month.
Where the consensus estimating
group is looking at future
sources of general fund revenue.
And what does that look like
over time given the expectations
for oil and gas and for all
other revenue sources.
And what you see here is
actually really um amazing for
what the legislature has done.
And we all know this. It's
primarily severance taxes or
rents and royalties, so your oil
and gas, which is roughly 25%
just direct, uh, not including
its GRT impact, but you have
that sales taxes and income
taxes, and those are the three
legs of the general fund
revenue.
That makes up the
Overwhelming part of how the
general fund receives money.
Your permanent fund
distributions today make up
about 11% of total general fund
revenue for FY 24. Now fast
forward to FY 50. Under your
consensus group's baseline
estimate for
The trajectory of oil and
natural gas and the trajectory
of your other revenue sources.
Your permanent fund
distributions will now almost
entirely replace that oil and
gas leg. So you see the
permanent fund distributions,
32% of total revenues, whereas
your severance taxes and your
rents and royalties go down to
roughly 7% of your expected
future revenue.
could pay off in the future, and
a lot of that has to do with
these intentional decisions that
you all have made to sweep these
windfall oil and gas revenues
is page 17.
And this was put out by the
Department of Finance and
Administration, uh early in
earlier this month, or I guess
at this point, September earlier
last month.
Um, right after the consensus
revenue group and so it's
recognition that the permanent
funds are expected combined land
grant and severance together are
expected to surpass oil and gass
uh as the state's leading source
of revenue, uh, probably before
the end of 2040, so right now
their estimate says by 2039, the
total amount that you get from
your permanent fund
distributions should become one
of the state's leading sources
and out out outpacing that of
oil and gas.
So I'm gonna leave on that. I'm
happy to stand for any questions
and uh
Thank you for the discussion.
Thank you, uh, Don. Thank you
very, very much, um, very, uh.
Um, I just have a couple of
things before I go to the
members.
On page 3.
So, uh, what did we do prior to
1973 and 119.
Um, my, what was the other 1,
1999?
Prior to 1973.
That is a fantastic question,
Mr. Chair. Um,
under someone's pillow or.
So I would have to take a look
again at the statute.
My
If I'm not mistaken,
I
I think the severance taxes.
We just went into the general
fund?
OK, yeah.
So the, the severance tax that
was collected instead of being
set aside for bonding, I think
it just went into the severance,
uh, into the general fund. So
let me clarify that, so please
don't hold me to it.
Uh, very well, and then the next
part that I was gonna ask you is
um
Uh, this is a fantastic
presentation, really, really
good.
It uh
Um
Going through
Every page.
You know, it was very
interesting, very nice thing.
The part that I struggle with is
um.
How do you plug in when you're
looking at um.
Um,
To stabilize.
How do you plug in?
How much we add per year on
recurring.
For the Mr. Chair, for the
general fund budget or for the
revenue? I'm, I, I just want to
make sure I understand.
It's because you know we say we
will stabilize.
And, and in my part is like just
on your home.
He, you know, if you're
spending.
So much and then you're spending
a little more next year and a
little bit more, you know, how
do you balance that to
stabilize.
Mr. Chair, I think that's a,
that's a great question. So one
of the ways that this helps to
stabilize is say, for example,
As long as the 5-year average of
say your permanent fund revenues
is growing, then you should get
some pretty stable increases
from your permanent fund
distributions and in theory, if
your economy is growing as well,
you should get some pretty
stable increases from your
personal income taxes, some
pretty stable increases from
your, your GRT. And in theory,
you could say those stable,
reliable increases, so the
amount by which your economy is
growing and the melt by which
these investments are able to
reliably increase.
Each year, that gives you over
time, I think historically
average growth has been in
revenues, 4%, 5%, but you've had
these very recent years in which
growth from one year to the next
has been 20%.
I wouldn't call that stable in
the sense that you could expect
20% growth in your revenues
every single year over the long
term or on an annualized basis.
So I would think your stable
budget growth along with your
would match your stable revenue
growth in the sense of over the
long term,
How much would you expect
annualized growth to average,
and the, the really large double
digit increases that have been
seen recently are probably not
sustainable in the sense that
you wouldn't expect those all
the time because your economy
isn't gonna grow most likely by
20% each year, what's actually
been growing is spikes in say
commodity prices that have
helped to increase these, these
different sources. So I think in
terms of the stabilization, it's
looking at what is the long-term
Growth that you can expect to
sustain from your revenue over
time, and then translating that
sustainable revenue growth into
a comparable budget growth. I
hope that answers your question,
Mr. Chair.
Yes, so, you know, it does so,
but, uh, let me just give you
one example that what I see.
Yes, uh, it doesn't matter how
much we put aside.
But when we have, and I'm not
saying that the need is not
there, but I'm saying like uh
with education K-12.
We went like from 2.3 to 4.7
billion.
That is a lot of money.
You know, and what would I do in
5 years if uh.
Revenue part is not growing.
You know, you will just swallow
it up, you know, it would just
uh
And the worst thing that you
want to do is to take back.
It's very
Hard.
But just a thought in my part
that, you know, looking at it.
Mm
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um.
It's so good to see you, Don. I
miss you on our side finance for
it, but this uh.
This just goes back to all the
work that you did even then for
the state. So I want to say how
lucky we are to have you even um
right now what you're doing.
So I'm looking back at the
graph.
And it, it looks familiar on
page.
15
And you're looking at the
distribution of oil and gas, um,
and a little bit about what,
what, um, Senator, um,
Gonzalez is mentioning I
actually want to say Senate Bill
26. Thank you, Senator, for that
bill. That, that has just
changed everything. It's, it's,
this is a game changer really
um.
But as this grows, um,
For the foreseeable future.
Oil and gas revenues are going
to be stable.
From what I understand and from
what I, what I see and from the
market.
So that means that what we've
done with Senate Bill 26 and um
Means that we're gonna have
growth there as well, and
So, what do you, what do you see
in the future for us to develop
out of the, the growth of, of
this fund and in I guess
including with the severance tax
as well, I mean, what do you see
as we, as this grows out because
I know we have, we have to take
into account with the ETA in
place and how we're trying to
diversify and move away from oil
and gas and all those wonderful
things that we're trying to do,
but
We have solved the problem here,
but we have a great problem
because I think this is just
this one's gonna continue to
grow and it was on the
forethought of that oil and gas
revenues are gonna, they're
volatile and they're going to be
going up and down and that sort
of thing, but what we know now
is that they're going to be
stable.
So, can you maybe give us a
little bit of forecast about
that and where the future is for
this, I think we're gonna have a
wonderful problem with this, but
we're gonna have increases. Can
you talk about that, man, Mr.
Chair.
So, Mr. Chair, Representative
Lujan, um, it's very nice to see
you as well. Um, and there's a
couple of things that I would
like to respond to for, for what
you said, one of which is
The baseline forecast that from
your consensus group, from us,
from a variety of other energy
uh analysts is you're right that
that we should in theory, from
at least from the Permian Basin,
be able to see continued growth
probably through the end of the
decade, and then sort of more
gradual declines and you
actually see that on this chart
here on page 15, where if you're
looking at the, the overall
chart, the, the amount of all
these blocks together, you see
that still continued increase.
There's one thing that I would
point out for this again in
terms of that volatility of
energy markets is this is not a
guarantee. And what I mean by
that is if for some reason
something happens, a brand new
technology is invented next
year. Uh, there's another, uh,
uh.
It
A recession or some sort of
pandemic, like not a pandemic,
but something that happens that
that reduces demand overall.
Like there's a number of things
that could happen that can
change this outlook for oil and
gas on a dime, really, and that
could end up changing that
future trajectory. And so one of
the things to think about is, is
this goes a long way and it has
the potential to solve the
problem, but it's not
guaranteed. And what I mean by
that
if there is a big decline in
demand in the future either some
new technology or a big price
drop or something like that. If
you don't end up getting
revenues that are more than the
revenue you've got in FY 24,
then nothing gets deposited from
this mechanism into the
severance tax fund.
Because you, it's only
depositing the excess and we
expect there to be excess and it
has the potential to solve that,
but it's not guaranteed. And I
think that kind of gets to your
point in terms of this.
We're gonna be seeing a lot of
increases, this outlook, um, is
very fortunate for us, but it's,
it's not set in stone, so it's
one of those things to keep in
mind, sort of maybe going back
to um the chair's point in terms
of stable and reliable budget
increases because this is a way
to um
Potentially solve that. It's got
a lot of um of promise, I think,
um.
But no future is guaranteed. And
with these, with these increases
from the oil and gas by, by not
relying on those in the budget
and allowing those to come
through back to the general fund
and sort of
A more stabilized way. You can
really focus on that long-term
outlook of of building your
budgets, building your programs
in ways that are more reliable
and that the state doesn't later
have to claw those things back,
and I think that's the more
important part is reliability of
the programs and the services
that we provide to New Mexicans,
and we want to make sure that,
that everyone in the state can
rely on those, um, and so these,
these permanent fund
distributions takes away
Of that volatility gives us
promise and hope for, for.
relying less on oil and gas in
the future. Um, but I just want
to caution that that no future
is guaranteed. I appreciate
that, and that's something we
all, we're always cautioned with
as we're forming our budget.
But is there, is there a point
when we can rely on, you know,
with, with these windfalls at
What year, when if we don't see
that volatility and we're
blessed without having to deal
with that, at what point then
this um becomes our um
Source of of of revenues for the
state that we continuously rely
on.
Mr. Chair, Representative Lujan,
um, one of the interesting
things if you dig into the
detail of the, the consensus
forecast.
Groups long term outlook, both
in all of their scenarios, is
that because oil and gas
revenues are expected to decline
in the future, sort of
regardless of the scenario, the
timing changes, but um they
The the story is sort of
similar.
In each of those scenarios where
oil and gas revenues decline.
And
Regardless, you only have so
much of a pie, right? And so
those pieces of the pie, your
permanent funds, pieces of the
pie will continue to get larger
and larger compared to the oil
and gas pieces of the pie, which
will get smaller and smaller as
those revenues decline. And so
that does mean that these
permanent fund distributions,
the state's going to be relying
on them more in the future,
regardless of how much money is
put into those funds. The
difference is gonna be how big
are those? Were they able to
talk
Totally offset the, the oil and
gas revenues or were they not?
Because you're going to be
relying on them more.
Either way, but the decisions
you've made now.
Improves the the potential
outlook for for how well those
two can offset the other and the
size of those distributions.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you.
That means we still have some
adjustments and some things to
look at. Thank you.
Well, thank you. um.
No, uh, Borrego.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Um, thank you. Um, I was just
thinking about how old you were
when the chair asked about that
question.
Um, so I was just Googling to
see how many barrels of oil, the
United States provides right
now, uh, 14 billion837,639.
510.
Um,
Barrels per day and that's
Right now,
And it shows us as for the
United States as being the
number one provider of oil in
the world.
And I'm listening to your
discussion about decline and,
you know, diversification and so
on.
And I just had a couple of
questions, um, Mr. Chair, and
the first one is
Um, and I know you don't have a
a looking glass or a magic.
You know, ball.
But
If
We were to go into war.
Um, in a severe war. I mean
we're already in a bad war, but
A couple of wars that we're
already in, but if, if this were
to escalate.
Um,
Wouldn't the production of oil
in the United States actually go
increase?
Mr. Chair, Representative
Boriego, that is possible. It's
also possible that in the event
of say, oh a war-related supply
disruptions, you'd have a huge
increase in the price. So even
if production didn't increase,
the price would, and therefore
revenues from those sources
would. Um, so you can get a few
different effects. And then
there's also the, the production
from the US overall versus
production.
From different basins and
specifically in New Mexico, and
the Permian Basin um has had the
fortune of being able to, to
grow and adjust pretty quickly
to different changes in the, the
energy environment, um, but as
that basin matures, it is
possible that production
increases could come from other
basins and not necessarily
From ours, although, uh, I would
expect at least in the near
future, if, if such a thing
happens, right now, the, the
Permian Basin is still pretty
nimble and able to respond to
increases and it's done a, a
fairly good job in increasing
that production, um, and with
higher prices, maybe that would
uh incentivize more production.
The only thing that I would
caution against is a lot of our
producers, um,
Not just hours for the Permian,
but producers overall.
There's been a bigger focus on
return on investments, stable,
sustainable growth, and
inventory management,
particularly in the Permian as
the basin matures, and that
inventory management means there
isn't necessarily an incentive
from producers to rapidly
increase production as opposed
to um
Having a more stable business
plan for smaller production
increases. Um, but
Dire times call for for
different responses. And
Thank you for that answer. I
know that's a tough question,
but, um, and Mr. Chair, um, so,
I'm just thinking in terms of
the state of New Mexico wanting
to diversify into more, you
know, energy efficient forms of
energy and so on. Um.
And in your discipline, I guess,
and I'm sure you guys talk about
this a lot, but
How do you, I mean, over time,
like how many years do you think
we would have to diversify so
much that we would be
At a different level in terms of
oil and gas and
And cleaner, more efficient
fuels. I mean, how many years
are you guys projecting out?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Borigo.
I would say that from the
forecasts that we follow.
They're all over the place. Uh,
we actually have a presentation
that that we've put together for
our council that shows demand
for oil and gas, world demand
for oil and gas over the next 10
years from, I think, 12
different um sources of
forecasts, the international um
Energy Administration, OPEC, JP
Morgan, uh, Goldman Sachs,
different banks, different
financial analysts, different
energy market analysts and where
they are.
And the only thing that they can
agree on is that they think
demand is going to decline
sometime in the next decade, but
they very wildly in terms of
size and uh how rapid that is.
And so for us, what we try to do
is take, say, the baseline
forecast from our group, we use
Rad Energy and Oxford Economics
is our baseline uh energy
forecasters, and we use that as
our base assumption, um, but
We scenario plan because the
truth is no one really knows how
long that's going to take, um,
and there's so many factors that
are involved technologically,
um, and factors outside of just
developed countries, but also
for for emerging countries as
well and their demands on energy
and where that those sources
come from, that I'm actually,
we're, we're hesitant to even
put out a forecast that says
this is how we think it's going
to happen. The way we do it.
Similar to what your consensus
estimating group does is say,
this is our baseline forecast
based on the information that we
have and the energy forecasters
that we rely on today, but
because we know the future is
uncertain, we're gonna plan for
a variety of different scenarios
as well. And I, I really
appreciate that, Mr. Chair. I, I
appreciate your honesty because
I know that, um, you know,
having served on the para board
in the past and listening to
actuarials, there's no way to
forecast.
Yes that accurately, Mr. Chair,
um, and, you know, I'm glad
also, Mr. Chair, that she
mentioned uh emerging markets
because that's probably not
shown on the, on the graphs that
I was just looking at. Um, and I
know that, you know, people are
looking at oil and gas in those
emerging markets right now as we
speak.
Um, so I just, you know, as we
talk and we move forward as a
legislature, it's really
important that we think about
all of these factors that are
influencing.
You know how we're dealing with
oil and gas and how we're um
trying to
Transition also to emerging or
um clean energy and fuels. I
think it's really important that
we keep in mind in the back of
our mind, Mr. Chair, that
Um,
You know, it could be anywhere
from 2 years to 50 years. I mean
just depending on the economics
of the world. So I think that
those are just important points
that we need to, to be
considering as we're making our,
our decisions and, and I'm glad
that New Mexico is, is becoming
a leader in clean energy. I
think it's really important that
we are, but I think that we need
to also, Mr. Chair, consider the
balance that we need to be
thinking of as we kind of go
in the next, you know.
In our next session or our next
10 sessions or however long, um,
because these, all of these
things are gonna influence and,
and that's what I'm hearing you
say. So it's sort of confirming
my thought, but thank you for
that, Mr. Chair. I appreciate
it.
Very well, thank you, uh,
Representative Rim.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, let's
go to page 4 1st.
And on the column all the way
down it.
At the bottom on the right.
Do you have a forecast for 2024?
Uh, Mr. Chair, Representative
Rehm.
Right now our forecast for 2024
is actually relatively low for
two reasons. One, we get
distributions twice a year, June
and December. So in June, the
permanent fund got no
distribution because the entire
balance of the bonding fund was
swept to create the new capital
development and reserve Fund. So
nothing was distributed to the
permanent fund then.
Now for December, we're
expecting the statutory minimum,
which is 116 million. So again,
when I was discussing the
codification of debt service
savings, it says there's a
minimum amount that has to be
distributed to the permanent
fund. A distribution occurs in
December and it's uh the 2019
amount was about 24 million. The
2023 amount was 92 million. So
together we're expecting that
116. Now,
What we get for
FY 2 FY 25.
I think the
Board of Finance in their
estimate for FY 25, so it's
gonna span 2024 for us was about
500 million I'd have to double
check their estimate. Some of
that amount that we would expect
for June for FY 25 could end up
being pulled in December based
on the mechanic of it, so at the
end of the year, the Board of
Finance says, how much are we,
do we need to issue supplemental
STBs right now, how much is in
the bonding fund, what was
collected as of the day were.
Doing this, so it's possible
that we may get some of that
distribution pulled in, but
otherwise we're only expecting
for 2024, the minimum, which is
the 116 million. Now that's
different from 2025 when Senate
Bill 26 finally kicks in, uh, in
2025, we're expecting well over
$1 billion to be deposited into
that fund.
And uh Mr. Chairman and Ms.
Iglesias, let's go to
60
So when we look at
The pie chart on the left.
And we look at the severance
rent royalty is 24%.
And we're, we're really talking
about oil and gas, you know.
So if we go up to the permanent
fund distribution.
We really need to take a slice
of that pie.
For oil and gas.
Correct.
Mr. Chair, Representative Rehm,
I, I definitely understand your
point. If we were looking at
just how much of general fund
revenues is attributable to oil
and gas, then yes, you would
include permanent funds because
all of those monies come from
oil and gas. You'd include a
slice of the sales taxes because
a lot of GRT comes from oil and
gas, and you would include the
severance taxes, rents, and
royalties because that's
obviously very directly oil and
gas. So what this is doing is
just looking at the source.
Of the type or the funding type
and not necessarily the fact of
whether it's oil and gas
related.
And Mr. Chairman, if we looked
at
The total contribution of oil
and gas.
To the general fund, it would be
equal to what percentage? Mr.
Chair, Representative Rehm. So
if you look on page.
We were just on it.
I think it's the page before
this one.
Um,
Or maybe the second. There we
go, page 14.
So this is, it's well over, I
think it's 36% is estimated for
FY 25. Now this percentage
includes, you'll notice on the
footnote here, this is the
severance taxes, the royalties,
the percentage of GRT that's
attributable to oil and gas, and
some of personal income taxes
attributable to oil and gas. So
that's 36% if you were to
include the permanent fund
distributions as oil and gas
contributions. It
would be well over 40%. Um, so
it, it, it depends on how you
slice it to look at it, but much
higher than that, what that pie
chart is showing cause that pie
chart is just the direct
severance tax and royalty.
And Mr. Chairman, and thank you
for that. I, I think that, you
know, one thing we don't look at
holistically.
Of how dependent we are on oil
and gas.
Because
While you're doing income taxes
down there. I don't know, does
that include corporate income
tax?
Mr. Chair, Representative Rehm,
so this chart from your
consensus estimating group only
includes personal income tax, so
you're right, there's even more
from corporate income tax if you
were to include that. It's a
little harder to estimate, which
is why I think they don't have
it in the chart, but yes.
And um, Mr. Chairman, the last
one there, it's been several
years ago.
There was a lobbyist who was uh
talking to me and uh the
lobbyist was telling me if we
went
Back to uranium mining.
Like we were in the 60s now.
With the current rules, OK, so
that, you know, we had bad
actors at that time.
Um,
Apparently the severance tax on
uranium is exceptionally high.
And uh the revenue estimates, I
think was $30 billion.
That they were saying do you
have any idea what it would be
or what the revenues.
From uranium. I know that
there's some discussion right
now.
I think the Forest Service has
issued a permit out by grants.
And I'm just wondering if we,
you know, in mining is totally
changed. I'm not advocating the
mining of the 60s.
Mr. Chair Representative Rehm, I
don't have an estimate on that,
but um I did make myself a note
of the, of the tax rates. So
the, the severance tax rate on
uranium is 3.5%, which is on par
with the severance tax rate of
oil and natural gas, which is
3.75. Um, but you're right in
that say copper is 0.5%. The,
the severance tax on uh potash
is 2.5%. So the, the severance
tax on uh ur
Uranium is, is higher than other
natural resources and on par
with that of oil and gas. I
don't have a sense right now of
the size and scale of that
revenue, but it's definitely
something for us to pay
attention to in the future
because the severance tax
revenue is just whatever the
severance tax is levied on right
now that's predominantly oil and
gas, but that doesn't
necessarily mean that that would
always be the case.
And thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Thank you, representative, uh,
vice chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and it's
very nice to see you, Don.
Congratulations.
Um, so one of my most favorite
things.
About
Or um investment council.
And thank you for your, uh,
before I go into that, uh, your,
your, uh, breakdown, an
explanation on the funds and the
distribution.
But my most favorite is the
investment part of it, um.
What you do.
And
It is because
When I look at an investment,
it's a return for the long
investing for the long term.
Um, return, as well as the
sustainability um of our state
of economy.
And so what we do in our
decisions, Mr. Chair, based on
that is incredibly important.
And so the funds
And the movement towards the
creating of funds.
It's not just because we wanted
to throw out money.
To programs.
For whatever reason.
That it's because we understand
the nature of the funds, and
that
The funds are meant to grow.
And the best way they grow is
when we make um very informed.
Uh, educated.
Decisions about the investments
that we're making.
Because
We know that the highest
yielding
Investments in I mean that, uh,
yes.
based on highest yielding
interests, but we also have to
evaluate, Mr. Chair.
The history of those interests,
right.
And there's patterns and all
kinds of ways in which to
analyze that.
And um,
And I just love that part of it.
One of the reasons why I started
a
Uh, females for financial
freedom Investment club, many
moons ago, and um everybody
thought we were crazy.
Uh, young.
40-somethings that were had lost
their minds.
But
We were not investing for the
moment. We're now
I don't want to reveal my age,
but
Several generations later,
experiencing our return, which
was what it was meant to be in
our
Those years that we were going
to retire and have a return.
So it brings me to um
My first question.
And that is on page 12. I just
wanna make sure.
Um, that we all kind of
understand, um.
On page 12, you have
The council focusing on emerging
frontier technologies.
So
My question is,
Uh, what criteria or what do you
base your, um, determination.
Of these emerging, these being
the emerging um
Investments for the
How do we emerging frontier
technologies.
Mr. Chair, uh, Representative
Caballero, if you wouldn't mind,
I'm actually going to uh ask
Charlie to help answer this
question. He's very informed on
the New Mexico program and
should be able to provide some
context.
Mr. Chairman and uh
Representative, thank you for
the question. Um, so,
The severance tax fund, let me
give you a.
back just a bit.
It is unique among the funds
that we manage, which are now
12, and, and the focus of the
severance tax fund through the
legislative work.
Um, allows this the
Investment Council to make
economically targeted
investments. Um, the, the
largest
ETI that is out there is the New
Mexico private equity program.
That program was started back in
the early 90s, has gone through
various iterations over time.
And
Today, um, we have kind of gone
back to the roots of these types
of investments focusing on the
findings and purposes that you
see on 727, uh.
514, which is
New Mexico has these wonderful
Um,
Research laboratories, uh, the
national labs, they've got the
Air Force research, um, uh,
laboratory. You have UNM, you
have uh NMSU, New Mexico Tech.
We should take advantage of the
strengths we have.
Um, with the PhDs that are doing
this.
Very in-depth scientific work
and work to commercialize those
technologies.
So that has been the focus for
the last 2 years, um, more than
anything, and, and essentially,
you know, we have had challenges
with this program. I think
during the, the 2000 10s, uh,
during that decade we saw
overconcentration of
not enough company creation, um,
and that led to some, honestly,
when larger companies, larger
investments did not pan out.
That has led to
Less than hoped for returns.
What we are trying to do, um,
with these 18 fund commitments
that we've made since November
2022 is really focused on um
Getting more company creation.
Injecting expertise into the
ecosystem, um, matching
entrepreneurs with the
scientists that we have.
And um looking for better
outcomes than what we had seen
historically.
Uh, and so,
I think that is, is why we have
invested across so many
different funds, including some
that are based here or some that
make commitments to start up
offices in New Mexico.
And working with NMFA and their
program working with SSBCI and
EDD um and their program, uh, to
kind of
Create the best opportunity set
that we can. Now, we're taking a
big swing at this. This is $600
million in commitments, but we
feel very strongly that we've
chosen wisely that the council
has made good decisions.
And so, um, we will know better
in the coming years, whether
this was a, a, a strong and
well-founded, um, bet, if you
will.
Thank you for that response. So,
um,
How often will you evaluate? Oh,
constantly. I mean, we, we are
doing that, but understand.
Getting the the process rolling,
we are are picking the best.
Investment teams we can find,
um.
We have been helped by the fact
that we're so active when many
of our peers, 1 may not have.
Legislators that have created
programs like this in other
states, um, and so we also look
at what has worked elsewhere.
Utah is a very good example as
far as getting a uh venture
ecosystem going.
And we are modeling some of our
practices on that.
Um, there are other countries
that are have done well. Israel
is one. They have a very
Active venture system there, so
good, uh, in fact, that they no
longer have to fund it with
Additional dollars, it, it
became self-sustaining. Same
thing with Utah, and so I think
that's what we're trying to
create here and success breeds
success. So, you know, some of
the, the big
I headline type investments we
made in the early 2000s, Eclipse
aviation, um, Earthstone, other
companies that did not pan out.
Um, I think if Eclipse had
succeeded, I think we'd have a
different
Um, uh, environment today, we
still have a company that that
is active, that was a spin out
of Eclipse, but we are looking
for an adventure, you know,
you're gonna lose a lot of
companies, more than half of
the, of the, the investments
that are made, um, will fail.
But you're looking for the big
home run that will lead to
additional entrepreneurism in
the state. And so I think that
is what we've been
Focusing on, um, we are
assessing constantly as we build
out this portfolio, but we're
hoping to get as many, you know,
times at the plate that we can
to get that home run and by
hiring 18 very good venture
firms, uh, to pursue these.
Opportunities for us. We hope
that we're, we're creating an
environment that's conducive
with um
Startups doing well in New
Mexico.
Thank you. And so, on, on page
13 where you list um
The uh
commitments through the venture
funds.
Um,
We know that funds are rated and
ranked.
So do you have a um rating and
ranking. This Morningside
provide are they a rating of
this or how, who?
And each one of these, can you
give us how they're rated and
ranked according to the most
Um, what would you say?
Applicable prestigious, whatever
the terminology is system or
rating and ranking. That's a
good question. If we were
talking about public market
assets, so Morningstar rankings
are going to mostly regard um
public entities that are traded
on the stock market. These are
private entities, and so, um,
the investments they are making
are private, much of their,
their information is not out
there, um, for
Insistent marking evaluations,
and so a lot of times you don't
know until a couple years into
the fund how things are going,
um, initially, what they are
doing is making um early stage
investments, um, that's what you
end up with something called the
J curve, where initially you
have to spend the money to build
up the companies and then
hopefully they succeed and you
start making profits towards an
exit, but
Evaluating those, uh, there's
not a, unfortunately, a ranking
system. Um, so what we do is we
look at track records.
We look at the teams, we look at
the strategies that they have,
and we make decisions based on
that.
Um, certainly, when it comes to
venture, especially, um,
The differences, the deltas
between the top performers and
the bottom performers are very
significant.
We have unfortunately picked too
many bottom performers,
especially in the early days
where we had restrictions
around.
We can only invest with certain
companies if you bring uh uh a
full-time person to New Mexico.
Well, that resulted in adverse
selection, where we would only
get firms that would take
And of
Terms that didn't fit in the
venture world we have removed
some of those. Thank you, uh,
for kind of helping us fix that
statute in 2017, and that's
allowed us to to basically
increase the
The selections that the
opportunities that we have in
getting the top managers here to
the state to, to look at deals.
Thank you. It's, it's obviously
a big
Um, not concerned, but
Flagging that we keep a good
handle on that, um, so that we
don't repeat where we've been in
the past.
And we
Uh, I don't, yeah, it was part
of that leftover residual.
Um, terrible past, um, when I
came in, and so it was difficult
to try to correct all of that,
that I'm happy to have been part
of all of that. So, the final,
um, it's not necessarily a
question, but maybe an
observation on page 14. So there
was some discussion about um
The
Um,
Oil and gas.
Um, how do you refer, uh,
directly accounts for about 24%
of general fund revenue.
And more than 30% of the fund,
um, including the sales tax and
other revenue.
But you started with the mining
industry represents less than 3%
of total employment in the
state, and about 10% of New
Mexico's GDP.
Stand alone.
In comparison to that chart on
the left hand side.
It's
It's um what I don't even know
what word to use, but it's not
you, it's little you can't
compare.
Actually, you can't compare.
That's the best way to, to, to
state it. And so, um, but it's
also telling.
About our state of our economy.
That left column is very telling
about the state of our economy,
and it shows um
It gives at least from my
perspective, um, a good
perspective.
Of um
Of our strengths.
And weakness.
And so diversification is the
path to go, and, but we're
already quite diversified.
If we make that
If we don't look at that.
Dollar for dollar.
Comparison.
Um, and I, I want us to look at
that very carefully because that
addresses with um
was just answered.
Previously, and what why the
mechanisms that we have in
place.
Uh, in terms of the private
equity funds and investments.
And where to put.
Those
Where to put them in, to
strengthen what already our
strengths are.
Because we have a tremendous
amount of strength in our local
economies.
The local economies are what are
what is driving the majority of
that success on the left hand
column and are non-dependency on
oil and gas.
So I think it's a misnomer to to
even declare that we're
dependent on oil and gas, when
you look at that chart.
I think it's a strong, obviously
a strong source of revenue.
But it's also very volatile one,
and there's so many markets.
situations that could cause that
global.
Nationally and state that could
cause that to
Um,
think at any particular time,
which means that we have to
continue to strengthen the other
strengths.
And that's where I think we've
tried to to direct ourselves in
the last
years to kind of recover from
several major economic um
Buss, I guess.
That we've
Experienced as a state.
And so, but I also want us to
just really understand.
Um, how important that chart is.
In totality.
And so thank you for, for your
diligence in um
And breaking all this down for
us. This was extremely good for
us to use in our various
discussions and arguments pro
and con, in terms of where to
go. Thank you, Mr. Chairman.
Very well, thank you, and again,
thank you.
Very, very light.
Thank you, nice to see you
again.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and it's
nice to see you all again too.
Thank you, Chair, members, so
we're moving to our last one.
And uh
We are running behind, so.
Maybe when it comes to our
questions we can keep them a
little more.
Precise and
So,
Um,
percenters you want to come
forward?
We have our treasure, Ms.
Montoya.
And Vicky Hanks.
And Anna Murphy.
Overview analysis.
Of the funds managed by the
Office of the State treasurer.
afternoon and uh.
We are a little behind, but
sorry for that and your weight.
So please start whenever you're
ready.
Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman.
Members of the committee were
very happy to be with you all
today. Thank you so much for the
invitation. Um, we have a table
of contents, but before we get
started, I wanted to do a little
bit of introductions. So today
presenting will be Vicky and
Anna, our chief investment
officer and our portfolio
manager. Come on up right away.
It be get better. And then in
the room, we have our deputy
treasurer Janice Varela. We have
Christina Naya, who's the
special
Projects director and Christina
Pella, who is our programs and
outreach director, and then we
have my assistant Victor
Cornejo.
You'll see an organizational
chart we have probably a couple
of staff online um because they
had a meeting uh in the cash
management division with some of
the folks that were on boarding
a software system with, um, so I
wanted to start off on page 5.
Since balloon fiestas is coming
up this week, I thought it would
be a really nice idea to add in
our balloons and our culture
into this presentation.
Last time I saw you all, you
were talking to SIC and I think
the two pension funds and I
wanted to remind everyone I'm on
13 boards, councils, and
commissions, and they're all
listed on page 5, with how much
money more or less each one is
managing. So SIC, of course, you
just heard from the state
treasurers Investment Council is
now about 17 billion, uh, give
or take, ERB and Pera go between
17 and I think some of them are
hitting 18 billion, um,
depending on the day, retiree
healthcare 100 million.
MFA who does our housing and
other items, 10.3 billion and
then all the rest of them that
are a little bit smaller as far
as funds.
So, I wanted to put that in
perspective because we all do
things quite differently as far
as how we invest, um, so what
the state treasurer's office
manages is $17 billion in your
general fund core, your general
fund liquidity, the bond
proceeds, both taxable and
non-taxable, severance tax
bonding, and then what's most
important, I think, as it
relates to your local
communities is the local
government investment pool.
You're used to hearing only
about short term, but this year
we have
Um, partnered with the state
Investment Council in
collaboration with the
Department of Finance and
Administration, and we've opened
up a medium-term local
government investment pool that
is specifically and only at this
time for SIC and we're managing
about $1 billion for them.
Something that we don't usually
talk about, but I thought the
senator would love this one, the
chairman, is technology notes
and general obligation bonds,
and we'll give you a little bit
of data on that. It's almost
basically a free service that we
provide for our schools and for
others within our community for
them to be able to to do it at a
low cost, um.
Process and then uh pain agent
for outstanding bond issues and
collateral management.
So if you go to page 7, those
are the funds, um, and the pools
that are under the state
treasurer's office.
Uh, page 8 is assets under
management. What I wanted to
show in the next couple of
graphs is that we've had 168%
increase on the assets under
management. So if you go back to
2019 or 2020, you were looking
at less than $10 billion and
today we're almost double that
amount. Yeah, the staffing back
in 202,010, 2020 was a lot more
than what the staffing is today.
The trade volume has gone up
2000.
22%. I'm on page 9, fiscal year
24, of course, that's only
showing up to current, so we
haven't hit the rest of the year
and we've already um gone far
beyond the fiscal year 23.
Agency bank deposits is 49%
increase from the previous year,
and you'll notice that each year
that increase has um
dramatically shifted.
And as far as accounts payable
transactions, um, we have
dramatically increased on that
end as far as the number of
payments that are going in and
out, which matters because when
Vicky and Anna speak to you
today, which is gonna be a
really great treat is that with
all of the activity that goes on
in the treasure's office, it
requires a lot more activity on
the staff's responsibility for
internal controls, checks and
balances, and making sure that
we have enough cash flow for the
needs of
The state.
Um,
The investment objectives by
statute 61,010 NSA is always
safety first, then liquidity and
then yield. Um, and we live by
that standard, um, and the
allowable investments under that
particular statute, I say the
treasurer's office does the
vanilla in investing. So what
does that mean? It's treasuries,
agencies, mortgage backed
securities a couple of years ago
when I was Sandoval County
treasurer, we came to the
legislature um and ask for your
support in supras and commercial
paper A1P.
14 Class A counties and the
state treasurer's office and so
now we're able to, to invest in
those in both the treasurer's
office and in class A counties.
Um,
The New Mexico management
oversight. So the state
treasure's investment council is
uh makeup of 5 people. One is
appointed by the board of
Finance, one is appointed by the
treasurer, and then there's one
person from my office, um, so
the makeup is Steve Marcio, our
cash manager. He chairs the
council, and then we have
Treasurer Celia Aguoloo from the
city of Albuquerque. He's one of
the appointees, Treasurer Eric
Rodriguez, who is the Donana
County treasurer.
South and then the director of
the board of Finance, uh,
Director Ashley Leach.
And we meet on a monthly basis.
And then you also have um the
board of Finance, um, that I sit
on is also where we go uh to get
the investment policy approved,
which is what we are currently
updating as it relates to um
Uh, the, the, uh, state
treasure's investment policy.
Um, so at this point, I'd like
to um
Turn it over to Miss Vicky Hans.
She's been with the treasure's
office for quite some time. Many
of you have heard her speak, um,
but hadn't seen her in in
person. Um, she's the chief
investment officer. She is um.
They both are very amazing. I
like to brag about the fact that
they've had uh for the 19th
consecutive year, a AAA rating.
They are the only two women show
of investors in the state of New
Mexico and probably in the
country and um they do a lot
with a little, and they make it
work. And so, um,
Send it off to you. Thank you,
treasurer, uh, chairman, members
of the committee.
I'm on page 15.
Um,
With the market overview, so,
but I want you to take away from
this to the mic, OK. Is this, is
this better? OK. So on page 15,
what I want you to take away
from this slide basically is
that the state treasurer's
office is Fed Federal Reserve
obsessed. So what I mean by that
is that our management of the
funds is really based on the
overnight federal funds rate.
That the Federal Reserve
controls this overnight rate
because our assets are from 0 to
5 years with 5 years being our
maximum maturity, what really
controls um our strategy, um,
And how the market reacts to
certain economic data is um
really revolves around the
Federal Reserve and where that
overnight Fed funds rate is.
And um right now we are at the
point where we had gone through
a cycle.
Starting with the pandemic.
Where Fed funds rate had gone
down to 0%, and we were earning
practically nothing on our cash.
And um all the way out to 5
years, the 5 year was yielding a
0.5%, just very low. Um,
basically what the Fed does is
when the economy is struggling,
the Fed lowers that short-term
interest rate, so that they can
generate more borrowing, um,
make, make cash more easily
available, um, so that the
economy can take advantage of
that and hopefully stimulate
economic.
Growth.
When the Fed raises the Fed
funds rate.
Um, that's basically to slow the
economy down, um, keep inflation
under control and um.
Generally slow the economy down,
so.
Um,
The Fed is responsible for um
stable prices, which is
inflation and um.
Full employment. So that's our,
our, those are the two mandates
that the Fed follows. So if you
look at this chart, you can see
that um
The Fed's 2% target rate for
inflation is what they're aiming
for during the pandemic, we had
gotten close to 6%, 5.4% was
reached in inflation, so the
Fed, um, had to combat inflation
and was raising short-term
interest rates to try to get
that inflation down.
Um, and they have been
successful the last, uh,
reading, actually, this was the
July reading 2.6%.
So you can see that they're more
comfortable that they're on
their way to um obtaining that
2% inflation rate, um, and also
the employment numbers have also
started to look uh more in line
with um supply and demand of
workers. So the Fed uh got more
comfortable and they lowered
short term interest rates by 50
basis points last month,
September at their last meeting,
so, um,
We went from, and I'll and I'll
show you the Fed funds rate
chart. It's very important. Um
and you can see how quickly and
how much uh that short term rate
has moved and how important it
is in terms of our portfolios
and how we invest as a result.
So on the following page.
Page 16, you can see the federal
funds target rate, which is the,
the rate that I'm talking about
that overnight rate and because
our portfolios are so short, if
you're getting paid a 4 and 3/4%
overnight.
Um, most of the short paper will
follow that 4 and 3/4 rate.
However, when the market starts
to feel as if the Fed is going
one way or the other, so in this
particular case right now, the
Fed is leaning towards easing
monetary policy or lowering the
the rate because they're
starting to feel more
comfortable with inflation.
And, um, prices, um, inflation
and employment.
Um,
The rate has has started to come
down.
So, um, what I wanted to really
point out here is that
The Fed during the pandemic had
held interest rates.
At 0 for about 1.25 years and
that's on the right-hand side of
the diagram, and you can see
that.
During the next year and a
quarter, the Fed funds rate went
from 0 to 5.25% in a very short
time.
And what that does is when
interest rates go up.
Prices go down.
Um, and that was the, the
Federal Federal Reserve trying
to keep
Uh, the economy, uh, from
overheating and inflation from
going even higher.
So then you can see that we had
a little bit of a plateau where
interest rates stayed at 5.25%,
so that the Fed could see what
What, what those higher rates
were doing um for the economy
and is now more comfortable
starting to take some of that um
tightening of policy down to
that 4 and 3/4 level. So now
we're anticipating that um they
will continue to ease short term
rates and um.
Uh, the, the market is actually
expecting another 50 basis
points this year, and then
another 1% next year.
So that is very, uh, those are
big moves, um, especially in, in
the fixed income markets where
as yields come down, prices go
up, which is actually a good
thing, um, whereas in 2022, when
rates were going up, we had one
of the worst bond markets we
have ever seen where prices were
going down and yields were going
up.
So on the following page, page
17,
Um, as I mentioned, uh, lower
interest rates breed higher bond
prices, which is what we're
experiencing right now.
And if you look at those, if, if
you look at the the lines on
that chart is just the white
line is that federal funds rate
that I showed you in the
previous slide and the other two
lines of the 2-year Treasury
yield and the five-year Treasury
yield.
Um, 5-year treasury yield is in
orange.
And the 2 years in blue.
And you can see that.
That
The Treasury yields follow those
federal funds rate moves.
But usually way ahead of when
they actually occur because the
market is always thinking ahead.
So what we, what we try to do
with our strategy is we follow
the Fed, we follow the economic
data and um see what how much
the market has moved, how much
is the market offering us in
terms of has the market moved
too much, I mean, if you look at
Where the 2 and 5 year
treasuries are right now, we're
at 3.5% in yield.
And um the Fed funds rate is at
4.75%. So,
Maybe what we might have to do
is I know that we were late with
your presentation.
But uh some of our members have
some commitments and we'll lose
our quorum. Maybe if you can hit
some highlights and move it a
little more. Sure. Mr. Chairman,
how much time do we have? Is it
about 15 minutes an hour.
Um,
Yeah, in all fairness, let's.
Not later than.
3:15.
OK, so let's just move to page
19. I'll show you how our
portfolios are positioned now
that we've entered this um
Federal Reserve, um,
Uh, easing cycle, so you can see
that um we manage our portfolios
versus benchmarks. So in the
case of the general fund core,
we use the 0 to 5 year Treasury
benchmark.
And we're almost 99% our
portfolio average.
Duration is um almost the same
as the benchmark we've been
extending um our maturities as
interest rates are coming down,
um, and the, the same for the
taxable fund, the tax exempt
fund is a little bit shorter
because it has debt service that
it pays on June 30th, so, um,
once it gets paid, the duration
lengthens as well.
And then on page 20 you can see
that the performance of the
funds has been um
Very good. So over the last 5
year period, um, the portfolios
have outperformed their
benchmarks, um, so we were very
short in duration when interest
rates were rising and um
We lengthen our duration and use
more cash to buy longer term
securities when we felt that
interest rates were starting
well would start to turn in the
other direction.
And with that, I will stand for
any questions.
So actually there's a little bit
more that I wanna go into, um, I
want Anna to talk to you about
the local government investment
pool, um, so if Anna, you could
To present
She's gonna switch spots.
Um, you can go ahead and finish
your presentation and then we'll
have questions.
Oh yeah.
Thank you.
Thank you, Chairman. Thank you,
members of the committee and
thank you, treasurer. Uh, I feel
like I need to lower my high
chair, so I apologize, but this
is, this is what happens when
you're tall. And my grandmother
used to always tell me, just
because you're tall and you're a
woman doesn't mean you should
slouch, and I would agree with
that sentiment. So here I am
slouching no less.
But briefly, I just wanted to
turn to slide 32, which is the
slide that uh begins to focus on
the local government.
Investment pool, which is the
treasurer pointed out is not the
only local government investment
pool that we currently manage,
although the second local
government investment pool that
we're managing is currently
exclusively for the state
Investment council, and that's
the medium term fund, but the
short term fund is the local
government investment pool that
you would be familiar with is
the one that we have run in the
office for many years, uh,
certainly since I've been in the
office, which began in 2019, and
as you saw from the
Charts that Vicky was was
showing starting at the
treasurer's office in 2019 was
quite the roller coaster ride of
yields, and that um that
movement in the federal funds
rate is what translates into
this incredible change in the
earnings on the local government
investment pool that you see on
slide 32.
Um, so to see the earnings on
the pool increase from 330 to 93
million.
Across 3 fiscal years is really
reflective of what we went
through with interest rates. I
just want to highlight 93
million.
Those are the earnings that were
distributed to the participants
in the local government
investment pool. We have
approximately 120 participants
in the pool, roughly half of the
counties of New Mexico, several
municipalities that not only
include the large metro areas,
but villages, towns across New
Mexico, that's 93 million,
nearly 100 million that was
distributed to all of those
local governments to support
their budgets. So that's really
a phenomenal thing, but what I
would
Also underscore at this point,
well, that's great, and we
celebrate that. We are so tied
in tandem to the level of
federal funds that we want at
this point in time since we're
right at the inflection point,
the Federal Reserve has begun to
cut rates. They cut rates at
0.5% point at their last
meeting, and they've now
forecast another 1.5% of rate
cuts through the end of 2025.
That's the projection they're
giving and it's not that that
projection is to be taken as
some guarantee of where rates
will go, but it is a guidepost,
and it is the Federal Reserve
giving us that guidepost. And so
we have to look at that
guidepost anticipate, that means
another 0.5% point of reduction
for the rest of this year.
That's their median expectation
followed by another percentage
point decrease next year.
What that means is that the
yield on the pool is going to go
lower.
If that, if that translates what
they're projecting to do that
certainly our our base
expectation, the yield on the
pool will go lower.
And
In, in broad terms, that means
that we could be seeing a yield
on the local government
investment pool at the end of
this fiscal year, midway through
the next calendar year. It is
roughly 2% lower than the highs
that we saw at 5.3% yield on
this pool. We could be ending at
a Fed funds range of 3.25 to
3.5% uh as soon as midway
through next year.
And so I, I put that out there
as something for local
governments to consider when
they're budgeting. They, they
saw really, uh, you know, strong
income coming from this pool,
and certainly it's better than
the 0 to 25 basis point quarter
percentage point range that we
were in during the pandemic. So
what I'm, what I'm now, you
know, talking about in terms of
getting to 2% lower could end up
being an average yield of
roughly 4% across its fiscal
year. That's still, that's,
that's good
Income, but it's lower than what
they saw in the prior fiscal
year, and that's an important
thing, I think, to highlight.
Um, the next slide on slide 33
just gives you a snapshot of how
the pool is invested, and the
treasurer had mentioned at the
beginning that safety,
liquidity, and yield are the
three principal investment
objectives and this really
applies predominantly to those
first two in terms of the
management of the local
government investment pool.
Safety of principle is the core
objective of this pool, as was
mentioned, were rated triple AM
by S&P. That is a rating that
applies to
What they call their principal
stability fund rating criteria,
and what it means to be triple
AM is that's the highest um
rating that you can achieve in
that category, and it means that
we're managing this fund with
the principal stability
component, first and foremost,
uh, in mind, and that means the
safety of the investments that
we have in this pool or at the
front of our mind, and, and uh
are or how we invest the pool
and that translates into just
government and government
related.
Securities only and you see that
here, US Treasuries, US
agencies, short term discount
notes, um, supernationals is the
treasurer had mentioned,
although that's capped to a much
smaller percentage of the pool,
you see approximately 10% of the
pool in supernationals, we can
go as much as 15% across the
three issuers that we can invest
in there.
Fully collateralized New Mexico
bank deposits. These are 100%
collateralized either by letters
of credit or pledged securities,
um, and repurchase agreements,
which are also overnight
investments that are
collateralized with Treasury
securities. So this is a very
safe pool, maximum maturity on
the pool is 60 days, so it's an
incredibly short term and, and
that is the principal objective
is to preserve the stability of
the principal investment to
allow the participants to redeem
their full.
in most cases in 24 to 48 hours.
And the yield essentially as the
next chart on slide 34 shows
follows the level of federal
funds. And that was what I was
outlining at the beginning, that
has been
You know, above 5% and provided
that great source of income, and
there will still be a solid
source of income for
participants in the pool, but we
are expecting it to decrease
over the next fiscal year. We
want to uh set that expectation
going forward.
And then finally on slide 35 is
a snapshot of the medium term,
uh, LGIP that the treasurer had
mentioned, currently, so the,
the initial funding for this
pool came on the first of April.
It was trunched in, so at the
end of the fiscal year, it was
just over 750 million. We
received an additional 250
million after the fiscal year on
July 1st, so now it's roughly
over 1 billion.
And what I point out about this
pool is that it's managed to a
longer duration, which in this
environment is actually
beneficial to the investment
council. It's yielding
approximately 5%. Now that we
have a Fed funds range, it's
actually 4 3/4 to 5% on a
midpoint at 4.8%, having a pool
that's yielding 5% is
attractive.
And it's also participating in
some of those uh the price
appreciation that Vicky was
mentioning when interest rates
fall.
And I think with that I can
stand for questions. Actually,
let me finish off for us. Um, so
a couple of takeaways from what
Anna and Vicky are talking about
since we didn't go directly into
them. I just want to point out
like general fund liquidity.
When you look at how much money
was earned in 2022. I'm on page
24. It was less than $10,000.
When you're looking at today, it
was $228 million. So each one of
these graphs for the seven
different pools will show you
how much interest was earned two
years ago versus current, and
it'll also show you with the pie
chart on each one of them, what
we are investing within each one
of those based on the needs of
what that portfolio looks like.
The second thing I would say is
that we've had the largest
portfolio that the state
treasurer's office has had in
its history, and we have earned
the largest amount of money that
has ever been done in the state,
uh state treasurer's office
history.
The other part or component with
the medium term, which is the
partnership with SIC is also
factoring in that each one of
the participants in the short
term or the long term, only has
to pay 5 basis points for the
skill set that you get with the
entire state treasurer's office
team and our two portfolio uh
gurus. And so the cost that it
would have taken for $1 billion
if it was outsourced would have
been a very significant amount
in addition to
Um, and, and, and the
subtraction of the interest
earned that they they had
received in this last short
amount of time. The educational
technology notes that we
contribute. I thought this would
be great because you go back to
your constituents about 600 and
35 million in the general
obligation bonds.
So something else that I wanted
to talk to you about.
You mentioned diversity in your
previous conversation and I
heard it throughout the morning.
When we're looking at diversity,
there's diversity within the the
portfolio. There's the diversity
of the asset allocation and
something we don't always talk
about is the diversity of asset
managers. Now, in the state
treasurer's office, we have two
people that do the investing
in-house, but some of the other
portfolios that have private
equity that have real estate,
that have a lot of different uh
parameters that I sit on those
boards, councils, or
commissions, they have a lot
more flexibility on who they
invest with. And so something I
would talk to you all as
legislators.
about is making sure that the
diversity matches.
For example, right now we just
asked for data from SIC um our
consultants, how much of the
diversity is with fund managers
that are veterans, that are
women, and that are people of
color. Less than 1% of all fund
managers managing $55 billion
are people that are minority
that are veterans and that are
women.
That's a concern, especially in
a majority minority state. In
pension funds, we have to start
asking the money that everyone
is putting in every single week
is the money that we're
investing, money that is
incorporating our values for the
people that we're investing for.
So those types of questions I
want to bring to your attention
because right now the state
investment council staff has
presented a policy to us that
they want us to give them more
of our authority to do the
investing and how similar to
what the pension.
funds do. What is very different
from pension funds is that
pension funds are lay boards
that are elected by their their
folks.
Um,
I sit on all of them. The
Secretary of State sits on Pera.
The difference with SIC is that
statutorily, it is required to
in order to sit on that council,
you have to have 10 years of
some type of financial
investment experience based on
what the legislature requested.
So I would, I would say we're
working through that process,
but I wouldn't be surprised if I
come before you in January with
the legislation that is similar
to the state of Connecticut,
where it requires that we look
at diversity and the idea of our
fund management because the two
don't match.
Somebody would easily argue,
well, you don't want to risk
rate of return or safety. That's
not what I'm saying at all. What
I'm saying that is if we had not
a broken process within the
process, we wouldn't have less
than 1% because automatically
you would have had a percentage
that was more reasonable to the
idea of what our fund manager
system looks like in this
country.
Another thing I wanted to
mention is investment policies
are important right now, MFA
retiree healthcare, the
treasurer's office and the State
Investment council are all
looking at their investment
policies to see what we need to
do to upgrade or to advance it.
It's standard practice that we
should be looking at it every 2
years. Treasurer's office so far
has not done that, so we're
gonna be doing that in the
coming months.
Um, so here's my ask on page 39,
baby bonds is something that is
new and incorporated um in the
state of Connecticut. They're
the first state to have baby
bonds. What it is is putting a,
a group of money into a pool,
investing it, and after the, the
legislation passes and depending
on the legislature and what they
require of it.
In my dream world would allow
for every child born in New
Mexico to be able to have a
certain amount of money that's
partly their trust fund at the
age of 18. They would not take
the money directly, they would
be able to utilize it for books
for schooling, for trades, for
uh business plan for a car so
that they can go to and from
work. Whatever you as
legislators decide that this
would look like is what would
happen, and that would allow for
every child in New Mexico, not
only to stay in New Mexico, but
Bridge.
The gap of inequity, inequity
and build that wealth divide
that we so desperately need.
Many of us grew up, we didn't
have a savings account. We
didn't know financial literacy
mattered. It matters because we
make bad choices when we don't
have the equipment.
Knowledge of what that stands
for. And so there would be a
financial literacy component
within baby bonds, you know,
something that you all have seen
me very passionate about is
financial literacy. Right now,
last year, it became a local
option, so we've gotten on the
road, we've traveled to
different school districts.
We've talked to superintendents
asking them to put this as a
component of their graduation
requirement.
Most of them already have it as
an elective so we're asking,
begging, requesting for students
to push that and for
superintendents and school board
members to support that, and
it's been a very positive
experience talking to students
and letting them see a
reflection of themselves in
their leaders. That baby bond
symposium on October 17th. I'm
personally inviting all of our
legislators to it. There's a
component that I want to keep
private just for all of you to
ask questions to Doctor
Hamilton, who is
Uh, from the new school in New
York. He worked with Senator
Booker a long time ago on this
concept of baby bonds, bridging
the gap of inequity, you know,
they use different terminology,
but that's basically what it is.
The treasure from Connecticut,
Eric Russell will be coming
down.
To have this discussion about
what does this mean for us? How
does this build our economy? How
does shifting the money that
we're spending on social
services and Medicaid, which is
about 85 to 90%. How does all
that shift when you give people
enough to be able to sustain for
themselves. That's something
that we're excited to have that
conversation with and want to
welcome all of you too. On page
40, New Mexico stable.
New Mexico stable. I want to
thank the legislature. You all
passed a bill last year, not
sure if you remember,
Representative Thompson
sponsored it, but it allowed to
remove the clawbacks.
This also helped to align with
the federal government to change
the onset of disability from age
26 to 46 beginning January 1st
of 2026. It expands the
eligibility for New Mexico's
stable programs to be more
inclusive of disabled veterans
and individuals who become
disabled later in life. This has
been an amazing program. We
changed the logo, we added more
emphasis to it. All of you are
getting a treat of a beautiful
New Mexico stable bag today that
we've been sending out to our
outreach programs. We
Encouraged and increased the
stable program percentage by
40.7% in this last year since my
administration, an 18.7%
increase in the amount of the
account balance where almost I
think 2nd in the nation now of
how much each one of those
participants has in this
account. It's
You lose it if you don't spend
it, usually, right? Use it or
use it.
Uh, use it or lose it. And now
you don't have to do that. You
have an investment account. It's
making money and you can use it
just like LGIP. You can use it
within 1 or 2 days. Take it out
if you need to for an emergency
or whatever the case may be. I
know all of you have people in
your communities that are
veterans and that are disabled.
Let them know that this program
exists and we, you can send them
our way. Um, the increase of
18.6% is the percentage change
in the active accounts and 18%
was in since the.
Counts were opened. We have over
2000 total accounts. Bern
County, of course, is the
majority of the opened accounts,
but we're also on the road
traveling to rural areas to talk
about that program. And then the
last component which we already
talked to you about is financial
literacy. When we meet with
people, um, we have, um,
Piggy banks, which you all get
one today.
To talk about savings and to
talk about investing and to make
it more
Standard of a conversation for
us to have. Many of us who did
not grow up with a savings or
having stocks or understanding
what those are, making it more
customary to have those
conversations is critical to be
able to shift that cultural.
divide on on those subject
matters and so we're trying to
just be a part of that
conversation and spread the word
throughout our state. Um, and I
stand for questions, Mr.
Chairman.
15 minutes early.
Oh, thank you for that and uh,
you know, thank you for your
presentation and
Uh, the next time, what we'll do
is we'll put you first in the
morning.
So that we don't have this part
at the end of the day.
And it always happens that way
with all our agendas.
But um,
We don't have anyone so far, so
I will ask you a few.
OK.
I'll, I'll ask you a couple of
questions.
On the HO.
Yeah
On page 9.
When you mentioned about
That you had more FTEs.
At the FY 19 to versus where you
are, which is almost double.
So, uh, have you asked for more?
Yes, we did.
We asked last year and uh we
were not able to get it out of
the house with the request and
we tried in the Senate, um, this
year, uh, we're seeing pretty
solvent, but we are needing some
support.
The 5 basis points on the local
government investment pool is
money that goes into a bar
instead of the actual 200, 300
or 400 category. And so we are
requesting more out of that to
be able to do uh
Some of the things we need to do
in hiring some of the folks.
I will say, just to put it in
perspective, when you look at
investment groups.
Um, ERBSIC and others.
My two staff get paid
significantly less.
And they all do, and it's
because of the way that the pay
band structure works, and so,
and because they're classified.
And so that's something that I
would really like your support
and being able to pay them
equivalent to or at a standard
of based on the portfolio that
they're managing.
That's one of the the roles.
So with that all.
Uh, what was the ask on the FTE
so many.
It was 30. I looked behind me
and they're all new.
I think it was 36.
36 new ones. No, no, no, only 4
new ones.
That's very reasonable.
Yes, sir. In particular, because
I think the ask was less than
one day's full interest earned
that we made for the portfolios,
just so that we can accommodate
the demand. So if let's say
there's an emergency instead of
justification time, that makes
it very difficult for one of the
two that didn't do all of the
investing on the cash management
side, we have the same problem.
We're, we're making it work.
But they're overloaded and
The idea that the salaries are a
lot lower than what they can get
in those other um groups of
agencies.
And put us in a very unsafe
predicament that we could lose
more staff and so that's
something that we're trying to
evaluate and work with our new
budget analyst this next year.
In fact, we have a meeting with
her on Friday.
Mm
And uh Miss Murphy or no?
And the part that you mentioned
about.
The distribution that went to.
Some of the local governments.
And I think you mentioned, what
was the number that went to?
Thank you, Chairman, members of
the committee for the past
fiscal year that just ended, it
was 93 million that uh was the
income that participants in the
local government investment pool
the short term uh pool received.
But out of the for the 93
million how many entities
received that?
It's approximately 120
participants in the pool. So
it's pretty much statewide.
Or no.
Mr. Chairman, it's any of the
local county cities, school
districts.
Um, special district, uh, like
water associations who
participate in the LGIP and have
us invest their money. Any one
of them are part of the pool
that makes the interest earned
off of it and they could either
continue to reinvest, or they
can pull it out within the 24
hours, but they earned
significant dollars, ARPA funds,
buyer funds that got put in.
equated to more than 3 years'
worth of some of those counties'
budgets. And so it has been very
significant, but to Anna's
point, because interest rates
are shifting, if you just
started participating in LGIP
and you see how much money
you're making each month, that's
gonna shift and, and, and
decrease as interest rates
decrease. So we're trying to let
people be educated on that
aspect of it as well, but it was
$90 million more than what it
had been in 2022.
Well, I guess the question that
I look at myself is so.
Why wouldn't the other ones want
to be in it? I mean I think it's
an educational aspect. A lot of
them have still done, you know,
when I was a county treasurer,
some of them are very
comfortable with CDs, even
though at some points in time,
CDs can do good at some points
they don't. A lot of them don't
have enough money to have like a
financial advisor so that we're
reaching out as much as we can
when we're going on the road and
talking to folks, we've talked
to the New New Mexico Municipal
League, the New Mexico counties
to tell them
You're someone that you can use.
Tribal entities can use this
also, um, so that even if you
have a little bit, the amount of
interest you earn because of
everyone else that's in that
pool is quite significant. So if
you could help us to spread the
word to your counties, your
cities, your school districts.
That would be imperative for
them to be able to diversify the
money that they have. It's not
just in the bank account, and
they'll be making a lot more
rate of return.
The other thing I would also add
to that is the interest rate
policy that's approved by the
board of Finance. It's been in
existence for over 20 years, but
I never even knew about it as a
county treasure, which you just
give the paper to the bank and
they would um keep the same
interest rate as a Treasury
know, a two-year Treasury note
listed on our website. That's
significant money when you're
talking millions for a couple of
basis points.
Well, I know that when I was, I
used to deal with you almost
daily and I was uh.
We're always working with that
because I saw the benefit, but
the last part that I have and
then I'll go to the members is
on.
Page 41.
On the financial literacy.
Uh, why not go through public
education department.
So, we did speak to the finance
to the public education
department before and they said
that um the governor and
themselves are working on some
type of curriculum to assist
with financial literacy in K
through 12. There's a new
secretary, so I haven't met the
new secretary yet.
Um, so I do need to probably
reach out again, but we've been
asking people based on what the
the bill that got passed this
last legislative session
required on a local option that
we would do it, we would try our
best to get them on boarded.
Because uh
I've been working in some areas
where the governor's office.
And uh you know, I keep telling
him.
You want to have change through
education.
And what more is them to have a.
Program of curriculum.
Sequential K through 12.
I would have this.
And then you won't have to have
all these meetings with all
these different groups.
And you could have a much more
concentrated effort.
Something that would go out and
flow to.
Everyone
I agree. Very, very well. We'll
go to uh representative if you.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. I think
you got at the core of
My two main questions as
regarding FTE looking at the
asset increase, the volume
increase, the trade increase.
What has been your FTE increase
2019 to 24,
when did you go to the current
size of 36? So we actually have
declined in employees from what
I saw in the paperwork 10 years
ago when they were at 100
billion, that's when they had, I
believe, 36. Today we only have
26, I believe 26 or 24.
Wow,
the accomplishment of your
office is all the more
impressive, Mr. Chair, Madam
Chair.
Um,
I think especially if you add in
the programs on page 39, 48, 41,
that you are also tasked with
promoting and educating the
public about
Uh, Mr. Tay, I don't see how
they could do it without more
staff.
So I hope that is going into the
um budget creation process
that's happening right now.
The other question I have.
I think repeats the chair's
concerns as well about the um
page 32, the increase.
The rate of return that has been
so phenomenal that is
Going to drop due to the Fed's
actions and how are you
communicating or educating.
Those entities who might be
building budgets around these
expectations now.
Mr. Chairman member Figueroa,
um, that's a great question. So
we have been talking about it a
lot in the state treasures
Investment Council we've been
talking to legislators. We've
also wanted to put it in our
newsletter, and we're also
sending letters to our
participants to remind them,
don't use your interest earned
as part of your standard budget
because that could always shift
based on the interest on the
Fed. So, um, we're trying our
best to educate because we don't
want people to be surprised, but
when you're talking
to your local leaders, please,
by all means share the
information with them too, um,
one participate with us, and 2,
that if they have been, they're
not gonna see as big of a win as
they had seen in the past, and
that's just the standard because
of the, the Fed fund rate
declining.
Sorry. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, Madam Treasurer, and
I am glad to hear that you are
reaching out to Superintendents
and school districts because
they are all in that process of
selecting what two additional
graduation requirements, they
are going to establish as in
their district.
Which is what we allowed them to
do with the bill we passed in
financial literacy would be
phenomenal, so I hope many of
them take you up on it. Thank
you, Mr. Chair.
Very well, thank you, uh, vice
chair.
Thank you, Mr. Karen. Thank you.
Um.
Madam Treasure, uh, you, your
report today and your combined.
Uh, office staff that are here
with you demonstrates your
visionary leadership, which
We all knew was there, um, but
you're
Your dynamic enthusiasm is
turning things around, so I
appreciate that.
So, um, a couple of things that
I wanted to.
Just point out, I'm extremely
interested in, in the, um.
I forgot what page. I wrote page
numbers for all the rest, but
the
Comment you made about um the
representation.
Women of
Uh, communities of color, women,
and veterans.
In the decision making
processes, and that's extremely
critical of the Connecticut
model I started to look it up,
but I didn't get very far
because.
I wanted to pay attention, but
I'd like to know more about that
and then I'm interested in
seeing how we can help.
Increase that, um.
In a way that is um
counters the arguments about
mandating.
And that makes it.
Conducive to reflect.
Um, our populations in the state
of New Mexico, which really
shouldn't be any type of push
push back on that, but
Be prepared, we need to be
prepared.
So that's one thing and then um
I wanted to mention about
financial literacy, um, they sit
on the education and I, we've
tried for years to incorporate
it as part of the curriculum
from K through 12.
We got as far as just getting it
as a financial literacy as a an
elective. I, and I forget the.
whatever it is of credit.
Um, but it absolutely is, uh,
uh, necessary. The bond and the
financial literacy.
For me, work hand in hand. Um,
they're, they're taking us from
cradle.
To
Whatever futures uh that are
young younger generation choose.
So we've got to correlate the
the connection between the two
in order to strengthen.
Um, these approaches, which is
really critical to sustain and
and our, our population and take
us out of those cycles of
poverty into cycles of
opportunity.
So then my, my final point is a
question actually, and I, I was
talking to the chair briefly or
somebody or Senator Stefani. I'm
not sure if representative
Fillon touched on this, but on
page 32.
Um,
In Miss Murphy's presentation,
she mentioned that the yield
Um,
Could go as low as 2%.
I can't remember, but I made a
note 2%.
Lower than 5.3.
And so, uh, my question is, how
are we preparing the local
governments to plan
appropriately so that they're
not caught off guard because
oftentimes when we travel the
state in these little small
rural communities were told over
and over again we don't have the
technical assistance, we don't
know how to plan through these
things. We don't have, you know,
all that we don't have, so.
I know when you're a poor small
community, you see the good
times and the biggest yields and
oh wow, but.
How do we prepare them to plan
adequately for those.
Ebbs and tides.
Thank you chair and thank you,
Vice Chair for this question.
I'm, I'm happy to hear that that
was um the message that I was
able to impart because one
important step is being in front
of you today to take that
information with you. Um, and
you're correct that the uh yield
to the participants on the pool
peaked at 5.3%, and that it is
possible over this next fiscal
year that that decreases as much
as 2% in increments.
Not all at once in increments,
but that is possible and
fortunately, we send out a
quarterly newsletter to our
participants. It goes out with
their statements, and that next
newsletter will go out with the
October statement, and this will
be
The focal point of that
newsletter, um, to include
charts that show how the yield
on the pool follows the level of
federal funds, what is happening
with the Federal Reserve and
interest rates really make sure
that we put that information in
front of them right now on the
front end so that they can plan
accordingly.
Thank you very much. That's very
important. Thank you, uh, to all
of you for fantastic
presentation today. Oh.
Thank you.
Um, on that newsletter, is it?
Possible that we could get a
copy of that.
Chairman, absolutely.
Uh, we have 2 more members, so
we have a representative
Martinez.
Representative.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I know
we're way over time. I don't
know.
Take up too much time. I have 2
questions.
That are related, so I'll ask
the two questions and then.
If you could answer it first.
Along his
As the treasurer's office been
operating at a 33%
Vacancy
And then what would the 4 FTE
positions B.
a request.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
So Mr. Chairman, uh
representative, as you know, I
just got elected in 2022, so I'm
not absolutely positive what
that number is, but I can get it
for you.
I will say coming in, I didn't
want to just hire people. I
wanted to find out where the
needs really were and how we
needed to shift based on where
the trade volume was, where, you
know, we're at with the amount
of money is coming in, the cash
flow, this last year, we used a
lot of our money to help us with
software upgrades so that both
the cash management division and
work with and tie in to the
investment division because you
noticed on general fund, um,
core and liquidity, there was a
lot more.
Cash in there and it's because
there's such large payments that
need to be paid out, and Anna
and Vicky have to understand and
and be able to move according to
both the needs of the state and
then the requirements of keeping
with the benchmark and making
sure they have the correct
weighted average maturity and
duration. It's very strategic on
their end. So now that I have my
my feet on the ground and more
familiarized with what needs to
be done. I'm working with our
division directors to see what
positions need to be in, so we
have.
Two positions open right now
that we just put out to the
public under um Dominic Chavez,
who is in charge of all of the
bank accounts portion of the
division, um, and then we um
Moved somebody into the
collateral division, and then
now we're gonna be looking at
hiring somebody in the
investment division so that they
can help support Hana and Vicky
and learn from them and grow
from them, and then we also are
looking at um one more full-time
employee in the budget.
Division and our new CFO comes
in October 14th.
It's the um
Uh, current, there's 2 CFOs in
DOT.
One of them, uh, Kristen Dorland
is gonna be start start starting
to work with us on the 14th of
October. And so I think all of
those shifts will assist us in
seeing where we need to go from
there.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank,
thank you, Madam Treasurer. I
appreciate those answers.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Boredo.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, um,
ladies, thank you for your very
thorough presentation, um, and
thank you for the work that
you're doing for our state.
Um,
One of the questions that I have
is, and probably not so much for
me, but we talked about the
financial literacy program,
which I completely support. I
think it's wonderful program,
you know, I talked to a lot of
kids that are 1516.
In their teen years and they
don't even know how to balance a
checkbook, so I think that that
is a really great uh program,
Mr. Chair. But I wanted to talk
about the, the baby bond
program, and I, I just wanted a
couple of answers in, in, you
know, more for the public
actually, um, how is that
program just really brief
because we're, we're between
here and
Wherever we need to go next, but
um how is that program
administered? Who administers it
and how is it, how is each one
of those baby bonds going to be
established, is it for new
births? Is it, you just really
briefly explain that, please?
So Speaker Martinez and I are
working on the legislation now
and trying to draft something,
um.
To put it towards New Mexico
instead of Connecticut. So
Connecticut is only Medicaid
participants. They have a very
different divide of wealthy and
and poor. New Mexico is more in
the middle, so 85% I think is
how many Medicaid participants
we have. We, we are hoping or
I'm hoping that we're able to
put a pool of money based on
24,000 births starting July 1st
of next year. Any baby born in
New Mexico, um, would be able to
get impacted by this.
What would be a trust fund. And
so the money would be put in a
pool, sort of like the trust
funds that we have, it would be
managed by the state Investment
council because it's long term
and you can, you can do that
with this, the Investment
council, and then from that
point when they turn 18, we will
have an agency within the state,
whether it's DFA or treasurer's
office, whoever the legislature
decides would take in the
invoices and pay them out. So
the person would never get the
money directly, it would always
be for whatever.
The legislature decides whether
schools, trades, um, a business
plan, but it's all within New
Mexico you can't go to college
outside of New Mexico. It's
building our own state, building
our own economy, building our
own grocery seats, building up
the jobs and the pay of jobs and
salary so that we can hopefully
keep our people and then stop
being last and putting so much
money in like other social
services and instead shifting it
so that people can become
independent, um, and bridge the
divide.
In a nutshell.
Thank you, Mr. Chair and just
really quick, are you working
with the unions then? Um, it
sounds like a kind of a career
enrichment at some point, at
some level.
Mr. Chairman, really we're just
trying to get the word out about
what baby bonds are and
familiarize people with them.
Our first attempt, big attempt
is gonna be the symposium on
October 17th at the Hispanic
Cultural Center, we're we're
inviting all of you, different
members from the community, it's
completely free, um,
Representative Linda Serrado
helped us with $160,000 last
legislative session and all of
you, you know, agreed on in the
budget for us to be able to
utilize it to bring people in
and to also educate people on
it.
And us get enough education to
be successful in the program.
There was a pilot project that
was recently done um about two
months ago, both the speaker and
I went and attended it and, and
we are seeing how that works and
we're also bringing the treasure
from Connecticut to talk to us
about the good things, the bad
things, what's working, what's
not working, um, and then go
from there. But we're hoping New
Mexico will become 2nd.
Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair,
as I think about it a little bit
more, um, I really see an
opportunity for like public
private partnerships, um, for
the private sector, you know,
getting interns and um I mean, I
just see a huge opportunity in
that and so I look forward to
that.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Thank you, uh, thank you very
much, uh, you know, so.
A lot of information, very good
information, and
Thank you for your work to all
of you.
members, so that completes our
agenda.
Our next meeting is um.
Uh, October 29th.
And it's a Charlie Marcus's
home.
Just wanted to see if he was
asleep or if he was awake.
Uh, our, our last meeting is on
the twenty-ninth and it's here
at the Capitol.
So members of thank you for
being here today.
Go Charlie.
