Vice chair and colleagues let's
go ahead and begin our third day
of meeting and we will reconvene
with a welcome and status update
now by.
Our chancellor of the university
of new mexico gallup campus
welcome in good morning.
There we go
I shouldn't I should have tested
that myself.
So as I was saying good morning
and sabrina is
still the chancellor
you know how these jobs can
change but i'm still here in
them and just happy to be
hosting your meeting today it's
really nice to see all of you
again.
A union gallop has a light of
great things going on
see if I can get my screen or I
can see it without my reading
glasses.
So first i'd like to start just
sharing their enrollment this
semester and we're very
fortunate this is our third year
to see an increase in enrollment
since covered we are ten percent
increases backed back the last
two years and right now we're
we're at eight percent increase
in student head count and
student credit hours so I expect
us to be at least ten percent
again this year may be higher
which would be get.
We arms are seeing increases in
our traditional college students
as well as our dual credit
programs and i'd like to share
with you some progress for
making the door credit we're
going to continuously increases
in those numbers.
We have a really great new
program starting this fall where
we are collaborating with the
school district to address their
pathways programs so this file
we will admit ninety students
into the health careers pathway
program again you know we're
thinking about how we going to
bring more nurses into the area
how are we going to bring more
physicians into the area and the
other allied health care feel so
that is the initiatives the
meaning behind that initiative.
We're in twenty in the fall of
twenty twenty five we will admit
ninety students into the digital
media program and that will be
to help increase the students
pursuing careers and information
technology.
And in the file of twenty twenty
six we will admit ninety more
students into the engineering
pathway
and that initiative will be to
increase our number students who
are pursuing careers and stimus
so I think that these are very
positive moves and and a great
example of claboration between
their school district and the
branch campus.
Next i'd like to thank you for
funding our rpsps are ongoing
our psp's in nursing and teacher
education.
The nursing program is in the
process of hiring new faculty to
teach the high school lpn
program which will help to
further expand our registered
nursing program.
While the teacher education
funding is going towards
recruitment and retention of
students in teacher education
are fields of early childhood
elementary education and
secondary education.
I watch for our new rpsp this
year
which will fund a teaching
position in our community health
worker program
this if funded this program will
provide jars to people who are
pursuing a job as community
health representative on the nab
honation and the suny
reservation as well as c w
positions within the
presbyterian medical services
health care services
from the academic perspective we
see the chw program is a
pipeline for our human services
degree which will bring
substance abuse counselors and
people interested in working in
family studies fail a child and
family studies such as cyfd
positions so those are very
important
our non credit programs are also
being revamped we hired a very
energetic director for our work
first development in community
education program her name is
actually balasker she is local
and she previously worked for
the nabonation she's very well
connected in the community with
work force development
and she's been out in our
community meeting employers
asking what their trading needs
are for their employees
exploring all kinds of ways to
address non credit needs in the
community and we recently
responded to the rfp from the
new mexico department of
transportation so we will be
provide if selected we will be
providing training for cbl and
pay the equipment operation so
i'm excited about that
hopefully we'll find out soon.
Um how many of you noticed the
dirt light across the street
when you drove in today.
So that's one of the new
construction projects happening
we have several
you probably familiar if you're
from this area you're familiar
with our high school programs
that are located on our campus
for many years we had middle
college high school which is a
charter school it's an early
college high school program they
are building their own building
so they will be moving out of
our girly hall and moving out of
some modular buildings that are
on our campus into their own
facility that would be really
good for them to be to operate
out of one building and be
consolidated it will also open
up space for us to expand our
student services operations in
girly house and we're excited
about that.
Mckinley academy is our other
high school program on our
campus that is i'm affiliated
with the gallery kelly county
school district.
They are funding a twenty three
million dollar new building they
are they are distracting that
building on our campus next to
these students services building
that is currently in the
planning phase and they hope to
start construction by next
summer it may hopefully sooner
and really nice thing for
unimgalited in addition to the
proximity of the students and
being able to be on our campus
we will be able to use that
facility after the high school
questions are done each day so
we can actually offer ac-
afternoon classes and evening
classes in their facility so we
really appreciate that
we have a couple of our own
projects that you probably are
well aware of from geobon twenty
twenty we received funding to
renovate the north end of girly
hall girly holidays very large
large building next to us it
goes way back towards the north.
The north incontains the welding
department auto technology and
construction technology does
spaces will be renovated
construction has started this
summer after several delays due
to increased construction
material costs and just finding
things as we were moving through
the program are moving through
the planning process but finally
construction is starting we will
renovate and give face lives to
the welding area starting first
then auto technology then
construction text our students
will have i'm very nice learning
spaces and have the safety
improvements that are necessary
to those areas.
We also receive funding through
go back to for the south end of
early hall and group that end of
girly hall houses
most of our students services
programs so.
Trio upward bound which is high
school trial student success
services wishes for traditional
students bother those programs
serve.
First generation low income
students we also have our
student resource center located
in that area which contains our
veterans resource center and our
center for students who need
accommodations so that is also
house in that section of girly
we also have the center for
academic learning on the second
floor of early.
We are adding our australia I
should see in september we will
be opening our native american
students success center if you
recall last year when you when
you were here I mentioned that
we had applied for a federal
grant through the native
american serving nine travel
institute branch of the
department of education and we
did receive that grant so that
is three million dollars over
five years and i'm very very
excited to have first of all to
get the designation and then to
receive the funding
so.
That center will that that
funding will provide a case
manager for students to connect
them with um resources in our
community like mental health
counseling.
Um food resources housing other
things that we know our students
need i'm not sure if you've
heard of the basic need survey
that was done last year unm
participated they provided a
large amount of the the man
powered to produce that the
report.
But why we learned from
surveying students across new
mexico is it seventy percent of
our native american students
identified as being food and
secure and housing and secure so
we need their snoot native
american students success center
with these resources to help
connect our students with the
resources that they need.
And will also be renovating the
dining areas really going to be
that entire portion of girly
hall on this
southean of the building with
with the exception of the
executive area which was
reinnovated in the past
and then finally we have this
fall please note on the november
ballot we will have a geobind
this year to renovate our
finance department
that is the final renovation of
girly hall that the middle
portion so we did it's like a
sand which we did the ends first
now were doing the metal and the
finers department has not been
touched since nineteen eighty
five and i'm sure you all are
aware that sibola and mckinley
county have the largest
percentage of adults who am
identify.
What was it cultural art
cultural artisan as their
employment
title or or designation and so
we really want to support our
local artists and are classes
all of our art classes fill
every semester and we have
everything from party to weaving
to do making
out drying painting everything
so i'm very excited about
getting their space renovated
and I feel like our local
community to serve that so I
hope you'll support her our bind
effort in november.
This concludes my presentation
i'm happy to welcome any
questions you might have a
better effort to anything I have
not mentioned.
Thank you for listening and.
The.
Thank you representative mobile
cover
thank you madame chair and thank
you so much chancellor for your
presentation it was very.
Uplifting to hear about growth
and expansion for the better man
of our students so that's
exactly what we aim for so I
appreciate that I have just one
question that that occurred to
me
because we were here
with the legislative health and
human services last interrupt I
believe it was last time and we
had the opportunity to hear
about the health care crisis as
we hear about it around the
state so in your nursing and
medical professional programs
what particular health care
providers are the students in
these programs placed with
here on site because as we all
know they do require the
programs require in there
professional training that they
receive arm on sight
I don't know what else to call
it on site training or
experience their work
experience.
Thank you thank you very
question madam chair members of
the committee
I can speak to the nursing
program which has several
clinical rotations and the it
covers the game of of
specialties so students start
out in the
what I should check out at the
long term care facilities that's
where they begin their rotations
and then in the second semester
they do public health.
In the third semester they go
into the hospital and start
working with patience on the
medical surgical ward in labor
and delivery surgery emergency
services.
Any of the specialty
areas inside the hospital itself
they also go to the public
schools and work with the
nurses in the school system so
they see that site as well the
human services.
Degree that also has courses
that require clinical rotations
if these students are in the
councilling
branch of the human services
degree so those students will
also have clinical experience in
behavioral health
the nursing students are so do
psychotations in albert cricket
at the unm s facility.
Thank you for that so do you
have.
Would you say they have
sufficient.
Um.
Providers in the immediate area
for these clinical rotations
that are required
for students do have to travel
um we do have students do
rotations in grants at their
hospital in addition to rmch and
game c and forty.
So they do travel to get their
clinical rotations and that's
not necessarily a bad thing and
it's good to see how healthcare
is provided in different
settings so I feel like the way
things are designed right now
they are getting very good
clinical experiences
and thank you for that that is
very important because a lot of
our
provider areas are going to be
in rural remote areas and so
wherever there are clustered to
receive their health care is a
very good experience and that
they you know I think it's
we need to broaden that however
when we can so are there any
particular needs in these
programs that we could arm
assist with for example you
mentioned travel
to help reimburse the students
and travel concert maybe
something to be thinking about
how we in our um
funding processes or how you
work it into your budgets I
would I guess is do they receive
travel costs as part of their
arm
educational programs at their
under
madame chair members of the
committee yes the nursing
program does reimburse their
students for any travel costs
that they incur okay so I am
thank you I am imagining madam
chair that on whatever needs
that you're a programs require
it will be worked into whatever
your annual request size or i'm
i'm imagining that's how you
provide for them is that correct
yes madame chairman reserve the
committee that it's correct
thank you i'm i'm
really impressed with the growth
and expansion of the of of the
campus and how it's going
especially or native american
center which I think is
absolutely
critical for the area as the
needs are going to continue to
increase so thank you very much.
Thank you madam chair
thank you representative
representative little.
Think you made him chair
very happy to hear about the
programs that are taking shape
here and
how exactly those programs are
action host students are
benefiting from them a couple of
questions that I have and think
you to my colleague for
answering a lot of my questions
here or if we're asking the
questions I had um in the ninety
in the pathways uh programs how
worst can you explain a little
bit about the process since you
used to determine who gains
entry into these programs.
Madame chairman reserve a
committee I do not know the
admission process but I can get
that information for you that
would be just fine thank you
very much madame chair than also
was another
if you would be so kind as to
provide information on the
makeup of the ninety that are
admitted into these programs
that would be great as well.
And I think that's important
madam chair because of the need
that exists in rural communities
it would be nice to be able to
see whether our students in
these programs are actually
coming from those rule
communities.
I'd like to ensure that their
encourage to take advantage of
this opportunity not just here
but and like down in
western at portallas at as well
as the meeter of the current kid
last crucial universities but I
think that that's quite
important and it is definitely
up to the students to enroll
into those programs but I think
having and seeing the
opportunity that exist would be
encouraging that it must well
and i'd like to.
Encourage more to get into those
field cause we should need
himself thank you madam chair
manager by me i'd like to share
a little more information.
The health science is center of
unimal science the center and
the department the health sites
the center office of diversity
equity and inclusion held a
summit last year and brought
together people from around this
state to discuss these pathways
is health care pathways in
particular
and I would encourage you to if
you are aware of you hear of
this again i'm sorry I can
certainly let someone know that
this is going to take place
again
that way people from the other
colleges can attend and hear
about the work that we're doing.
I'm locally and you're all
invited to this locally next
week on thursday from one to
five we are hosting the health
sciences center and the health
sciences center office of
diversity equity and inclusion
they are holding a meeting on
the.
Assets mapping
for health care pathways I
believe that was the title and
it will be held here in this
room from 1-5 next thursday and
we will be presenting on our
pathways efforts and we'll be
hearing from other
folks as well and that work that
they're doing to increase
students interest in the health
careers.
So just wonder make sure you
knew that that was happening.
Thank you.
The.
Thank you madam chairs that was
the less quicker last christian
appreciate the information and I
wish you all success in where
you're going thank you
representative of lunch them
thank you madame chair i'd like
to thank
soprina doctor is all for the
presentation today just for the
benefit of the committee I just
like to say that for my
experience she has been the best
director we've had here.
And I and I say that whole
heartedly i've been in gallop a
long time and there was a period
of time where we had lots of
revolving people in and out of
that role but I think part of
the success for programs like
this is you have that
institutional knowledge and she
was if I and correct me if i'm
wrong but the dean of health
sciences hear of the nursing
program before moving into the
chancellor's job is that is that
correct I was the director of
the nursing program and I was
the chair of the education
health and human services
division so that so she was I
want to say home ground I guess
would be the way to talk about
that but she's done a great job
here I did have a couple couple
of other comments I wanted to
ask first why not there is a new
behavioral health initiative
through mckinley county they're
looking at a new facility we're
just completely overrun I mean
when it comes to need here
and i've i've committed to try
to help down are you part of
that collaboration
here at the college with
behavioral health and the county
I I have i'm sorry madam chair
and members of the committee I
have not participated in any
group meetings with the county
but I was looked in by a
lobbyist to a tend the training
for the behavioural health
initiative that they are looking
out so I did a ten that and I am
aware of the the model
it's certainly I know
representative johnson and I
were also part of that but they
had done as account had come out
to gallop and had individual
meetings I think with different
different folks in
representative johnson and I
were part of one of those
meetings i'm not a professional
in any way in that stuff when it
comes to behavioral health and
and how that
hate how you make that work.
But anything we can do to help
initiate more service here
course i'm gonna support and I
want to make sure though that
you're part of your part of that
link particularly because of the
career pathways program my
question to the group that's
organizing that is where do we
get the staff i've always been
concerned about getting licensed
staff for those kind of programs
but sounds like you might have
an option here through career
pathways
also wanted to mention that
asset mapping is a tool
afternoon in economic
development and I were to see
that you guys are going to do
that here next week when we look
at everything we have and how we
get from a to be disease that
kind of thing i'm glad to see
that you're going to use that
type of tool in now for the
health science program
I also wanted to make a comment
madam chair with the
particularly the leadership
there with less seam senator
souls.
You might recall senator several
years ago we had a discussion
this was a budget discussion
about the importance of higher
read being heard by you guys in
the budget process I don't know
if that ever happened but I had
tried to initiate that as the
formarill of sea
working with you and and some
others and the reason I bring
that up again is because
clearly when it comes to
education and the success in the
connection to was happening at
the high school
you guys are critical in out and
because of the programming peace
I think more so than lfc I know
a lot of times you just get we
would just get budget numbers
and on spreadsheets and that
kind of thing but to really
understand what outcomes
were being proposed would be
more in your field i'm hoping
that that can happen this is a
good example here of
collaboration between public
education and high red and as
she mentioned the whole dual
credits issue and it sounds like
three specific programs were
these high school kids are
coming right up here for career
development so again i'm gonna
ask if that's a possibility I
mean I think it's it's super
important.
Made
representative lenstrum the less
have always been trying to get
higher education under our
perview
for in many cases for the very
things that you're talking about
is that the education system
from early childhood i'll all
the way through really is a
seamless system and we try and
break it into separate pieces
and it really isn't however in
statute the LESC is limited just
to k twelve education with the
exception of teacher preparation
programs at universities
and so it causes some
difficulties because the
education committees when we get
into the legislature get all of
the early childhood in all of
the higher red bills yet we've
had no chance to discuss them
that them get them ready I tease
the hiring department a little
bit that sometimes they like
that there is that anyone there
accountable to in the interim
but then when they need
something they don't have anyone
to go asking of it either
and so we've had bills to do
that but they seem to get stuck
in judiciary committees in kind
of the tied up at the end as not
being a very high priority
and so we will continue and I
think there have been bills
introduced either in the house
are in the senate almost every
year since i've been there to
expand the scope some of l c d
cover all of education but so
far we have been unsuccessful in
getting that formally changed
you know that a good point madam
chair is the whole early
childhood education piece which
happens up here also
the programming appear and then
the the staff for our educated
here so it just does not make
sense to me that there would be
that break in understanding how
the whole system is supposed to
work in what those outcomes are
but without i'll just.
If you need help on that i'm
certainly willing to help
because I as you know i'm always
advocated for some of that for
goodness and now we have a
perfect example and we don't
have a lot of resources in rome
I mean we need to you know get
the most of out of the money
that we do get out here and
collaboration is key thank you
manager
thank you representative
representative black
thank you madame chairman think
you chance to resell and I love
your presentations are also good
and you're also such a coming
presence here I think that's
probably why it's such a a great
atmosphere here at univer gallop
but madame chairman chancer I am
really excited to hear about the
charter school uh building
that's going to happen I think
that so call because I love
students being able to use their
time in high school to gain
credit toward their degree so
madam chair i'm just wondering
how many students at unam gallop
are doing dual credit and what
percentage if it's if you know
what presentative the population
here uses the dual credit madame
chairman madam chair
representative black we have
over seven hundred dollar credit
students in her under campus
which is a little less than half
a via total traditional college
didn't population
so that will go up to cost to a
thousand.
Or I should say mse
yes close to
once we get to twenty twenty
seven
between
the manager and thank you for
that that is so encouraging to
hear that there's so many
students who want to pursue a
career or at least want to take
some classes to get those credit
so that they can see what they
want to do because not everyone
knows what they want to do right
at a high school I know I didn't
switched around with a bunch of
different air majors which cost
me dearly before the opportunity
to scholarship so
many tier and so I think that's
so good and I I do want to know
regarding the reimbursement
because they know on the state
level the reimbursement is lower
I believe for dual credit so how
do you guys make that up in your
budget to ensure that you can
provide those services as well
as continuing to keep the lights
on madame chairman
madam chair members of the
committee that's a really good
question
we just deal with what we have
to do to make the make the
balance work
for any extra funding we could
get credit
and I think that that's probably
something that legislators
should thinking about
I I know that this was unfunded
mandate and we have you know the
schools to college is especially
the community colleges are doing
their best to meet the these
door credit demands and I
personally value door credit and
see the benefit completely so I
hope that will continue these
conversations about how to
efficiently and effectively fund
door credit.
Thank you madame chair and I
think that's a to important
conversation to have because you
guys are doing such a tremendous
service for the community and I
think it's imperative that we as
a legislature give you the tools
to be able to continue to do
that work and it I mean your
campus is beautiful your
building new buildings your
renovating things it's it's
incredible to see and I would
just love to have that
conversation about those because
it's it's a great service and
i'm just I can't stand off good
things about what new mexico
higher education is doing
regarding to a credit and
providing these services so that
we can have a good work force
and teaching and in health care
and business and I was a
business major finally after
after my journey to find it
after media arts and god only
knows what else I studied but I
think that so important to just
have a a learning thing tank for
people to grow and especially at
a at a two year college like
this I believe it's probably a
more culturally
beneficial experience because
you get to be in a classroom
with people who are not
necessarily just an eighteen or
nineteen or twenty something
you're old but they could be
going back to school to learn
new things so I think the more
diverse classroom is great so I
can't see enough good things
thank you madame chair I really
appreciate the time and good
luck out their chancer thank you
thank you
representative allison
thank you madame chair thank you
for the presentation it's good
to hear that you're a lot of
renovation on your older
buildings like the girly hard so
far
as you're talking about dual
credit
I was one of the big promoters
of dual credit keep their
several times there are it come
before a
hfc the house appropriations
that they were going to be cut
but with the strong leadership
of a
chair linstrom we were able to
keep it in there and after she
left us.
I continued fighting for it so
there was a few times that they
wanted to reduce it but we
thought to get it restored back
to the original amount and i've
so happy there some of their
institutions there are using
that deal credit funding is a
is something good it's a good
investment you also mention the
you have opened a native
american services center I think
there is a tribute to a high
percentage of your attendance
because one of your earlier
reports we heard that the
native attendance was quite high
and at that time we had ask you
quite are you doing to entice
more in the way of student
housing or dormitory in my
districts and on college built
beautiful dormitory student
donatory I think it has forty
units you know it's a good start
I always brag about my my sam
one college so
i'm just wondering if you're
doing anything about student
housing madame
madam chair representative
allison thank you for your
question.
Student housing
um has been a consistent
discussion item in the fifteen
years that i've been here
and
for a variety of reasons I think
we we have eighty four acres
that we own that unm ones and
the board members have been
supporting
new construction for buildings
that provided education
so that has been the the
directive and the direction that
we've taken i'm so far however
I would be certainly happy to
meet with someone community
college and president and any of
her leadership to discuss how
the developed their bit their
plan their model for student
housing and i'm see what you
could potentially happen here
there are many ways that we
could do this and it doesn't
just have to be the university
by itself
and I think that
we really need to be
collaborating with the county um
in any other resources that
could be available in our
community to look at this so i'm
glad that you brought this app
and I will i'm definitely reach
out to believe it's president
pending grass.
And see what what she can
provide me where as far as that
information thank you very much
thank you madame chair
voice chair pinto thank you
madame chairman members that the
committee thank you for your
presentation it was very
exciting to attend some of the
graduations in here's some input
from the students about the
support services that you are
is
starting to really give them
even at the bit better level and
the with that you know they're
finishing their finishing or
education not stopping our
feeling like it's that much of
the battle so I really
appreciate that we're being
forwarded because the numbers
are up way up and some of the
bills that we have seen or heard
the degrees in are the fields we
we need so please continue to
work in reach out to a sectors
anyway we can appeal in any
further thank you thank you for
the work you deal thank you
senator rependa
thank you
I too just want to thank you so
much for the amazing work you're
doing here and providing all the
services I did attend the career
technical and education
recognition ceremony I attended
as an anti
and was really impressed and
proud of you know to be a family
member in the audience.
Uhm of their success program and
then I also work at the hospital
so I do see the students come
through and do their internship
and they're their pathway
learning portals it's amazing so
uhm and then i'm so happy that
you're providing the native
american
center.
Um you know yesterday we were in
chief springs and we had make
four or five students who are
doing the work for us program
and just to continue to
encourage your students to reach
out and attain an education or a
career or a vocational you know
it's hard because
look like how far we had to
drive to sheep springs and the
surrounding areas so just one
appreciate all of your work and
terrible I support I support you
just let me know.
Thank you
okay so thank you for your
presentation and no more
questions committee members
will move on to a next
presentation.
Seated schools.
Doctor caba bega school
superintendent and curby johnson
school board president.
Welcome.
Good morning
I think my port president went
to go take a break
so he'll join us as indicated
comes back in
good morning and it's
apprivilage to be certain in
front of.
The indian affairs committee
this is my first time ever to be
sitting in front of you guys so
it's gonna be
um
giving you information and we
would really like to get a lot
of input or a lot of help from
the state of new mexico
let me start all over dr johnny
cable we get instantly gave it
uninsured or touchy business
chain
nor buy near the shachi not as
she additionally it would l then
their son and she know and my
son ado none inch
a man said all um just to share
with you i'm originally from
shipprock new mexico to invery
proud to work with and my
community to come back in after
I got my education come back to
my community and work there and
provide services for young
children that we have so with
our priorities with ship
associate at schools what we're
asking for and with late two um
look at an where we're
lacking is our priority for ship
associate schools's teacher
housing and
she practice i'll say that
schools is in an area or it's
located it's kinda hidden hidden
gym and if you know where
northern apple medical center is
on the north side of town and as
you know you have the net
college that has a north campus
so do you have the net college
the
hospital that sits behind a new
northern apple medical center
rate behind the northern never
medical center you have to
do a hospital in behind it all
hospital is the northern the
north campus of the net college
and right behind.
Then their college is where our
campuses and right behind theirs
only green
um greenness of ship brought
that you will see
you have we have grass we have
nice trees we have a very
beautiful campus and we just
recently demolished the all
normatories went through six
which is that was right next to
the net college and arm we are
we ground we broke ground july
fifteenth for a new
new
residential so that's gonna debt
in pargress and we're looking at
hopefully opening up doors next
september and
again we serve children from pre
k through twelve grade within
the community and outside
surrounding areas of armship so
right now we are working handed
hand with a kind of
residential
assistance with domitories we
have like about ten beds each
other olds and boys if we have
the students to be held and we
should we bring them in to
chiprock for for classes and
this is my second year discount
and be starting my second year
as the superintendent there I
was the principle it at saviors
community school within the
organization so this is my six
year at chipotle so see it
scores so are
what we've been looking at is um
like I was saying we
concerned that we have as were
lacking the um teacher housing
and as you see at the bottom of
your
one page that you have we're
looking at one ten when fifteen
or either thirty but or goal is
thirty housing units because we
get teachers from all over um
they have to
relocate from.
All over the united states and
we have no housing
they have to move to let corters
I have I have stacked or
traveling in from here from
galler to work we have people
that are living from farmington
to astech in the surrounding
area where they have to travel
in so this is my next goal is to
look at teacher housing to get
it not only from the state we
are looking at
um looking at now plenation to
help with the cost to an other
areas where we can touch base in
and as you can see um we do have
an estimated car that will be
looking at them we like to tap
in and we'd like to get your
support in where we would need
to go again like I said this is
my first time so um looking at
the ten housing units if we are
looking at square footage at
five hundred five hundred and
fifty dollars per square footage
if it's the house sizes fifteen
hundred square feet it's gonna
cost
two hundred fifty thousand
so that's for time but we're
aiming for thirty which is
looking at thirty thirty three
million but we're
maybe in um phases we would like
to do this and know we had to
start off with them planning we
do have the lan and arm just
wanted to share that information
with you again that's.
Our goal to look at some housing
for our teachers they don't have
to travel very far and do right
there for her children to
continue the services that they
can provide for our students and
they just wanted to share that
um since i've been the
superintendent with the support
of the school board um we are
really enhancing our curriculum
really enhancing the
standards of the state of new
mexico making sure we have a
curriculum call beyond textbook
that we're implementing full
force and we are also we revent
are now who curriculum
this over the summer so we're
really improving in in making
sure that we're looking at
proficiency of our students in
the culture language and also in
our academic portion of it in
arm again like I said we're also
really trying to include an
really have our community
members are stakeholders be a
part of our school so I just
want to share that with you in I
know that lot of you are not
familiar with your associated
school we are a tribally control
school
but we do serve and we do umm
work in the kids that school
district that says is also
central consolidated so we
try and collaborate with them a
lot more
in making sure that we provide
services cause we're all in one
community in the toll the the
superintendent there too also
that there are the students are
our children and we need to be
able to communicate and
collaborate together to make
sure that our students are
successful so i'm gonna hand
over there mike over two mister
johnson our schoolboard
president to introduce himself
and how is uh full force
supporting what we're doing.
Hello good morning
yati she could be chancing in
chef a touch easily for
simplicity's chain but that made
a snow key on it should charm I
just wanted to think the
committee for allowing us to
speak here today and that I hope
you all travel back wherever you
need to safely this weekend um
the school board is in very
supportive of that to be gave me
in their superintendent for
cheaper associated schools and
this is a another direct need to
issue that we've been trying to
retain our teachers here in our
community of the forecorners
region is the lack of housing on
the never who nation so this
would really help try to retain
some of the teachers that we
need in our local school areas
here so I just wanted to say
thank you and thank you for your
your time thank you
thank you committee members
vice chair senator pento
thank you matter and members of
the committee
because my understand I mean we
don't know where you give money
to like now
and they think that's where we
need to distinguish is how the
the differences between sassy
and then never hope prep uhm
because they know there has to
be a fiscal agent if we are
putting funding for told
somebody no
there's a couple oh
or budget people are in here
they're out in the holly know if
anybody in here has an idea of
where that needs to go but they
can't
done a lot of work it is it
probably when I was surprised
because I used to coach and we
would go to some games out in
the area and now it's a very
different capital now didn't
when I remember
which is good which is good
because in my area we have.
Uh community school and we know
little patch aggress when you
drive in but not really much for
their students to enjoy
and to raise the level of the
facilities for the students is
various century concert means
happy students happy teachers
happy score so and that's one of
the basic things you can do is
with with the infrastructure
that there
so you think there are a couple
questions that
will need to answer on rn to
find out in I think just having
a little more to about the
project because couldn't you
brought ground for the rest of
the dental facility
that land you already had an
idea of the land didn't have to
be withdrawn because the school
already has it and there with
the residential
center being there that the
infrastructure would probably be
very supportive already
that it wouldn't need to be
created infrastructure so it's
just the planning planning and
design it's probably what you
need to start to kick it off and
if he can get a sin estimate on
that
because even if it is not
something that we can actually
cause I I don't know where the
barrier would be at usa just a
find out about the fiscal agent
ability and and how the money
would find out to you if we give
it if we're able to go that
route and then
that we can also have the gate
too at the federal level from
this community from this
committee
too to have a congressional that
they were all here yesterday
well we were in sheep springs
they were there with this
to advocate to for the need in
the area do you know also
question fire this teacher
coming from I mean what twitters
to hardest position for you to.
Bill I guess
about a year ago we were at or
amount of staff that we have is
the whole organization is about
the hundred and twenty seven and
before we add it some positions
we were at one fourteen um
before this year so at one
fourteen about a year and a half
ago we were at like about fifty
seven staff
and that's where we had to work
very closely with the screwboard
to ensure that we got we were
able to um higher staff.
And even now we had interviews
and so forth
a lot of them like we had people
that were applying from clovers
down all way down south adaming
last cruises but the problem is
the housing area issue so
as of right now
but we were fully staffer at a
hundred and three currently
right now so
there's just like about two
about
I will say about five staff to
ear two at the um high school in
three at the elementary that we
still have a vacancy for so five
teachers in the rest of the
support staff and with that are
the first of the furthest
currently right now that are
traveling in is like I said from
from here from gallop every day
and then we have another one
that they travel in from
cortes micus area though creek
area those and then as tech
outside of as tech going towards
durangle we have another one
that comes in from the platter
area so those over the furthest
and last year had one that was
coming in close to handling
which is near just now did
so that's the furthest that we
had arm staff traveling in from.
Madame chair members that the
community and at that ground
breaking the the chapter
officials the local community
was there too so i'm pretty sure
you have the support of the
local community to as far as
moving that they're not gonna do
any of that yes we do.
And they think that's very
important to as far as we move
forward do we know if the nation
I know they were there
but how
do we know if there'll be able
to assist you on this.
I have discussed with them
several of the council delegates
and again like um not never has
done with it to talk to
honourable and she said that as
long as we get older stuff in
and she was willing to support
that also so as much as possible
we're wanting to get everything
together and make insurer that
we move forward with this we do
have the support
do you know if you've so many
spanix would be to make a
connection with our indian
affairs department and are
new mexico public education
department
that way the plan in design is
something that would probably
need the initial amount of how
much it's gonna cost and then
compare that to other projects
in the state so we're not so we
were we're hitting the ball park
yes I also talk to
governor um the governor about a
month and a half but when they
were at prep in I have cut to
who and she was in full support
in that just getting things
going and then they get to cost
of the umm design in planning
we would need to get together
and yes we'll get that
altogether.
With other council delegate some
the other one we have is a
hulling and this beginning and
then the other one would be a
doctor ending is to so those
would be our other two other
three resources we could
probably reach up to for the
council delegates with a never
honest
thinking and i'm just gonna cash
in your because
it to name was to think that we
had the capital out the
reversing list
that didn't help came in with
the other case for some of the
projects so this one makes you
that would not getting in over
our head where we end up not
finishing the residential
because it's then
and then move into this but I
think also when you start some
projects it's a good flow to to
keep cheap things you know going
constructing especially when you
have someone in the area
louisings work so I think the
next step is really
the plan in design how much it's
gonna cost cause this amount
you're giving about five hundred
and fifty percent where but uh
well thanks for your amount that
i've heard are usually about the
school building not really about
residential so maybe that's
that's where but I was like this
is in a lot
this isn't it light to me
but I guess i've heard their
breakdown if this is just an ask
an amount from us you know
combine with others or you know
the whole total project costs
because we did need to see that
there's some leveraging coming
in that's why I ask about the
nation even if you if the
governor gives a little bit of
what she can and then we can see
what our federal partners to
from there I forget what that
fund is called that they're able
to
give some too so I don't know I
would members have further
questions but they came out of
chair thank you for coming bef.
Force and for serving our
children and are up there
especially the ones that them
come in from the nation that
need a home in the residents i'm
excited to see the reds that in
character when you guys open
that
think you manage you
thank you representative little
thank you madam chair thank you
for your presentation today and
and now I do remember great
first and that was at the summit
last month or so yes it's good
to see you again
so
err bring it related to
specifically to the request for
housing that you're making we've
been hearing over the last
couple of days the
need specifically to address a
a project a building has
something that's going to be
constructed but one of the
things if you recall madame
chair who is the operation in
maintenance of a facility a
project whatever it is it's
being built that
uh
is such an important in key
piece to
being able to
have these uh buildings or
projects established and
continue for a long period of
time to be available for a long
beautiful time so again i'm not
an expert on the
operations and maintenance piece
of the funding again I would
look to her colleagues who are
familiar with the appropriations
process and how that might fit
in but I think that's one
question if you haven't already
i'm going to presume that you
have had some discussions
already so my question madam
chair and specifically would be
how have you considered that
addressing the operations in the
maintenance
up needs for a housing at number
at any level.
Thank you manager
yes
we will you will help us in the
bill and then once we have the
building them built then we will
use our
grant contract rent funds the
maximum and the facility meeting
it's funds to keep that in
operation so there will probably
be added to our own maximum so
there will be funding to rent it
so.
And just follow cushion managers
so you're
if i'm not mistaken those
dollars are actually it will in
the federal government and
anyhow if that's where some of
the money was coming from their
cues i'm in a waiting list of of
uh facilities that are waiting
for these funds and they can
move up the line as money
becomes available is that what
you're referring to or are you
looking specifically adam I
guess just the concern is you
know I would it would be
and this would be wonderful to
have to establish an
to have it held up or the our
person to maintenance piece
be a more challenging to to
address if the funds are not
identified or the sources of
them I I what I would offer and
so
that it's an offered to consider
thank you thank you and we would
work with our funding
and part of that would be the
what we call the facility and
then it would be added onto the
maximum which is basically the
armed facility portion of the
budget and so forth will be
working with the
funding source.
Okay thank you.
Representative allison.
Thank you madame chair
doctor began and curby thanks
for the good presentation of who
is your primary thunder or you
are federally funded school bia
charter you mention tribally
controlled so where does your
operation budget and you're
total budget come from
we get flended the same way that
now who prepties it's under a
bie and we get her funding from
there.
Okay madame tear o
n and earlier presentation or
the presentation just before you
the tenseler of unm indicated
that when I ask the question
about housing see indicated that
she will communicate and
collaborate with a president of
san on college because they have
a new dormitory you know I was
good
I was glad to hear a common like
that where there's communication
cooperation and collaboration
several times we had our
meetings at never haul
preparatory schools and the
audience my car leagues from all
over the state always saying
there never who
is always a shining example
maybe
if I could encourage you to do
the communication co op recently
and collaboration with never
hope head of school this
percentage
I think that would be a good
start she could put you i'm sure
she could point to in the right
directions because our ultimate
goals is educated quality never
hold children so I think with
that single we need more
cooperation collaboration so
just my comment on
thank you for the presidency and
think madame chair.
I don't see any further
questions or comments from our
committee just when I thank you
for presenting before us and
will do the best we can
continue hearing from you and
our discussion since you were we
can go okay thank you thank you.
And now or next presenters
time and they're setting an
upgrade
so where
were about moving until lunch
you would you like to.
Continue with our next
presentation and brake for a
working lunch or how would you
like to move forward committee
okay.
I agree okay so let's go ahead
and call our next presenters now
the whole prep school and that
would be doctored dara tabra
tabra
and then I also see mr robert
appedaca
sherich ron horrors ever asked
esco escoher.
Thank you welcome.
Yate
there's only one way the sectors
presentation good morning
everybody at a
**** a data tee room in this
year like on initially but on a
vicious team belagana dash a cha
valegan additionally ado
is there new zealand bination
and sell and my role at
navolprep is the associate head
of school for for advancement
and outreach and navigal prep
being navo prep we have a strong
commitment to language and
culture a sustaining dinner
language and culture through our
instruction through our score
through all of our offerings and
as such as I introduce myself to
you as a non naval hooper sim at
to ensure that i'm living our
school mission and model as well
I also want to give
president and the checker and
horse the opportunity their
introduced himself
could be good morning yet a bit
made and chair and madame vice
chair members of the committee
it's always good to be here and
it's good to be back home here
in the galip area
shirkroad horse school board
vice president for naval prep in
may nab language is how age
introduced myself formally
known as asia companies now
thought totally bush is cheap
although not credit attitude
that technically industrial
should not let
even the community of steamboat
canado core and feels area but
of you know as a always let
either my fellow
representatives and senators
from the area know I was born in
galip and I have family that's
here in galts of galpas also
home for me as well so i'd like
to claim new mexico and arizona
on the naval nation there really
are no borders so they always
same from the four corners area
because I want to capsulate in
all the areas that it's home to
be thank you think you sell much
so before dive into the slides
which I hope you all received a
copy of the hand out.
I do want to acknowledge that
our head of school missus
shannon allison listened he was
unable to join today she sends
her kind regards her
appreciation to all of you and
she's looking forward to
continuing to work with you all
at this this session in this
year and she wishes she could be
here but unfortunately i'm she's
night and it gives us the chance
to come and speak on her behalf
so and kindest regards from mrs
percenti also on acknowledge
that gallop is a home to many of
our students as well as so
you're here where our students
are from any students take the
bus up to farmington from here
as well as for those of you from
other areas we have business
from bernalio add to a city as
well as a cross the nation and
for our students so I want to
begin by sharing a little bit of
an overview out of naval
preparing score now will prepare
to rescore founded and nineteen
ninety one by the naval nation
tribal council it was founded to
sustain naval language and
culture and also to build
students as leaders now and into
the future do this cargo not
only is our school mission at
which means leaders now and into
the future
are we sit on eighty two point
four five acres which are
purchased by the naval nation
from the women's division of
the women's division of the
global board of global
ministries the united methodist
church and we'll talk a little
bit more about the history of
our campus as we continue in the
presentation it's important that
you know that our campus has
hosted schools for the last
hundred years and but it was in
nineteen ninety one that we
began our era of self
determination with the current
facilities of naval prepatory
score.
The.
Naval preparatory score as those
kind of mentioned in the prior
presentation by assassi never
preparatory score is funded as a
tribally controlled grant score
which will be sharing a little
bit more information as well so
we're funded federally through
the bureau of indian education
as a mentioned the mission and
of naval preparatory scores you
this cargo nat arni meaning
leaders now and into the future
our vision is to create a
compassionate and carrying home
where the naval community
thrives we strive to install a
strong sense of self identity
cultural foundations and global
awareness in our students
through this whole listing
approach to education we prepare
students at the tools and
knowledge they need to become
leaders within their communities
and on a regional national
international scale we faster
and inclusive environment that
welcomes all individuals by
attempting to remove barriers
some of the barriers that we
work to
remove are barriers of distance
that's why our best is ran ah
twelve hundred miles a week at
two go and pick up students drop
them after bring them back those
are an expenses that we don't
receive funding for so we're
we're always trying to find
additional funding stores within
our operating budget to ensure
that we remove the barrier of
distance of course residential
is another component of that
barrier that we remove because
so many students come from out
of the area to attend that well
prep we have to maintain a
strong and residential facility
first in
the next slide you can see
some pictures of our students
were really proud of our
students achievements this year
we had an eight of our student
to received the naval language
bilingual seal and showing their
fluency in the naval language
this was out of the twelve
students on naval who received
the cr and what was really
exciting about this achievement
of our students was the credit
that they gave to their teachers
and score they shared that many
of them had didn't have the
foundations of language.
Which in their home but when
they came to school they
participated in our four year I
required course work and
developed a strong understanding
moving them to fluency and so
we're really incredibly proud of
their efforts you can see the
picture in the top left of our
students who were aware the
place and blank get and by the
naval national early we have a
residential program that allows
an actor school program that
that is truly focused on culture
you'll see on the tap rate
picture picture of the shoe
games that are hosted that our
school we encourage students
from other schools across the
region to come at prospective
students can come in
participating it's a good
transfer community to come
together.
In addition we have
we have a year see the photo of
our students at graduation
dancing getting ready to go and
walk across the stage our
students
have a hundred percent
acceptance rate into college for
your colleges and universities
and they're excited and proud
for their next steps as they
walk into the future
a little bit about our
demographics we broke down our
never prep enrollment by county
so you are can see either
representation of your
constituents at our school
see we have for a students from
bernalio county once didn't from
travers one from support forty
one from a kindly
thirteen from reor reward one
hundred and forty nine from san
on county two from sand all one
from valencia we're always
reaching to increase are
enrollment ensure that all one
hundred ten chapters of the navo
national representative and also
that there is a home for our
students across from a
craspination in addition we have
students who come from outside
of new mexico in arizona the
fourth corners region many
students
may be are the children of
alumni or relatives who want
their still children to come
back we have a story of one
student whose family had moved
out to massachusetts for work
and her out and they enrolled
their child in score naval prep
and then actually their whole
family ended up moving back
through remote work
opportunities I believe
representative little you met
with one of those students last
session and so we we take prive
in the opportunities of our
students and families to come
home to the nation through naval
prap experience in the
residential program was the way
that out their family found that
avenue back home you can see
our graduation rate seventy
three percent of our students
graduate from college within six
years six years kind of the
national marker I adds often
referred to its a four year
degree but six years is there
and.
The statistical time that's
given to a look at completion
rates the comparison data is
that they the national us
graduation rate is sixty two
percent and for indigenous
communities are indigenous
enrollment it's i'm forty nine
percent graduation rate so we're
really proud of our students who
have surpassed that again that
are a way of seeing our students
live that mission of your desk
cargo not only
and I already mentioned of
course our college acceptance
rates which were really excited
about in proud of as we move
into our schools strategic
priorities we have a big focus
on ensuring that our alarm night
a part of our students
experience and as are out there
a lot they have traveled into
their couriers and developed
their standings in their
respective fields we want our
students to connect to those
alumni are and when I have a
great example sitting right next
to me mister sharick grown horse
class in nineteen ninety nine at
naval prep who has come back and
provided incredible support to
our score it's that kind of
leadership that we seek to
continue to strive for
as we look at the next slide we
also know that are in romen
which is as I mentioned two
hundred and ninety six we we
know that that is a small
population of students small but
mighty and we have a very proud
of the impact we have on our
students their families and
their communities but we seek to
continue our outreaching
communities to ensure that that
we have
that we're providing as much
support and guidance in in
collaboration as possible so you
can see just a small list of
some of the things that we do to
be good neighbors and good
relatives are you can see some
of the professional development
opportunities that I had a
school participate sand in in
attempts to contribute to from
debos bar na the national gifted
association we work really
closely with the new mexico
public education department.
We have provided chainings and
professional developments
through the indian education
division we work with the
college and current reading this
bureau
as well as the us department of
education we have received
selective competitive grants
from the US department of ad and
we work to insure that we're
good relatives to them as the
they determine where their
funding should go and what kind
of projects to implement and
mispercently I head of school is
a a subcommittee member of tibet
for i'm sorry since a committee
member is
a representative on the
education subcommittee attitude
and as the she's helping to
support their the tribal amp
interior budget committee as
they make their decisions about
how to allocate funding so the
next time you see miss for
sending which you i'm sure
you'll see her soon ask her a
little bit about some of the
tribally controlled school
funding for me I allocations and
because we're doing really a lot
of outreach to try there request
funds and pay period for a staff
with department of defense
schools there
in addition now prep works
closely with the department of
the net education and we have
helped the department of dinner
education through with some of
the competitive grant
initiatives the US department
have add out were really
grateful for the opportunity to
support and partner on those
projects as well as
of course during cover eighteen
sharing our plans and our
approaches
and largely with current naval
language and culture is a
incredible opportunity for us to
share our practices and also to
learn from our neighbors and we
participate in jom trainings as
well as working with
organization call naval highways
and by serving as their fiscal
agent as their developing media
to support language and culture
acquisition through like tv
shows like pbs kids.
Umm furthermore where and we've
received several grants for
native american language
programming all that is to say
that we work tremendously to
increase our findings that we
can provide the most relevant
and excellent educational
opportunities possible to
students.
This is especially important as
current funding formulas through
the federal bae don't
necessarily allocate what we
need on the next two slides
you're seeing new mexico capital
outlay funding as well as new
mexico programmatic finding we
really want to give a huge think
you and from the bottom of our
heart and she happened sago
thank you so much for the
support from the representatives
and senators at your impact has
been felt and it's an incredible
incredible
contribution to our school our
community are students and if
you haven't visited our campers
I hope that you might be able to
come and take the time because
you'll see across the campus the
impact of state of new mexico
finding and I do want to make
one clarification on the twenty
twenty finds it says fully
expended I heard senator pinto
make a comment about the
reversing list there was a four
thousand on that ways reverted
due to an bet the project was
fully complete it so I did want
to make a correction to the
power point slide where it says
fully expended the project was
fully completed at nine and
ninety two percent of the funds
were spent
out for example as you continue
to look at some of the funding
that we've received through
capital outlay you can see that
one of the most significant
impacts especially in in the
most recent years has been the
the funding that has provided
our new student home on campus
so we received five million and
in additional two million from
the state of new mexico uhm at
those funds were matched by the
navo nation in twenty twenty
three and we received an
additional three million so I
think i'm getting ahead of
myself I have a whole breakdown
of things on the next lights all
get to that but I want to just
make sure that you take no of
the incredible impact of that
capital outlay funding is had on
our campus you can see from
residential facilities to campus
improvements.
Team are we received some funds
for the steam cultural
performing one the center which
we're in the process of planning
and expending
in and we're incredibly grateful
for it for this support I do
want to bring your attention to
the next five new mexico
programmatic funding this is
something that maybe you all
haven't heard or are not as
familiar with as it's not always
through the accept funds many of
these plans we've applied for
competitively through the pad
and so if you look at the next
slide you can see and the
general appropriations act the
sign of course is on your list
the two hundred thousand we
receive for behavioral health
providers for to support our
programmatic costs at eight but
we also wanted to highlight at
the the impact of some of the
bills that were passed their
stereo each b fifty two the ib
student fees are resulted in a
nine thousand dollar
reimbursement for half of our
student fee expenses so if
you're remember ap fees are
covered across the state but I
be fees weren't included in
their special mention and for a
funded schools to be included in
in that reimbursement so thank
you so much to the
representatives here who
supported that bill and we're
really grateful for the the nine
thousand dollars nine thousand
three hundred and two dollar
reimbursement that we received
and further more we've received
some additional funds these ones
are competitive so we did have
to apply but we're appreciative
that the legislation included
access to bare funded schools so
that we could
be at least submit an
application for a review and
then go through the competitive
award process so through that
competitive process now though
pretty was selected there's an
innovation's own score which
allowed s two hundred thousand
dollars to support some of our
cte programming and of course
innovations across the campus
in addition we received two
hundred and seven dollars two
hundred and seventy.
One hundred and forty two
thousand dollars this was a non
competitive process so that was
the way that it was written in
legislation for next year and
see and that has been an
incredible impact on our film
pathway program our students are
creating these beautiful films
then I would love to share them
with you and next time you'll
see the quality of the film the
stories that are being told the
connection to language and
culture
is amazing and so it's it's
allowing us to use cte funds to
help our students to tell their
own stories but also to develop
these very transferable skills
that they can use into the work
force and agree after time may
have im not sure the exact
percentage I want to say it's
almost like thirty percent of
our students are enrolled in
that cte film pathway because
they see the impact they love to
learn the skills and then their
videos are incredible they were
presented at the forecorners
film festival earlier this year
and they and blew it out of the
park so I did want to also bring
your attention to the license
bullet on the slide indian
education division funding at a
big shahad to assistant
secretary katie and when he go
who has been working with naval
prep and and we've received
funding for the past three years
however we did receive
notification that we may no
longer be eligible for future
funding and through the indian
education division based on some
definitions of public school and
so we're we're interested in
looking more into what that
means and and how that could
impact our funding eligibility
though we did receive
notification that fiscal year
twenty five would be our last um
our less opportunity to be
eligible for those fine so
that's something I wanted to dry
your attention to and we will be
following up with you all as we
get more information about what
that might mean
for the future session.
Whether everything that we have
going on all of the projects and
initiatives and success we also
want to remember where we came
from so you can see on the next
slide and outline of the way
that our school has our school
count best has developed over
years as we started the
presentation I mentioned that
naval prep was founded in
eighteen ninety one but
for over a hundred years prior
had been this score and so we
started and then as the campus
started is the naval method
mission score transition to
naval emission academy
transition to naval academy and
then to naval preparatory score
and this is a really important
first to be aware of because
it's a matter of self
determination of the naval
nation and also the self
determination of communities and
constituents who are calling
first schools that reflect the
needs of their communities I
don't know sure give you have
anything you wanted to add in
we have a long rich history and
I know residential schools and
indian country is a big issue
and I know that the department
of interior through the
secretary didn't announcement a
couple days ago talking about
some of those experiences
we've learned we've learned from
those experiences we've had a
dark past we've had a
residential school we moved away
from the terminology dorm or and
we're moving it to stood at
homes but we've sort of taken
ownership of that past and we're
a reflection of indian self to
termination so we're taking what
was done that that was very dark
in the past and we're trying to
embrace it and make our school
our own and this is what we're
doing language and culture is
the foundation of who we are as
now the whole people and native
american people and that's one
of our key priorities so just
wanted to show that when we talk
about residential schools dark
pass but we've taken this
lessons and we're trying to move
for we're moving forward
and we're taking control of what
we can control.
Absolutely
another example of our alumni
who are leading the way doctor
windy gray eyes professor at
university of new mexico is the
naval prepalam and she is
working with our school to to do
a research project where she
interviews a landlay from from
the past to see what their
experience is wearing to help us
kind of create a a strong idea
of how we're moving into the
future at our own students have
supported in the interview
process so it's been a really
like amazing opportunity for
first or passed in future in
present to come together and one
thing we did do this past last
year we have actually teened up
with dr gray I was in the
university of new mexico's
native american studies
department and we actually
created a course with unm and
about prep and it was all about
the history of residential
schools that's going forward you
know that's something that we
want to make available to other
schools especially those that
are residential schools eh I
think it's in another example of
the outrage that we're
attempting to do is really serve
as a demonstration for what's
possible in the smaller school
environment to have this
laboratory of a dears
initiatives a laser sharp focus
and where we're going and then
to ensure that those best
practices are shared across our
nations and across the state of
new mexico
so
we are also here to share with
you a little bit about our icip
requests and we're really
grateful for any support that
can be offered through the
legislative session this year
and your c included in the power
point the acip numbers as well
as amounts the first request is
a additional funding since
support student housing on
campus will talk a little bit
more in the next couple sides
about the incredible
conflictment of the new student
home but as the new student home
is being constructed we want to
ensure that the.
The same standard and quality is
at present throughout all of our
homes are residential facilities
on campus so we are requesting
one point five million further
renovation of existing student
homes in addition the second
icipie request we have is two
million for campus
infrastructure and drainage this
would navel prep sits under the
farmington airport and so the
airport of course is on a may
sale with the nice little runway
but the ran off comes right down
into our school and you'll see
attempts to to facilitate the
drainage throughout but it as we
invest in the buildings and and
capital development of the
school we have to protect them
and that's where the dream edge
and infrastructure request comes
in we see our account best for
the next hundred years shining
brightly and we want to make
sure that the state's investment
in our campus is protected
through infrastructure i'm
further more we have another
icap request for two million for
additional general
infrastructure improvements
these would be things like
sidewalks across campus eighty
eight adam needs and landscape
being as well as safety and
security
we also submit it or we're also
submitting a two hundred
thousand dollars request through
operational or gro funding and
again for to support behavioral
health providers on campus
as we talk about the icip
requires I also want to make
sure we draw attention to some
of the key issues I don't know
if you all received our one page
here but some of the the key
issues we have are not
only found in funding requests
but truly in some of the
structural components of the
funding formulas and so as we
look at the weighted student
unit and for bies scores we see
a vast under funding as compared
to state of new mexico we seek
your assistance and helping to
develop creative innovative
solutions.
That address this funding
inequity for our students who
are new mexico students of
course tribally controlled
schools cannot drama local tax
base cannot issue plans
primarily rely on issue on
support from federal government
the state of new mexico has
taken great strides and
providing additional funding to
be funded schools through some
of their the funding that I just
mentioned it might be then
through the funding through the
nmpad like the next jan or
innovation zone we urge you to
continue to assessed schools in
this way to breach that am gap
and also as as I mentioned how
best to look into the
legislative action that might be
taken to ensure that ba funded
schools are considered public
scores
and just to add a little more
give little more context to that
we've been a part of you know
our advocacy strategy is to also
reach out to the congressional
delegation our own congressional
delegation as well as other
congressional leaders especially
those that control
appropriations and budget on the
federal level so we are doing a
lot of education were only one
school but often times we are
advocating not only for our
school but also at the bie
schools and we're your help
comes in and I know if spoken
with a few legislators in the
recent past about just getting
letters from the committee of
supporting efforts to increase a
resources for a bie scores I
think it goes a long way and we
would just ask that's really how
you can help on the federal
level in when we go into this
conversations with different
congressional leaders will we
love to brag about new mexico
and the state legislature
because you are doing amazing
things per education the support
is there every state is
different but I think there's a
lot of good things happening
here for us in new mexico
the next slide your scene alone
nation investment in about prep
we want to highlight that.
In addition to working with the
said a new mexico we're working
with the nabo nationwide
increasing our asks where
seeking funding from the nation
and we're using their support
tick and incombination with the
state in new mexico to
to accomplish some of these
really big projects so we did
include a little bit of
information on that there for
yield I think most recently as I
mentioned before the nation
invested three million dollars
in what we consider to be
matching funds to the state of
new mexico so
in twenty twenty two the state
in new mexico awarded naval prep
five million dollars for the new
residential construction in
twenty twenty three they helped
us continue the project with
increase to construction costs
with an additional two million
and we were able to take that
seven million total to the
nation and request the final
three and that's when the nation
was able to to complete
through a funding match I do
want to note I mistake on the
slide it says there's a twelve
million dollars project it's
incorrect it was a ten million
dollar project the reason why it
says twelve and we wanted to
make sure you were aware it was
because naval prep did take a
loan for two million this was as
we waited for the reimbursement
funds and so we could get the
project continued and completed
and on time as so it's not a
twelve million dollars project
but it is ten and we are able to
repay that loan using the funds
that we were awarded then now
the the building was completed
in less than a year
and we broke ground in twenty
twenty three and
the grand opening is actually on
monday so students will be
moving in early in the next week
or two school starts august
twelfth and they are so excited
students are and fighting over
who's going to be in the new
student home and that's kind of
helped us to push ourselves
forward to continue the
renovations on existing homes
and we are so excited to have
this new home because it's truly
an example.
Of white a student home could
look like in the twenty first
century as we are moving beyond
some of the ways that
residential scores existed in
the past it's it includes a
healing room it includes a
cancelling office from into
health support it includes
multimedia spaces for students
can come together to that
project their projects onto the
wall till learning community and
it also includes a more full
kitchen than our others student
homes are students come from all
over and so they are able to now
live and learn to gather by
sharing food and community so
we're really excited to see how
this impacts are students while
being while at this score
especially as our students the
majority of our students are
there for either five or seven
days a week
again once boards direct
engineer thank you I know that
with during the state recent
state trouble leader summit that
was held with a governor of
michelle and grisham and the the
indian affairs department so I
know some of you were there to
be there for the community these
are travel communities and we
were able to share with you at
the you know give you a peak of
the residential
and his daughter mentioned you
know once more you were invited
to come to farmington on monday
in the morning and we could send
another reminder through like my
colleague are you vet who will
reach out once more and I hope
that you can get a chance to a
celebrate with the said it is a
truth it's a true success and I
think you know with all the
resources that you have provided
this over the last four to five
years it's helped us and so many
ways and I think you know I can
outlate it in three ways that
has helped us wine the most
important part is you allowed us
to build upon our culture
framework or language and
culture framework you help fund
are hogone our new hole gone in
that new hogon is used for
community learning it's used for
a cultural activities it's
learn.
Use for a language development
it is utilized
gosh it's always busy but that
really is the foundation of our
campus and you've also allowed
us to grow and were continuing
to grow we're trying to increase
capacity so that we can provide
other opportunities for other
naval who youth and native
american youth and so that sir
gallers to continue to expand as
much as we can given the funding
but you helped us move forward
in that initiative and alas is
just really allowing us to build
upon our education framework
supporting our international
backulate programs and
supporting all of our partners
partnerships with ped and so
thank you
think i'll so much and we stand
for a questions if you have any
additional questions or
information we can provide.
Madam chair pinto
thinking madame chairman members
of the committee thank you for
your presentation
lifts of sat when we see a lot
of the improvements that are are
going on especially when you
talk about education in the in
in that area
the um
to begin in some sense as we
move forward by very curious
about what you were saying about
not being able to access the
funding the longer for the
graphs
through the indian enemy ped so
i'm hoping we can address that
because I know there was a
request for a letter to be
drafted but I think my request
back to you is can we
incorporate some of the concerns
about the existing funding that
you were receiving and how do we
address it if it needs to be a
bit we got to make sure that
it's written in their order have
some kind of amendment put in
and then when you talk about the
water dream in improvement I
don't think it will have to
actually come from capital
outlet maybe to
but I think we should probably
be able to see if our deot or
the surrounding I know we have
the water
it's broken down to many
different departments but I know
there's some kind of funding for
drain it in a manner of speaking
and see if we can work together
with the I don't know if it's
the county or who owns that land
a north of you guys didn't see
what we can do to move that for
it so the burdens not all on you
guys
because they
we see in some places is when
part of the land are property
will kind of do what they need
to but if the other part is not
taking care of feel still see
issues with with coming into
your area so we want to make
sure all that's taking care of a
bit in it and has to be a while
your shed study.
Aspect of what we need to begin
then let's go ahead and move
that forward
to the think different coming in
on the wiki gates do not or
doors opening if we have to come
back to the table before the end
of the interim to have some of
this but for it for the
committee to take action or any
kind of motion I feel ready to
contactless ok that would be
great if I can respond and I
communication with the number
this is since secretary winnico
says that the an impedes also
looking for clarification so
they've submitted a letter to
the department of justice
the other new mexico department
of justice and their waiting for
their input regarding this issue
of of the funding concerns so I
will.
Absolutely reviser letter tech
to once we have more information
about exactly what revisions are
needed or whether it's an
amendment or not will start
doing a little more research on
our ends.
Um madman chair members of the
committee and they will clean up
to that there has been
communication with the federal
delegation about some
legislation
I think it was more directed up
about the salary so if you guys
are still pushing that it's
getting there the words getting
out and I hoping it'll be very
soon I think now other nation
listed one of the other steps
were still leading for input on
that legislation to see if it's
a
if they has their approval to to
move forward so if we can other
areas there we need to push on
her please let me know his
beginning support think you
manage.
Thank you
representative robert cabalero
think you madam chairman and
think it is vice chair because I
was going to ask a little bit
more in depth about the p d what
you made reference to the
language about public other than
stating that do can you speak a
little bit more about what the
with the particular issue is
because then
that will assist us and
assisting you and ped and we're
else need still
absolutely thank you for the
question I wish I had more
information to share but at this
time I don't have and too much
more where we received
correspondence this week from
the impact so we're in the
process of doing additional
research to determine exactly
and what are an except will be
in terms of the definition of
public schools and so once we
receive that once we
determine our next steps we will
absolutely keep the committee
informed of the information that
we find out can you
thank you madam chair and thank
you
that correspondence is from
whomper do you have in
particular
assistant secretary kdn when he
goes from the new mexico public
education department indian
education division and she
she shared that that it's
something that they're working
on and they hope they're able to
find a
resolution to
think you madam chair at the end
it kinda gives me a little bit
of a
insight because I think we're
going back and time
in in fighting wars concerning
um
who are service who wish who
were serving and the right to
self determinent and so uhm.
We need to probably be ready for
whatever the um
feedback is in that part
together concern but I can
almost tell you what that's
going to be so it means that
we're gonna have to address
certain structures institutional
structures and ways of how we've
been doing things and so if it's
impacting from the federal to us
then we need to be ready at the
state level to address that
really whole heartedly so think
you madam chair and thank you
very much will be waiting for
any feedback you give us thank
you.
Representative allison
thank you matter
I don't have a question but I
just like to make a comment
I believe that never help
prepare to reschool has been one
of my best investments of capped
lately
they were so proactive in
everything that they got
with the beginning of when I
started my term in twenty
nineteen
and it's occurred prior to that
at the as take high school where
there was student shooting
within a matter of hours and
maybe even a few days never hope
preparatory school was the first
school in the area to take
proactive action and securing
and make their school grounds as
safe as possible
after that they ask for capital
at least a request and we submit
it to them and they they were
the first ones on board in our
area to make their area safe so
I always
uh brag about and it's just
happy to cooperate with uh never
who prepared to reschool because
they are proactive.
I
submit capped all out the
requests for many chapters and
communities and different
projects
in all those areas often times
see reversion or people who
would ask for
extensions I have never had from
never had preparatory school
because they are proactive they
use all their funds and if they
have a little bit of excess that
you get some change they give it
back to the state that is
integrity so I just wanted to
make that comment and I wish my
colleagues to continue
supporting the never hope
preparatory schools are
i've only got five months to
encourage you guys thank you
very much thank you madame chair
I think you represent out of our
senate don't see any more of my
colleagues wishing to speak I
wholeheartedly and fully support
it now the whole prep i'm
familiar with now very prep when
it was now behold academy I
believe err my I know first hand
they're now the whole academy
now the prep turns out
successful great minds
individual slives my little
sister is all in alarm and so is
my brother in law and they are
now in seattle my brother in
laws amount mechanical engineer
at boeing and my little sister's
in telemet and has been with
eric clinic for many years and
now their sense are at the
university of washington
washington university also
following the same career path
and my nephews and turning out
boeing as a medicanical engineer
so it begins with
you know
now we're hoprable.
And then like you said the
family and the children are
raised and continue that career
pathway so I appreciate your
presentation thank you for
traveling here from farming time
and uh albertricky robert you've
traveled far and we will
continue to support
your efforts and
I will follow
waste here woman uhm pintos
advice on
amending and revising this
letter in will.
Will look at it again in
december when we endorse our
requests
any further comments from
committee members
thank you we will give us a few
minutes
we will have lunch
regis provided.
Do you want to close
up I just wanted to see thank
you so much to the committee and
thank you again for all of your
support and and of course if
you're in town we blood free to
start by our grand opening any
time you're informington let us
know would love to have you on
campus our students will just
blow you away and with their
passion and commitments to
service think you again then
think you to rather it need that
esco had our staff who helped to
coordinate this and I
participation here today.
Thank you in folks stay around
lench is provided
juries cafe sounds good.
You can see no we have no one
listed for a public comment
unless we missed anyone.
And we'd like to think um
galibian and branch thank you
sabrina thank you for hosting
our meeting here thank you for
always taking care of us for
breakfast for lunch we
appreciate you very much.
All right we will adjourn this
meeting and will go ahead and
have lunch and safe travels and
see you down the road
colleagues.
