Even though some of these
Uh,
from the 2 to 3 o'clock, the
Gallup water supply project, I
believe those might lead into
each other because it's the same
topic to me. So we might just
hear from both and then hold
questions till after.
Um
OK, well, where's our,
yes I just got an update for the
title tomorrow.
OK this implementing the Indian
Education. OK. So for tomorrow
on the update on Yazi Martinez.
It will be implementing the
Indian education Act, and we'll
have Assistant Secretary Katie
Anneanico, um, here tomorrow.
So why uh
There's my uh Pinedale
leadership.
OK
You want to stand?
Oh, you're, oh, come out here to
the, you're going to use the mic
here, the, in your, let's see,
we got
Sarah Jackson, Sylvia Morgan,
and Claire Day. Hold on, let me.
The Senate or the Indian interim
Indian Affairs Committee will
come to order.
We are reconvening after being
in Tahatchie yesterday, so we
have the um welcome status from
Sarah Jackson, Sylvia Morgan,
Clara Day, and Titus Nez. Are
you going to be the only
presenter?
Um, they may join you there if
there's any questions from our
committee members.
So, a little bit of
housekeeping, you press the
button there with the
Oh, OK. And then when it's
ready, you're good to go and um
Thank you for having us and
hosting us here. It was a
beautiful drive out and I'm glad
our members are here again and
safely made it, so we will, um,
again.
OK, uh, good morning.
Everyone here, you're all
welcome. um, here to our
chapter. My name is Clara Day,
um, the chapter secretary and
treasurer, and this is my 3rd
term serving our chapter here,
um.
My clan.
With the
With the Navajo system, my, my
clan, my poor clan is too who
came to the water plan and then
born into the metal people, my
grandparents on my mom's side
are salt people and then on my
dad's side, they are black
street people. So those are our
four clans and um.
Uh, do, do I just do the welcome
address or I, uh, I'm not sure
what I need to do. You, you can
go ahead and introduce yourself
and then um who's presenting and
then we'll introduce ourselves
to you guys.
OK, and then our chapter
secretary is Sarah Jackson.
She's not here. Our chapter vice
president, uh, her name is
Sylvia, uh Morgan. Um, she's not
here, but um she's working and
um Titusness is our community
service coordinator.
So
I know that um our
representative Wanda came and
we've been requesting to have
the in an affairs meeting, you
know, we wanted to host it and
we've been requesting it for a
couple of years, and so now that
it happened, you know, we're
very thankful. So we're very
thankful also for all the help
that you have given us as a
chapter because we receive
funding from the state of New
Mexico.
So, um,
We're, we're just thankful and
we still have projects that
we're gonna probably lobby for
this coming year, um, and so
most of the problems that we do
encounter here within our
chapter, and all chapters are
basically wrote, roads, housing,
um, and right now we are
encountering that you're, we're
not really having enough rain,
um, like hodoso, Rosa has a lot
of rain, but not us, so.
so share some rain with us.
OK, so I'll probably um.
I think Titus is going to be
coming, so I, I don't know how,
how much time I have to speak
because I have a lot to say.
We'll, we'll go around and
introduce as we go forward. So
Um, if we want to start out in
the audience on the site to our,
to my left, and then we'll move
along this way.
Good morning.
She had corn, OK. And um
I'm glad you guys all found
Pinedale, New Mexico. I'm so
happy and surprised to see you
guys here. Thank you for coming
and um
Um, my name is Marge Gray. I'm
the uh Clepsy member from Church
Rock, New Mexico. It's just down
below where it's just right off
the I-40, so that's where from
and here's my, um, president.
Good morning, everyone. uh, it's
good to see a lot of familiar
faces. My name is Janice
Peterson like Marge said we're
from Chur area. I'm a club pre
uh club C president and.
I've been going to a lot of
community meetings and it's good
to see a lot of representatives
are here today at this Pinedale.
It's an honor for all of us, and
it's good to be here. Thank you
for having us, um, agenda today
is very helpful learning and
there's a lot of concern that we
need to address to
representative what we come
through every day, what we see
in the community needs and what
community concerns are. Thank
you.
Thank you, and we will, um,
after Pinedale gives their
presentation, if time permits,
we will allow the other
surrounding chapters too, if, if
you're representing Churrock
here and then uh I don't know
who else we have in the
audience, so thank you, um, go
ahead.
Good morning. I tried to run
from the mic,
um, nice to see you all here.
I'm glad you, yeah, like she
said, I'm glad you found
Pinedale.
And welcome to our to our little
community here. I am from Church
Rock chapter. I am the lepsy
member.
And I'm also the um VA
secretary, so it is an honor to
be here and an honor to see all
in each and every one of you.
Thank you very much.
I don't think so
Yeah, OK.
Uh, good morning.
Um, I'm Willis Snas. I'm from
Nash C. I missed your meeting
yesterday because I had a
meeting on my uh commission
president over at the City
chapter.
Uh, we're a little different
from regular chapter. They have
a we have a um a local
government, community
governance. So we have 5 members
and we have 5 members of that is
a commission.
So we're we're a little
different, so it's glad to be
here. Thank you.
You
You ought to have been there.
Good morning. All the uh.
Distinguished honorable leaders
of
The state of New Mexico, your
Pueblos.
Your nation.
And then coming to the net.
Welcome.
We always say prayers for these
leadership.
And the land, the water.
Those, those are
Rights that belong to the people
they don't belong to the
government.
And, uh, my name is Larry
Foster.
I'm from the townhouse people
clan and the water age people.
Is my grandpa's.
And Mountain Cove or my dad, and
Uh, the red house people are my.
My grandfather's are called And
Slido
My grandfather's are called And
Slidoda should shoot out there.
Aydano.
Uh, I just wanted to thank, uh,
our, our leader here, Shannon
Pinto.
She uh recognized me on the
Senate floor last year and I was
inducted into the uh North
America, uh, indigenous athletes
Hall of Fame, the state of New
Mexico recognized me for my
athletic ability or call, yeah,
thank you.
I like to say welcome to
Pinedale, Pinedale is not my
chapter house from
church chapter house.
Although
I don't really
Or with the chapter house at
Church,
but that's where uh my mom, she
used to vote.
And there's I guess that's where
I, I belong. But anyway, I'd
like to say welcome to
everybody. I don't know any, any
one of you except Shannon Pinto,
only one I know. The rest, I
don't know. Anyway, my name is
Mattie Foster. My client is with
2.
And I'm originally from
Um, 18 just right over down the
road. That's why I was born in
Hogan,
so I was raised as herding
sheep.
And
I lost my mom when she was 96
years old.
So I like to say welcome to
everybody.
are here
So
Yeah
Very good
No.
Good morning. My name is Francis
Price. I'm a community member
here in Pinedale, just like to
say welcome. This is my first
time with this committee, so I'm
just here listening to you guys
and see what you go and plan and
what's good for the no nation or
with this community, so welcome.
Thank you.
Hello, my name is uh.
Oops.
You can just, you know, you
could just
Oh, OK.
Ricardo Carlos Caballero, I will
be very busy today trying to
hook on to a meeting. I don't
think it's gonna happen. Thank
you.
We'll start with uh
Representative Royal Caballero.
And um, good morning, Madam
Chair, members of the committee,
those in the audience and those
viewing on webcast. My name is
Patricia Royal Caballero. I
represent House District 13,
which is the far southwest
quadrant of Albuquerque. I've
been on this committee since I,
uh, my first term.
Uh, I am a proud member of the
Beatle Manzo Tiwa tribe from
Dona Ana County and we are all
related. I'm finding out with my
research and our uh for my PhD
I'm finding out that I have many
relations in this area, so thank
you very much uh for hosting us
today. Thank you.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
Madam Vice Chair, and
Representative Liz Thompson. My
district is in Albuquerque in
the Northeast Heights. I have
Uptown in Winrock, but, um, I
grew up in Crown Point, so it's
great to be back with my
assistant and I took a little,
uh, detour to uh
and and had to knock on
someone's door and ask someone
picking up trash. Where did we
go wrong? So here we are. Thank
you.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Madam
Vice Chair, members of the
committee, and, uh, everyone
here today. Thank you so much
for having us. Uh, I'm Charlotte
Little. I come from the pueblo
of San Felipe and Taos, uh,
along the rivers and um I
represent House district 68,
which is in Northwest
Albuquerque. That's where I was
elected and this is my 3rd year
serving and I'm very happy to be
on the Indian Affairs Committee
and having this.
opportunity to get out into our
Communities to hear directly
from the people, uh, as well as
the presenters that are coming
up today. So thank you very much
for having us.
You been there, Madam Chair,
Madam Vice Chair, members of the
committee and uh uh community
members and the public a uh
Joseph Hernandez Yeneche
Kloganle now OK buseschi
using the
chana deanilla.
Uh, I am from the community of
Toon.
But I live in Kariaha.
And I am the state
representative for House
District 4.
I got 9 Navajo chapter houses,
the town of Kirtland and city
of.
Farmington, um, I am the 3 times
great grandson of the, the, of
the vice chairman, John Claw
Senior. 1951 to 1952.
Uh, my grandmother's, uh, uh,
cousin brother is the late John
Claude Junior, who created the
Great Seal of the Navajo Nation.
Yeah.
Thank you
All right, good. Uh, good
morning.
Um, members of the committee,
chair, vice chair, and I'm Benny
Sendo. I'm from Jama Pueblo, New
Mexico, so, uh, we'll be
celebrating our eco's feast day
this next Saturday, August 2nd,
so come to Hamus. We'll be,
we'll be dancing.
Uh, I represent Senate District
22, which is, uh, portions of,
uh, 5 counties.
Uh, Sandoval, Bern Leo, uh Real
Reba, San Juan, and McKinley
County.
I have 2 Navajo chapters. I also
represent 7 pueblos, all of
Hickory Apatination.
Small part of the city of Rio
Rancho, the town of Cuba, and
everything in between.
Lake Valley, White Rock to the
corner of Santa Ana Pueblo to it
it used to be Coyote Canyon, but
now it's uh Crown Point.
And going all the way up to
Chama so those are my corners.
If you know the Mexico
geography, so it's always good
to be here. This is one of my
favorite drives. I represent, um
Mary on the Lake, which is my
chapter just east of here, so I
always enjoyed this, uh, ride
through, through here, uh, into
Gallup. So it's good to be here
and good to hear from
The people on the ground, so he
yeah.
Yeah, it's a Bennett, Madam
Chair, members of the committee
and community members and also
our committee staff. Thank you
for being here today. My name is
Michelle Abeda and I represent
House District 69. If you're
Kiaanni or uh
Let's see,
aka when you're my relative. I
live in Togela with my family,
uh, District 69 covers
Troisille, Alamo, Theroux, Baca
Pruitt, Oo and Sino, Pueblo
Pintado, Lake Valley, White
Horse Lake, and White Rock 9
chapters, including the Pueblo
of Laguna, Pueblo of Eslada,
Pueblo of Akima, Grant, San
Mateo and Seboeta, very large
area. I'm also joined today with
my
DLA Miss Netty in that corner
over there. I just want to
introduce her. I believe she's
the in-law to your community and
also say thank you to the
chapter for hosting us, uh, the
chapters where I got my start.
It was my first official job as
a teenager and probably a rite
of passage that most of us in
Navajo community share where the
chapter house is our first job
in the summertime. So if you
have student workers here, just
encourage them to keep going,
doing great things, and
um help with public service.
It's a great opportunity to be a
voice for your community, yeah.
Good morning, Madam Chair, Madam
Vice Chair, good to see everyone
here. How do you do? Uh, John
Blockhouse District 51 in
Alamogordo in beautiful Otero
County. We neighbor the
Mescalero Apache tribe. So it's
great to see all of you here.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Good morning, Madam Chair, um,
presenters, everybody here in
the audience, I'm Angelita Mejia
from Chavez County District 58,
glad to be here.
Hey, good morning, madam Chair.
Um, my name is Debbie Sarignan.
I represent House District 21 in
Bernalillo County in
Albuquerque, um, I too took the
scenic route to get here, but
we, I did find it, so it's not
surprised our districts are
right next to each other, takes
us a little longer, um, I just,
it's great to be here and it's
great to be in this part of the
country or state because I've
never been here and always um.
I've heard people talk about it,
these two, and uh it's it's
exciting and it's so beautiful.
It's just a picturesque. Thank
you.
But they have been a
Madam Chair, uh, she, uh, Bill
Sheer in total then the shah,
uh, so those that actually speak
Dana, I was trying to say I'm
Bill from Farmington.
Um
And uh Senate District One,
which is Farmington, Kirtland,
and West to the edge of the
Navajo Nation.
Good morning, Madam Chair.
Members of the community, uh,
Members of the
Oh
You, you have a very beautiful
place here. The scenery is just
awesome. I, I just love the
drive from Gallup over here. My
name is Martin Zamora. I
represent House District 63. It
covers the south half of Curry,
north half of Roosevelt, all of
the, all of Guadeloupe and
touches on Meed County. Thank
you for hosting us.
Good morning, Chair, Vice Chair.
Thank you, Pinedale Chapter
House for hosting us. Uh, I'm
Nicole Waispack, a staff member
for the Legislative council
Service, uh, and I'd also like
to introduce our other staff
members. We have Roberto running
all of our IT and we have Sheila
Killaher and Paul Etock behind
me. So thank you.
Thank you. Good morning,
Anahi Aetna Jenny sloa
Anibaishin
Nana Ejhachi daal
ado uh
Ihaodoyathidini
labiojeehoanjeta.
Uh, this is my 11th year and my
6th term and I, uh, am so glad
to be here and I wanna, uh, tell
you that I represent 15 Navajo
chapters, Church Rock, Pinedale,
Crown Point, Vicente.
Nahadeki standing Rock, Coyote
Canyon, Tohatchie, Newcom,
Nashiri, Sannati, two gray
hills, crystal, and back around
to Twin Lakes, Hain Besinna Ado,
uh, I represent, um, the
community, um, east of 491 and
west of 371 south of Sannaste
and north of Gallup and East
Gallup.
And,
Um, I have relatives from
Church rock, Pinedale, my
maternal grandma Shama son A
Aodo, Mariano Lake, very close
relatives in Pinedale, Mariano
Lake, Crown Point Vicente,
Chanella A. Standing Rockto
so again relatives and Standing
Rock Coyote Canyon.
Into Tohatchie,
A, um, since I've been the
representative. We've had and
hosted Indian Affairs Committee
meetings on the reservation in
Sheep Springs. We've had a
meeting in Lake Valley, Rock
Springs, Bread Springs, Crown
Point, and then Hanzad. And now
you can add Pinedale to that
list.
And then I have um a special
team of guests that I would like
to introduce you to our club,
Church Rock chapter Club C,
which I am the vice president of
and we are a group of um
Community members who address
local land issues. Uh, we assess
community land issues for
development, improvement, water
line, power line, roads and
bridges. So with that, I'd like
to have Barb McClanahan stand.
And then Janice Peterson is our
president.
And then uh we have uh Margie
Gray, and then we have another
member, um, Verna, who is still
on her way, so I just wanted to
acknowledge, um, our leadership
from Church Rock and I thank
them for joining us. They wanted
to be here to help host you and
also to listen and to learn and
then Otto and uh Shade, uh, Ruby
Adoilledo Titus.
then I see Mr. Leonard Gorman,
just want to thank you, Aunt A
Ado. I'm familiar with the
Fosters, Mr. Larry Foster and
Maddie. I see you in the
communities, and I'm aware of
your work. So I just want to
thank you for joining us.
Adeeha.
Thank you,
Madam Vice Chair, and I
represent all the other chapters
they don't. I'm just kidding.
No, I got, um.
1513 with land, uh, 15 chapters
with land-based 13 that are that
have the chapters in in in the
area, you mountain, all the way
up to 4 corners.
And then out to Standing Rock
and then half of Gallup and then
all the way up almost 491, but
uh thank you for hosting us and
One of the things too coming out
the um
So we allow uh church rock and
um notcheti here also to report
after you, uh, if they would
like to, but for the new people
that are here, there is a
sign-in sheet for public comment
and uh we're doing public
comment at 11:45 before
lunchtime. So if you'd like to
say something a little more,
then that's when you, um, so in
these meetings, that's what we,
how we allow our, our public to
um come forward, but during
those comment sessions, we don't
usually allow uh questions to be
asked of our member.
it's just uh 11 directional uh
communication, but when we have
presenters on the agenda, that's
when we have the dialogue going
between our committee and
whoever's presenting, so thank
you for that.
OK, go ahead.
Yeah, thank you. I have one more
announcement. Please help
yourself to donuts Danish, and
coffee, um, at the breakfast
window there. Thank you.
OK, yeah.
Madam Chair, I think it's, uh, I
wanted to add 11 small piece
here. Um, though we represent,
and there's quite a few of us
that have come in from
Bernalillo County that represent
that area.
Um, I think it's important to
say that in that county alone in
the, uh, Albuquerque metro area.
That there are over 60,000
native people that live in that
city, in that area and that
I want to say as a former
hospital administrator, uh, I
worked for the Albuquerque
Indian Hospital at the
ambulatory facility.
And there is where we saw a lot
of people from Navajo that were
able to come in and get the
services there. So what I want
to say, and I think it's
important that all of us.
Take care and look out for the
best that we can for the people
who come into Albuquerque for
school work, um, whatever reason
that they're there, so just
know, we will all continue to do
our best to help the people
wherever they're at throughout
the state because they don't
just come to Albuquerque as we
know, so thank you. I just
thought that was important to
mention.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Little, and also to those that
did not attend our, our new
today this committee this year
has the highest membership of
Native American, uh,
representatives and legislators,
um, than we've had before some
of you that were familiar with
my grandfather and then uh
Senator Shindo, and then we had,
uh, Senator Lovejoy there for a
little bit, Senator Soi, um, but
this year we got 9 people that
have Native American blood on
this uh.
Committee and in the legislature
in the House of Representatives
and the Senate, so.
It's a little more conducive to
what our state uh looks like a
little more, and I appreciate
100. So, um, thank you for
hosting us, Shannon Pinto, Yanni
Yankee, Andy Nishki the
cheekneybushishinnastejatachini
does your che Filipinodanola
and I tell people I am from
Tohatchie all the way north is
kind of my dad's family and then
from there towards um Fort
Defiance to coal mine areas my
Aani side, my mother and my
I've been there, uh, when you
talk about Peterson's Marshall
Plumber, Chief Manuelito, um.
But that's my and, of course,
Senator John Pinto, that's, uh,
my, my lineage in that sense,
so, um, yeah, and thank you for
um having us here and before we,
you know, I, I could go on and
on and on about many things as
we move forward, but it is your
time and you may begin your
presentation, but thank you,
yeah.
OK, I'll give the floor to our
community service coordinator.
Uh, had a,
I don't care. Thank you for
coming, uh, distinguished
members of the Indian Affairs
Committee, uh, show you how
tight this na in the show.
To buys as initially, but I bash
chain.
No.
To, um, welcome to Pinedale. I'm
originally from this community
from a place called Rainbow
Canyon, so the story behind that
is, uh, every time it rains from
where we live, a rainbow always
forms within that little area,
so we call that place Nazillete.
That's where where I'm
originally from.
Uh, but I live down the road,
uh, I'm a, a proud member of the
Church chapter community. Uh, I
live in Springsteads, so, um,
welcome again here to our
community, I am the chapter
service coordinator, uh, some
people call it chapter manager
but serving my position for the
last 8 years, uh, still going.
Um, and, uh, first thing I want
to mention is our WiFi password.
I know we had a little trouble,
so, uh, the Pinedale public, the
Wi Fi is in Pinedale Public. The
password is Pinedale, all
lowercase, so you can log into
our Wi Fi and use our Wi Fi, so
um it's always important to have
that, so we, we've been trying
to set it up so um when I first
started here, our, our Internet,
we had a, a dish called Hu's
net.
And opening one email took about
15 minutes with it's, uh,
attachments. So as we progress,
uh, we got to, um, very good
internet service here. We have
one with AT&T and one with um
T-Mobile.
So, uh, uh, we have high speed
Internet here now and recently
we started working with
Starlink, so we're improving our
community, uh, providing
services infrastructures to our
community. We've also recently
started a uh library, state
library, so I think we're the
only uh Navajo Tribal library
that's open at this point. Uh,
we do have Toon, but from what I
hear they're semi open and
closed, so we, we do have a
library here. We established one
here. We provide services to our
community.
as well as our children.
Um, we also do have our summer
you working here as
representative of Beta did say,
we do have about 35 students
working, so they're all uh doing
things in different part of
chapter right now, but I'll,
we'll be able to have him later
on to.
Present themselves here just,
you know, you'll you'll see
students walking around here,
but that's our traditional
summer youth program we have
every year, so I've been a part
of that program as well in
Church Rock, growing up. So, uh,
I just want to say welcome to
our community, um, we als also
mentioned that we've also highly
benefited from the state of
Mexico. We've just recently um
got a road construction done. If
you came from the west side,
there's a uh right over this
little hill there's a, there's a
road that heads south, the paved
road, the state.
Mexico travel infrastructure
funding awarded us 1.9 million,
so that was a cost share to
establish a permanent highway
into the canyon.
So we do have a lot of our
residents living inside the
canyon that's where we also have
high speed Internet for them, so
in the past, they had to come
out or go all the way out into
the open to get service, so now
they they're home, they have,
um, they watch Netflix and I'm
sure Amazon Prime, you know,
it's we have.
We're pretty much getting to the
21st century here in Pinedale,
so all that we've, we've, uh,
worked with, uh, tribal
infrastructure funding.
Uh, just a little story behind
that, um, when I had applied for
it in 2019, 2020 had uh came
about and uh uh pandemic
started, so I was, uh,
Literally still in my pajamas
and uh presenting to the
committee from my house, so, uh,
and I presented and they awarded
us funding and that, you know,
provided funding for our project
there in Second Canyon. So if
you get a chance, you can drive
back into the area. It doesn't
go all the way around the loop,
it just goes about halfway,
we're still pursuing additional
funding to finish up the other
half, but a majority of our
community live along this uh 3
mile stretch of road, so they,
uh, that road used to be very
muddy, used to.
But be a havoc for our emergency
services, so we, we, we provide
um we provide a road for them
and also the high speed
internet. Also, if you notice
this little building to the
west, um, our, our state
representative, uh,
Representative Johnson did help
us get this building completed,
it is an additional
administration building, when I
started here, um, we also had no
AC, as you can tell, it's kind
of warm in here our HVAC system
gave out last year. So we're
working on, uh,
We're gonna, uh, we're gonna
refurnish this uh facility, so
this building was dedicated on
April 20th, 1960, um, not for
the reasons why you want know
420 is about, but I remember
that day.
Uh, vaguely through, uh, develop
Independent.
So this facility we're gonna
preserve it.
Our plan is to provide uh some
murals of our community of some
of our leaders that um led the
community through the years. So
this building is actually 65
years old as of April 20th.
So, uh, a lot of history made
here, a lot of, um, our
community members that brought
these um sandstone rocks uh from
the area. So a lot of history,
um, and we want to preserve this
facility for the next 100 years
for our community because
there's a lot of history of why
it was put here. So those are
the little things I want to
bring up what's in our
community, uh, the last thing I
want to mention is we are
working on a community cemetery,
um.
As you know, uh, within our
tribal government, uh, we were
restricted to uh burial within
uh family plot cemeteries, so a
lot of our loved ones are now
being buried in uh elsewhere
like in the city of Gallup or
Hobeth, uh, and they're charging
our committee members 2 to 5,
2500 just to bury your loved
ones there and a lot of our
community members are
unfortunate to have that kind of
money. So we've established a
cemetery and with the help of
Representative Johnson, we're
going to hopefully get the
infrastructure in place within
the coming years.
But uh that's one of our biggest
projects here in our community,
I want to share with this in the
affairs committee, um, we do
have a lot of projects on hand,
we do have a lot of um uh.
Priorities uh with our
community, so, uh, with the help
of myself and of course our
leadership here as well as my
staff. I do have a staff of 5
individuals um that work with me
but full time it's a majority of
time it's about 4.
But we do a lot for the
community. We spend after hours
here weekends, we get a lot of
things done. We're getting close
to our chapter getting uh local
certified certification, um, uh,
we're just waiting for a final,
um, audit, um, financial audits,
so once that clears, we're
looking forward to getting
certified and as one of our
chapters from North I should
mention they have a different
form of government, so we're
looking to actually, um, make
this a township, so we're going
to get away from the chapter we
want.
make a township here in our
community, so we can bring a lot
of businesses to Pinedale, um,
there is a lot of um talk about
uh creating local economy, uh,
our, our, our, our tribal
government uh is giving us those
resources and tools, so with the
help of State of Mexico, I think
we can expand services here in
Pinedale, not only for our
community but for our regional
chapters such as Marianna Lake
and Church Rock, so I'm very
ambitious, um, still a little
younger in age, but I hope we
can get a lot of stuff.
For our community, but with the
help of the Indian Affairs
Committee, uh, the state of
Mexico, and the support of our
leadership at higher levels, our
governor of New Mexico, I think
we can get a lot done, um, but
we, we do, uh, do a lot of
research, so I'm hoping in the
next couple of years, uh, you'll
come back here and you'll
address my leadership as
commissioners and myself as a
town manager or you know, we're
very ambitious and looking
outside the box, I always tell
my community, um, we're we're
sort of like sheep, we're just
pinned up in a corral.
And if you the, the, the, the,
the, the pin is open out during
the past year, there's really
good green grass and, you know,
you could pasteurize it, but
everyone's afraid to go outside
that corral. They're afraid of
the coyote or whatever out
there. Why not? Why can't we go
out there outside that box and
find those opportunities, so
that's kind of my ambition to my
community, that kind of
perspective.
So, uh, I, I, I again thank you
for coming and joining us here.
Um, I, we do have also our local
royalty, uh, we've established
a, uh, Ms. Pinedale community,
uh, a year ago, and, uh, we're
uh trying to promote Pinedale as
a place you really want to move
to in the near future we get
apartments here and homes here,
it'll be a little town, we'll
compete with Gallup, sorry,
Gallup, but, uh, you know, it's
time for tribal government to
expand economic resources here.
So, uh,
But I want to give it a little,
maybe a minute or two to our
royalty to introduce herself,
uh, if I may.
Hm
You, um, ate a hae
Meinazienishia Toba Ajalan lo at
vein
so that should chase and a
Janida Chanella Elezaa
Shanahaihidoshima a rando
Natasha Yazi will yeah
Sheche doshamaanae.
Richard Richard Monika Allende
and Arle Monika Boya Channela
haste Chanel Hasan a Thomas
Charleneai will, yeah,
tobe is kinda denashasha agan.
Good morning everybody. My name
is Megan Yazi. I am too who came
to Water clan born for Zea
Weaver clan, my maternal
grandparents or sleep rock clan
in my paternal grandparents are
Black Street good people lan.
I'm 15 years old. My parents are
branded and Natasha Yazi.
My maternal grandparents are the
late Richard Renica and the
current Arlene Winika and my
paternal grandparents are Thomas
and Charlene Yazi. I'm
originally from Pinedale. I come
from Rainbow Canyon. That's
where my maternal grandparents
live, but I reside in Fort
Wingate, New Mexico, which
you'll see like if you go on
I-40, there's a
Exit 22, I think it was 23 and
then you turn to your left and
up that past that mountain,
there's like a little valley.
There's school 2 schools, and
there's a housing, and I live in
there. It's
It's really nice, but you have
no service whatsoever, so we
have Wi Fi so I'm very glad for,
but I'm from Pinedale and I am a
youth member, the I'm working
here today, and Pinedale is
really great, like I really love
it like I used to spend every
summer at my grandma's being
just a little res girl running
around with no shoes on, but no
shoes on my hair, bushy, so
yeah, this place is.
just has a lot of memories and I
love it here and it's just
wonderful and I just asked.
I just want to thank you guys
for being here and I'm glad to
be a part of this, and yeah.
Thank you.
And, and, and closing on my
part, um, I just want to share
that, um, we do um have our
youth, um, we do encourage them
to be part of the community. We
do have our youth council as
well, um, and uh we encouraged
him to uh be part of our
community to take part on every
aspect of planning as well.
Uh, and, um, unfortunately, I
don't have any of my planning is
the only members here I see that
Churchill has a club seat here,
but I wanted some more planting
only members should be here
because they're a critical part
of this planet aspect of a
township, so I wanted to present
that but hopefully in the near
future, I can do that. Um, but
in closing, um, I, I just want
to share that I've served uh as
a gal McKinley County School
Board president and uh secretary
in the past. Right now, I serve
as a school board president for
the what we call the Navajo, uh,
excuse me,
had a brain fart, uh, Navajo,
New Mexico, Navajo, South Agency
School Board, so we consist of 6
schools, we have um.
We have the Bejahabain Bingo
Pass. We have Baca Pruitt right
down by F-40. We have both at
Wingate Elementary and high
school as well as the bread
Spring Day School and uh Jones
Ranch Chichea Community School.
So we combined them as one area
and we have about 7 board
members on that, so I, I take a
big part of my, my life uh
ensuring that our students have
a quality education
representation at the local
level and at the state and
federal level. So that's uh my
role here as a
community member, um, a lot of
time it's uh.
A lot I know being a state
representative or a elected
official at the state level,
it's a lot of um
How would you say it's a lot of
free time, you don't get paid
for what you do. So uh when I
was a sca McKinley County board
member, we didn't get stipends
whatsoever traveling, we had to
do on our own voluntarily, so
which was, which was nice, but
um I do hope um that.
You today hearing a lot of these
reports, uh, remember our
children because they're an
important part of our community.
I stressed out a lot at
traditional ceremonies we have
that uh remember our children,
teach them to speak the language
because who else is gonna do it?
I mean, there's all these
different programs, but there's
nothing we can't really learn
our Navajo language from that.
So I really do um get after our
parents, grandparents, and
encourage them to talk to your
children in Navajo.
Same with the pu languages, you
know, I'm saying the same with
the Apache language, the same
way, you know, our languages are
dying and we're speaking more
English. So, uh, I just
encourage that, think about that
when you uh create fundings,
provide fundings, um, I do
encourage that and I always tell
our parents just it it's not the
school's responsibility to teach
your child to speak Navajo.
It's you at home where the fire
is at to teach your children.
It's just a little part of it
that we encourage our children
to speak Navajo in the public
schools, but thank you again for
providing funding for that. I'm
really appreciative. And again,
welcome to Pinedale. We will be
providing lunch. I hope it's
good because I was up early this
morning preparing it, so.
You guys will enjoy. Hopefully
it's OK, but um I was a little
late because of that, but my uh
my leadership here told me be
here, so I'm here, but I hope
you guys enjoy our lunch. So
yeah OK thank you.
Thank you. We have Senator
Sheer.
Uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
So, Mr. as you talked about, uh,
making Pinedale a township.
What would
What do you envision, does that
mean a gas station, a grocery
store, or hardware store, what
is so, so one or one of the
issues that we face as a
sovereign nation is uh
sovereignty and immunity. And a
lot of time that uh lacks, um,
having companies come into the
Navajo Nation to create
businesses like you said, gas
stations. So, uh, we, we've been
studying uh Kenta Township in
Arizona and they've started to
expand their economies and
include gas stations, um,
laundromats, car wash, you know,
all those things. So the biggest
hurdle we have is uh uh issuing
a business site lease, uh,
ensuring that the our community
or the the businesses are have,
they're safe and secure within
the community. So yes, um, by
creating a township that gives
us the authority to issue a
business site lease to create
local ordinances for the
community, similar to how a
municipality would be, but at
the tribal level, so, uh, a lot
of these chapters, the 110
chapters we have, they
They have limited authority.
They, they, they don't have uh
expanded authority. So to cross
that hurdle we're, we're seeing
if we can maybe create the whole
community of Pinedale into a
township and, you know, uh,
created a nonprofit and
for-profit organizations um to
make sure we can expand in the
nonprofit section and the
for-profit to bring in revenues
to the Pinedale community,
whereas now we, we, we, we
heavily rely on revenues from
the um Navajo Nation government.
We kind of eliminate
that and provide these services
at the local level to our people
and to regionally to the area.
So, madam.
So it's the 528, right? We're
talking about 528 designation.
So it kind of eliminates when
we're saying, well, the money
goes straight to Nava. It still
will, but the process after
that, it's a little bit shorter
and more immediate because they
have proven that they're able to
handle their audit. That's why
they have to go through these
audits of the 10-year, um, you
go 5 years back and then you
have to prove for 5 years of
your audits being compliant, and
then you can apply for that
designation and not.
is one of the few along with
Rama that have that designation.
And so some of that bureaucratic
stuff when we talk about red
tape, much of that is kind of
eliminated in that, but out of
110 chapters, um, there's only a
few that have that designation.
So
Madam Chair,
I
I don't think I've heard of that
before. I don't, I mean,
obviously there are, there's
ship rock, OK, there's.
Uh
They're not
Are they just a spot in a map?
They, if they have a bad audit,
then there, it's it's taken from
them they have to start all over
again. So even with the
administration that comes in, if
a new administration comes in
and the other administration
wasn't compliant or when they
come in and do the audit, they
have to start all over with the
5 year process.
Wow. Well, I think that's great.
I think.
I love it. I'm I'm sorry, Madam
Chair, um, yes, it's something
that uh like I was mentioned
earlier, a lot of our chapters
are comfortably in their corral,
but if we move out and expand
services, um, I, I worked one
year with the city of
Albuquerque and I've got to know
how to municipality form of
government works, uh, as our
representative said, said, uh, I
was one of those 60,000 Navajos
or Native American that lives in
the city of Albuquerque.
But, uh, I didn't like the
traffic, so now that I, I moved,
I used to go from northeast
Heights down to downtown every
day and I used to get in the
bus, but that was faster, but
now that I live here, I travel 8
miles without traffic, but
living here, uh, I feel like we
could expand the economy and
start somewhere to be
self-sufficient because heavily
we rely on services outside our
community and a lot of times our
people want to work, but they
don't.
reliable transportations or they
don't have uh adequate um
services that they could utilize
at the local level, so they rely
heavily on the city of Gallup or
City of Grants or City of
Farmington to provide those
services. So I think it's time
that we carry our own water, you
could say, and move help build
an economy with the state of New
Mexico as a partnership and the
Navajo Nation.
So, uh, I, I, I've worked in the
past with it, so like, thank
you, because that's part of the
self-determination too of the
tribes, nations and pueblos that
process and that's where the
grant schools, you see the
differences between the grant
schools and those that, um, so
he has a school board that has
all these BIE schools, but just
guy is its own entity and they
have their own school board, so
you'll see funding come in
different ways. Um, any more
questions, Senator Cha?
Thank you, Representative
Johnson.
Thank you, thank you, Madam
Chair, colleagues, and uh
leadership and guests, uh, I,
uh, Titusne, Adona Aido Shade
and uh Miss Pinedale, thank you
for your presentation. I want to
commend um Titus. He just
hosted uh an amazing big
traditional Navajo healing
ceremony.
And then Titus, I want to give
him kudos because he is a really
good administrator. He writes
grants. He does research and so
that's, you know, you've heard
his plans.
But I also wanna continue to
encourage you, Shenan Dai. Thank
you for the number of summer
youth employees. I went back
there to say hi to them, and I
had them fill out a survey and
um traveling among the chapters
over the summer. That is the
most number of summer youth
employees I've seen all summer.
At other chapters, we see less
and then I just want to also
encourage you to continue to go
to Window Rock and work with our
nation and the council
delegates.
To provide more opportunities
and numbers for our PEP workers.
Some youth employment. Um, I saw
your weaving class online and
all of your ancillary.
Extracurricular programs
throughout the year. I think you
had quilting, cooking.
I think those really help our
communities and you're right,
our people from here drive to
Window Rock, Shiprock, Crown
Point, Gallup, every morning to
go to work. Can you imagine,
ladies and gentlemen,
Um, so,
I, I think you're doing awesome
work and um that's the, you
know, what you just talked about
our sovereign immunity.
That's, that's the reason why we
have problems with our capital
outlay funding. Our hands are
tied.
Our hands are tied up in window
rock. So I think you're doing a
great job and thank you for
hosting us. Thank you for
hosting lunch and we look
forward to our continued work
together. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Johnson. Representative
Hernandez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and uh
to the presenters, uh, thank you
for your leadership, each, each
and, uh, one of you, your
leadership in, in the community.
Um, my, my question is how many
registered voters do you guys
have?
Madam Chair.
Uh, Madam, that's a good
question actually. When I
started here, we had about 690.
Uh, today, we could see we have
1400 and I think 25, 26, so
we've doubled.
Thank you
Madam Chair, um,
You, you had mentioned, um, an
initiative, uh.
within the chapter to help um.
Uh, um, create homes in the
community, uh, how has, uh,
Um
Has has your chapter initiate
that initiative like through
your club C, um, plans and also
uh, working with the permittees
cause I that's the situation in
my community, we, we are
struggling with. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Uh, thank you, uh, Madam Chair
and Representative Hernandez.
Uh, yes, uh, that's a bigger,
biggest hurd our community is uh
land and uh we've identified
land within our community, um,
there's one area.
That fence right here, the
chapter. If you cross into that
fence, you're in nobody's land
because we work with BIE BLM,
and they tell us it's chapterin
and then in return they say it's
nobody's land, so it's called
executive order 1359 and
President Tapp was the one that
issued that 320 acre land for a
school, but we don't have a
school here no more. So we've
been trying to get that land
back. We work all the way to
Department of Interior and the
executive branch to get that
land, but to
you a question on that, yes, uh
we, we started rolling the ball
and uh identifying land and
we're working with uh NHA Nel
Housing Authority to see if we
can start developing, not just
those subdivision homes, but
like, you know, apartments to
where they could, where we could
uh combine in little areas of
lands we have to uh provide
homes not only for our community
but for the rest of the Namo
people, so thank you.
Madam Chair, my last question,
um, uh.
Does, does your, does your
chapter, uh, community have
rural addressing?
Yes, that's a good question,
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Hernandez. Uh, we do have rule
address. We work, um, over the
years with Gal McKinley or
McKinley County uh GIS, uh,
recently we've, uh, I've been
attending the GIS conference
down in San Diego, so pretty
much we're building our own GIS
system here at the chapter as
well, that will work with the,
with all local authorities on
making sure that in response to
chapter level, we can um work
with GS so
We do have part of our capital
outlay project uh request
funding for GIS system, but we
started just with the base
minimum, that's expensive, but
it's worth the investment for
our community.
Thank you, man. I'm sure.
I thought that money comes from
the tri, I thought the tribe had
issued all the chapters money
for rule addressing the, the,
the Madam Chair, the, the Navajo
Nation, uh, they have their own
address and authority, they have
a whole different perspective of
how real address should be, so
we're, we're working hand in
hand with McKinley County
because the county has taken
care of Pinedale and uh we uh
invested in what they call the
AGIS software, so we've uh been
uh so being a chapter manager
doesn't mean I just sit here.
And Twitter myself. I am
actually Al Jackson trade, so
I've got to learn how to code on
the RGIS too, so it's, it's, it
was a learning experience, so
but that's part of it, Madam
Chair.
Thank you. Any more questions,
Representative Fernandez. You
good? Thank you, Representative
Her Hernandez. Representative
Thompson.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and I'm
sorry that Miss um.
Ms. Pinedale left. I, I was
going to tell her how impressive
she is. I think back to when I
was 15
I wouldn't have been that put
together in any way, shape or
form, so pass that on to her.
She's she's an impressive young
lady and I sitting here um
you're, you're, you're, um,
example of the sheep not leaving
the pen. What a great visual. It
really, it's like, yeah,
exactly, um, and I mean I grew
up in Crown Point, so the
chapter, all that.
And it's like
People never think outside the
box. This is how it's been for
however long people have been,
uh, you know, we have been
around and so I just want to
commend you for, for thinking
outside the box. It, it, it
really, the, the chapter system
and I mean it's, it's the whole
having to answer to so many
governments is, uh, I can't
imagine, uh, I mean, just the
state government is, we, we roll
our eyes and curse and all that,
just dealing with that.
So to add other layers of
government on top of it. I just
wanna thank you and, and tell
you how impressive you are, um,
in terms of this, this whole
chapter in terms of all the
things that you're doing and,
and how much of a model you can
be for, for other chapters and
uh so thank you. And then my
question is, can you explain
what Club C is.
Thank you. Thank you, uh, Madam
Chair, uh, Miss Thompson. Um,
yes, uh, the club C is short for
uh community land use planning
committee, and, um, and with
their their role is to uh create
a land use plan um for each
chapter and the chapter would
use that plan to, I guess you
could say, uh, create local
ordinances. So within our
community in Pinedale, uh, we
got our land use plan certified
in 2018, and we just recently
completed our 5 year um plan
again, update. So we're going to
actually be presenting to the
Naval Nation council within the
next coming months, um, but
we've changed our title to
planning and zoning. So if you
um look at different
municipalities they have
planning and zoning similar
situation here so our now our
plan is only commission is now
working on creating a, I think
it's 115 page um local
ordinances, land land
ordinances. So it's, it's very
detailed and all this
on our website, so if you get a
chance to look at our website,
um, it's everything's on there,
we're very transparent, we're
accountable with everything, so
you can log into our website and
check all of our financial
reports, our media minutes, our
planning zoning documents,
they're all on there, so there's
nothing, you know, we're trying
to be making sure that our
community can prosper at a local
level, being accountable with
everything,
Medicare so the the clubs, is
that a, is that a thing from the
tribe where, where, who, who,
who says you can, who?
Validates that who, who, who,
where did it come from? Yes,
thank you, Madam Chair, um, Ms.
Thompson, um, yes, it's actually
in our, in our tribal codes, uh,
tribal code 26, uh, is a portion
there section 2004, I believe,
it uh it creates uh each chapter
is allowed to create a planning
or community land use uh
planning committee, and that's
where they established it and
the uh appoint 5 up to there's
some chapters have 9 members, 7
to 9 members, 5.
We have 5, the chapter
president's responsibilities to
appoint these individuals to
create these plans and also
present them for certification.
Once that's done, then you, you
can, you know, move forward with
your, um, land use plan of how
you like uh representative
mentioned earlier, uh, do you
have land for residential, so we
identify residentials,
commercials, industrials,
government use of open space
plans, those kind of things,
this is so impressive. And then
just what's your website, Madam
Chair?
Yes, uh, thank you again, Madam
Chair, Ms. Thompson. Our website
is Pinedalegov.org.
Um, I wanted to use
Pinedale.gov, but Pinedale,
Wyoming has that.
That link, so we had to use
Pinedogovf.org. So if you get a
chance to look at our website,
it's open to the public.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Thompson. Representative Block.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you all for your great
information. It's like, it's
almost overwhelming to see the
good things that are happening
here. And so one of the things
that I do whenever I drive
around the state for these
meetings is learn a little bit
about.
Just
What, what's going on in town
and also the beautiful.
Sights to see and I see that you
have this beautiful mesa or I
don't know what you call it, but
I don't know if you have any
history or any, anything that
you could tell me more about
just the beauty that you have
here naturally in your area.
Yes, uh, Madam chair, uh,
Representative Block. Uh, if you
look to the east, if you came in
from the side, if you look now
to the east, there's a mesa that
that looks really pretty.
They call that pretty rock in
Navajo we say San on
um, so that, that makes us there
and a lot of our kinship uh come
from that area. Uh, really,
there's not much history to it,
but um, what they just call that
pretty rock. But there's another
Mesa to the west if you're
heading back towards Gallup this
evening. There's a big ma they
call it Ra Mesa in English, but
in Navajo they call that sien,
but the story behind that is um
way back when, um, well I guess
you could say when the
indigenous people lived.
Um, that was a place to go to
when the um cavalry
conquistadors came here to raid
our area, they would go up that
mesa and they would protect all
their family that Messa.
There's a little uh pond to the
south. They call that Toye and
what that was for was when these
um when they were here to raid
at the Navajo people at night,
the, the people that lived on
the mesa used to come down that
mesa and they walk across to
that water and ga the water and
go back up. So it was sort of a
a hideout spot for our community
way back in the past, but that's
that mesa right there on top of
just west of here, Ra Mesa,
that's kind of a little history
uh for protection.
It was also used to uh you could
say, do you smoke signal back in
the day, they ran the smoke
signal from here. There's one
down by South of Gallop, they
run the smoke up and identify,
you know, this is happening, so
that was how they communicate.
2-300 years ago, 400 years ago.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you so much for that information
and uh I just love being in your
area. Last time I was up here in
Gallup, I went to the Red Rock
Park and uh did some hiking up
there and I want to continue to
do that and just explore all the
beauty that we have in our
state. So thank you both for all
the things that you're doing and
your entire team. Thank you,
Madam Chair, for bringing us out
here because it's great to, to
meet the people at the chapter
level because I think that's the
most critical even in local
government that's non-tribal,
the, the more local you get, the
more
Information that you understand
and you see, so you can actually
see what the real problems are.
So thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you all for, for all your
hard work and I'm great. I'm,
I'm just so grateful to be here.
What a beautiful place to be.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Black.
them. I'm not going to tell you
where the spring is, that's way
up in the cave.
Because um it's something I,
it's, it's a wonder because you,
you walk up there, up into the
cave and there's a spring up
there in this, and it's all
sandy, sandy, sandy, but, um,
few, few get to visit it. um,
representative Abada.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you again. I have a question
about your partnerships with the
county. Can you tell us a little
bit about that if you have any
partnerships with them and maybe
who your county commissioner is.
Thank you.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair,
Representative Ubeda, um, yes,
our county commissioner is
Danielle Nota, uh she represents
our, our area, uh, a partnership
we have with them at this time
is uh we have a couple of roads
that are county roads, and we've
been uh working with the County
Ros department to making sure
they maintain those roads within
our community. One of the
biggest ones that we have an
issue with is um Rainbow Trail
and Lobo Valley Road. Uh, we've
always present that during our
capital.
requests. Um, if you get a
chance this evening when you're
done with the the meeting here
or recess for the meeting. Take
a little drive on that road, um,
if you go down the highway but
maybe a half a mile, there's a
turn off to the north, um, and
that it's a, it's a paved road,
but that road is very rugged.
It's very dirt road. We've been
trying to get that road
maintained halfway through um
that road, uh, it's a flood
plain turned into a floodplain.
So that whole area floods up
and.
We've been trying to mitigate
it, uh, with the tribal
government, but we, we've come
to know, um, uh, working out on
that road.
So, uh, we've been asking uh a
state government, uh, a state,
uh, legislature to uh request
additional funding to get that
road maintained, um, and that,
uh, that road is very bad, so uh
it it used to be a, um,
Uh, used to be a paved road but
now turned into like a dirt
road, majority of it and there's
a lot of potholes, so, uh, we,
we do have, where I work with
the county to replace those two
bridges there. So in the past,
uh our uh superintendent had
stopped uh the school bus from
crossing those bridges. So once
they get replaced, then we're
going to go ahead and allow
students to, you know, get in
the bus, so parents have to
drive out over those bridges to
drop their kids off at a certain
bus routes, but uh we're getting
work with the county on that,
so.
Um, that we have a good
partnership with our county
commission as well as the Rose
apartment. Thank you.
Thank you, Representative Roybar
Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you. It's a wonderful to
see you again, Titus, and to uh
listen to your presentation.
Thank you for all of the, I have
to mention the women in
leadership. Um, it's absolutely
wonderful to see us all, um,
Standing up and taking
responsibility as we always have
been. We've been the defenders
of our communities and so I want
to acknowledge that and Madam
Chair, I also want to
acknowledge that coming through
the area, um, is always a
spiritual journey for me. It's
a, a spiritual grounding to see
the the rocks, and today I
noticed even more water lines.
And that tells you a lot about
our presence.
And I'm not at all surprised
with your leadership and your
vision, uh, because it also
tells us a lot about our
resiliency and how we've um been
stewards of these um beautiful
lands.
And um we have a responsibility
to continue to be stewards and
own our self-determination and
so, um, having said that, I, um,
I wanted to
invite you if you're not already
Titus, a member of the um I
think it's, uh, I, I just lost
my, uh, train of thought the um
New Mexico tribal planners
group.
Community organizers and
planners, and it
You would be a tremendous asset,
but also I think that tribal
planners roundtable meets on a
regular basis, and, um, we
Uh
Talk about
The struggles that we're having
in our relationships with local
governments and also in getting
things through our um in your
case, the Navajo Nation and
meeting the thresholds that you
have to meet, and it's helpful
to be part of a planners group,
um, so that we can exchange. So
I just wanted to extend that
invitation and then um in
reference to representative
Charlotte Little's comments
earlier about
Number of Native American
populations in Albuquerque.
I want to say that in my
district when I first ran in
2012,
I had um maybe around 5% Native
American in District 13.
And I'm happy to say that we're
close to 10%.
Um, District 3 is also home, uh,
and I'm proud to have her as, as
a constituent of the Honorable
Linda Lovejoy. She lives and
resides and she's been very
active in my district and in
reference to representative um
Hernandez's question to you
about voter how many voter reg
registered voters who have
Either increased from 600 to
over 12 1400 is extremely
impressive, um, and we have to
keep that up because as you
know, our right as sovereign
nations to self-determine, uh,
also is measured by how
powerful our voice is through
our vote.
And, um, because we still have
to live in the greater uh
society and so.
How we, as Madam Chair mentioned
about how this committee has
grown in terms of our
representation.
Um, we want to see that growth
and representation at all
levels, school board levels, uh,
local government level, state
levels, and national levels. Uh,
I think that is uh very
important for us to be the face
of our sovereignty.
At all those levels, not just
confined to our reservations,
not just confined to our local,
our native communities, but we
need to exercise our
sovereignty, the power of our
sovereignty.
At all levels in government and
so I don't know how more to, um,
say that I'm just extremely
proud of your leadership and
your youth, and I also want to
commend uh Miss Pindi because
she then
Demonstrates the line of
succession of our leadership.
Our youth
And our young adults into our
adult leadership, and that's
very, very important, and I just
wanted to um
And continue to encourage you to
be a strong community organizer,
community developer and planner
and take that vision, uh, as
high as you can because Pinedale
can be a thriving township on
its own. It has all of the the
major components, Madam Chair,
that it takes to be a strong
township. So I wanted to to make
those uh statements and thank
you very much for all that you
do. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative Royal
Caballero. So for me it's just
some maybe um yes or no answers.
Um, when you talked about the
internet in the canyon, how is
phone service?
How is the phone service, madam?
Uh, it's pretty good actually,
um, when they first turn on the,
the, the internet, there are the
the the cell service there. uh,
I had a 5G service, so it was
pretty good.
So you have the Apple phone is
my assumption. Yeah, yeah, well,
uh, a lot of our community
members have been using um AT&T
uh home phone services in that
area, but most of them you cell
cell phones now, so it's changed
within the last two years, so.
OK, and you said you're still
developing the role addressing.
How is emergency services, um,
locating where you, if they come
out here and need to go to a
certain spot or are we good with
that or oh, we're pretty
definitely order we're good but
uh we had a couple of cases
where the emergency vehicles
slipped off the the dirt roads
and into the ravine a couple of
times, but we got those roads
addressed it, so moving forward
getting out the road to dress
will be good.
So.
Thank you. And could you
elaborate on where these
services are provided from
because I don't think you have
the tribal station here.
No, a majority of time, uh, the,
the EMTs come out either from
White Cliffs or either from the,
uh, depending on how fast we can
get services here at at this
time or sometimes you scale, we
had a infrastructure that burned
about a year ago and the
response time was actually a
little um
Little too late after a while,
so, uh, there are plans to uh
put um ENT or medical services
at the chapter as part of our um
ICIP plan, so hopefully that I
can address that soon.
And the um there's no store here
in Mariana Link. I mean, sorry,
no, we used to have one, but the
people that used to run the
store, um, vacated and sold the
property. So it's just now an
abandoned facility, facility
right down in the area, but
that's one of the reasons why
we're maybe being ambitious
about creating is a grocery
store here in our area.
And members on your way out
here, you probably passed a big
sign says cold beer.
Those Speedway that used to be a
convenience store and gas
station, um, but, uh, I know the
community has been
Not just this community
surrounding communities have
been in opposition to that
particular enterprise in the
area because as you see once you
pick that up, there's nowhere
for consumption besides on the
road, so there were, there's a
lot of it, um, we choose that
rub rise from that particular
entity because there's no
restriction in, in that sense
of, uh, was it Sundays Sundays,
yeah, I would, Madam Chair. I
actually live about 2 miles
from.
that, that convenience store,
um, but in the past, it was very
good to have the gas station
there, so we didn't have to
travel all the way to Galup to
get gas. We have also a story
down in Smith Lake that used to
be a gas station, but now that's
also just a liquor store.
So, there's 2 liquor stores
within this highway here and uh
we actually have a lot of
fatalities on this highway
because of that, um, I don't
think it's being reported
adequately at the state level,
but the tribal level, we, I
could tell you where there was
an accidents relate to alcohol,
um, fatalities.
Thank you. And you talked about
preservation of the building
here, and this isn't the only
chapter that does have the
sandstone, um, because that was
a long time ago. My great
grandpaoie Dennis and built some
of the structures over by Coyote
Canyon that have the same
structure.
The problem with um
preservation um to our members
is the cost is so high, um, to
do it and um because the
planning and design to preserve
this is very, um, in some sense,
almost sole source to bring in
somebody to preserve it. So if
they want to repurpose the
building in that sense and make
sure it's up to code to have it
as a public building, the
sprinklers, the ADA, um, all of
that, uh, even the um restrooms
for ADA compliancy is.
the high cost. So when you see
some of these requests come in
and you see the amounts, um,
even the remoteness of coming
out here when we see those bids
come through because there's no
housing for the workers, um,
they have to commute from
Gallup, even bringing the
equipment out here. And when we
talk about these bridges to not
being replaced and not having
the buses to cross it. How do
you expect heavy equipment to
be, um, one of those uh things
to move across, especially if
construction is going on out in
an area. Um, the,
Cemetery, um,
Also, I just want to make a note
too to our members that not
every chapter has a cemetery.
You probably have other, um,
areas that come in my ask for,
uh, burial at your cemetery.
Yeah, we, we, we do have one
cemetery, but that's on private
land, uh, the church does on the
cemetery. Unfortunately, they
charge a lot if you're a
non-member. So a lot of our
people are being buried down in
gallop, so.
And the members, one of the
things too, it's not that this
cost can't be met. It's the time
period of which the cost can be
met for our people, we need to
come up with a $2000 or $3000 to
have your loved one buried in
our culture of 4 day time. It,
it does put stress, um,
especially if it's in, I mean,
we don't.
In our culture we don't plan for
death, so it is in, um, an
expense that arises very
immediately and, um, it's not
foreseen in that sense, but um.
Miss Yazi, I'm sorry she left,
um, and I think summer youth
young was our first jobs, uh,
look forward to, uh, what's it
like a, they only get two weeks.
Uh, yes, Madam Chair, 2 weeks.
So they get 2 weeks of pay, um,
when my day was like a little
under $300 that you got a check.
Uh, from the tribe, which was
interesting too, because they
gave you a check, and if you're
a minor going to the bank and
cashing that, um, you don't, uh,
you to pay the service charge
and all of that when we talk
about an unbe community and our
kids, our children having to
Get the real ID.
Because we don't have in some
senses, deeds, mortgages, to
utility bills are usually in one
person's name in a on a
property, so some of that can be
a challenge and even the
addressing when we talk about
the um going to the chap or
going to the window rock to get
a verification of the location
of your home if the addressing
is not available.
Um
Is there anything else you would
like to close out with?
Yes, uh, thank you, Madam Chair.
I failed to mention this, but um
I want to speak about
streamlining um the uh county
Mexico capital outlay uh
funding, um, a lot of times at
the chapter level, we face
hurdles from our own tribal
government. Uh, we've asked for
the IGA's duplicate process
right away. So what our tribal
government tells us is that it's
in between 6 to even 12 months
just to get an IGA done. So by
the time you get IGA out, you're
starting your bidding, your
work.
Process, you're already within
like 6 months of the deadline.
So we, we had a uh ambitious
project to do bathroom editions
in the last couple of years, but
because of the pandemic, because
of our tribal bureaucrats, um.
Not, I guess, doing their job,
uh, but I don't know if we lost
that funding, um, but, um, I
know a lot of times our state
legislatures do tell us, you
know, hurry and get this done,
but at the chapter level we do
our best. We try our best, we do
all our paperwork, we do all our
lobbying at the state
legislature level.
But it is at our tribal
government level, so I, I'm
hoping somewhere along the way,
we could sit down with our
tribal leadership and the state
government to see how we can
streamline that process and get
these fundings out a lot of
times and it involves the
waiting period of the the tribal
government itself. So I, I, I
really hope we can get that
changed. Um, I, I, in the past,
we did have all these fundings
for different projects, but.
Because of the burden of the
tribal government, we've, we've
failed to get some of these to
get completed. So I do hope
somewhere along the way we can
address that. Um, it's too, so
bad, I mean, honestly, um,
distinguished members here that
I actually want to run for
tribal president, you know, and
get it done because uh who else
is gonna listen to getting
projects done, you know, I mean,
we are our people are heavily
benefit from this
infrastructures, but uh if, if
it's something that they can't
get done or they don't
understand.
Then, you know, I could probably
do it, you know, I, I speak
fluent in Navajo, but that's not
the case for me. For me, the
frustration is getting somebody
to at least listen to us at the
chapter level to get these
projects done, or even maybe
even a state legislature, I
don't know, so along the way do
something, but I, I'm ambitious.
I, I'm, I'm not a political guy.
I ran for office for tribal
council, but um I'm not a person
that can have a politician's
mouth, but yeah, so, but um, but
I I think we could get something
done. I'm, I'm just frustrated.
So I just hope we can find some
words to get these capital
outlay funds spent at the tribal
level and, you know, reporting
back to the the Indian Affairs
Committee as well as the state
legislature of the success we've
done. We have a couple, the
building here, the road, but
that was only a few, but let's
do a lot more, so that's my
closing remark. Thank you, and
yeah.
I'd just like to say, um,
A less, a last minute note.
Being a chapter official for the
past couple of years, um.
It's been very good having
Titus, you know, being our
chapter coordinator because like
he said a lot of times we were
just, you know, we just want to
stay within the corral, but what
he's really telling us as
chapter official is to use and
learn, you know, the technology.
And to communicate through this
and.
Because a lot of times, you
know, I, oh, you know, my, my,
my, my generation, we're so used
to just riding, uh, using pen
and papers, but with what he's
doing now is really helping and
so we're so proud of him and at
the same time within the Eastern
Agency.
Uh, tides is one of the
One of the one person that's
very outstanding.
You know, within the uh chapter
coordinators with other
chapters, so we're so proud to
have him here. Thank you.
Thank you.
And
I appreciate that you're
allowing the bridging of the
Of our younger generation
because that is something that
is um much needed because some
of my chapters too don't have,
uh, the younger generation's
participation in the government
and
I think offline, um, if there's
a way we can help you, I think
the what I've seen are some of
the reports I've gotten even
with the senior centers in that
aspect was help with technology,
um, infrastructure within so you
guys are able to have your
operation a little more
streamlined, um, but I don't
think the nation has gotten
there yet, um, with their,
because it's still, um, I
understand some people still get
checks, so.
But thank you so much. What
we're gonna do is, um, cause I
did see that Church Rock had
some representation and Nashri
here. I don't know if there's
any other chapters that are
here. Anybody?
So I will allow for a couple of
minutes for it, uh, we'll go
with, um, church rock chapter
first, if you'd like to just
briefly, um, anything here or
you just, um, would like to take
that offline with us.
OK.
Please join us here.
The Nachiti will be following
very briefly if you'd like to
give a presentation shortly and
then we will follow up with the,
uh, redistricting task force,
and you pressed a little red
button there.
the person on it.
Go a do a
yo ode,
uh, not only the no lanqui
uh Tobahaelalia Doctor Caroline
Whitman, that
when I got in uh Dane
uh Ying Juliere Aisinasha.
Jolie are the
auto, uh lay,
not show University in New
Mexico, Gallup ranch, a a
Jolie are the
auto, uh lay
not show University in New
Mexico, Gallup ranch aos of
adjunct professor in a
hole.
Welcome honorable uh, senators
and representatives to Pinedale
chapter. It's good to see you
and it's good to know that you
are going uh throughout the
community to uh visit and uh
discuss what important issues we
have out here in our
communities. I am, uh, uh.
The Churchill chapter of vice
president and uh I have with me
some of the church rock
community members. I have the
club C members here with me, Ms.
Janice Peterson is our
president. I have, uh, the
members here Marge Gray, Barb
McClanahan, Vernon Craig, and I
have a, a community member here,
um, Noreen Kelly, then I have my
mom back here.
Yeah.
That's my mom, Miss Elizabeth
Whitman, and then I have Miss
Cathy Daniels here and
So I think that's all our
members, oh, and then we have a
representative Doreen Wanda
Johnson, who's also vice
president for our Club C
committee. So I'm, I'm proud to
say we have a, a very good
working group, uh, in our, in
our community and I want to say,
uh, also thank you, thank you
to, uh, Representative Johnson
and Senator Manoz for uh working
with the chapter. I remember
when I came in in 2021, we were
uh
asking for a greater and it
finally arrived.
Um, a couple weeks ago and we're
so happy. It's a huge grater and
um I was very impressed with,
with the purchase that was made,
and I, and I think the senators
and representatives for uh
helping us with that, uh,
purchase and uh like Mr. Nez
said prior, it is really hard,
uh, to work with, uh, Windero,
uh, even though the money is
there and it's sitting there.
Um, it's, it's just, um, you
know, you just have a whole
bunch of red flags, uh, a whole
bunch of hoops to jump through
and like I said, I came in in
2021 as a vice president. It
finally arrived in 2025. So this
is my 2nd term as vice president
and so uh we have other projects
on our ICIP listing.
Um, there's, uh, I believe a new
chapter house that's the number
one priority. We, we desperately
need a new chapter house, our,
our, uh,
Our roof is leaking with the
slightest of rain, the roof
leaks and they try to patch it
up the best they can with Flex
Seal because that doesn't do
much, but, uh, you know, it's,
it's, it's, it's just held
together to to me by um.
Duct tape, OK? So we desperately
need a new chapter house and
then we are working on a
warehouse right now, um,
although they said we already
received a warehouse. It wasn't
us that received the chapter. It
was actually, uh, the Eastern,
uh, regional business office
that received that and um you
know, we, we just wanna make
sure that that, uh, warehouse
does come into fruition because
we've we've obtained other
Um, heavy equipment, uh,
machinery that we need to
protect and uh safe keep in, in
for our community. And then uh I
believe we have roads on our
ICIP listing, you know, roads
are, are terrible uphill Road,
if you go from here, go down the
road, take uphill Road. Try it.
You're gonna go 10 miles an
hour, honestly, you are gonna
just crawl because the road is
so bad like this, and um we have
um
The Democratic representative,
the head of the Democratic
represent that lives on that
road and her uh believe her
auntie's sitting here and she
says that road is terrible, she
says, you guys got to fix it
and we're we've planned, we
planned on it when we first came
into office and
Still in the planning stage just
because, you know, you don't
why, I just, I just outlined it
a while ago, but, um, you know,
those are some of the things
that are that are on our
listing, uh, we have plans for
our community, uh, you know, we
just need to have the, the extra
oomph dollar wise to get us
completed, OK? And then I don't
know if uh Miss uh Peterson
would like to say anything, so
I'll give whatever's left of my
time to her thank you so much
for coming here. Thank you for
listening.
me.
Good morning again, um, like my
colleague here says, uh, my name
is Janice Peterson. I'm from
Churchard area. I live in er
area for or on a 4th generation.
And my client was what is cheap.
I just chin
And my client was what is cheap.
I just chinnari che so I do have
um 6 kids and have grandkids, so
they're very honored to be here
with you guys and they're time
to time I went to Santa Fe for
different reasons. I've seen
some of the familiar faces, and
we talk a time that we were
concerned about our communities
for our needs are, so I work as
a club president, uh, land use
planning, we're at this year
we're updating it.
We're working on it, uh, we've
been getting pictures with our
members and then within that and
they've been really working with
us switch road needs to be
addressed in what railroads have
been done, so we're doing that
as a manual book and we're
really grateful to do that.
And it's a lot of work, it's not
an easy job, uh, we had to go
out to the certain community
areas and see what the community
needs, what we see needs to be
done, what needs to be dealt
with it, and it's hard and it's,
you know, a lot of people think
it's an easy thing, but it's
not. So we're at 80% getting the
book done, so we're aiming for
the end of the year to get it,
you know, certified if not by
next year.
So that's what we're doing and
we're helpful from the lady
named Latasha James. She's been
really exploring this, helping
us out with the drafting it and
what we really need to put into
the book and that's what we've
been doing and we've been
working with the chapters
officials and a lot of them we
get some information we share
it, we come together as one team
and we're pulling it through, so
basically our community really
concerned about is um.
They say like alcohol abuse.
It's been hard also with the
road area it's really hard that
people could travel and right
now at the wish there was a bus
that could run to each chapters
to pick up people that needs to
go to town or medical reason,
but it's not, it's hard and the
only way that some of the safe
right goes at the reservation is
they had to be made
appointments, so there's no just
right off the road that can be
picked up and go take to their
knees, but it's hard with the
reservation where we at is
really hard.
With certain things, it's not.
Just right off into the corner
that you can go get something
you would have to travel to
distance to get what we need.
We had to travel to go to our
medical. We had to travel to go
out of town to get what our
family needs our community
needs, so a lot of these things
are really different. If you
live in the city, it's just very
simple, but you live out here,
you have to take a walk, go down
and find your neighbors to see
if they can give you a ride
sometime your neighbors will say
here, I have things to do. I'm
sorry, you know that makes it
hard on the community to travel,
so if there's a possible way
that you guys can be able to
maybe help us out with that.
part of it and the community
level that'd be really helpful,
but in that we do what we gotta
do and yes we are just having
the fundings sitting in their
office and we're over here
struggling with what we need. It
takes forever, so we request
something for this year we won't
get it for another few years, so
that's how the work system so
it's nice meeting you guys
again. It's good to see all of
you and it's been an honor to be
here with Pupi chapters, our
communities are all the
different coming out here to.
Addressed you, but thank you.
Thank you. And
You have a senior center there
and they were still it was like
complete, then they were
supposed to bring an awning for
the uh for you guys unload. Did
that get completed? No, it never
got completed completed right
now the senior center is closed
because the um overhead HVAC.
is not working we help uh as a
chapter we help the senior
center then uh they said we
can't open it unless there's a
contract with the Navo Nation so
this contract was um.
Submitted, then it's going
through DOJ right now to make
sure all the verbiage is
correct, and then, uh, that
contract will come back to the
senior center and that contract
is with the HVAC uh provider.
And I believe that's um.
Off the top of my head, I can't
remember his name, the name. I
see it, but I can't.
But it's, it's a new, to me it's
one of the newer senior centers.
I think it was completed right
before, I think when I got in,
is when they opened, and that's
when they were like, we're just
waiting for the awning to really
have a opening. Did it ever come
in operation or was it just
never opened it's been in
operation for um
I'd say about 6-7 years.
It was operating. I remember
cause my, uh, some of the
friends that I have that are
elders used to be there and used
to sit in the lounge doing
puzzles.
So it was open for a while until
OEH came in and had some sites,
uh, what do they call it
discrepancies, so they had to
fix those first, so right now
the last thing is that HVAC we
had the uh fire uh fire alarm
system from PLTI.
We had that one, straightened
out so now it's just that air
conditioning and heating that,
that we're working on.
And
The um area.
Because I think you guys are
landlocked too, as far as if you
want a new chapter, you're gonna
probably have to relocate or
actually demo the old chapter
first, um, because the area of
land around there, I don't think
there's much room for expansion,
um, uh, in that area is there
plans as far as relocating the
chapter government or you guys
want to do right there in the,
where the old.
I think the idea is to go ahead
and demo the old chapter because
even if you go down below,
that's a flood plain right
between the chapter in the
warehouse, so the warehouse just
a little bit higher than that
flood plain and then there's a
water line that's coming through
by the warehouse it's um the
gallup uh the San Juan Galup
water line is coming through
there and then we have a gas
line, uh, so one of the things
that we're kind of looking at
too is uh working with uh.
gas to try to identify where the
gas line is and maybe somebody
told me it needs to be capped at
certain places because if one
house goes, the other ones will.
So it's kind of a scary
situation for that area for
Church Rock. Yeah, cause the
rail is right there too, but I
don't recall their offense being
along the rail from the
community because we have the
element, the new elementary when
I say new, I'm thinking it's 10
years.
Um, right there, and I believe
that area too experienced some
flooding back, uh, a couple of
years ago, that water just came
down through that canyon. I'm
surprised that mobile homes
there, um, but it was uh pretty
bad because, uh, I mean, it's
just sand right there. I know,
but I don't think there's a
fence between the real and the
community.
I, I recall.
No,
yeah, because I think that's one
of the things that's on our ICIP
listing is uh uh compound
fencing that will go around the
whole compound that way it's
identified where the chapter
compound land is, and then I
believe the hill is where the
new chapter is going to stay
unless they identify somewhere
else but it's.
It's, it's hard to say what will
be the new.
New piece of land identified.
You can my family used to live
out. My dad was like, they got
on the bus, they were going home
and then his little brother and
my uncle was over there by the
railroad tracks waving at them.
So I was like, I think that's a
safety issue in that sense, um,
especially because the
neighborhood's right, the, the
newer housing neighborhood and
the other one on the other side
too.
In the area and then in regards
to the chapter house, um, my
dad, uh, worked on it back in
the early 60s, uh, somewhere
around 1960, 1961 when Ed Lee Na
was uh a chapter official.
So that's what my dad went over
there in uh laid some bricks
down.
Now.
So it's all.
Yeah, and the opportunity for
economic development, because I
don't think Thompson's store is
still open, is it? No, it's not.
He's trying to get uh his store
opened. He's running through a
lot of red tape with the Navajo
Nation, and it's gonna be there
at the corner of 566 and 118
where right where they're doing
the construction now that's
where it's gonna be located and
um we had a groundbreaking way
back in 2013 when President Ben
Shelley was
President, so, uh, it's been a
while since we had the
groundbreaking.
Yeah, OK, and other than that
you guys have to come all the
way into Gallup for anything the
way Gallup for our needs, and I
think Thompson is planning on a
convenience store with gas
station with laundromat because
he had a gas station in store,
but I don't think he had the
laundromat back in the day
because the girls played
basketball.
For back in the day. Yes, yes.
But thank you, thank you and uh
please come forward and uh for
Senator uh representative block,
the little canyon in there by
the white cliffs. It's where
they had the Superman film, um,
part of the.
says Superman can, yeah, part of
that, that's uh that's what the
area is famous for, but thank
you, and we will go with uh
Nashchiti very quickly. But
thank you guys for, thank you.
Thank you, Mr. Nez for joining
us, um, yesterday we were in
Tohatchie and uh Tusa School
that was talking about up there.
Mr. Nez was on the school board
during the time when I was a
student teaching and was a
teacher there. So thank you for
joining us.
Yes.
A.
Good? Oh, OK.
I guess I just need to talk a
little bit louder. Thank you.
uh, and good morning again, uh,
honorable uh representative of
uh New Mexico legislators.
Uh, like, like myself, uh.
Chairman said that we, you guys
were at.
Tohachi and I was, we were at
the next door, but we had a
meeting.
We had that meeting and then you
had meeting at Tohachi and then
I, I was trying to attend the
Uh, government reform with the
Navajo nation was being held in
Chinle, Arizona, and all three
of them came in, but I, I said,
I'm responsible to my chapter,
so that, that's what I did, so
and and then I, I just, they
said he was going to be here, so
I said, oh, OK, I'll be going to
that one, so.
Uh
I didn't know what the setup was
here.
And uh
I was just told you have to
register if you want to talk or
not and, and that was it.
But I have a few reports I like
to just give you with my
chapter. Like earlier I said, we
are commission type um
government over there. We have 5
members, and they're commission
members, we've been like that
for a while. It's a little bit
different than the regular
chapter chapter
uh organizations, uh, we get
money kind of from this if they
got money from the state, it
goes to them and kind of goes in
our account.
Instead of going, uh, asking for
uh payout, we, we got that money
at, at the chapter, and we do
our own uh hiring and everything
we don't do with the, uh, with
how the um nomination government
does. And then we do our own
contracts. We, we bid out
contracts, we, we make
agreements and where I signed
off on contracts and stuff like
that.
So, but then there's a lot of
other things that, um, for, for
me.
I like to do, but then we said
um the the the nation says no,
we can't do that. This is ours
and this is ours. So,
As a a local government with
commission, I like to do more.
what they're saying like roads
and stuff, I like to take over
roads.
You know, instead of them, I
like to deal with the BIA when
they have the roads I like to
take over that.
Along with the fundings make
agreements on that, and, you
know, uh,
It's a lot of work that I'm, I'm
trying to do.
Uh, I just got into office and
in January.
But before that I used to be uh
on a grazing committee and there
was for like 16 years, and then
I was like on the school board
for 14 years too, so.
Uh, and then from there, my
daughters were going to college,
so I said I need some money, so
I quit all of that.
And I've been working ever since
then, and I retired uh last
month, the end of June.
After 55 years.
Uh,
and I used to work, I worked
over here at the nuclear, um,
uranium mine.
For a while too, so, up, up the
road over here, um, that's part
of some of my things that I'm
throughout.
my working days.
I just like to say that.
We do our chapters asking for a
multi-purpose building.
And there's always a question
about land, but the people where
we were planning on.
the family there says go for it.
Uh, we support that, so.
So we're asking for a planning
stage, planning and design stage
for 2026. We already, uh, uh,
encoded or, or Mandarin encoded
everything, so, and then on 27,
we'll, we'll ask him for for
funds to, to start.
As to see how much it costs and
how much we'll be asking for. So
those are the things that, and
then the next thing is our
chapter, you know, this is a
nice chapter. I like this one.
You can live in here. Yeah, so.
Uh, our chapters all, all, I
think it was in the late 40s or
early 50s that was built, and we
are
We can't really have air
conditioning. We're trying to
get air conditioned, but
Or um
Electrical is, is can't handle
it. It needs to be upgraded, so
we're kind of asking for that
too. And then even our, our
water lines, you know, we'd like
to have a sprinkler system to be
put in there, but you know what
we're lacking all of that, so
that's what we're asking, but
then maybe multi-purpose
building can take care of that
too, you know, if it sits over
there and then we need to hire
people to, to oversee that maybe
our chapters administration can
be in there.
overlooking that and and the
whole thing, so that's part of
it. So those are our, our
requests for funding.
And then I have some other
things that I just need to make
you aware of and that's a thank
you for
Overlay on 491.
You know, it's
Whatever you put there it was
good. We used to drive on the
left side, because this side is
so bad, we have to drive on the
left side. So now we can drive a
little bit but it needs more
work.
It's, it's the southbound lane
that's really bad. And we have a
lot of, uh, chuckers go through
there, um, and when they, um,
Are you, I sit there and I can't
like 11 truck every 5 minutes
that goes through there.
And we got a lot of potholes, so
that, that's just, um, some of
the things that
I'd just like to let you know
that it's there. If it comes up
and, and your legislation or
whatever, then you, you know
what, what.
What's up there? OK. And then
the other thing that
That, uh
We talked about a little bit
earlier is San Juan County and
McKinley County lines.
I know they had a meeting out
there at Cheap Springs on, I
guess the Navajo Nation is
disputing it.
But like I said, I was there for
20 years and
There's always been.
We never got service from San
Juan County.
Never.
It's always says,
We don't have no money.
So our county line is certain
that my market 37.
And our chapter is set at
Momarker 40.
And um.
Cheap spring, there's, there's a
line there between the chapters,
uh, is uh 45.
So
And I know crystal is part of
one too, but they used to say
that too.
So at one point we said, let's
move.
McKinley County.
Up to
Malmark 3045.
But it's never happened.
So, uh, I don't know that the,
the, the latest uh
Uh,
I don't know if you call it
redising or uh we, we do
alignments, whatever, uh, I
think that's happened, so.
And from what I understand from
the cheatin meeting was that the
state has that authority to, to
do the changes. That's what I
was told, so I, I don't know if
that's true or not.
And the other thing too is um.
We have a
A school
In McKinley County, the school
bus turns around right there at
my market at 37.
And we have a lot of students
from Nash City from Malmarker 40
and the housing that area
Tohachi.
And they want the bus to go all
the way to the, to the chapter
and turned around over there.
And that's.
You know, that's, that's another
problem, they said it's the
state.
It has to change that in order
for them to do that.
But through
through the Trump
administration, he's saying
the school choice. So I don't
know if that covers that or not.
So, uh, just, just concern with
the community, we haven't really
touched on it or, or started to,
to, to address it. Those are
just the things that I I just
like you to know. So and then
the other thing too is uh fruit.
We have a lot of roads that that
need to know in the past used to
be the state used to fund us for
clearance, you know.
Some clear money and it's been
clear, but my understanding is
we need to do the EA or whatever
again, the only good for like 8
years. So we need to do that and
I, I asked, um, our, our
managers there, she said, you
guys don't do that anymore you
don't fund that anymore.
That's what she told me, so I
don't know.
So, um, those are my.
Um, my concerns too, so.
That, that's all I have.
Thank you. Thank you. Any
questions from members?
So being on the grazing
committee, I know the cattle
guards was, was in one of the
issues and with our community
members and those listening is
that go through the process,
through the chapter, get your
cattle guard identified. There
is money in the DOT, um, budget,
but it's just an allocation
because we don't really have a,
a good solid number of how many
have to be um cleaned out, so
they're going to start that
process, so we do have a chunk
of money in there that'll go
year by year, but the
The
cattle guards need to be
identified so the residences
need to come forward, let them
know, and I know on some of
these cattle guards there's
several residences on those
roads, so everybody needs to be
notified and all come forward
because one person opposing to
it or is not notified or you
don't have their approval, you
highly likely won't get your
cattle guard, um, cleaned out,
but they are cleaning them out,
um, here and there, but those
are the chapters that have
identified where they need to be
cleared out, so they need to go
through that process.
The, um,
So we'll try to find out about
the jurisdi we have
redistricting here, but I
understand that line's been
Oh, and the problem with it is
we have community members that
are in that zone of they're
saying it's over here and it's
over here. They don't know where
to go to get services. They
don't know if the hos supposed
to go to Nash chitty chapter or
Tohatchie chapter because they
get bounced back and forth
because that's not um been
clearly established and I did
mention that during
redistricting. Um, one of the
things I proposed to Nashchitty
chapter if San Juan County is
not going to be responsive, then
we'll see if
McKinley County, I don't know
how the chapter felt about being
absorbed into McKinley County as
far as getting their needs met,
um.
And we'll, I'll try to inquire
about the um that reimbursement
or cleaning up of the road
because the DOT2 has their
jurisdictional clearances,
especially when it snows. They
come out and they clear the road
and they'll get to Tar turn
around right there and then go
back up for 91 because that is
what they're assigned to.
There's that little section in
front of TNR that will just be
snowpacked because the, the snow
plows don't, don't come out
there. So, and then that's where
we get some issues.
Um,
as we go forward.
But I appreciate nice chitty
chapter because, um, well,
they've been with me uh and uh
that was one chapter I did
because they were um
self-governed. They had a store
there that was responsible for
the post office contracted. The
store burned, so Nosh Chitty
does not have a post office any
longer. Um, they've been trying
to, the store owner did have
insurance. He got the money, but
he wanted to relocate because of
the location of where he was at
to make it more accessible.
To allow for some economic
development, uh, with the truck
drivers along the road, but
there was an issue with um
Navajo Nation along that sense,
but I appreciate Nash Chitty
working together with our DOT
because they were able to get
those ingresses for safety
concerns and do the lighting
that we heard about from um one
of the chapters yesterday with
the Light of America, they were
able to get all that lighting
there, so if you went a little
further north at night, you
would see a bunch of lights
there where you come in.
To the community and with the
speed limit, um.
Uh, the slowing down of the
speed limit, I think causes some
of the waving of the road in
that area.
But a question for you is, um,
do we know what they're gonna do
with that auction.
There used to be an auction
there every year or across from
the chapter. What are they going
to repurpose that one or who
owns it or what are they gonna
do with all the
Cause that was a big economic
driver. I mean, we got
everybody, we were there all day
with with the cows and the dust.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Uh, that
Uh, auction there is in
litigation.
The
The land users there don't want
that anymore.
And I'm, I'm working on moving
it.
To Malmarker 36.
And uh I'm trying to get the.
wrote to White Rock to be moved
over there, and then we can have
a truck stop and all kinds of
other like uh housing area. I
think there was like about 3
maybe 300 acres there we that
we, I'm working with the permit
holders.
Um
Uh, there's they're kind of
positive with that.
So
Well, we need to restore that I
know there's a lot of people
that used to bring their animals
there. Sometimes we were there
till midnight we have to, we
used to have like 3000 head of
cows.
So, and that was good.
For the nation
Yes, and
Since we didn't go out to
Nashchiti. Nash Chitty only has
an elementary school out there.
That's why we have the students
that are split from going to
Newcom or going into Tohatchie
as we talk about the mid school
and high school, so that
jurisdiction line with my kids
or my children getting um
dropped off at that county line.
There's no store there. There's
no, it's just a turn off there,
um, during the winter, during
the time changed, my studio and
you'll see.
sometimes our students are
walking along the highway north
because they get off and
nobody's there to pick them up
and they could even be
elementary students too if Nash
Chitty is full and I know
they've been pretty full most of
the time, um, with their, with
their student count, uh, to the
point where I don't even know if
we can get um pre-K in there
because they're, they're they
didn't factor in, they're
wanting to start, but I don't
think we have enough room there.
But even our little ones,
because
The sibling goes to med school
or goes to high school, most
likely the little siblings also
will go to that school too. So
if they're going to Tahatchie
High School, the little ones
will be going to Tachi
Elementary School. If your older
sibling decides to play sports,
who's your escort home after
school if you have to stay for
practice, then you are on your
own, um, and our children are,
our economy that most of our
kids don't, don't have cell
phones. They don't have that
luxury and then.
In that sense, to have that
access to let their parents know
where they are. So it can be
tough. There are, um, issues
with weather and all of that,
but, um, I, I really like uh
working with our, our members
there in Nash City and they're
doing some good work. They put a
lot of transmission lines, got
some people, um.
electricity out there and, but
the roads, I believe there's a
jurisdictional issue because we
have county roads and the tribal
roads, so I'm glad you mentioned
about just if they can take them
all over, but we'll see. Um,
thank you, Mr. Nance.
Just a little bit more, um, 491
when Mr. John Pinto was there, I
worked with him for right of
ways.
And then within that area, I
worked with him for electrical
extension right away, so he, he
was always good we appreciate
that.
Thank you.
Thank you. We have Mariano Lake
here. Would you like to give a
start? I'm very short.
And for our members here and
those in the audience, we
probably, we'll, we'll go into a
working lunch just to let you
know because there's there's no,
I don't think there's any unless
you want to go, go take a tour
and get lost out there, but
we'll keep you here. Thank you.
Um, when he pressed that, um,
But in to turn it on.
When it's red there.
Y A.
Our honorable chair.
On me Senator Pinto, and then on
was her Arnold Johnson and then
honorable members of the House
of Representatives.
And I know, I want to say.
Congratulations to.
A new representing on
that you have to take the Homer,
uh,
Represented,
Uh,
he passed away, so I want to say
congratulations to you and I
also I want to congratulate uh
honorable Obeda too, and then on
little
you I want to say thank you.
And all those new, all those
members that are here, I will
say, welcome to Pane. I know
this is not my chatter, my
chapter is just right down the
road
5 mile from here
and my name is Young Jeff To.
Um, on the Church of President.
I want to thank each one of you.
I want to bring out to the
point.
On man.
It's a very concern
with the nation, not only with
the nation,
but the other child and also the
state of New Mexico and also
other state.
The concern that we have.
It's what is gonna happen.
What is going on?
With a Medicare.
And then also not that.
With the school, public school.
You can't have kids. You've got
grandkids that are going to
school. You have relative.
Yeah, needs
To go to hospital.
Senior citizen
And then
I'm the Vietnam veteran.
1971 to 1977.
When I came out,
I join New Mexico Army Army
National Guard.
I was the national government
here in Gallup.
And at that time when I was with
the National Guard.
What happened in Santa Fe when
they had that rice.
I was there for security.
participate.
So what is going on
with our we you? How much you
got that impact.
What is going on in DC?
No matter what your democratic
Republican.
We won't vote for you to defend
us. You guys should come
together and work as a family.
Now on against each other.
And I used to be a president for
30 years ago.
Um, uh, a young.
But I'm from Lake.
I can transfer to reality and
was a trust the president.
As to that, then I became a
councilman.
And with the councilman for 20
years.
I retired
And now was also McKinley called
the school board.
And that time when I was one of
the part that one that, uh,
impact 8.
It was brought up with Zuni.
Uh, it's still going on, so I
want your support on that area.
I don't know how it will impact
your decision on the state.
When it comes to Medicaid and
cutting up. It is a very
concerned not only myself and my
family's, each one of your
family too. I, one thing that I
want to say thanks to our
Uh, Arnold Johnson, and then
I know on uh mandus is not here
and I know you came in late on
Garcia, but I want to thank you
for the, uh, the greed that was
proposing will be given to us
and then I want to thank each
one of your members representing
that you support our legis
legislation and we're still
working to get the greater to
our chapter was still working
but the.
you know, what was brought out
here with the Navajo nation. And
so I know that's so.
that we have, we try to get it
right away. And also,
We did have a, a, a polar did
before
legislation representative and
also the Senate. Did they
support us for a new chapter.
And you could, you know, the,
the legislation was approved and
signed by the speaker and then
we send it to the governor, but
the governor veto at that time,
so we had to go for the Navajo
Nation
and we the fun, and now we have
a construction that's going on.
So what um what um what I'm
asking for is we need to have
additional funding that will be
coming before you before
probably next.
that it, I just want for your
support.
So again, I want to say thank
you for coming over, issuing a
few and take care and no matter
what, be strong and remember
that you have a family that you
need to take care of it.
Uh, I wanted to say.
Each one of you congratulations
again and on behalf of my
family,
And more community people, I
want to say congratulations and
thank you and God bless you.
Yeah.
Yeah. Any um questions for
members and no questions.
Marianolate got a new chapter
housed at the state did um
provide because they went for I
think 3 or 4 years without it
because it burned down.
But we do have other chapters.
Casamero Lake, uh, I don't know
if Smith Lake Casamero Lake
doesn't have any government
right now or I don't think they
have a chapter either, so those
members of that chapter are not
getting any service from the
nation and their neighboring
here too as we move forward. So
just keep that in mind when you
see some of these communities
come out, but thank you, uh, Mr.
Tom, for your presentation, and
we will move on to the
redistricting.
Mexico task force.
Getting it for 60 redges 60s.
And we will try to get back on
track here with time. Um, thank
you for joining us, and, uh, you
may begin your presentation.
OK.
Although Koshi.
Uh, so, uh, Madam Chair, and,
and
Madam Chair and
My Madam vice chair.
Uh if you would let me, I would
like to also have the
opportunity to
Intersperse my presentation with
the in the Navajo language.
Is that OK?
Uh, the Navajo Nation has a new
law that says that
The Navajo language is the
official language of the Navajo
government.
Um,
Cocoodoshita.
Be
Benny.
Konahikenazi.
The like I do yo.
Laskoya.
Uh,
so I just pointed out that uh
there are relatives here in the
audience that
Predominantly speak the Navajo
language and they prefer to
communicate in the Navajo
language.
Than any other language, um,
that they're aware of.
Uh, so in the Navajo Nation does
have the
Uh, it's language as the
official language.
Um, I'm just coming off of a
meeting, um.
That was pointed out by the
representative from Nash City.
Uh, with San Juan County, New
Mexico.
Uh, a, uh, um,
We were in those meetings the
last day and a half.
Uh, talking about the bill that
you had passed in 2023.
Uh house Bill, um, 4.
Uh, the Native American Voting
Rights Act.
And how that impacts the
communities plus how that
impacts the San Juan County, New
Mexico,
uh, Corro C nakichita
uh the Ecuador.
you to out so then
as anna hahaha.
To 18agisazigi.
And I, I get pays an earlier.
A cocoin Nacha ya
they call it so
so.
Behanando nigo landed uh kina.
Uh, so through that cycle of
conversation and as a
I would just like to say I'm a
technician and redistricting.
Uh, issues, um,
I was schooled by a community
member yesterday, um, it's
interesting, it's just the
method of
Information that comes across
and the impacts that it has.
On communities across the state
across the uh the school
districts across the counties.
And I think the interpretation
that I got from that schooling.
Uh, was the fact that it's my
district.
I have that responsibility.
To that district. That's mine.
What in the bleep bleep bleep
are you doing?
That's, I
I guess that's the, the level of
Um
Personal interest in these.
Uh, caroused that, that we
build.
As, as technicians and
redistricting folks.
Codoya Basitin this is a house
kid.
Was the.
Otto
So my dad didn't with the snow.
I must lila.
A good egg was she
that's a.
She needs to know she that's a
pani.
Sayallaita.
It's Eli.
So that's a bany Benina.
Jo
did I understand. I don't, I
don't know,
uh, bennina this kid I used to
say not sure the
Pahati.
The cooker, um,
Uh, I've been, um, recruited by
the, the fair districts of New
Mexico.
And also other organizations in
New Mexico. I, I live in, in
Arizona.
But I live on the Navajo Nation.
That's the first and foremost.
And
When I speak my language, I hope
that everybody that is in Navajo
across the states, no matter
where they come from, uh, Utah,
New Mexico, Arizona have, have
the ability to understand what
I'm saying, and I think that's
been a proven fact that I've
communicated with my people in
the Navajo language.
But as a technician and
redistricting, uh, we've been
involved in variety of
redistricting activities in all
these three states.
And we have litigated these
issues many times, uh, in the
three states, uh, was a, um, um,
witness in the 2011 12 party uh
litigation that took place in
the state of New Mexico.
Uh, Navajo Nation prevail in all
of the four cases at that time.
Um, and then I have had the
opportunity, uh, I guess the
privilege to submit an amicus to
the US Supreme Court on, on
other issues from that came from
the state of Arizona.
As a resident of the state of
Arizona.
So I, I think I've had some
level of understanding.
Of what redistricting is all
about and I think that's the
reason why I get to be recruited
by the fair districts and the
League of Women Voters and all
other organizations from the
state of New Mexico that need
the assistance.
Um, I've been involved in the uh
voting aspects of the uh
Arizona uh Independent
redistricting commissioned
establishment. I was so happy
that, uh, just last cycle of
redistriing that a Native
American was appointed.
As to be a member of that
five-member redistricting
commission. It's an independent
commission.
Uh, so, so with that I
participated in the 2020, um,
Um, New Mexico redistricting
task force. I was a member of
that uh task force.
And I remember there were a
number of legislators that were
uh members of that task force
and made presentations and made
input and comments about that,
uh, development of the task
force and the work of the task
force and as a result in 2021,
the US legislature passed a bill
that created.
Uh, the
Uh, New Mexico's citizen
redistricting committee.
That was wonderful. That was a
good step. It's a good step in
the right direction.
But as a citizen of the Navajo
Nation, I think we're split
between uh Arizona and New
Mexico and Utah and were treated
differently, unfortunately in
many of these areas of policy
making because of the state.
Uh, on Arizona, we, we
participate in the
Um, redistributing activities
with the independent
redistricting commission on the
New Mexico side, we have to go
through the legislative
processes, but the next first
step is that, uh, citizen
redistricting commission. So I'm
aware of, of those, of those
matters and issues that, that do
permeate,
uh, by CR the next
not only
Johannei
so I'm not that, uh, could have,
could have done you know
a yanti.
not its kitchen no office of
nomination human rights
commission Danitaoko Anoto not
don't topokokodinahazoki Ilia uh
tight snas.
Uh,
the Dailhaliat and no when the
art ed lion and sing
Uh,
the Dailhaliat and no when the
art ed lion and sings
Uh,
the Dailhaliat and no when the
art ed lion and sing
a DGA uh you didn't know so you
not you not so the bahana
tigittayahai
Lanahuzhenzhoe what would you
nati nata
That that dudes got that zogi ni
niokininsatta.
Hey, la la ba ba ba.
0 800
pee and cargo.
Or
Oh yeah i
waiki.
It
a
yogi.
OK.
A here and
uh
it's um laleleniki
uh tani.
It cannot
adenosole
not so yas and
tikoji or to.
Nien.
I did a lot
egoeyapanokeo bansikishi yako Ii
I think I have given the
opportunity uh to the fair
districts, um, we're the co-host
to them, we're just a technician
that they employ in this
organization, uh, they're from
New Mexico, uh League of Women
Voters are also from
New Mexico and they have the uh
know-how on the grounds they're
the experts in the state of New
Mexico. I'm just simply a person
that has the ability to draw
maps. I've seen a lot of you in
these um redistricting meetings
in the state legislature. Thank
you.
Yay, good morning, Madam Chair,
Madam Vice Chair, thank you for
having us here today. I wanna
thank Leonard Gorman for
inviting me to join him today.
Thank you, Leonard.
I would like to thank
Legislative council Service for
your assistance. Thank you.
Madam Chair, I, I have a, a, a
request, is it possible we have
a photographer with us today.
May the photographer take a few
photographs from the back of the
room.
Only of me. I'm just kidding.
No, that's right. He said he
would be very discreet. Could
you state your full name and
then the, the name of the
photographer.
Yes, ma'am. My name is Kathleen
Burke. I am here with Fair
Districts for New Mexico. We are
located in Bernalillo County,
though we work statewide and we
have partners statewide, uh, 50
organizations around the state
of New Mexico and nationwide
comprise New Mexico and as Mr.
Gorman said, are in need of fair
districting. The photographer
gentleman who is here with me
today, Madam Chair, is Mr.
Thomas Campbell. Thank you.
I, uh,
I brought a, a couple of
handouts. One started out as a
PowerPoint presentation and all
of the slides are here for you
front and back, and we'll just
go through that quickly to talk
about the task force, which is
the most immediate matter at
hand in regard to redistricting.
So,
You've met Mr. Gorman myself,
uh, and going across, why are we
convening the 2025 redistricting
task force, the reasons to
further the the success that
we're building on from the 2020
redistricting task force. Some
of you will remember that and
the recommendations, more
importantly, the recommendations
that came out of that task
force. As Mr. Gorman already
mentioned, we got
the citizens redistricting
Committee, which
is a stepping stone to
Perhaps having an independent
redistricting commission.
You will have a report in front
of you provided by legislative
council service that came from
us at Fair Districts for New
Mexico that is the official
report from the 2020
redistricting task force. I ask
that you please have a look at
that.
We are also convening this task
force in order to educate the
public, right? I'm sure that all
of you have some constituents
who are interested in
redistricting. Maybe they've
spoken to you about it, but we
need more of our constituents
here in New Mexico to understand
redistricting and to be able to
have a say if and when they want
to.
Next slide is the calendar and
the chairs. You'll see we will
have 3 meetings August 4th,
August 19th, and September 10th,
just three meetings for this
task force. They'll all be held
on Zoom, uh, we believe, we hope
to be opening it up to all of
the legislators, uh, to observe,
we've turned that over to the
chairs to make that decision,
and we're awaiting their
response. We'll let you know.
So speaking of chairs, are
chairs for the task force are
Judge Rod Kennedy and Judge
Linda Vancy, both former head
judges of the New Mexico State
Appeals Court. We're happy to
have them.
You'll see on the 4th slide,
you're, some of you are on this
list, and some of you will
recognize your colleagues'
names. So on the task force, we
have representatives Armstrong,
Dow Parajon, and we have one
open seat for someone who might
be in this room, who might
accept this seat as a, a
democratic representative.
We also have senators block,
Senator Brantley, Senator
Charlie, and Senator Pope.
And then on the next side of the
sheet, you'll see we have
community members including Mr.
Gorman, as well as Heather
Ballas, Mason Graham, Dick
Mason, who is with us today, Mr.
Mason in the back, and Doctor
Cedric Page from the NAACP.
Um
You'll see, you'll recognize
their organizations, uh, these
people represent diverse causes,
common cause in New Mexico, the
Navajo Nation, election
reformers Network.
And the NAACP, etc.
You might be curious about our
subjects. You'll see that over
here on the right-hand side of
the sheet.
We're going to talk about
history.
We're going to talk about racial
gerrymandering, partisan
gerrymandering and incumbency
protection.
We'll talk again about the di
the recommendations in the
report that you have before you.
We evaluate what is called
redistricting principles that
those are the principles that we
ideally would base all
redistricting upon.
Which ones does New Mexico want
to prioritize?
Which what will be our
priorities here in New Mexico,
and we'll know that after the
task force convenes and
hopefully, well, they will be
reporting back to us. You can
count on that. And back to you,
legislators.
So, um, evaluations and outcomes
from the 2021 redistricting from
an objective, uh, an objective
person at
University of New Mexico, an
objective PhD, uh, professor
there.
So, uh, as I mentioned, there,
there, we will be reporting
back. There will be a final
report to be released by October
15th. We want to have that in
plenty of time before you start
your next session in 2026. We'll
be happy to get that into your
hands. So please watch for that.
Please watch for any further
updates about, uh,
If we can get you on as
observers on the task force. If,
if you're interested in being on
the task force, if you've been
nominated, you will have
received an announcement about
that. So with that, I think Mr.
Gorman and I would like to
answer questions and thank you
for listening today.
And uh yeah, let's have some
Q&A, please.
Thank you. Thank you for your
presentation and uh
representative Garcia, would you
please introduce yourself and if
you don't have any questions.
Uh, thank you very much, uh,
chair, and Vice Chair, members
of the Indian Affairs Committee
that are here today, uh, sorry
for being late but last night,
uh, coming home from Tohatchie
and having dinner with my family
and then going over to the hotel
on I-40. I had a major blowout.
I, I didn't know what was going
on. I drove about almost 1 mile
to the hotel and then I found
out that I was just on rims.
But, uh, so I was busy getting a
new tire this morning, so I was
late, so you can't have to
excuse me, and I'm safe and
pretty much protected.
Uh, I'm Martha Garcia. I'm from
uh the community of Raymond,
Navajo, live at Pine Hill. I
represent District 6, that
covers McKinley County and uh
Sila County. I have portions of
grants, all of Milan and uh
Bluewater and everything west of
there, uh, including the Zuni
Pueblo. I serve uh
8 chapters and uh of course it
was 9 chapters. Now I've still
have to find out how commit uh
Cassimerlake not little water is
gonna be operating. So based on
that, uh, those are the chapters
that I cover.
And I was appointed uh back in
uh February. It took a while for
me to come aboard and I served
the last 20 days. I was.
Fortunate enough to have the
help of um my colleagues and
Senator Munoz to put a budget
together even though it was past
the deadline.
But I was not able to introduce
any bill, but voted on a lot of
the bills that had come through,
so uh this coming session, I'm
more than prepared to address a
lot of the issues that we have
and again my concern
upmost would be uh
The uh
Bills that uh
That are have been identified
for chapters, that's where
majority of the problem is with
the Navajo Nation, and I have
requested, what can we do? There
are a lot of opinions and ideas
that are floating around, but,
uh, it would be up to the Navajo
Nation to help Eastern Navajo
Agency, uh, chapters to uh.
See how the process can be put
in place so we would get our
fundings.
Uh
Through the process within a
matter of time, no less than 2
years, so they can be
implemented and be taken care
of. Sad to say this go around.
We have millions of dollars that
has been reverted back to uh
to the state of New Mexico
because we didn't have proper
agreements or
there was nothing that had been
put in place and we lost those
funds and I, I would like to see
all of the funds that are out
there. It's not only Navajo
Nation, but there were some that
came up for reauthorization and
did not make it through the
process, so, uh.
We have to do a whole lot better
than what we are currently doing
because you have heard over the
past day and a half that we uh
that the chapters and uh the
organizations, different ones,
uh, need those money to uh make
uh a life, a lot, lot better for
our communities and constituents
and uh we have to find
solutions. We, I don't feel like
I can't just sweep this under
the.
Table or carpet and then just
Become a status quo situation. I
like to have it resolved.
And uh hopefully that it will be
done and I am, I aim to follow
through with the issues that
have come up and has been
expressed by our constituents
and leaders of this um
It that covers all of Eastern
Navajo Agency, and it does
impact our local communities and
towns and villages, uh, in, in
all of the areas that we serve,
so I just want to express um my
thank you to our colleagues for
uh hanging on this long and uh
being here with us and being
able to see what we are uh
people in this area have to deal
with and
I noticed that yesterday you
guys all enjoyed the wonderful
um lunch that was provided and
uh
And glad to see that now you are
able to partake of our mutton
stew and lamb.
Sandwiches and that was good. So
with that, uh, chair, thank you.
Thank you, Representative.
Representative Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you presenters for that
great presentation.
So, first of all, I want to
start with the map on the, on
the.
That you gave us that's on your,
on your sheet.
What
What's the deal with the map? I
What, what map is this?
Could you say that again? I, I'm
wondering about the map, why we
have this map on our sheet.
I do.
Representative Samoa, Turn your,
turn your mic.
Representative Zamora, it's been
a while since I've seen that
map. I'd like to come look at
it. I believe it's the
congressional map, the current.
Oh.
And I'm wondering why we're
using that map.
OK
Uh, let me, let me respond to,
to that question.
Um,
this is the report.
Actual report that was submitted
and it's entitled redistricting
Task Force in New Mexico
recommending develop
recommendations developed by the
New Mexico 1st 3 Districting
Task Force 2020.
So at that time, this was the
congressional map.
So that's a 2011 congressional.
I.
I'm sorry, I'm out of rhythm
here
yes, so.
So it'd be nice to have a
current map so we know where
we're at today. And, and, uh, so
everybody.
Understands a district.
Uh, because I, I go around
talking to people about
CD3 and, and
They don't, they don't really
know where it's at and, and this
doesn't help us any, so.
I'll go on to to another
question, Madam Chair. So,
Kathleen, you made a statement.
About
Racial
Gerrymandering
Can you kind of go into that a
little bit and, and tell us what
racial gerrymandering means.
Yes, sir. Thank you for
Representative Samoa and, and
sorry about the map confusion.
It's true that's from 2011 and,
and that report is pre, is prior
to the last redistricting, and I
believe on the NM Leis website
are all the current maps that
have been redistricted, so
they're there on, on
Nimledis.gov.
Uh
Your question about racial
gerrymandering.
New Mexico has uh an objective
history of racial
gerrymandering.
Um, this is not conjecture. This
is not opinion. We have a
factual history of racial
gerrymandering against native
people, uh, primarily in the
northwest of the state.
We also have a history of
gerrymandering against Hispanic
people, uh, primarily more in
the southern part of the state.
Um, that is all, uh, compiled in
a report by Gwyneth Doland.
Um, you can find that online.
You can find that on Fair
District's website. It's a
pretty lengthy history of
redistricting in New Mexico. I
assure you it's rich and
interesting, um, but all the
facts regarding historical
racial gerrymandering are there,
uh, for you to read.
In recent years, we don't have.
A problem of racial
gerrymandering, uh, because we
have other laws in place at the
federal level that prevent
racial gerrymandering from
happening.
Nonetheless, we do have
gerrymandering that still goes
on in New Mexico as recently as
the last session. The, the
courts declared that it was not
egregious gerrymandering, but it
was gerrymandering. So that's
why we are continuing our
efforts. That's why we're
continuing to have uh a more
transparent and correct process
for redistricting. I hope that
answers your question.
Representative.
And, and thank you for that
answer. That gets me a little
closer to where I'm going with
this. So,
Can you explain to everybody
here what the deviation numbers
are.
Uh, Representative Madam Chair,
I believe Representative, that
you are referring to.
How, how different, how
Much deviation we may see
between one district and the
next.
Uh, so deviation from
The population, how many people
can be, how many people should
be in each district and how, how
far we can deviate from that
number being population. Is, is
that the, the deviation to which
you refer representative? Yes,
Madam Chair, and, and, and
Kathleen, thank you for that
answer. So.
And I can't remember the name of
the act. I don't remember it's a
voting act or or what it is.
That was put in place.
In, in the past.
And I'm trying to pull that out
of the top of my head and I
can't get there. Would that be
the Voting Rights Act,
Representative.
OK
Yes
Uh, maybe, uh, Mr. Gorman, would
you be able to help us with this
one?
Um, Representative Zamora.
There have been a number of
times that this legislature.
Has had the opportunity to enact
the Voting Rights Act, for
example, as I mentioned, XB 4,
that was done in 2023.
Now before that, when you were
considering, uh, the
establishment of the independent
redistricting commission as you
referred to as the deviation.
What was the deviation?
Is your question.
So.
So the, the, the deviation, the
word deviation really just means
that from whatever is perfect,
how far can you get away from
it?
OK, that's a deviation. So in
the redistricting principles is
often the, the, the courts have
defined that to mean you can't
go wandering around far from
that perfect number. It has to
be limited to 5% above or below.
So the standard has been
positive 5 and 5 for a long
time.
But the good thing that the New
Mexico legislature did.
In 2021 is to account for the
COVID that took place in 2020
and the accounting that
supposedly were executed by the
US census. I remember talking to
the legislature saying that
there has been an undercount on
the Navajo Nation, and I've
illustrated to the legislature
using maps from my computer, put
a dot on the, on the, um, uh,
the census block that the Navajo
Nation.
says there's a household living
in there, and the census block
has a 0.
So what you did at that time is
created what I was referred to
as the sliding deviation.
In New Mexico, which was good.
So for the legislature that I'm
aware of the deviation is
positive 3.
And -7.
Thank you, thank you for that.
So,
In, in the redistricting.
And, and
There's always been all those
arguments.
And
I believe that we ought to try
to bring it to, to as fair as we
can, humanly possible.
But in the Voting Rights Act,
The deviation numbers are
supposed to go to.
The minority people of the
state, the Hispanics, the
natives.
So that they can
Have that deviation number.
To help
Themselves be better represented
in the state
and
do you, oh, OK, I'm seeing you
shake your head now, so, so can
you tell us why we have the
deviation then in the, in the
voting rights Act.
And how it pertains to minority
people.
When, when we do mapping, uh,
representative Zamara, uh, and
the congressional side.
It's very easy to get to a zero
deviation and come to a very
perfect, uh, allocation of
population per district.
Because the lesser number of
districts, OK.
Uh, now on this House Senate.
And also, for example, the
education.
Plans
The larger the number of the
districts that you have to work
with.
And how you impose on the
process to limit the
redistricting only to precinct
boundaries.
You have it across the state.
This is not a race issue.
It's across the state and it's
across the country.
That oftentimes it cannot as a
member, as a mapper, come to a
zero deviation.
For the legislative districts.
Especially in New Mexico because
you have to pick up chunks of
population because the limit.
The redising only to precinct
boundaries.
On the Arizona side we throw the
precinct boundaries out, and we
use census blocks. So a part of
the factors are, for example,
community of interest.
The communities will say, hey, I
like that group. I like that
community that we work together
very well. How do you combine
them together? Navajo has
demonstrated that chapters are a
community of interest. Make the
effort to keep the chapters as a
whole in a single district.
That becomes a factor.
Communities across the, the
country do make those
statements. You can run into a
canyon.
Uh, a canyon may split a
community.
You, you, that the vision may
create that mean is created by
that canyon. Is the canyon a
race? No, it's not a race.
So from the dynamics of the
mechanics of redistricting those
become elements.
Now, what you're talking about
are different sets of of this
redistricting principles, voter
dilusion, cracking, those become
race factors.
Thank you.
And, and Madam Chair, and, uh,
Leonard
Leonard, Mr. Gorman.
I'm gonna, I'm gonna disagree
with you on the Voting Rights
Act and deviation numbers.
And I'm gonna say that that from
what I've read and understand.
The deviation numbers are
supposed to be distributed
throughout the state equally to
the minorities, which include
the Hispanic and the natives.
And
In this last
Redistricting that we did.
There was some debate in
committee as to why all the
deviation numbers went to the
northwestern part of the state.
And none of the Hispanic
minority districts.
Or, or any, any of the Hispanic
minorities got any of the
deviation numbers in the state.
Every, every, all the deviation
numbers went.
To the northwestern part of the
states to the natives.
And there was, there was debate
in committee that that was done
so that.
The natives could have more
representatives in Santa Fe.
And
The argument was had and I don't
believe that it was fair to the
Hispanics of the state of New
Mexico.
That all the deviation numbers
went.
To the northwestern part of the
state, and that's a fact where
they went and, and after the
debate in that committee.
I had the demographer come up to
me.
And he was upset.
Because we, we debated that.
And the reason we have debates
is, is to learn and come to an
understanding and, and try to
figure out
Where we're going with things.
Debates, debates healthy.
But, uh, so the demographer came
up to me after the debate.
And he was very upset. I mean,
madmen.
And my question to him after he
Gave me his thoughts.
And he was being very stern.
Is
Why did all the deviation go to
the northwestern part of the
states to all the natives.
And what he told me is because
we asked for it.
That was his answer.
We asked for it and they gave it
to us and we took it.
So I think as we go forward.
In the redistricting process.
We ought to try to make that
more fair.
On the part of the deviation
and, and when we're talking
about racial gerrymandering.
I think, I think we ought to
take it more fair, make it more
fair. I don't blame.
Anybody for taking those numbers
if they were given to them.
I just think that we ought to
distribute those numbers
throughout the state and make it
more fair.
Uh
I'm not trying to pick on the
natives in any way.
If, if, if you guys understood.
The system and that the
deviation was gonna help you to
have more representation in
Santa Fe.
And, and you asked for it and
they gave it to you, I'd take it
myself.
But I think in the process.
Of, of
Fairness
And redistricting.
There and, and that wasn't the
only issue that we had with the
redistricting, uh,
And, and sometimes you hear the
argument and you want to hang on
to that. But
If you flip the coin and you
look at the other side, you
know, you can, you can come to
two different conclusions as to
why lines were drawn, uh,
Per se through the city of Ross.
You know, and, and you're not
supposed to cut up, uh,
communities of interest.
And yet
We drew lines in the state that
were just crazy.
Uh, and I kind of tend to
disagree with you that you can't
run a line through a canyon.
We're not drawing lines through
any kind of geographical areas,
we're drawing lines to meet the
numbers of the populations that
should have
A district
Uh, assigned to them.
So.
The, the, the redistricting to
me is very interesting. It's
very political.
And when it turns, when it,
since it's, it is political. We
tend to try to pull and, and,
and move things in a certain way
where, where people have an
advantage.
I almost think that instead of
it going.
To the legislature the way it
does.
That maybe there ought to be
equal amount, even though we
have a party that's greater.
In number and, and, and more
powerful than the minority
party, and I don't care if the
minority party was Republican or
Democrat or what it is.
It'll change at different times,
but that we ought to have an
equal number of
Democrats and Republicans in
those committees.
Because if it goes down to a
vote, the majority party is
always gonna win.
And, and how do we fix all these
things as we go forward. If we
give it to an independent
It's, it's not their job, it's,
it's in the law and in, in the
rules of the state.
That we.
The legislator ought to be
legislators ought to be
redrawing the maps.
But to me, one of the things
that bugged me the most was the
deviation numbers and why they
went to a certain part of the
state, uh, and communities of
interest being cut up in half
and, and the way things got
done.
But uh we learned, we learn as
we go and we try to work with
each other. Everybody really
wants the same results.
Because at one time or other,
one party or the other is gonna
be in the minority.
And if the majority party always
gets to draw the lines, that's
not fair.
So
I, I really appreciate your,
your, uh,
Your presentation and and look
forward to working with you guys
in the future and, and, and
learning from each other and.
And uh get to maybe a more fair
place and, and when we
redistrict. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Representative
Zamora, and thank you for your
interpretations, both of you.
Uh, representative Buck.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I will
try to be as brief as I possibly
can. I know we're running short
on time, but I wanted to thank
you both for your efforts when
it comes to redistricting. Uh, I
was super involved back in 2021,
when all the redistricting
committee happened and I tried
to attend as many meetings as I
could in person to try to get
fair maps, and I think that's
kind of, that's really what we
want. We want fair
representation that represents
the very districts where we're
trying to
Renegotiate the lines, right? So
I, I guess I, I just have a few,
I had a few concerns with the
last redistricting, which I'm
sure everybody already knows
cause I've, I've talked
everyone's ear off during
session and after session, but
Madam Chair,
I think the, the main thing that
I had a problem with when it
came to redistricting was the
lack of input.
From the people during the
actual drawing of the the
buildings or of the of the maps.
And so the building was closed
in Santa Fe. There was a
literally an 8 ft wall
resurrected around the Capitol
for supposed security and people
couldn't, they literally could
not step foot in their own
capital to give their voice and
their opinion. And so I think
what was what happened very well
when it came to redistricting,
the committee itself, you guys
went across the entire state.
Talk to communities in their
community and heard their
voices, and that's how we got
that big report, the huge report
that we had with all the
testimony, and we got all the
maps. I, I think Justice
Chavez's map, in my opinion, was
the most fair because it took
all of that, it sifted all of
that into one map that took
information from everyone from
tribal interests to local
communities and Hispanic
counties and primarily Hispanic
counties, uh, and I think what
it
did was a good balance. And so
my, my big concern from the
current redistricting maps is
that I just think they
They didn't do everything that
they probably should have done
when it came to competitiveness
and fairness, and so,
I was a co-sponsor a couple
years ago on the, on Senator
Jaramilo's redistricting bill or
resolution to make it a
constitutional.
Resolution to get it on the
ballot. So I think
I just, I just hope that we can
all come together in the future
to create these maps, Madam
Chair, that truly can.
Lift people up, because I, I see
our current congressional
districts.
The, the CD3, if you want to
represent CD3, you have to
drive, I think 7 or 8 hours from
the top of your district to the
bottom of your district. And I
think that is really hard to be
represented by someone who
literally would have to drive 8
hours. So I don't know if you
guys have any thoughts on, on
any of that, but I hope in the
future we can come together to
bring our communities to the
capital so that they physically
can be there and have their
voices represented there. So,
thank you both.
I don't know if you have
anything to add to that, but
I'll just throw it to you guys.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Yeah, thank you, thank you,
Reverend Representative Box, and
your thoughts, so make sure we
got questions, you guys. I got
Senator Charlie.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, I'm gonna start by
introducing myself because I
came in late, um, Chea Angel
Charlie and Isa,
Um, I'm gonna start by
introducing myself because I
came in late, um, Chea Angel
Charlie and Isaiahle uh Kisani
bashishin, um, the Kaine
Dashache and Manele was Kisfani,
Zuni clan, not full Kisani, and
I was late because I thought we
were meeting in Pine Hill.
So this Kisani got got turned
around.
I'm happy to be here and make it
in time for food. Also happy to
meet you both in person and I
look forward to serving on the
task force with with the both of
you, um.
And thank you for your previous
efforts in, in redistricting and
it being reflective of
communities of interest because
of that Senate District 30, now
has the first ever Native
American and woman representing,
and that is myself and it is
because of the efforts, um,
that, that of the redistricting
commission, um, and championing
what I know, um, my community's
issues are in Santa Fe.
Um, my first question, Madam
Chair, is on the task force and
the commission, um, why is there
not representation from the uh
Pueblos and Apache nations.
Yes, thank you, Senator, Madam
Chair. That's a really important
question. Thank you. We have,
uh,
We have been encouraging, uh,
organizations of the Pueblo, uh
Native Americans to be a part of
this movement. It's, it, it has
been a bit difficult though we
have still been trying and um we
just have not had someone uh
willing to step up.
To, to be, to represent, but
since you've brought it up
again, um, maybe you and I could
talk about that, about who, if
you would be uh willing to help
us recruit, uh, we would love to
have.
More of that. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. um, I'm
also interested in what are the,
the census efforts happening
right now. I think especially
for underrepresented
communities, we get to a point
where every 10 years, um, we're
severely undercounted in our
community. So what is that
looking like right now? And
where does that intersect with
the work of the task force and
the commission.
You want to try it.
Madam Chair, Vice chair, um,
Senator Charlie, um, the census
issue.
What I'm aware of, um, from my
office.
Regarding the census.
And, and, and pretty much I can
speak to
The Navajo Nation's efforts, but
I think that's also applicable
across the country.
The US Department of Census is
working on realigning for, for
the Navajo Nation, the census
blocks.
Because
The tribal they refer to as a
tribal subdivisions is
inaccurate. So we're making the
effort to ensure that
The nation's voting and census
boundaries are appropriately
Incorporated into the census
blocks, uh, of the, of the
department. The second is that
there are ongoing
American community surveys that
are going on.
And that's a branch of the
department of census.
And they are responsible for
Uh, taking samples of the
communities across the country.
And, and that, that data that
they collect becomes a part of
The disennial census count.
And, and that's, that's an
important facet. The other part
that's
Uh, I think it's important and
we're hopeful that we will get
to, to that concern is the
points that you asked about the
previous presenters about the uh
rule addressing.
Uh, it's a, it's a very
important facet of of the
information that's collected,
um, as an example, we're looking
at some data yesterday.
In San Juan County, New Mexico.
On the north.
On, on the southwest corner, uh,
the registered, the registrants
are kind of piled on top of one
another.
What that means is that the
addresses for the registrants or
1 for like 900 registrants.
While on the eastern side of the
Navajo Nation, the, the, the
numbers and the, and the
location that identified are
relatively diffuse or that they
supposedly at their proper
places. So that brings about the
issue of
Um, are they placed in the
correct
Um
Precinct boundaries.
OK. The other part is that as
you made the law, uh, XB 4.
In 2023, uh, to my knowledge,
the only county in New Mexico
that's on that extends on to the
Naval nation that adjusted its
precinct boundaries to reflect
Navajo voting and census
boundaries is McKinley County.
San Juan County, um, Sandoval,
Ririba, uh, Sabola, uh, Bernard
Leo.
Uh, there's 7 counties that
extend onto the Navajo Nation.
Uh, they need to revisit the the
Precinct boundaries.
In order to reflect
In their boundaries as you made
the law incorporate indigenous
boundaries into your uh census
blocks. That's a challenge.
So, counties will be going
forward.
To the US Census Department soon
to submit their uh census blocks
so that those, those will be
incorporated into the US
censuses, uh, census blocks. So
those are some of the efforts
that my office is undertaken.
Uh, senator.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, I
really do appreciate that
information, um, especially in
thinking about these areas of
cultural landscapes.
And why we need Pueblo and
Apache representation on the
task force because Senate
District 30 is reflective of a
cultural landscape, but we're
only hearing that part of this,
um, we're only hearing the
problems of Navajo Nation when
we have a diverse, right, Indian
country is not a monolith. We
have extreme diversity
throughout um the United States
and especially in New Mexico
and, um, Mr. Gordon, I
appreciate your expertise.
Um, on this issue and I really
hope that we have people from
New Mexico, right? New Mexico
residents that are informing the
way this moves forward. Um, I
respect tribal jurisdiction and
boundaries but to have a a a
person from Arizona on this, um,
I think it's something that we
need to tussle with and really
think about, especially when,
um, one, we only have Navajo
representation and then we and
that now whole representation is
from Arizona. It's not from
New Mexico, um, and we need the,
and we need, and we need this,
this other representation to
have an adequate full picture,
um, so we avoid uh a monolith,
uh, story. Thank you, Madam
Chair. Thank you, Madam Chair,
may I respond, please?
Thank you, Madam Chair and
Senator Charlie, it's very nice
to meet you as well. Thank you
for your input. Uh, I hear you.
We will continue recruiting from
the Apache and from the Pueblo,
uh, trust me, please, it's, it
is.
Very much in our hearts to do
so, and we will continue our
efforts. Thank you. Thank you,
Madam Chair. Thank you,
Representative Royal Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
And um thank you for your
presentation panelists.
I have um just a few questions,
but I wanna begin.
With a um
couple of comments.
And I think, uh,
It's important to note and thank
you to Senator Charlie she,
she addressed several of the,
the major concerns I have,
especially the representation of
pueblos and Apaches and our um
in this process, um.
And I think it, that's important
because
Uh
Part of the history.
the failure.
And representation.
In voting has to do with the way
the census has lumped our
populations into
Generic
Terminology.
And terminology that doesn't
Adequately or fairly.
Represent the multiplicity.
And diversity that exists within
our tribes, nations, and
pueblos.
And that's why we have and refer
to our tribes, nations, and
pueblos appropriately.
As that instead of as natives or
Native Americans in terms of
just a generic representation.
So that has to filter down.
To what we've, what Senator just
addressed.
The fact that, um,
We can't continue to
Play into the very system that
created these generic.
Terminologies and lumpiness
into, for example, Hispanics,
Latinos.
Have been lumped into until I
think it was the 80s or I think
maybe the 90s into being white.
And we, we, you know, we
We obviously are not. And so,
um, even then, we had to as as
Mexican Americans as Puerto Rico
uh Americans ascuano Americans
as Central and South Americans
had to fight.
To have additional
classifications add it.
In the census process so that we
could actually um identify our
ethnicities appropriately as
opposed to just an as being um
one particular uh
classification. So I bring this
up because this points to the
critical importance, Madam Chair
of the census and participating
in the census process because
it's the census process that uh
the redistricting.
Uh, relies upon the re
redistricting process relies
upon. So it's gonna be a
continued process, uh, and, and
fight and struggle with the
federal government, um,
especially under these um times
to ensure that we have um
The classifications that and,
and the descriptions of what we
as a minority populations,
minority majority populations
wish to be classified as. So I,
that's really critically
important, uh, because it also
points to, I think earlier,
there was a discussion about
fairness.
And so that brings me to 11 of
my first questions, and that is
during this entire process, what
um
Specific criteria.
Um, was proposed for addressing
fairness.
And then how does this criteria
comply with the voting rights
Act.
And existing federal and state
laws, and I, I asked that
question because I partook in
the entire process. I either was
in person or um I was on Zoom
while these meetings were being
held around the state and there
was considerable discussion
about
Fairness, so could you just
briefly
Um
Address that question?
As brief as possible.
Uh, Mr. Gorman, if you wanna
start and then Ms. Burke.
Um, representative.
Regarding the census issue, um.
I, I recall when I was having a,
a, a direct discussion with the
folks in the US Department of
Census in 2021.
And I know that.
The census department started
counting people back in 1790s.
And finally, in 2021.
One of the high officials in the
department of census said, I had
no idea that there were
indigenous boundaries.
I had no idea that there were
indigenous boundaries.
Um,
that's, that's the conditions
that we face as First Americans
or indigenous to these lands.
And, and that's a fact.
And then the other condition
that became a serious, uh,
factor in the 2020 census is the
what was referred to a diff
differential privacy.
And
The, the point with that was
that
The department of census said
that we cannot divulge
information that's collected
through the census count of
individuals.
That's private.
Because the effort was
undertaken at that time.
To weed out people that are in
the United States
inappropriately.
So that the US census would
identify those individuals.
Now, the differential privacy
made it where
As you get close to the census
block.
The numbers are diffused.
They're different. It's not
accurate, but as you go up to
the county level, they become
more accurate at the state level
it's accurate.
So as you drill down to the
lower level, it became
A matter of incorrect numbers.
OK. So I've seen that happening
a lot on the Navajo Nation.
So, along those lines of
identification along ethnicity.
I, I would like to say yes, um,
those concerns, and I know that
the Pueblos have raised that
very strong concern back in
2001, and that is, we don't want
you, USDOJ Indian. We don't want
American Indian. The closest
that we can get to as far as
being a race and ethnic
ethnicity is non-Hispanic
Indian.
That's one race Indian.
So, those are some of the
conditions and aspects of the US
census, uh, that is a part of uh
the dynamics of collecting data
and just a little bit of
response to the fairness
question. I know that for
example, the Voting Rights Act,
the uh the redistricting
principles.
are intended to be applicable
across the board.
Community of interests.
Um, uh, voter dilution.
Uh, things of that nature are
supposed to be applicable across
the redistricting activities
equally, OK? So those are the
guiding factors that you all are
aware of that you employ when
you pass your redistricting
plans.
Do you wish to add, Ms. Burke, I
will, uh, Madam Chair, thank
you, thank you, Representative
Rubak Caballero for your
questions. I would just direct
you to page 8 of the report that
you should have there. If you
don't, I'll bring you one, but,
uh, legislators in the room,
page 8 goes into guiding values
and principles for fairness, uh,
very clearly here.
For you. Thank you,
Representative, Madam Chair.
Thank you and
If my copy to no, no, that's OK,
you keep it, but um I thought
that it was in the report, so,
but I needed you to address it,
so I can get another copy, don't
worry about it. Thank you. So,
um.
The um
The next question I have is um.
It, it's, it's uh, it's a little
bit contradictory for me.
And that's why we have to
monitor the census process and
the data that's related to the
census because on the one hand,
they're they're
They're talking about or they
talk about or you described the
whole notion of um what is it
that you call the pri the
privacy um.
The differential privacy.
And then, um, we're going into
our populations during the
census process and assuring our
populations that the data that
we're collecting is private and
it's not shareable. We're not
going to share that, and that's
part of what we
Try to um dis
Um
What's the word? we try to, to,
um,
Diffuse is uh that notion that
the census is the only
government entity.
That
When you put uh respond to the
questionnaire that that
information is private and, and
will not be shared. However,
Just
To note for the record, that's
not necessarily true under these
conditions that we're facing
right now because apparently
that information is being
shared.
And um our federal government
currently and I, for example,
and law enforcement are
colluding.
Around that data and using it to
attack our communities and enter
into our communities, so again I
raised that because it's
critically important that we
monitor these processes and that
we continue to provide our voice
when we're asked or even when
we're not asked during these,
because right now leading to the
next census.
Um, we're being asked to give
our opinion or our um
recommendations through the
open.
Process of similar to the
request for proposals process uh
concerning how we can improve
census. This is something really
important for our communities to
contribute to so that we can um
continue to secure and ensure
that the data that is being
collected, um, is in fact
private and not shareable. Uh,
that.
That's a false notion and um
So anyway, I wanted to make sure
that that is on the record. And
um, so another question I have
very quickly is, so there have
been claims of um
Not claims, there's, there's
actual, I mean, there's
Yeah
There's actual record of uh
racial gerrymandering. So in
this last process, um,
Those claims came up again.
And so the question is how
How do you reconcile?
Um, these claims against what
the voting rights Act requires,
which is to consider
Race in order to avoid minority
vote dilution dilution. So
that's really important because
I was revisiting again the
Voting Rights Act, and I love it
because I was part of this
history.
I was part of the history of the
60s and the 70s, and I've been
partaking in census and
redistricting since 1970 and
every census redistricting
process I've been involved in at
in whatever state that I've
lived in.
Which has been uh Texas,
Colorado, New Jersey, New York,
and New Mexico. So it's very
dear to me to follow these
processes.
Um, so how, how do you, I think
there was considerable
discussion about that, and we
were being accused for a to a
large extent of
Doing exactly what the Voting
Rights Act told us to do, right?
guard against, so how do you,
how do you reconcile that, um,
Mr. Gorman.
Uh, Madam Chair, my sister's
looking at me.
Um,
OK.
Um,
The, the VRA, the Voting Rights
Act of 1965.
Um, does mention.
The word race.
But it also says
That that cannot be the only
Determinant.
OK, so as I've mentioned, there
are other principles that need
to be weighed.
As an example, community of
interests.
Uh, the deviation.
Things of that nature also have
to be a part of.
That process.
Now, I, I am a champion at, I
believe I'm a champion at
designing maps.
That protect Navajo voting
strength.
Because there are steps that
have to be accounted for.
And as an example, uh, if you
set the stage at a certain
Native American voting age
percentage.
The next cycle should entertain
that starting point of that, uh,
Native American population.
So if the last cycle was at 55%.
The next cycle should start off
at 55%.
And build upon that.
And, and those are some of the
factors that I take into
consideration when I do mapping.
Thank you, Mr. Gorman. So just
finally, um, the processes that
I followed in this last, um,
map drawing and the, the whole
redistricting process for me was
inclusive.
Uh, was transparent, um,
addressed.
What has been historically, um,
We, we've had an
underrepresentation
historically.
Period. We all know as
populations of minority
populations in our nation that
we know what our population
strength is, but because we have
to deal with structures that
have been discriminatory and
racist in, in their intent and
purposes, um, we've been
Intentionally
Uh, left out of this
representation historically,
that's why we have the acts that
we've had, we've had.
The uh the changes throughout
the years because communities of
interest was really in the last
1010 to 20 years has come up as
a respo as as our response to
addressing the failure to
represent. So
Um
I'm not quite sure that we're
going to be able to resolve the
issue of
Uh, an independent body or
legislative body or any of that
body. I think the bigger concern
and the bigger question is how
will we demonstrate our strength
and representation.
Through the process that we
ourselves set up because we have
to ensure that those processes
that we're setting up.
Actually respond.
To the historical
misrepresentations if that makes
sense. So my final statement
would be that we need to make
sure New Mexico, um,
Reflects
That
it's entire
Process from the beginning.
Through the process and to the
end result. And we know that
it's a difficult, the results
are difficult to handle because
we're faced with the fact that
this nation is finally becoming
the mirror.
Of its populations.
Through all its institutions and
all its structures.
And it's hard to take when
you've been on the other end.
As the oppressor and now the
oppressed are coming forward and
actually becoming the face of
the nation.
And that's hard to take.
And I understand that because
I've lived through all of this
last almost 60 years, I would
say.
And so, um, I just want us to,
to not get into that.
Battle because it's reality.
It's no longer.
Controlling the structure
controlling the institution.
It is now a matter of
This is
What we're coming forward to
indicate the set up and to
ensure and this is just the
reality of the way that
That it should have been from
day one, but it now is playing
out. So I just want us to guard
against that and make sure that
When we set up these processes
that they are inclusive.
Because we don't want to be
Repeating
The exclusive.
Exclusivity of the past.
And so we have to ensure that in
order for our populations to be
represented at all levels. Thank
you, madam.
Thank you. Thank you,
Representative Royal Caballero.
I have Representative Johnson,
Representative Thompson, and
Representative Little in that
order. Representative Johnson.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
committee members, I just want
to thank you for your
presentation, uh, both of you,
Mr. Gorman and Kathleen, um,
obviously we have a lot of
continued work ahead of us,
continued educating, continued
presentations, continued
learning, continued discussions.
I appreciate your schedule in
advance, and I hope that we can
take advantage of that and
Um, zoom in and continue to
learn.
It is true, it is very true that
redistricting and having a voice
and demanding fairness is
important.
For my situation, I had to fight
for my district.
I was asked to represent only
Navajo chapters.
And I said no.
Because I live in Gallup. I'm a
member of the community.
I want to have a voice in the
school district.
Public safety, housing. I live
there. My people come to gallop.
They make a living there. They
work at IHS. They go to school
there. They our students go to
school there.
So
Yes, this is indeed a very
important discussion to continue
to have. So maybe, um, going
forward and for following up
with you, we can continue to
have offline detailed
discussions, but with that, I
just want to say thank you very
much for your presentation, your
hard work.
And uh with that.
Thank you. Thank you,
Representative Thompson, uh,
Representative Johnson,
Representative Thompson. Thank
you, Madam Chair. Thank you for
your presentation. I'm just
curious, I mean, these meetings
seem so quick that looking for
another house member who has all
three of those dates open, it's
gonna be a challenge.
And I'm wondering what's the
rush? I mean, not that we should
wait till 2029 or whatever, but
I'm wondering why, why a month
is is the timeline essentially
for for this part of it.
Madam Chair, thank you, uh,
Madam Chair, thank you,
Representative Thompson.
Well, as you know, um,
When it comes to uh bringing
legislation to you at the
legislature, the more prepared
we are before we get to January,
the better. So we are, uh,
We are keeping the timeline
condensed because once the, once
the task force is finished, then
we go into the, well, it's a
continued process, but we will
have to get
Really tight about the
legislation and the enabling
legislation that will be
required. So we have a bit of a
long road as far as uh with our
sponsor, of course, you know,
uh, Senator Figueroa.
So, um, it, it just has to do
with being prepared for the
session.
Thank you for your question.
Thank you for the short answer.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, I
still think, I mean, I looked, I
thought I could do this, but 2
of the 3 days I have committees
where I'm cheering, so I can't
do this, um, but just, I just
want to make a clarifying point.
It was said earlier that um when
during COVID when we locked down
that the public did not have
access to us. I would argue that
the public had more access to us
being able to go to Santa Fe.
It is a privilege. You have to
have money for gas. You have to
be able to take off work, you
need to have childcare, you may
need to spend the night or
several nights if the committee,
so the fact that we do, I'm very
proud of the fact that we do
Zoom and we have, we have great
tech folks to help us, um, but
so that even if you live in
Caerco and you have a job, you
can still make public comment to
our committees and um I think
it's a great thing so I don't
want people to
out there saying, I can't go to
Santa Fe so my voice can't be
heard because we took care of
that. So thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative
Thompson. Representative Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you both for your presentation
this afternoon, uh, as you know,
I've been involved with the
redistricting was involved with
the redistriction process and
for 2020.
Um, as a result of the census
and having gone through led the
Pueblo Coalition for uh the
census in 2020 and anybody that
was involved knows I, it's an
understatement when I say it was
challenging. It was nuts. It
was, it was very, very.
Challenging in a way I've we've
never seen before, and the
result of the census, uh, having
being so important uh because
they would reflect, it would,
those numbers would be reflected
in the redistricting process,
uh.
was so key. So, um,
There's a couple of pieces,
Madam Chair. I'm gonna try to go
through them really quickly, but
what I think is really
Important is for the benefit of
those that might not understand
uh why, why the issue of
fairness depends on the
perspective.
On where you're standing.
In relation to fairness. So, um,
and it's, I offered this again,
I'm gonna offer this as a chance
for those who may not be aware
of some of the history of how
we're at this place to be at a
table has come about.
Um, first,
The citizenship.
The indigenous people of this
country were not granted
citizenship or recognized until
1924. We've been here since time
immemorial, but when these other
countries have come in, these
other governments have come in,
they've decided who was part of
their citizenship.
So let's put that, I, I wanna
put that out there first. The
right to vote.
Those individuals that have come
in have had rights to vote.
For natives, for indigenous
people in New Mexico, we gained
that right to vote after
fighting for it, Miguel
Trujillo, all due respect to he
and to those who came before him
to attempted to vote. That was
not officially done until 1944.
So we have barely had 70 my math
is bad but a little over 75
years, a bit, uh, I believe.
Not
Not, we're not even at 100 years
of being able to vote. So what
has happened when we did, when
we did gain that right, we still
had to overcome. People of
color.
And I'm talking specifically
about indigenous peoples. I have
stories that we are not allowed
to forget in Pueblo country
about the efforts that our own
representatives, congressional
and state representatives used
to come by in the 50s, 60s, even
in through the 70s, warning
native people, indigenous
peoples don't vote because if
you start voting, you're gonna
lose your land, you're gonna
lose your way of life. All of
these ideas, and many, including
those in my
family, where these actual
experiences come from. This is
not a story I'm telling you. It
is a narrative of what actually
happened.
And so it took years, years, and
countless
Numbers of people in our
indigenous communities to
Correct that to correct the
perception that people had about
the dangers of voting, that it
was important they tried to tell
us to be at the table where
those decisions are being made.
Now it happened, but then yet
what happened and there are
others, the two that are sitting
here probably better equipped to
describe what the impact was of
those geographic features, those
canyons, those mountains, the
rivers that flow that keep our
communities from uh being not
just one community, but being uh
separated and those polling
places being located hours away.
In other locales, so.
If I'm working, I mean, I, I
hate to pick up be so detailed
as to paint that picture, Madam
Chair, but when we think about
the reality of it, did we have a
vehicle to go around.
The canyons around the rivers,
around the mountains.
Did we have to catch a ride with
somebody? Did we have the
opportunity to vote early. Did
we have an opportunity to vote
somewhere else. Those things
have come about because of the
efforts.
Of the people that have been at
the table because of the efforts
of people like you, like others
in our communities, and we know
who they are, who are trying to
help our people to register to
vote.
And so where I want to, where I
want to end, Madam Chair, and
thank you for indulging me in
this, but I think it's really
key.
Because
The
Let me point out to you, one of
the things that hadn't been said
was that this map that was
eventually created in 2021.
Was drawn not as a result of a
judge.
Not as a result of the courts
were in fact, and correct me if
I'm wrong, please, Madam Chair,
presenters.
Every redistricting map before.
2020's map 2021.
There were 3 that were decided
by judges because of the
inability of the legislature to
agree on maps to agree on these
districts that would be
established.
And as a participant in the
native coalition redistricting
efforts.
I got to see.
How those maps were actually
made. It is not a pretty sight.
wheeling and dealing, bringing
maps in. OK, I changed it this
way, and as, as my my colleague
described, uh, we want you to
take this whole thing. I was
shocked to hear that.
Uh, we want to take you to this
area, uh, you, so you can just
do Navajos. It's like, no, she
lives in Gallup.
But the wheeling and dealing
that goes went on in there. I
see why the public is
mistrustful.
I see why there is an urgent, an
urgency and an imperative for
trans for transparency. And it's
for all of us. This is not a
partisan thing. It's transparent
to all of us, so thank you for
indulging me in this. We are now
realizing the results of efforts
that everyone had in this room
has taken when you've tried to
get people to register to vote,
to talk to them about why it's
important. And to talk to them
about
Yeah.
Look at
Look at the people around this
table. This is a mix of people.
We need to be proud of that mix,
and it's not just natives, look
at every, all of my colleagues
that are sitting here, it's
wonderful to have this, and this
is what reflects New Mexico, so.
We have this right to be at the
table. I think it's a good thing
to continue the efforts of
redistricting and Madam Chair,
thank you so very much for
allowing me to address them and
I don't have a question. Thank
you. Thank you very much.
think you Representative Little
because going into that special
session, I didn't expect to be
in the position I was put in,
but thank you to your expertise
and all those involved, you
know, getting all that knowledge
is like a really crash course
for me, um, being, uh, going
through that, my first
redistricting. So, but thank you
for all your participation.
Thank you for your expertise and
all those involved and even our
legislators that also were um
involved in that uh in you new
ones, we shall see when you guys
go through.
Swedish drinking the cast that
ensues. Uh, yes, Ms. Burt
Madam Chair, thank you. I just
would like to add that, uh,
I'm sure many of you are on the
mailing list for the National
Conference of State Legislature
legislators, and you maybe
notice that we've been getting,
uh, prompts from NCSL to get
ready because redistricting is
right around the corner again.
So that's another reason why
we're, we're pushing at this
point because we're getting the
impetus from the outside to get
it going. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you and thank you for your
presentation. We will move on to
the 6 directions indigenous
school and to my members, I know
we all can tell tell time, so,
um, may we have uh Rebecca Niha
here.
Because we still had some public
comment there and then we're
going to move right into the
Yazi Martinez. So we want to
distinguish too from those that
are here for actual public
comment, um, could you please
raise your hand if you're going
to give public comment or if you
signed up for public comment.
Like
12
To
3
OK, thank you.
And a little bit of a reminder
to our presenters and even to my
legislators, one microphone on
at a time, so if the light is
red and you see another one
coming on, please turn off your
mic or I will turn it off for
you.
I
I'm on.
Yeah
And I remind you that the reason
we only have one mic on a time
is because we are on the webcast
and we get feedback when there's
two mics on sounds like an echo
and it's hard to, um, for those
that are watching us and
listening on the webcast.
Welcome and we'll try to
accommodate. Thank you so much
and thank you for joining us.
Nolita Gammaya hopi Matua back
up and Bahan Matsuwa.
Am I close enough?
Can you hear me?
OK.
No, and Hopi Matiwaakahey on
Bahan Masukoewa baswaneve uncle.
My name is Rebecca Naahey. I
come from the Hopi tribe. I
currently live in the Pueblo of
Zuni, and I'm the head
administrator of Six Directions
Indigenous School, a 6th through
12th grade charter school in
Gallup, New Mexico.
Oh, madam chair though, Madam
Vice Chair Johnson, um.
And members of the committee,
uh, Shaya, uh,
chinidala in Wilhelmina Yazi
inahohimaoche
Nlie a ya al
about 35 years, let's see the
urgent day Casamer Lake.
kitchen rosa ultrai
uh governing board member chair
a bus
and um our head administrator
support and Haniyao,
uh good afternoon relatives and
um our leaders.
Uh, my name is Wilhelmina Yazi.
I am here in support of our head
administrator for our 6
Directions Indigenous School,
and I'm just honored to be here
in support of her and also, um,
I just wanna say, yeah, thank
you.
Um, so some history, if you
don't know about charter
schools, they are authorized
either by the local district,
which has a little committee
that they put together to
authorize a school, which
they'll call a district charter.
There's also a state charter,
which is what Six Directions is,
Um, I came to this school in
2023, but I was a community
member there and my son went to
school there since 6th grade,
um, when I first entered Six
Directions was at -80% growth
over the prior 3 years as
conducted by a needs assessment,
which is required by the state
every 3 years, and the school
was at 6% proficient in ELA and
8% proficient in math over the
last two years, the school I was
teaching full time in addition
to
being the head administrator,
when the former head
administrator was not renewed
for a contract, and I was asked
to be in that position.
During that year in the 1st 6
weeks, we taught a decolonial
education, which means that we
were centering the voices of
those most proximate and
impacted by the educational
decisions around McKinley County
and our students come from
primarily Zuni and the Navajo
Nation and Gallup area, they
come from Coyote Canyon. We have
families here from Pinedale and
Marianna Lake, Tohatchie, and
they drive themselves because we
don't offer transportation.
Um
In the 1st 6 weeks, our students
protested. They walked out of
the school and said, we're not
leaving this spot until our
parents pick us up or until
teachers listen to us because
they were given an indigenous
centered education. They
demanded that all staff also
conduct that type of education
and refuse to move from using
technology as the sole driver of
education.
That was the first type of civic
engagement our students had and
we had a 100% staff turnover in
that first year. In that first
year, the students went from 6%
proficient to 56.6% and they
went from 90, 80% growth to 90%
growth. They moved from an MRI
school and a CSI almost
designation school, which is the
bottom 5% performing schools in
the state.
To a traditional school, which
means that there was no findings
in that year. Um, the dramatic
improvement was primarily
because of the decolonial type
of education we were using.
We went this year entering into
a very contentious year with our
school board, and there was a
lot of conflict and open
combativeness and our students
using the same foundational
practices of centering the
voices of those most proximate
and impacted, locked themselves
in a room and read the bylaws
line by line and annotated for
any violations. They looked at
the record of minutes and
agendas, and they found a number
of OMA violations, and they
researched state statute, OMA,
the
PEC, the PED, and found people
that could help within that.
They started a media campaign
and from there started
presenting their findings to the
state, to the PED. They left
public comments with the PEC.
They reached out to attorneys
from the Yazi Martinez case.
They reached out to the media,
and there was ensuing um
publications from the Gallup
Independent.
And they held multiple
demonstrations.
The entire governing council,
um, then resigned at the same
time on November 5th, and the
PEC almost shut our school down
because they said that if
there's no contract with a
board, there's no school that
exists. So the students in their
entire school body and um their
parents went to Santa Fe and we
established a new board based on
a governing board profile that
the students themselves created
out of the research that they
had conducted from the
violations, and they recruited.
Um, 5 new members and we went to
Santa Fe and we presented our
case and have an attorney,
Daniel Iy Soto, who is helping
with it.
Um, during that time, we got
re-established and we were.
Hosted a site visits and things
of that nature. And then um the
charter school division came and
said out of the prior about 37
site visits that they had just
conducted, this was the first
school that they had no pushback
on. There was nothing that
needed corrective action, and
there was nothing that needed to
change, but it needed to scale.
I say all of this to present
that students at Six Directions
are quite remarkable but very
heavily civilly engaged, um,
civically engaged, and they were
the recipients of the PEC award
for school turnaround last month
where they also danced. Our
school in practice is also one
that butchers a lot of sheep. We
have uh a community of students
that dance and sing for
themselves. We have students
that are renewing and
revitalizing and
claiming indigenous languages,
primarily Zuni and Navajo, but
they also bring in other Pueblo
languages. We have a heavily
involved community and um but
we're also in a position where
Schools that are in a charter
network cannot access capital
outlay funds. If they do not own
the building and 6 Directions
was opened in 2015, but has not
been in the position to be able
to buy the building because the
person who owns the building
wants to sell the building
outright. The building is um
being sold for 1.4 million and
um
We can't access funds if we
don't own the building.
Additionally, we do get uh lease
assistance, but we're not on a
pathway towards purchase. Um,
the other thing that has to
happen is charter schools cannot
buy their own building if the
public schools facility
authority does not OK it also,
so it has to go through several
layers of authoritative, um,
allowances to be able to
purchase something, uh.
Additionally, Six Directions is
not eligible for the general
obligation bonds because we
don't own our building. Um, we
can't take purchases of
mortgages or any type of
procurement laws because of
that. We also don't have any
MOUs at present with tribes for
a tribally sponsored building,
um, because of the statutes and
law that contradicts that. So,
um, other charter schools
locally are backed by like.
Kozhou Academy has a lot of
fundraising from a college that
the founders also is associated
with and was able to purchase
their building through that and
then um middle college high
school is part of the University
of New Mexico school site, so
they're able to lease their
building or partial classrooms
through that university. Um, the
other schools in the district
would be a local district
charter, so the Gallup McKinley
County District would be able to
support that. We're the only
entire
indigenous leadership and 100%
native body school, but we have
a lot of restrictions securing
that facility funding, um.
So we're not really asking for
like an exception or special
treatment, but to also be
included. So I guess the ask for
us today is on the very last
page, we do recognize that
there's some legislative
influence and jurisdictional
authority that this committee
might be able to help with.
Um, one pathway is that
representatives can individually
sponsor.
Uh, champion inclusion for us
for capital outlay with um
proposals in the legislative
sessions to allocate funds for 6
Directions to be able to get its
building. Um, we'd also ask for
public recognition that we're a
statewide indigenous model based
on the data alone.
We're also looking at um in
tribal convenings to develop a
framework for facility access in
case there were other schools
around the state near or on
tribal land that could be
potentially sponsored by tribes,
um.
Leading into tribal charter MOUs
to support that formal pathway.
And then, uh, it statutory
reform recommend amendments to
the Education Act or charter
school law to allow for this
type of facility partnerships to
remove those barriers of access.
Um
And that's what we've prepared
today.
Does, does that conclude your
presentation?
OK, uh, members, any questions?
I do because I've been to the
school or I've been to the
school like a couple of years
ago. Um, I don't just visit our
public schools, I visit, try to
visit all the schools and at
that time, I went through to you
guys didn't have a cafeteria in
that facility, and it used to be
the former Highland University
branch building or is it still
part of that?
Um, it's formerly Western New
Mexico University.
So I wrong, wrong direction.
Yeah, Western New Mexico, are
they still in the building too?
It's all the whole buildings you
guys,
right now.
And I know I asked some
questions about it, I, I don't
remember the answers, but I know
with um your school and Hozhou
Transportation is one of the
things our, we don't actually
help with, especially when we
talk about equal access for our
students of New Mexico
regardless of um where they want
to go to school or what their
ability is. But um thank you for
your um work in the facility
because I did have um actually
one of my colleagues that I was
teaching
with was there um when I went on
the tour and I actually had a
student that was working there
too that we both taught, um, so
it was very um enlightening to
see that they're still involved
in education, um, the enrollment
now, do we have an idea, um, are
you going to expand because I
think Kohou right now this
coming year will be their first
graduating class, um, coming out
of that school, but I think
they're looking to expand to
other grade levels is that.
plan too?
Um, one of the barriers for
enrollment access is the
transportation, which again, if
we don't own our building, we're
not eligible for a lot of
transportation opportunities
because we can't offer it.
Currently all all families drive
in from Zuni and the local city
of Gallup and outer to come to
our school currently.
And uh members of the committee,
this location too does not have
any um access to gyms or any
kind of uh recreation. It is
just basically to me a business
building.
That's accurate.
So the facility that uh we have
our charter school in is not a,
not designed for
The um
our children as students, and I
think that is one of, um, and
you know that can be very
challenging because of the uh
going through the and but you
guys did the best you can with
what you have, but the interest
and I think that's the bottom
line too for our legislature is
that there is interest for this
particular in our children do
want this type of education and
moving forward. So I don't know
if there's any ideas of how we
can support you, but we will,
um, because
I'm very curious too about this,
um,
The framework for facility
access, especially when we talk
about Yazi Martinez and that,
um, I know we're using the word
fair, but I think that is a
little bit, I try to say that
it's just.
That it's, it, it's just part of
what we should be doing to make
sure we're um allowing all
students to have this ability,
and I don't think you
discriminate in that sense if
they're not indigenous, they can
be allowed to attend the school
too. That's correct.
Thank you. Do we have any
questions from members?
Uh, Senator, our representative
Abea.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you to the presenters for this
information. Um, if I've missed
it, I apologize, but what is the
population of students you
serve? I see it's 6 through 12.
But how many students? Um, we've
had averages of 75 students. OK.
And um
My next question is, do you have
any partnerships with uh Navajo
Nation or uh Zuni Pueblo for
funding.
Not specifically for funding,
we've had several tribal
consultations and we host them
twice a year and Dodi is heavily
involved with our school and has
toured its multitude of times,
but um there's a lot of barriers
to within that conversation. The
most recent conversation we had
was at our spring consultation
when they actually talked about
the kind of national
conversation of charter movement
and school choice to be able to
use in the Navajo Nation's kind
of um opportunity and starting
that.
conversation, but it's still
several like.
Sessions kind of a way.
Thank you, Madam Chair, uh, and
how many employees do you have?
We have 7 core staff but we also
are a host site for AmeriCorps
members and I've had um the
indigenous educator corps and
several of the staff, the, the
young people in that program
also came onto staff and taught
there and then we also host the
that's a state program, and we
also host the Federal AmeriCorps
program with something called
SOC Code, which is like Sco in,
but it's an in digitized program
to bring computer science to
indigenous communities, and then
we've also hosted
did the National Indian Youth
Council as an internship site
and then um right now we have
partnerships with IA to bring in
a workforce, so despite
Having that many people of just
stand alone on site. We also
have a rotating, a rotating
internship almost if you say of
young people and volunteers and
community members. We also have
a program of something called
Knowledge keepers where we bring
in um community members with
ancestral knowledge of different
practices or prayers or songs or
just in general culture and they
also come in with background
checks that we've started with
the Indian Ed division as a
pilot program to remove.
the barrier of access for only
those who hold a license are
valid enough to teach in a
building.
And we've had about 30 of those
in the last year.
Thank you. And my last comment
is, I recently attended a New
Mexico Finance Authority
oversight and they talked about
this barrier that charter
schools have with owning a
building and renting a building
and the loans associated with
it, so I hope that we can
connect offline so I could share
that information and what I
learned at that meeting and in
hopes that it'll help you too.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative Abea.
Representative Hernandez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and um,
Presenter, uh,
I have a, uh,
A charter school that's in in my
district up in Shiprock.
Uh, they have a really unique
relationship.
Uh, both with the school
district that's there, uh, that
handles, uh, some type of
financial agreement.
And then they also have um some
type of administrative agreement
with the Native American
Community Academy.
Um, it, it's really unique how
they operate and, and, uh, this
is the first time I'm, I'm, I,
I, I've always seen, uh, your,
um,
Your, um, like I, I, I've always
heard about your school, and I'm
really glad to to really learn
more today about it. Are, are
you guys involved in any, any
like, like networks with, with
charter schools and I'm, I'm
just trying to see how like,
how, how can like if if it's
working with Naka, you know, uh,
with, with my charter schools
that are, that's in my district.
I'm just just trying to figure
out is, is there any
Partnership there or has that
been, been established. Thank
you, Madam Chair. So let me
intervene here. So represent
Fernandez, there are some
requirements for us as a state
that the districts are supposed
to provide some of that certain
services, certain things, and I
think one of them I nobody wants
to correct me, is
transportation. They we, I think
we required them to work
together with them, but I don't
know if we have a shot clock on
it or if we say it has to happen
within
It's time, it's just there. So
if they don't want to work with
them, they can sit on it for
however long, but I think we,
um, that's my understanding when
I inquired about it, but you can
go ahead and answer.
The transportation is accurate
also because the, the charter
schools that do have
transportation in the area on
their building and in order to
receive transportation, you have
to put in one year of upfront
funds to be able to.
show that it's working
essentially and so Hojou Academy
was able to have those upfront
funds because of its connection
with Hillsdale College and um
private donors and Six
Directions doesn't have access
to that or um we don't own our
building. We are though
associated with NAA. There's um
NACA is an urban Indian ed um
school. It's a charter school in
Albuquerque and it was the first
in the nation. Since then,
they've expanded to
Something called the NACA
inspired Schools Network, um, 6
Directions Indigenous School was
one of the earliest along with
Dream Dena and Deep and um
they've since expanded to
several like schools on the
Pueblos Capo community school.
They've expanded to Denver.
They've expanded to South Dakota
and they've opened Ohetia Cohen
Elementary schools, middle
schools, and high schools. One
of the barriers within the
network though is that they're
also not able to receive funds
to purchase buildings for these.
Schools, they're able to
advocate for grant funding to be
able to support with modular
buildings and things of that
nature, but with Six Directions
we had to vie for state funds
and it was at a time when it was
more contentious to open charter
schools. So there was a lot more
barrier of access within even
receiving those initial startup
funds, which is why a lot of
charter schools will also choose
to like open a grade a year,
which is how 6 directions and um
the other schools have had
modeled around that too.
Thank you, Representative
Hernandez, I was gonna call him
Senator Munoz to introduce
himself, but he has joined us. I
have Representative Royal
Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you so much. I, I wanted
to say that hearing um
As a community organizer,
hearing that students actually
are exercise their right to
self-determine is music to my
ears because that's exactly what
we want students, our youth and
our communities um to exercise
and so thank you for that
overview and thank you for
describing that. That was just
absolutely wonderful. Um, I
think.
I had, um, I had a question, but
I noticed that you did prepare
how the IAC can help this
committee, and I think that's
really wonderful. I, um, my
husband is a, a former PEC
commissioner of Public Education
commissioner, and I know that he
Flat, hard, um, to have.
Our
indigenous as well as our other
um populations of color.
Be viewed as.
Critically important.
And not excluded, and he
oftentimes found himself as
being the only person advocating
for our schools, so I just
wanted, he's not here today
right now anyway, but I wanted
to acknowledge that because PEC
for a long, long time and prior
to that when we had the school.
uh, whatever it was school, um.
What was it called? Anyway, the
the state um school uh.
Body.
Um
We, we've
We have failed. We have failed
in the area of public education
to acknowledge that um we have a
right.
To determine the education of
our children and our populations
and we have the expertise to do
that.
We don't have to continue
proving ourselves. We have the
PhDs, we have the MAs, we have
the BAs, we have the teachers,
we have the language, we have
the culture, we have everything,
so it's a struggle not just with
the charter schools, but with
the public education department
and our institutions. So I
wanted to propose, Madam Chair,
um, that at some point we adopt.
Um
The section um 7 in the handout.
In the form of a letter of
support because I agree I was
there with Representative Abeta
at the New Mexico Finance
Authority and there are many um
steps that we can assist.
In um creating changes that
would help uh further our
ownership of our schools and and
um of our teaching of our
populations, so they propose in
this section, uh, 12345
different um recommendations. So
whenever it's appropriate,
whether it's today or down the
road, I'd like to offer that we
Strongly support, especially the
interagency convening, which we
have
Influence, direct influence
over.
Um
That's particularly important
because we can um dictate for
lack of a better word, um, what
we
Deemed to be critical for our
not just our consideration but
that of the entire state, so I
wanted just to offer that to you
and see if we can assist, not
just in your continued, um,
existence and moving forward,
but
Send a strong statement on
behalf of all the other schools
that are in the um in the
pipeline of, I hope that that we
can, we have many more schools,
so Madam Chair, it's, it's at
your discretion, how, but I'd
like to propose that in the form
of a motion whenever it's
appropriate.
The Representative Royal
Caballero. So we have this on
section 7. I'll you have your
hand out going down um the
strategies and actions you can
take. They individually sponsor.
a champion and our inclusion in
the fiscal year 26 capital
outlay or GOP proposals. My
understanding is you, you have
to go through the capital
outlays and make that request of
us. We can't come and do it for
you. So that process is open
online. You got to, it's up to
the school, but I do believe
some of our members here have
seen capital outlay requests
from their school districts and
maybe even from certain schools
to you, so I don't think that.
is, um, the GOB proposals, I
don't know if anybody's ever had
any, we don't have anything to
do with that either.
OK, so that first part of the
capital A advocacy, um, you
advocate you, um, then when we
get through our process during
the legislative session. That's
when we'll get our list
individually of who you
submitted it to, how much it,
um, just go through the, the
application process, but it is
all online and the deadline is
prior to the session. I know my
chapter members too are uh some
accustomed to it being OK to
come and give us an application
at.
session time, that is something
we discourage, make your plan,
make sure you know when the
capital outlay deadline is and
submit your requests, and I
believe that's open already, um,
not yet. Um, uh, well, um,
Senator Munoz says, uh, you can
introduce yourself in answer if
you'd like. Uh, good afternoon.
Sorry, I'm late, but I had some
other issues in my family I'm
dealing with and so, uh, I'll be
here for a little while today,
um.
So capital outlay will probably
open in September.
That's what we're targeting and
clothes maybe about November.
And so it's going to be earlier
than ever and earlier than ever,
so you're eligible for capital
outlay GOB is not set up for
charter schools.
And since I do have the floor,
Madam Chair, can I ask one
question? When the state came in
and looked at 6 directions, what
happened with that
investigation. Uh, I know former
Senator Ivy Soto represented
you, but I don't know what the
investigation was about and
what, what, what happened.
So we weren't investigated, but
we did ask them to come do a
site visit the public schools
facility Authority, which is
what you have to have done
before you're even able to
purchase a building and they
have to ensure that the building
is safe for occupancy and safe
for education and also that it's
um not older than 30 years old
because they'll reject that and
so what they do is they come
down and they kind of just
assess it and just say what
needs to be fixed, if
anything's.
structurally, so they gave us a
list of all of the things that
needed to be updated from small
things like electrical covers to
inspections of the roof and
fixing of some of the tiles and
things of that nature. And so we
gave that to the current owner
of the building, and then he
sent all of his crews out and
rectified that list within about
2 weeks and then we resubmitted
it to the public schools
facility Authority to try to get
something called your number to
get in the right range so that
it's appropriate for
Purchase, which is what we've
done, so we did all the legwork
to be able to do that so that it
would go through the public
facility authority and um and so
we've passed that.
But
Madam Chair, in, in, that was a
PSCOC looking at calculating
your, your building
efficiencies, right, and where
it's at, but there was some
other investigation that Senator
Ivy Soto, who's an attorney, had
to reps represent 6 directions
on, and I don't know what that
was.
I know it did happen.
So
I spoke earlier about the entire
governing council that resigned
on the same day on November 5th
and then our entire school was
almost revoked or up for
surrender or revocation of the
school on the PEC hearing that
occurred on November 11th, the
12th through the 15th, and so
the students were advocating for
The students were then at the
same time recruiting board
members from a board profile
that they had created and
recruited enough board members
that said yes, at the same time
that we had Daniel Avi Soto come
on board because of middle
college high school who saw the
PEC agenda and he came in and
re-established a newborn on
November 11th, we went into the
PEC with that um re-established
board on Tuesday and we were
again on the PEC agenda on that
Friday, and they had no
they said that you're back in
good standing essentially that
they didn't want to take any
corrective action because we had
rectified the issue itself and
um we were called back again to
the PEC in February to account
for um the prior year's VISA
scores for graduation in math
and then again they had we were
in good standing and they found
no fault and we're up for
renewal this year, which is why
this is at a critical conjecture
of time, um, because the prior
board hadn't conducted the
facility's needs.
in the time that it was taking
in the 5 years, um.
We now need to show the PEC that
we have a stable place for
students to be housed and for
education to take place or show
that we have a plan for that.
And in this time frame where in
traditional standing with vistas
with the state public education
department, which means that
we're at no fault and the PEC
has also issued that there we're
at no fault and they've cleared
us and we're up for renewal,
which means that the state is
going to go through a fine tooth
comb to from everything from
different layers of um
Like personnel issues, HR
issues, student files, sped
files, all of those types of
things are going to be presented
in November, um, but the
facility also needs to have a
plan in place and that's the
only barrier that the school is
currently having, as we've
excelled in all of the other
areas as defined by the state,
by the PEC and by um the PED.
OK. Thank you, ma'am. I just
wanted to get that update
because I knew there was
something going on there and I
wanna make sure that number one,
you guys have to be viable,
right? In, in the PC has to
renew your contract before we
can.
Really make any legislative
action so we know that you're
viable charter school. I mean, I
supported this school in the
beginning, maybe 10 years ago it
started, maybe a little longer
than that, right in there.
And and so I, I've watched him
move around a little bit and,
and so.
We'll try to help where we can,
but I, I just wanted to clarify
that in my mind to see where you
guys were actually at with your
charter.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, back to the, uh, motion
that's being proposed so the
public recognition issue a
committee letter, a resolution
naming SDIC as a statewide
indigenous model. My, I don't, I
don't have my education chair
here. I, who's on who is on
education with me, Royal
Caballeroerignane.
I think that um
That has to be something you
guys go forward with through the
curriculum process, adopting the
curriculum that the school, um,
the state approves.
Uh, is my, is that what we're
headed for or is this something
totally different when you talk
about indigenous model.
Um, this would be support in
obtaining funds for a facility
or just extra backing, um, in
addition to all the other
ecolades that the school has
had, but, um, with charter
schools, they actually have more
autonomy and self-determination
to be able to create its own
curriculum and um that's what
Six Directions is currently
doing, so we operate within our
own education model and
framework. It doesn't have to be
approved by the state.
No, not even our tribal.
Uh, deputy secretary Juanico or
so doesn't run through anybody
you guys just put it out there
and you're able to, to, to move
forward even when we talk about
uh the, the common core
standards and stuff.
OK, I suppose then that's
Something I uh I need to be
educated on that one.
Being on the education
committee, um, interagency
convening, uh, that was the one
with the tribal representatives
develop a framework for facility
access, um, we are gonna have a
Yazi Martinez update here, and I
think the last ruling was that.
The Lano Foundation is gonna
take over some of that framework
planning, which I found very
interesting. I don't want to get
into it now because I, I'm
Um,
that's just one of the other
things, um.
So I think we need an update on
that just to see where, where
this would actually because it
sounds like PED is not coming
forward to kind of do that for
us, even though it's our state,
um, department, and then IAD, I
don't know if they have the
capacity in that sense either
cause I've not really, um, as
far as anything with education,
it always fell into our
Our deputy, um, secretary, um,
yes, Royal Cala Madam Chair, on,
on that, I, I was looking more
at
Um
We
Being an advocate.
On the steps
that
The strategies as you, as you're
going through them. Thank you
for that. On the steps that um.
are
Independent to
The charter school.
And at the same time, um,
Help remove barriers that
actually uh.
The charter schools themselves
are coming forward and in our
committees and indicating that
they need um those barriers to
be removed, so
In this particular case.
That's my, that was my intent
as, as an advocate, not
necessarily because we may or
may not have
Um
Or defer to their um work but
that we're advocating on behalf
of the schools.
In this case, this school, but
at the same time what we're
doing is advocating on behalf of
all of the schools, um, by
taking this step, if that makes
sense, not so much that we have
a jurisdiction or that we want
to impose any form of
jurisdiction or legislative um
imposition, but more uh
advocating for these types of
models to move forward without
the barriers that they're
facing, if that makes sense.
And, um, Representative, it does
make sense in the way of what
you're trying to cover everyone,
but I think there are already
pathways, especially when we
talked about capital outlay for
them that they needed and if
they don't have the capacity to
pursue those, that's where we
can step in and probably try to
have some funding put in, um,
for, for position or, or some
kind of FTE, but
Because of where we are too with
Yazi Martinez. I think some of
this can be already incorporated
in there where we're not having
to interfere too much that that
communication line between this
school and those involved with
this framework are really the
ones that come and then we see
the freeration of it and then we
decide if we approve of, of what
they've come up with and that it
is adequate, um, for it to move
forward after and it's um that
litigatory part.
I feel like it's gonna
You, you changed too much and we
come back in, um, but if it's a
recommendation, um, that there
be amendments to the Education
Act and um charter law uh from
that ruling, then that's where
we go and we know where we need
to be, so a little bit of a jump
ahead on it, so I, I fully
understand where you're, you're
coming from. Thank you for the
list of asking us, but that is
where I'm, that's why I was
going through the list because
of our members here to see if
that was, if there was any
input on all these
recommendations here, so, um, I
don't know if there's any more
uh discussing the, the motion
here as we move forward in the
input from members, uh,
representative block. Thank you
so much, Madam Chair. Thank you.
I, I guess I'm just trying to
figure out what we're looking to
do with the letter, uh, because
I, I guess I understand in
general charter schools, it is
so difficult to get buildings,
and I think
Coming from our perspective as a
committee, that would be very
good to just in general, not
specific to this charter school
because I honestly have not
looked at all the curriculum of
the charter school. I would love
to visit your charter school and
see what you guys are doing. And
so I can't just like,
Endorse a total package of what
this charter school is doing
without seeing what's happening.
So I would just love maybe if we
were to do a letter to be as
general as possible, just
pertaining to charter schools
and making sure that it's more
accessible to these communities
that need to have that cash
freed up. So I guess that's
where I would come from. So if
it was a total endorsement of
just this specific charter
school, I would be inclined to
disagree with that motion, but
if it was in general, that would
be something I'd be OK with,
Madam Chair. Madam Chair, if I
may.
I think you've stated it
appropriate. That's why I
deferred to you, but I think
that we're gonna hear the Yazi
Martinez updates and where it's
going and how appropriately we
can interject um or how they are
anticipating interjecting this
model or these types of models
into the plan and the report to
the court, I think would be
appropriate, so we don't
necessarily have to address the
letter now. That's why I
deferred it to you, um, I agree
with your approach to
to hear how that might, how
they're already planning to do
this and then
Take action should it be
necessary at that point. Would
that, does that help a little,
representative, so there was not
a real formal motion to move
forward, but on that we're going
to move forward, um, um.
Uh to our next presentation if
there are no more questions from
members.
Thank you, thank you for the
work you do and meeting the uh
those little gaps where our
students want to attend your
school and uh I would also
recommend that um an invitation
be extended to the uh education
study committee to to see your
school in uh we already have
our, our sites for our committee
this year, so unfortunately we
won't be able to put you in and
um this year, but, um, next
year, um, keep us in mind as we
go forth, but thank you so much
for the work you do and it's
not.
Not easy, education and
education's our biggest uh one
of our biggest priorities, so
yeah.
Thank you.
And now we have um I have 3
people for public comment, so in
lieu of time, um, those that are
giving public comment. I have
Noreen Kelly first, Larry
Foster, and Barbara McClanahan,
so please keep it short and you
may come up and um introduce
yourselves for the record and
what you do and uh.
Thank you.
OK
Good afternoon, everyone. Um,
thank you for being here and
it's really, uh, informational.
I'm Noreen Kelly, and I am the,
um,
Uh, chair for
Uh, local collaborative 15,
which is McKinley and San Juan
and then all Navajo, uh,
communities and the LC is under
the behavior Health Planning
Council. I'm also a member of
the behavioral health planning
council and the Native American
subcommittee.
I just wanted to introduce, uh,
two of our members that are here
with me and just to let you know
that we're out here and we work
off of a huge budget that we
need to spend.
And it, and they raised it by
$2000 and the whole total is
$15,000.
For the county of McKinley and
San Juan.
And uh my my members are.
Verna.
Craig
And Janice Peterson, and we're
all from the Gallup area, so we
meet at the holiday or the
Howard Johnson on the west end
of Gallup, uh, monthly sometimes
when we have an activity, we'll
meet, uh, once a week to plan
those things and then also I'm
also my concern really brought
me to the mic is that uh the.
Huge
Turnover
With the Indian Affairs
Department.
And just when we get engaged
with the
Activities
In the state,
The staff.
That we're working in is leaving
and you probably got noticed
that we have one of them,
leaving, uh.
In an affairs again.
With, um, I believe.
The individual came in like last
September.
And it's leaving now so I think
I'm not sure what it is. The
workload or just um a better
offers across the country.
So, uh, it really does have an
impact on the work we do as a
local collaboratives.
And the training they offer is
tremendous, but also there's
gaps that we have to go through.
And that's one of my ask, um,
but we enjoy doing outreach out
in the community.
Um, sometimes we, uh, buy a load
of socks.
Uh, underwears.
For for youth and then we have
people reach out to us to uh
supply clothing for individual
students that may be high
school, they may need blankets
and we scour the shelves and the
local stores to find um.
Close out items and we, we buy a
huge amount for very cheap.
So that's how our budget is
spent.
So, um, those are the things
that we do um we're basically
out of pocket all the time.
So that's what I would like to
share with you the successes
that are going on in the uh.
The hills
Here in Navajo land.
In the land, and thank you.
Thank you. And um
The Kelly family will go way
back to, to high school, so.
Uh, it's great to see you here
in Verna. Yes, definitely. I'm
so proud of you, baby. Thank
you. Yeah, I have, um, Larry
Foster next.
Uh
Testing.
Uh, you there?
Good afternoon.
When the stairs starts.
call
They are so.
Uh
No.
No
I am Larry Foster.
A grandparent, grandfather.
Uh, of
Kids, grandkids.
Uh, we did have uh kids that had
disability that we adopted.
that were
Educated
In McKinney County School
system.
And their endeavors and how
Uh, the school system worked
really well at one time with uh
IEP and special a departments.
Uh, I think there is.
A lot of shortcoming now that uh
maybe I'm gonna talk about a
little bit here that I'm not
gonna take too long.
But, uh
I do have, uh,
Uh, some concern.
so.
Is my son and Linei
A R double O.
One of the areas that, uh, here
that we begin to encounter
Is the uh
ADA, uh, accommodation.
At McKinney County school
system, uh, the example is just
a language and
That's being presented in the
meetings.
Uh, this kind of, uh, drives
away.
Um, natives that are lack
Uh, English
Uh, so we've been doing
Uh, education, uh, the
Native
education in New Mexico.
For the last 50 years.
So we come a long way with the,
the Indian Education Act.
Although what we have 150 years
of
Uh, being assimilated to
Education.
So versus the 500 years of
English speaking Europeans that
Or are run the school systems.
Or call what uh
The other part is this the uh
Improper
You know, when we go to the
request to speak.
The public comments that the
Uh, school board means it's,
it's, it's, it's difficult.
It's difficult for the
grandparents.
They, they're not access to
technology.
You have to go online to request
to be
On the agenda to speak.
And your toppa has to be
written.
If they don't like what you're
gonna talk about, they don't put
you on. So, communication
improper.
I guess closed session that's
been existed now.
Discussions that they have is
always going in the executive
session. So, we don't know
what's going on.
We have to read about it.
So would I be on yeah.
Anan ah.
Uh, and then they, they, the
school district has a uh
A technology.
I guess public access to live
stream, and those are not
Record until 2 or 3 weeks later.
So there's missing uh
information here that should be
accessed.
Uh, the, the, the, the last
drummer they had was
The, um
Contract with this company uh
that was doing online uh
education.
Or students that are, are slow
learners or difficult to go to
school.
And uh they had to take that,
it's called stride K12
Incorporated.
There are, there, there.
Contract or
Whatever needs to be done to
make this successful didn't come
about. So that contract.
The newspaper say it was uh
terminated.
So
Those are some of the concerns
that we have, my wife and I,
because we're, we're, we believe
in education.
We believe in
What America did was the treaty
rights that gave us the right to
have education as Indian people.
There's a foundation of what we
believe in.
And they should exist.
In the state schools.
We're funding that exists
through
Taxing and in, in some cases the
uh
The federal
Government, uh, provides, uh,
impact 8 monies.
So some of that has been uh
pulled back.
The problems with the Navajo
Nation, Department of Education.
And all the uh
I don't know what the sign MOAs
or MOUs to make that.
System work
So, uh, the, the parents,
grandparents, like here in this
community.
Your, uh
They have, uh, they have to
fight for their education
rights.
Some of the, the problems that
exist as
Go down on 2nd Street and
Gallup.
We're gonna see a lot of our
young people.
With a backpack
So we, we, my wife and I, we, we
go out into the streets of
Gallup and talked a lot of
people.
Sometimes we give out food to
them.
We're asking, where are you
from?
Why are you here?
and say
no.
So they're expelled from school.
Because they missed so many days
of schools.
So those are some of the
problems that exist that I just,
we're just concerned about maybe
you already know about it.
But this is just to reassure
that in our uh treaty rights,
education is uh
Is is important annuity, I guess
you would call it. So they, uh,
In exchange for that, they took
the land and all that, so
In boarding school began and
that era.
And language
So we want to go back to
Corrective action.
So also Dolly.
Thank you.
Yeah, Mr. Foster.
I have uh Barbara McClanahan.
Wow.
Hello
Hello, madam, um.
Now I've got nervous, um, let me
back up. My name is Barbara
McClanahan.
I'm a member of Church Rock. I
originally come from Chin Lee.
My clans are Kanni.
And my dad is Cherokee.
My grandparents are twitter
cheating me and my knowledge.
Our Cherokee, so.
I have 5 kids. I adopted 5.
And I have
Close, a little over 50
grandchildren. I have a big
family and I have 5
great-grandchildren. School is
important.
And nowadays they come up, they
have these um disabilities in
your um behavior, bipolar and
all this, all these that are
coming up within the children.
And it's good that the schools
are starting to realize that and
see that within the students.
And um
Also.
I would like to see.
To the
To the House of Representatives,
um, thank you.
Thank you very much for coming
out here.
Thank you, I really, I'm, I am
happy to see the construction
going on in Church Rock, the
bridge, the roads, it's gonna be
awesome when it's done.
Um, also, um, I, I'm a member of
the Sundance, um coal mine road
across the uh casino.
So we've been, we've been, uh,
uh, club C, uh, we, we got
together and we're gonna go and
paint underneath there.
The graffiti under there is
really bad and
So we're gonna do that
ourselves, um.
And I would see if um Mr. Manoz
can put some lighting under
there.
It is dark. I come through there
2 in the morning, sometimes very
late and they'll be.
People sitting on the edge, the
side of the bridge underneath
the tunnel, so it's, it's
dangerous.
And I really, I'm, I'm thankful.
For the road construction and
what you have all done.
Um, for the state of New Mexico,
I know there's a lot more.
Um
Also
There's a big issue of housing
for the veterans.
It's, I think housing is all
over the place and um.
But the veterans are.
They're really in a lot of need
of housing as well and um
Also, um,
I, um, I heard my uncle's name
earlier this morning.
My mom's sister, um, my, my
uncle, his name is John Claw
Junior.
He
Married my aunt Thelma.
And he is one of the, he, he
designed.
The Navajo Nation seal.
And I see that Navajo Nation
seal.
Change a lot of times and I do
not appreciate it.
There's, I know our president,
Mr. Boone Narin has his
Has his, I don't know what you
call it around the
And he shouldn't do that. He
should just leave it as is.
Um
I, I would like to see how we
could get this fixed. I don't
know who to really look at, but
I know it's a Navajo nation.
Well, I'll pass it along to our
delegates.
And um well, I just wanted to,
to really say thank you, thank
you very much for all the
improvement that you're helping
us with in the Church Rock area,
Miss Wanda Johnson.
Um, according, well, the Navajo
Nation Klanship.
No matter where we go.
We're, we're related to
somebody, always.
We never are there and saying,
oh, I was all by myself. No,
there's always somebody there.
So I really do appreciate you,
um, coming out to listen to.
To everyone here and please have
a safe trip home.
And I do would like to meet with
you again soon and also
congratulations to all of your
new ones that came in.
I, I've been watching you and
I'm really happy that you're
sitting all right here. Thank
you very, very much.
Oh yeah.
OK, we will move on to our Yoni
Martinez state of New Mexico.
Hm, please come forward and let
me set up and begin your
presentation. Welcome again,
Wilhelmina, and welcome, uh, Ms.
Candelaria and uh.
you have one more. OK.
And then just some housekeeping
one mic on at a time because of
our feedback and the red light.
If it's on, you're good to go.
Thank you. OK.
uh, good afternoon. My name is
Melissa Candelaria. I am.
From the pueblo of San Felipe,
and I work as the education
director and attorney for the
New Mexico Center on Law and
Poverty. I represent the Yazi
plaintiffs in the Yazi Martinez
versus state of New Mexico
lawsuit. Thank you, uh, Madam
Chair, for inviting us to come
out here and I also want to
acknowledge um Pinedale's
chapter leaders and community
members for welcoming us, um,
and wanna also thank the the
cooks for preparing such a
delicious meal. I really
appreciate it.
And want to acknowledge all of
your efforts too, um, this
afternoon, uh, we're here to
give an update on the Yazy
Martinez case. We'll begin with
a presentation by our lead
plaintiff, uh, Ms. Wilhelmina
Yazi, and then um the education
team or the Yazi team will uh
give you a quick update that
includes me, and we have Miss
Alisa Deal who's also our
attorney for the Yazi plaintiffs
and it's a senior education
attorney for the New Mexico
Center on Law and Poverty. So
thank you.
11 moment here. So remember,
members, this is an update, this
is still ongoing, so some
questions that you might,
whatever you think you're gonna
ask if it's not like about now
or speculation, um, try to
refrain from that so we can, oh,
and then PED is supposed to come
too. um tomorrow.
So, um, distinguish your
questions, but thank you, thank
you so much.
I got
a Nana Arnoldigi
a call um.
And my age I
um.
She
must sandeleiwaibi.
On the
Fenoa.
shakes.
and he's not up.
Animajama shale.
In no, I didn't um.
I call
AR but I
call AR but not
um not she cane at um um has 3.
So they.
A in
and it's not.
I call it a man and a
maniaclin
I call it a maniaclinniki
I call it a maniaclin
Edina
it's a hardgo Xinzhou gain
um dinner.
I learned that.
I should, I should, yeah
I should, I should yeahhagoago
and in the in the
a mausoleum and duck a
show
I should, I should yeahhagoago
and in the in the
a mausoleum and duck
so and so.
Akoe yeah, um.
Aniki I see Bea.
Uh, I just briefly, um,
Introduce myself again, um,
mainly I come to you as a
mother.
I have 3 beautiful children. I
have two sons who are in college
and I have a younger daughter
who's in, um, going into 4th
grade this year.
And the chil my children and all
children are the reason why I'm
here sitting in front of you.
Growing up in my traditional
ways in my way of which includes
my language, uh, my culture, my
upbringing, my values, all of
that really plays a role in why
I'm here in front of you and why
I, um, I'm part of this uh
lawsuit.
So when you really think back
our main focus is on our
children, and I'm sure each one
of you.
May have a children, nieces,
nephews, grandchildren, and so
forth. So when we keep that
focus on our children and our
priority on our children, that's
really what my advocacy is about
is the foundation of how we
prepare them for life in what we
call in our in my language, um,
that's really what the
importance of what my upbringing
was growing up.
Was, um, we want the best for
our children, and we all
understand the the history of
our education system, especially
for us indigenous people.
How education system was set up.
It was to assimilate us, it was
to strip us of our culture, our
language, it was to assimilate
us into white society, begonic
echoodao
and his.
Jeans
for our children's education.
A called Enache.
A
but then either.
Unlikely to ask now what the.
should be in
and it's not just my children
that we go through this. I've
also experienced all of this. My
parents also experience all of
this. We've all experienced it.
So this experiences that we've
gone through, the lack of
resources, the lack of academic
support, and there's so many
much more that um my legal team
will elaborate on, but I just
wanted to come here today just
to
Give you a background of who I
am, where I come from, why I do
the work that I do. I call.
I'm gonna go ahead and just
touch up on some um
Experiences that we've heard,
we've done a lot of um
Um
Community events.
Since the ruling, just going out
into communities and hearing
firsthand from parents, from
students themselves, from
children themselves. Earlier we
did a rep uh presentation on the
six directions indigenous
school. That's one school where
We open
Everything for our children. We
hear from them. We want to know
what they're thinking, hearing,
learning what they want.
And that's the first thing is
our children's voices.
So all these experiences that we
collected from these uh
community meetings.
A lot of the main ones were
increased funding for classroom
resources.
Mental health services, that's
really big here in our
community, in our Navajo
communities.
Improved teacher training in
areas and men like mental
health, culturally responsive
teachings and inclusive
education.
Where children honor our
children, not children, teachers
honor our children,
acknowledgement, inclusion, all
of that. And then also to
emphasize the importance of
biliteracy, culturally relevant
curriculum, our language, our
native languages.
And, um, students and families
also want educators who
understand and value what I just
had spoke of right now and just
that diverse cultures.
Um, the need for more mental
health, as I mentioned earlier,
individually and then also in a
more community environment.
Out of the, we also have
community and family engagement.
So, and then also others that
we've come across were educator
preparation and workforce
development with university
programs that a auto trauma
inform and social emotional
support, although we just went
through this crisis with the um
pandemic.
Curriculum and language justice
thought, and then there's
identity, youth voices, cultural
disconnection.
System and policy failures, and
that's why we're here in in
front of you today with this
lawsuit.
Financial barriers and
infrastructure advocacy and
collective power.
So I just wanted to kind of
touch base only because of the
time that we have, um.
And then also, um, going back to
culturally relevant curriculum.
I had the same experience where
none of my history was taught to
me in school.
A lot of my history, I was told
from my grandparents in a more
traditional aspect.
Um, our local histories, our
culture, they're not
incorporated.
Um, our languages as well. And
then also going on to educator
preparation and practice.
Trauma in form and um teacher
need for awareness of our
communities. I know there's a
lot of um language barriers
right now in our school system.
Um, readiness to work.
School governments and policy,
um, just what Mr. um uh Chanel
Larry Foster had elaborated
earlier to you guys, um, and the
policies there.
Social emotional learning, a lot
of that.
So, there's so much more to
this, and I'm pretty sure that
many of you have really uh dove,
I hope that you have really dove
deep into really understanding
what this lawsuit is really
about. It is very complex.
There's a lot of things that
were covered.
And this is a really great
opportunity now. It's been 7
years since the ruling.
And our children are still
suffering. When I say our
children, this school suit is uh
based on the four groups.
Our indigenous children.
I are low income families though
are children with disability in
the hastei or English language
learners of thought, and those
are the four groups that um that
this case is about.
So
And advocating for children
through these years and asking
the state time and time that we
want to work with them with, you
know, we need to get something
in place that we need to get
somewhere.
We know that our children can do
great things. We all know that.
We have nieces, nephews,
grandchildren, and they're
capable of 4 far more than what
we believe or made to believe.
And most of all they're valuable
no matter what.
But our children have been
waiting a long time for the
state to fulfill its promise of
an equitable quality education.
And this case in the most recent
motion that my legal team will
uh cover here in a bit and
update you on is all about
making sure that the state takes
real measurable actions to
improve the education for all of
our students.
Especially those who have been
most neglected.
And they are part of this
lawsuit or the heart of this
lawsuit. So going forward, we're
committed to seeing this through
to ensure that all of our
children.
Have the opportunity that they
deserve
a quite a naso ha.
she sits on
that have seen very a lot of
familiar faces that I've got to
know, um, and the, um,
legislative.
I've come to learn that they're
my older sisters, younger
sisters, brothers, and I
acknowledge them in that sense.
A no matter where we go, you
know, as we continue to practice
with.
And that's the main number one
rule that we have in our Navajo
culture was the implammation of
a beta na.
Our government system
betaitna.
I
A
yashini as long as we all work
together and hear each other,
Ada,
um case ruling case.
Good
Thank you, um, Ms. Yazi. So I
think because we're kind of
running uh a little late on
time. We'll go ahead and start
with slide 10 on your handouts
just to give you a quick uh
reminder or a background of the
case, uh, many of you know are
familiar with the Yazi Martinez
case and maybe some of the new
lawmakers may not be, but as you
all know in 2014, this case was
filed in the state district
court and the plaintiffs include
uh at
Yazi plaintiffs include 5 family
plaintiffs and 6 school
districts and the Yazi case um
represents family plaintiffs.
The defendants in this case
include the state, um, and we
filed this lawsuit with the
legal claim that the defendants,
um, the state defendant has
violated state student state
constitutional right to a
sufficient education and as you
see on this timeline here in
2018, the court ruled that
New Mexico public schools were
in fact unconstitutional that
the state of New Mexico violated
Native American students,
English language learners, low
income students and students
with disabilities constitutional
rights, uh, to a sufficient
education and that the state
constitution requires the state
to provide at-risk students, so
these 4 student groups is what
the court deemed us at risk, so
the court went on to say that
at-risk students deserve a
sufficient education that
prepares them for both college
and career and that the state is
required to be in compliant with
the New Mexico Indian Education
Act, along with all of the other
education acts that um the
legislature has enacted and are
on the books and that the state
must provide students with
adequate educational
opportunities to succeed. So
this case really is a statewide
case and the ruling applies
statewide and as you can tell on
this timeline, we have been at
this for a long time.
right from 2014 to now, it's
been a little over 10 years, um,
and a lot has happened as you'll
see the state try to get this
case dismissed, which was
denied. The party spent 2 years
in discovery and out of that
process, um, resulted in the
motion which I'll cover here in
a bit. You also know that as
Miss Willelmina uh mention COVID
happened so the court at that
time ordered the state to ensure
that students receive the
necessary technology and tools
to be able to.
access education and we also in
that time uh we're able to meet
with the AG who wanted to
collaborate with the plaintiffs.
And so through this extensive
process and analysis and through
the critical and important work
with tribal and community
members, education advocates and
coalitions, it became very
clear.
That at-risk students are
failing still academically and
that New Mexico didn't take uh
enough measures to fix the
public school system and make
the transformation and changes
that the the court is looking to
a transformation systemic
changes, uh, PED uh lacks
accountability systems and that
the PED is failing to achieve
compliance with the court
ruling. So, um, the Yazi and
Martinez teams went back to
court.
And on September 4th, we filed a
joint non-compliance motion and
a request for a remedial action
plan. The motion was not opposed
by the Attorney general, but it
was opposed by the PED and the
executive and the motion
outlines our motion outlines
several many areas where the
state has failed to comply with
the court's order and its
constitutional obligation to
provide a sufficient education,
so we laid out evidence
regarding
outcomes, how, um, you know,
showing the achievement gap
still, the deficiencies, for
example, within the PED such as
a lack of and and and
implementation plan, the high
turnover and the vacancies
within the department and the
failure to hold districts
accountable. So in addition, we
provided really an extensive
laundry list of all of the
evidence that we found through
this um years of uh work on this
case, um, and we do acknowledge
that the.
Legislature has made a huge
investments in education and
that's, uh, you know, really um
critical and the investments in
education are needed, um, but
there's also more work to
transform the system overall.
So, um, we went to court and on
April 29th, we had a hearing
where the plaintiffs, uh, we
argued our non-compliance motion
and request for a remedial
action plan and the judge ruled
from the bench and the judge
found in favor um of the
plaintiffs, the judge ordered
that the public education
department must develop a
comprehensive education plan
that should include many the 9
comp
po n ent s that the plaintiffs
set out in its briefing so if
you look at and read the court's
order from April 29th, you'll
see that the court said that PD
is to hire a consultant that it
should look to the components
and it should also look to um
include the important elements
of a plan that we've all been
asking for, right? Short term
goals, uh, metrics, we want to
see, you know, how much things
are gonna cost, how, how much
does it cost?
It's going to cost to implement
the education plan and
importantly accountability
measures and so that is what the
court uh ordered and I will pass
it to Lisa. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chair and
members of the committee for
having us here today. Um, I'm
just gonna kind of cover the
most recent updates as I know
we're short on time and leave
plenty of time for questions or
comments from you all.
Um, so, as my colleague, uh,
laid out the core issued its
order in April.
And found that the public
education system is still
unconstitutional, which was not
a surprise to us.
Um, and that the state still
hasn't made the changes that are
needed to satisfy the rights of
our students that are guaranteed
under our state constitution.
The judge ordered the PED to
develop a comprehensive remedial
plan.
Uh, to address these ongoing
violations. And
That the PD is to do that with
help from an outside expert,
which the PD itself admitted was
necessary, that they could not
do this planning process within
their own department.
Uh, the judge denied our request
for the LESC staff to lead that
planning process, because that
entity is not a party to this
case.
But did specifically name the
AESC and its staff to be a part
of the process on a voluntary
basis. Um, which we think is
really meaningful.
And then really importantly, the
court also said that this plan
has to be developed with input
from stakeholders, critically,
uh, and with, with input and in
consultation with the
plaintiffs.
The court gave the PED a very
short timeline to do a lot of
work. Uh, the first of, of those
measures was July 1st, whereby
PED had to identify an outside
expert consultant that it was
going to bring on to assist it
in the planning process. Um, the
PD announced, of course, just
recently that it had brought on
the Lanel Foundation.
Uh, and Westted to be its
consultants in this process.
Oh,
Uh, and Lael is charged with um
community engagement and
outreach, and Westted with, uh,
as we understand it, kind of
putting the pieces together and,
uh, into, uh, the plan itself.
The draft of the plan is due by
October 1st, um, with a report
to the court at that point. And
we assume we would see it as
plaintiffs' attorneys.
A final plan is due November
3rd.
And then by December 1st, if
plaintiffs have objections to
what's contained in the plan or
is not contained is missing from
the plan. We have until December
1st to go back to court to file
those objections with the with
the judge. Um, the judge finally
made clear that if the state
failed to comply, that sanctions
were a possibility.
Finally, I will address um what
the court said needed to be
included in the plan. Um, as my
co-counsel discussed, we asked
that the plan build from 9
components of uh what a
sufficient education should look
like in New Mexico.
Those, those components are
aligned with the findings of
fact from the court, but even
more importantly, aligned with
community and stakeholder
feedback as to what education
should look like for our
students. Those come from the
Yazi Martinez, uh, platform of
remedies, the tribal remedy
framework and the PD's 2022
strategic plan.
The court didn't say that PD has
to address every last detail.
Instead, PED is directed to take
into consideration all of the
components and elements that we
raised in our briefing.
So,
That is where we anticipate
making sure that the plan
includes all the pieces that we
see as critically important, not
from the, the courts, only from
the court's prior orders, but
from what we've heard from
communities, stakeholders,
students, families, tribal
leaders, etc.
Uh, and then the very, oh, let
me back up. On the 2nd to last
side, there is a QR code where
you could read these 9
components in full. They're far
too long to put on a PowerPoint
slide or 9,
But you can read the full text
of what we've asked the system
to essentially look like at the
end of the planning process.
And then finally, on the last
slide, um, the education team at
the Center in Law and Poverty
works really closely with
Transformation New Mexico, a
coalition.
Uh, who is working to ensure
that stakeholder voices are
central in this process going
forward. Uh, they have convened,
uh, to or will be convening two
groups of folks who can elect to
participate, either through a
partner's table. So those are
mostly gonna be organizations,
um,
And other entities with subject
matter expertise or investment
in this process and a people's
table for individuals who would
like to be a part of this, um,
planning process as well, both
giving input to the planned
development, giving input on a
draft and input on a final
version, um, that we really
genuinely hope is, is included
in the final product that a
court orders. Um, and then last
piece I'll say before.
I turn it over uh to you all for
questions or comments.
Um, is that in asking for the
LESC staff to lead the planning
process.
We were really encouraged by the
ways in which that would
include um buy-in from you all
as legislators, which is so
crucial in the implementation of
this plan. It has to happen.
It's the only way it's gonna
work, right? And so we're glad
to hear that the LESC is
interested in being involved in
a, on a voluntary basis, um, and
we certainly hope that Lana and
Westtead also really cultivate
that, um, input and buy-in.
from you all and would encourage
to whatever extent you're
interested in being, um, a part
of the planning process to do
that because we think it's
really necessary and important,
uh, to achieve this system. I
think we all want for our kids.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, thank you for your
presentation. I have Senator
Munoz, Senator Sharon
Representative Serena, Senator
Munoz, thank you and you know,
Ms. Shai, I'm gonna start off
with something that bothered me
at the last LFC meeting where a
legislator questioned where your
kids went to school and, and I
came back and pushed back pretty
hard against her because my kids
went to Jehovah too and school
is a choice and you have that
choice to where you want to send
school your kids to school and,
and so I thought that was
something that was, was
interesting because
Just because you're a party to a
suit doesn't mean you don't care
about all kids and you choose to
send your kids wherever you
choose to send your kids. My
kids went to.
a whole bit too. That was my
choice and so that as a parent,
you should have that choice and
that should not be a legislative
comment that's made about your
children, our children are not
elected and they're not
participating.
Mr. Chair, did you move there?
Thank you. I'm gonna charge you
to move the mic closer. So, uh,
but I think that was, that was
kind of a horrible thing and I,
I, I want to apologize for that.
I, for that legislator saying
that because I don't think our
kids belong in this political
realm, where a parent makes
choice. The other thing is, is,
is just some common sense
questions. The legislature in
the last since 2020, I think we
put over $2 billion in
education.
$2 billion and we haven't moved
the needle.
The legislature can pass laws.
We can pass reading literature
literacy, which we did. Nobody's
going.
We can pass requirements to have
math at a certain level in the
school districts won't do it.
We can pass and we did in 20 or
2021, we had the highest paid
teachers in the region.
And then other regions came back
and started paying more. We have
teacher proficiency, teacher
training, uh, we have language,
uh,
People that teach abhoian
language that are paid the same
without a degree.
They're paying the same as a
person with a bachelor's degree.
That's, and I think we're at 56
or 76,000 for that pay.
But when we look back and we
look back and we, we put impact
aid back into the school
districts with impact8. Where
did that money go?
And I'm gonna pose that as a
question. If you know where the
impact the money went because
that money is directly for
Native American students.
And I haven't ever been able to
get an answer from.
From any of the impact a
districts that have a large
number, San Juan, uh, McKinley,
Cibola, uh, Zuni, while Zuni is
all native, so, but um.
Where that money went. If it
went in the classroom or if it
went to buy trucks or it went to
buy other things that impact aid
money is not designed that way,
but we can pass any law and we
can put any dollar you want.
But Mrs. Yazi will know this. If
your parents are not involved
with the children to get them to
school. We're not gonna see the
school districts use the
dollars. We're not gonna see
them grow proficiently and if
those kids are not in school and
are, are, are
Absentee rate was between 20 and
30% in school districts that
were in impacting districts, 30%
of the kids are not in school
enough time to learn.
And, and you can sue us and you
can and, and I'm at the point
where the legislature should
probably start learning to sow
the sue the school districts.
Because
We implement policy, we
implement the money.
And the school districts either
choose to do it or not choose to
do it and, and we do all this
and Representative Sean I said
she's not on there anymore. And,
and but we heard all this,
right? And we put so much money
into this and we the school
district say, oh yeah, we want
this money, and then we watched
their cash balances grow to
almost 700 million over the time
frame and them not spend the
money.
And so
I don't know if it's the
legislator's prerogative or, or
you guys to to.
To include the school districts
as a party to the lawsuit
because we gave them the
resources.
We gave him the statutes and the
rules that we think change
education, and I'm not an
educator, but we have educators
and sometimes educators fight
against things that are good for
change, uh, in, in the
legislature, but we've given
them every resource, $2 billion
haven't taken a penny away from
PED not one penny for one
program that's a failure.
Not one penny for a program
that's a failure.
And have been declining in our
proficiencies for the last 8
years.
Now we've had a high turnover of
PED secretaries. I think this is
our 6th or 7th month, and I'm
including Howie Morales in case
the PD secretary texted me and
said there hasn't been 6 or 7,
but I'm including Howie because
he served as a secretary for a
while, uh, and so high turnover
in a PED there's no stability in
an organization.
And you can't make change if
there's no stability.
Superintendents only last 3 to 5
years.
And there's a high turnover in
in superintendents. And so how
do you make that change and how
do you make people, children
attend school.
And there's things that happen
in life, they may not be there
and make that change because you
can sue us all day long, you
could sue us for $20 billion.
And we can
Know that 10% of $20 billion did
not move the needle. It moved it
in the opposite direction.
And so as a party to the
lawsuit, I think you guys got to
help us come up with what fixes
it and not just say more money
must be Bessel Besso Besso.
That's money in Navajo.
And, and I know you know, but
they may not know.
She may not know Navajo, um, but
I know Navajo. And, and so we
can put all the money you want,
but where's the change gonna
take place and you can sue us
till till the cows come home or
till.
We have a sheep butchering on
Saturday.
Um.
But where's the change gonna
come? because.
As a legislature, we don't
control PED.
We don't control school
districts.
Um, the school district in
Shiprock has been a troublesome
thing for 10 or 15 years now.
With some of the highest rates
of ass and attendance, but I, I
mean, do we run truancy bills
and do we tell the parents if
your kids are not in school,
we're a party to suit and if we
don't educate your kids, you're
gonna.
Did something happen?
I, I don't know if that's right
or not. I mean,
You know, every kid's a little
different in, in you, and you
got boys and girls are different
and you got to control that, but
at the end of the day,
$2 billion.65 million dollars
just for Native American kids in
Impact A districts and I see it
every day.
Right?
When are they going to change?
Because the legislature has made
the commitment with dollars.
Um
We made the commitment with
legislation to change. We in
this lawsuit started, I think.
2014, 2015, right in there. I
think we, we put like $300
million the first year and the
judge didn't tell us what to do.
And nobody's telling the
legislature how to fix the
problem.
Cause I don't think the
legislature can fix the
educational problem that exists
because
I don't have the skill set to go
in there and fix it, right? I'm,
I'm not a teacher. I'm.
But somebody has to tell us this
is a skill set.
Well, I'm glad LESC is helping
and, and we know Gwen Waterman
went to the former LESC
directors now at Lano.
And John's good and, and they'll
guide us.
Um, but I mean,
There's nothing you can do to
make us.
You can sue us and, and, but if
everybody's not on board,
And the school districts are not
enforcing what has to happen in
the classroom.
And kids that are not attending
school, we're not gonna change
that, and I don't know if the
legislature should now proceed
action against the school
districts that are a party to
the suit that brought us the
suit that aren't performing what
the legislature wanted to have
done.
And just sitting on the money.
And and so it may for me it may
come to that.
You may have to sue the school
districts and say it's not the
legislature that's not
performing. It's not the state
that's not performing well, it
may be PED, but the legislature
has performed.
And the school districts now
have to take a responsibility.
And that's gonna trickle down to
the teachers who
Representative Ina and I were
having a conversation. It
depends on the classroom. You
may have a special ed class that
only has 10 students and 1
teacher. Well, that may be too
many in a special ed class.
But
You may have another class that
has 20 students in and how many
teachers can be proficient with
that many students in the
classroom. Those are questions I
don't know the answers to, but
At some point in time, there's a
responsibility for the lawsuit
and the judge is going to say
who's responsible?
I don't think the judge can come
back and say that this that the
state's responsible because the
state and the legislature can
only fund and put in required
school districts to do that. If
the school districts aren't
doing that.
Then I think it's a school
districts that have to be a
party to the lawsuit in order to
fix the problem and, and the
parents have to be there.
I mean, if your kids are not in
school.
They're not gonna learn.
And, and so.
You, you could put a bill, 10
billion more in there, 20
billion, and we're not going to
change it unless we have all the
wheels of the cog turning in the
same direction at the same time.
And making sure that this
happens in, and so this is, is
very interesting to me that this
lawsuit, the way that the judge
set the timeline and the judges
say may roll from the bench.
Well.
I think the legislature may turn
around and and just start suing
the school districts for, for
noncompliance in order to make
that happen and they're probably
gonna like my email up and my
phone up and everything else,
but at the end of the day, I, I
say this, just do your job,
right?
Whether you're a superintendent,
whether you're the principal,
whether you're an educator,
whether you're the parent.
Do your job and everything will
flow.
And, and, but we're not getting
that, so I don't know how to
resolve that. I mean, common
sense ideas and and and recourse
may be the next action for the
legislature.
Um
Because money is not the issue.
And, and the $2 billion proved
that money is not the issue, so
thank you, madam chair.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and one
question on the impact date if
you know any of those numbers,
I'd be interested.
Madam Cha Senator Munoz, uh, in
San Felipe we say peso, so
money, uh, anyway, um, I think
you raised some really
important, very critical issues
and questions, uh, with regard
to accountability of LEAs and
that is what, you know, we had
argued initially in what's in LA
because we have a different idea
of Elliot, if you're talking A
and we those are legislative
aides.
So
we need to, if you, just so you
know. So I think you bring, so
these issues that you bring
really then speak to the need
for an education plan that we've
been advocating for since the
ruling, right? Because you won't
know this, the legislature and
again we see so much investment
in education that you all made,
without a plan, we can't measure
like the you know the progress,
what's working, what's not
working.
What's missing and how do we
hold each other LEAs the state,
um, the legislature executive
accountable to each other and so
one of the things that we set
out to uh advocate for in this
development of an education plan
is found in the 8 and 9
components um of the 9
components, one that speak
directly to your question about
accountability and enforcement
system. PED as a state defendant
already has the authority to
hold.
Districts accountable and how we
how they spend the money and to
your question, we don't know how
impact aid is being spent by the
school districts. So what we
wanna see in this plan is a way
that the state is gonna hold
LEA's accountable for how they
spend state and federal funds on
the at-risk students in
particular.
And to your point of uh, can you
tell me what an alley is so I
understand local education
agency for the school district
um it's regional. It's a
regional because uh with
McKinley and San Juan County, I
believe it's in Aztec.
The, the LEA for it's a regional
setup that we have sorry, I
thought I had answered your
question, um, with regard to the
PED capacity. We acknowledge all
of the lawmakers' efforts you've
put forward bills, um, enacted
bills that try to improve the
system, and again, um, you know,
you put the laws on the books
and what we found um in the
discovery process and what we
set out in our noncompliance
motion is.
that the public education
department just lacks the
capacity to implement fully and
to ensure that districts are are
implementing fully both the
Indian Education Act, the
Hispanic Ed Act, the bilingual
Multicultural Education Act and
so that's one of the things we
hope that um the state will
address in the development of
this education plan and with
regard to I guess just to make a
quick point on the what we're
seeing as far as um the
academic.
Outcomes of the at-risk
students, and that was a lot of
what we put forward as evidence
to the court, the high chronic
absenteeism rate, right? So how
do we, how is the state and its
plan going to address that
issue, for example, like, is it
gonna uh talk about ways that
they're gonna implement ways to
engage students so that they
want to come to school, that
they are in project-based uh
programs and curricula or
community-based curricua
curricula and instru
settings. So I think, you know,
You bring up a whole host of
issues that are all interrelated
and I think that, you know, in
this development of a plan that
we hope the state will engage
our local experts, the folks at
LESC LFC, and others around the
state, teachers, um, school
board members, uh, tribal
leaders in this development, so
we can all bring our heads
together and come up with a good
plan that hopefully will elevate
not just the at-risk students,
but overall, let's say
as a whole, right? We want to do
good in education. Our kids
deserve it and the state
deserves it.
At least
you wanna go ahead just to
follow up, but I mean in your,
in your plan, you don't define
what that should be.
In your 9 point plan, you don't
define that 3rd graders should
be proficient at this, at, at
80% level. You don't define what
the plan should determine. And
if you're asking the legislature
or even a teacher in a classroom
say, hey, you have 10 kids, uh,
every kid should be for
Christian and reading 100%, but
they may not be.
And and so the legislature you,
you, you've got a plan that's
not really defined. It's your,
you're I'm gonna be honest with
you, and it's nothing personal,
but your plan is designed to
keep the legislature in court.
And, and to keep chasing money
and the attorney smiling and
kind of grinning, but that's the
design of the plan because it's
not defined what the plaintiffs
really want the outcome to be.
And we can't determine what the
outcome can can be because we
don't know what we're aiming
for. And so give us more money,
we want more reading, we want
more teacher training, we want
more teachers every teacher
thing that we can offer free
tuition, um, uh.
When they're going to school,
we'll pay them to, to work in
the school district so they get
trained, they get training from
other teachers. We have so much
money out there for teacher
training to get that in the
classroom, but it doesn't help
and, and the number of teachers
are declining. They're like
police officers, they're
declining, and so when we don't
have a defined plan and we say,
well, we just want this to be
A 9 point plan that we want you
to succeed at, but we don't have
definite points of success in
that plan.
Then we can never achieve a
goal.
It's, it's moving the goal
Porsche there every time we go
to court in that plan and, and
so we needed a fine plan. I
mean, that, that's what the
judge hopefully will determine
what is a defined plan and what
exactly is the outcome, but.
Absentee rates we can't control
those.
We can't control, no kid really
wants to go to school when
they're in junior high or high
school because they think they
know everything and they're
gonna force back from the
parents and, and how do you get
them in and that's the biggest
dropout rate is from that 9th
grade through 10th, 10th grade.
Is our biggest dropout.
2200 students dropped out in one
year out of the 2200 with me
courses going back and trying to
get them back engaged to get him
graduated only like 200 of them
came back and graduated in the
system. The 9th through the
11th, which we funded this year.
Is the biggest loss that we have
in our graduation rate and in
order, if we got those 2200
students to graduate in the
state of New Mexico, we would be
not at the bottom, but in the
median was just 2200 more
students graduating the state of
New Mexico and, and so.
We put the money again this
year. I think it was 360 million
maybe representative 300 plus
million.
Yeah, 300+ million and, and we
throw big numbers out, but I
mean, a dollar is a dollar and
it's very important, but to
change that and so we can change
our graduation rates, but that's
not what you're asking us.
You're asking us for more money
with no, no end and, and so I'll
be quiet now, Madam Chair.
I'm gonna turn your mic off. I'm
just kidding. Well, speaking to
some of the um aspects of
putting more money towards it
and that, but we've seen two
schools in the same area just
next to each other, one will
have a great attendance rate, so
it's really having that plan,
but too, when you put money to a
school that um for attendance
and then they receive more money
and that this other school
doesn't receive anything. It's
like, oh well, we should be
underperforming and do all this
in this.
and get more kids into special
education, then, um, get them
out of it. It's what I've seen
in some areas too that they,
they kind of scoop up that money
and try to, uh, when we try to
eliminate the risk too, then
where do you have that
definition and how do they, they
want to reclassify now, um,
defining what an at risk student
is, and I was like, well, you
start moving this needle back
and forth, um, then we don't
really get to that measurement
and we cannot hold all schools
accountable because before I
understand we
had that grading systems were
like, oh, school, you're A
school, or B school, C school, F
school, and then you would see
these schools decline in
enrollment and it did not work.
That kind of punitive approach
to our schools was not a way to
correct the actions that needed
to be remedied for a better
education system, so it's still,
I believe that you do have to
leave it broad and up to the
experts because I don't believe
it is up to you guys who are
trying to leave it up to those
in our.
on our end that know our laws
and our statutes to put that
correlation together with the
plan you have and come forward,
but also two of the new members,
um, since I've been in office,
we barely kind of implemented
the um the online system with
the transparency to really see
what the budget thinks to money
appropriated to create that
transparency that the schools
have to input where their budget
and where that money is going
into the classroom and even
though you implement it, it's
not.
going to be a remedy, but it is
some a tool that you use to
evaluate um how the school is
performing and do we make a
connection with that data to the
performance of our students and
our teachers, um, but there's
too many gaps that a lot of,
when you talk about turnover,
um, you know, that's not at just
a high level. It's all the way
down to our schools that we have
principal turnovers, um,
teachers getting into schools
and even being moved in the
district where they're at one
school one year.
then they're moved um based on
the need of the student to
another school all of a sudden,
and our housing issue too with
the schools and, and some
schools they decide to put a
bonus for one school to get more
teachers there because of the
remoteness, but then how is that
equal 2 for our other schools to
kind of make it a monetary
thing. Uh, it's so it's, I
understand your the the buggle
on it and um thank you, uh Mr.
Chair, for all your, your
numbers. I don't know how you
were pulling.
them all down there.
With all those amounts, but um
we'll go on to Senator Scher.
You send her shares notes.
I know I don't have anything to
say now.
Oh, but I do. So,
So, Madam Chair, uh, sometime
this session I uh tried to find
out.
What's going on? Because now
we've got 25% of our students
that are proficient in reading
or math and in that
neighborhood, so I went back.
OK, what, what changed? That's
always my question. What
changed? Because when I went to
high school, we could all read.
And now we can't.
Why? What changed?
Uh, I don't know what the
graduation rate in my class was,
but my guess, it was almost
everybody.
And we weren't particularly in a
special school district, OK?
Uh, so I'm always looking at
what changed. So one of the
things I did find is that in, in
the 50s and 60s and into the mid
70s actually, uh, about 10% of
New Mexicans were considered
illiterate, and we can't find,
uh, I couldn't find anything
that said at 4th grade, they
were at
Uh, you know, great proficiency
or anything like that, but 10%
of New Mexicans, uh, were
illiterate in, in the 70s, I'm
sorry, it was 3% in the 50s, 3%
in the 50s and 10% in the 70s.
We're illiterate.
And today
It's a whole heap.
I'm not sure mathematically what
that comes to me math, but it's
more than 10%, I'm sure.
So
Trying to figure out what
happened.
We talked some about leadership
here earlier and uh I think the
leadership is a huge part of
that, um, certainly, uh, PED has
uh since, since PED became its
current form of PED, uh, we've
had a lot of
Of, uh, secretaries.
Uh
And so I know, you know, there
was great distrust or hatred or
whatever for, for, uh, Secretary
Scandera, uh, we couldn't even
confirm her for a decade, uh,
well, at least 6 years, um.
And then, uh, then we went
through a bunch of new cabinet
secretaries now and
So the leadership is an issue,
but I look at this, uh, more
specifically, uh, uh, Farmington
municipal schools in Central
Consolidated municipal schools.
We all shop in the same Walmart.
What's the difference?
Farmington schools rank well,
although in my opinion, being in
the top 10 of a state that's at
the bottom.
The bottom is not necessarily
the greatest place, but, but
Central Consolidated always
ranks at the bottom.
So why? What's the difference?
Because.
It's not
It's not cultural, it's not, oh
well, these people are, no.
I think the difference is
Farmington Municipal Schools has
a long history of the school
board of finding a
superintendent, hiring that
superintendent, and staying with
that superintendent until they
retire, 10 years.
So you have continuity.
And what's going on.
Central Consolidated School, uh,
school board.
Goes through superintendents
pretty quickly.
2 a year.
And have for a long time there's
no stability.
So you can't.
You can't do anything and you
can't do anything and the judge
can't do anything about that,
and you can threaten to. All you
can do is make more money for
the attorneys, but you're not
fixing anything for the school
district or the students.
So what do we do about that?
Well, we need big government
plan.
I think the big government
plan's the problem.
Because
The local school districts are
different.
I look at Los Alamos School
District.
And say, OK, so they're at the
top of the world. Why are they
at the top of the world? Well,
because.
3 quarter of the parents from
PhDs.
By the way, madam.
Sherman, OK.
Um
Just as, as kind of a side note,
the worst job in my mind, the
worst job you can have an
education in New Mexico to be a
physics teacher at Los Alamos
because it doesn't matter what
you're teaching one of the
students is gonna say teacher.
One of my parents proved that
theory wrong yesterday.
So
Uh, a lot of smart kids there,
no doubt.
But you know what the real
difference is?
Family involvement
The parents at Los Alamos are
engaged with their kids and the
schools.
Parents in other places are not
engaged.
With the with the the schools.
Or their kids for that matter.
And I look at, uh, uh, New
Jersey and Connecticut, uh,
almost a pay uh about twice as
much per student for their
education.
They're, they, their students
are funded at about twice as
much as New Mexico students are.
And they're always up there, #1,
#2, 3.
Utah
It's funded at about half as
much as New Mexico is.
And they're always up there,
well, maybe 23, OK.
But those three states always
rank up there in the top, and
it's not money because
New Jersey and Connecticut put
in a gazillion dollars and Utah
puts in 25 cents, and they get
the same outcome. Why?
Because their families are
engaged.
Their families are engaged, so
we talked about truancy.
OK, well, you know, if you're
not showing up to school, you're
not learning to read.
Maybe, OK.
So
That's family engagement.
How do we force that? Well, do
we make it a crime not to go to
school? And then do we go arrest
mom?
I mean, it used to be that we
had the truant officer that went
out there and hunted you down
and drug you to school. I don't
do that anymore.
I haven't done that in a long
time.
But
But would that get parents
engaged? I don't know. We're not
even allowed to talk about that
anymore.
Not even allowed to consider it.
It's one of those non-debatable
issues.
So what do we do?
So I actually think about this a
lot.
So I've come up with some other
solutions.
Even had a bill drafted for one
of those solutions. We don't
want to punish the school
district for failure, OK.
But what I suggested is that
every school district gets its.
It's guaranteed, OK, um.
State equalization guarantee.
Whatever the dollars is, that's
what the district gets, period.
OK.
But if there's improvement and
we can put the improvement in
regulation or law. So if you
move from 25% to 35%
proficiency, year 1 and 45 the
next year, whatever those
numbers are, I'm not going to
set those in stone anywhere. You
get more money.
You get rewarded for success.
You don't get punished for
failure, but you get rewarded
for success.
And the teachers union came out
to hunt me down.
Because that was wrong.
And so
We have
I ideas out there that are not
debatable. We're not allowed to
talk about them. Now maybe mine
was a bad idea. I'm not OK. I
happen to think it was
brilliant, but that's only
because I'm the most brilliant
guy sitting in this chair.
But there's all kinds of toes
that, that, that, that we've got
to figure out, we have to figure
out how to get around, Madam
Chair.
Because we step on the teachers
union toes.
We step on your toes.
Because I am absolutely
convinced that there are people
out there that just make money
off of this, and that's all they
don't care about. They don't
care if anybody gets educated or
not. Hey, I'm getting a good
paycheck from the state of New
Mexico. I don't care what else
goes on.
Maybe, I don't know.
But we have to be able to talk
about some of these things in,
in, in more of an open
Open sense here.
Because we're, we, we, we tap
around.
Delicately and
Then we blame you for suing the
state and you blame us for not
passing, uh, not putting enough
money into it. So we all blame
PED for not coming up with any
rules but PED can't come up with
any rules anyway because they
don't have leadership long
enough to come up with a rule.
And if they come up with a rule,
somebody's gonna sue them.
So
I'm not sure that I have a good
answer here, but I do want to
mention.
That
We used to be able to teach kids
to read and then we put more and
more and more government in the
way and now kids can't read.
Yes, we also put cell phones in
the way.
The kids were were.
We're falling behind before they
all had a cell phone.
Now they fall behind even more.
But I think there are two things
that we need to work on here.
One is the leadership of
schools, uh, of education staff
starting from the secretary of
PED to the teacher leadership
skills, OK.
Um
How do you, how do you do that?
And then the other one is how do
you get families involved?
Because if families aren't
involved.
Nothing else matters.
Nothing else matters.
And so can you force the family
to get involved through truancy
laws?
Maybe
But I do think if we're going to
talk about education in New
Mexico, the collective we need
to talk about, OK, family.
You have to get engaged.
And maybe that's just
Public service announcements,
OK?
It's 10 o'clock. Mom, do you
know where your kids are?
Used to be on television, OK?
Again, long time ago, back when
you had to turn the knob on the
television.
So
But that's why you had to have a
kid because I'd sit in my chair,
I'd send a kid over there
change. Actually, I was the kid
had to turn it off, right?
So
So I am very frustrated because
all of this suit to me seems to
be about money.
For somebody
It doesn't seem to be about
education.
But we can
Do something about we can do
something about education.
And we have an obligation to do
something with that education
and I don't care what the judge
sanctions are because when the
judge decides to put sanction on
sanctions on us. Woohoo.
What's Judge gonna do? Tell
people to go to school?
Judge is going to fail just
like, just like we're failing
right now.
doesn't matter who the judge is.
Didn't matter which attorneys
are involved.
So I'm very frustrated by the
whole thing because Madam Chair,
We can fix it
If we'll talk about it.
And not take things off the
table completely immediately.
Because I say something that
sparks some other thought.
In that other thought then
evolves into a plan.
But as long as we're not allowed
to talk about certain things and
well, by golly, we just will
never spark that thought.
So
There you go.
Senator Munoz put all the money
he can in.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator Duchero. I
don't know if my sprout his
checkbook today.
Uh.
Thank you, uh, Representative
Sean and then I have represent
Rear Caballero. OK, I'll try to
make it quick. Thank you, Madam
Chair. So I am a, was a former,
I'm retired high school math
teacher, 8th grade on up, um,
and, and the way I see it, so I
don't, I, I don't, uh, a lot of
what they said is, is right, um,
most, most of, well, kind of,
some of it.
Part of it.
So, so I agree on the parent
part.
My, as a teacher, you know,
they, a lot of parents don't
come to parent conferences, you
know, I'd be lucky if we'd had
one or two and I had a 150 kids
and it just, so parents is huge,
but then and and I, I, as a
teacher and as a group of
teachers, um, a freshman
teacher, we all had the same
prep first period, and we would
go to this room and call all the
kids who weren't there the day
the day before. We would call
every single one of them. So all
these things that you're saying,
what, what do they do about
absentee?
It's
as teachers, we do as much as we
can. We will call 4 and 5 phone
numbers and still not get, get a
hold of the parents. So, um,
But absenteeism, parents,
parents. I had a, I um, I used
to work at a high school where I
um lived really close to my high
school. I've forgot my computer
one day. I, I, I drive up at
school. I watch this parent drop
off her students, her child, and
I go home, come back, and I see
that child getting on the city
bus. So we can't even blame the
parents anymore because they are
doing their job as much as they
can, a lot of them, but not all
of them. During COVID, we would,
the kids are at home, and when
they had to speak
Turn on their computer to answer
a question, they would turn it
on and it would be the the the
TV would be blaring, the parents
would be talking. Everybody
would be in there and this, and
we were expecting this child to
learn. So it, it, there's so
many reasons why things aren't
working the way they, they
should be.
Absenteeism. It's great. I mean,
we have kids coming and going
all the time and and it's
absenteeism, it's mobility. They
bounce from school to school.
That's why when he said maybe
the government should be,
shouldn't be telling us. When
kids bounce from, you know,
within just within Albuquerque,
5 or 6 different schools, you
know, having the same curriculum
is probably a good thing or
something similar, because you
can't, if they're learning
integers in my class and in
exponents in another class and
then they jumped to that one.
They're missing. There's huge
gaps in their learning.
So that's another problem, but,
um, I think absenteeism for a
teacher, you know, when we get
kids, um, we have to teach
everybody. So, so I had 30, 36
kids in a classroom and, and,
and constant mobility, trying to
teach all the kids, and then we
bring in the ones who are absent
all the time or as part of the
time. So who's getting hurt in
this picture. It's the ones who
come to school every day. So
what do we do about them?
Because when, when the teacher
who has to teach everybody has
to teach the
Kids were absent has to teach
your kids who are having trouble
and then has this group of kids
who come every day and are doing
good, but, but as a teacher, you
have to slow down and teach
these other ones, and they take
up a lot of time, but as a
teacher, that's what you have to
do. So in my view, in my
opinion, the ones who are
getting hurt are the ones who
come every day. And that's why
we're not growing because
they're not growing because as a
teacher, you still have to teach
everyone in the classroom,
whether they come one day or
whether they come 2 days or
whether they're every day. You
know, it's, it's really
difficult. These problems aren't
just simple and they're not um
They're not, they're not, a lot
of them, I don't know if they
are solvable until we figure out
what makes the kids want to come
to school. And one of the things
in your plan, you said, meet the
needs of at-risk kids, meet the
needs of all kids. How do we
make them want to come to
school. One of the changes from
when we went to school because,
well, not you, but me and him
are old. We, we didn't have
not.
We didn't have phones. We didn't
have phones and computers that
that really do distract our
kids, even if, when my kids came
into my classroom, they had to
put their, take their stuff out,
put their backpacks against the
wall, and, and they, and they
did, they paid attention, but
they were worried about what was
going on in their phone. I could
tell all the time, they were
just, somebody's would go off
and everybody would look. So
these and we get addicted to
them. I know during the session,
we get addicted to them because
we have to know where we're at.
And, and these aren't our
friends and they're not good and
it's great keeping.
communication, but really,
If you, if you lose it, what do
you do? You go crazy until you
find it, right? I know I do. So,
so kids are up against computers
and phones, um, society as a
whole, um, everything they're
supposed to do, parents who
aren't always there, some of my
students, if their parents would
just come to one of their games,
they, that would have made them
the happiest kids. That would
have been like Christmas, but
they don't go to games or they
don't go to practices or they
don't see them, they're never,
they're not around, not many
parents. So if you have a parent
who is there, these kids are the
luckiest kids around when their
parents are there.
for them. Because I think in,
in, in reality, kids don't want
all these things that they can
have that we seem to always be
buying them. They want their
parents there, watching them
play their games or watching
them get awards and they're not
seeing that. And, and as a
teacher, I didn't see it either.
Parents just weren't around. I
used to go to the games just so
somebody would be there to cheer
for them. And then they were the
best kids in class, so it was a,
I had my motives, but, but I
also had 3 kids, so I knew how
important it was. But
So parents, it's important.
Absenteeism, we've got to get
our kids there and we have to
figure out how to motivate him,
but we also have to figure out
how to get this out of their
hands, and we can't start them
at 2 and 3 year olds. They
shouldn't know how to know, they
shouldn't know how to use this
more better than we do, and they
do. So this is going to hurt us
until that happens, but I think
the problem is just, it's huge
and it's not so, I don't know if
it's solvable. It's like trying
to do our police in Albuquerque.
How do you fix that problem?
It's huge.
And there's not one single way,
but I don't know in the lawsuit.
I, you know, I, I have 11
schools and I meet with my
teachers as much as I can, and
we are losing teachers because
we are asking so much of them.
We're every day they're getting
more things and every day they
are leaving the profession. And
these are good teachers and and
who've worked hard. I have a
whole national board certified
group that I work with, and they
are leaving and, and it's just,
it's um
I know you have, we know there's
a problem solving it is, is the
hardest thing, but we can't
throw it all on the teachers,
um, and the PED, I think they're
trying their best. I think like
what these guys said, we can't
keep anybody there because it's
such a hard job and we're always
getting blamed for everything
and like legislators, we get
blamed, and I like to blame him
because he hasn't went in. He
doesn't put it in math like you
should, but no, um, but anyway,
that's, I just, I just look at
this lawsuit and look at your
components.
And there's just so much that
nobody sees unless you're in the
classroom with the kids and um.
Uh, but I understand and I
think, I think, I think this is
good. The lawsuit was good, but
trying to solve it and
I don't, I don't know where the
answer would be.
Thank you
Thank you, Representative Sean,
would you like to respond? Thank
you.
Um, thank you, Senator Mino and
um um.
Um
All that has spoke. So as a
parent, um, this has come up
many times where we blame the
parents. Uh, we blame the
families, and I understand that.
I'm, I'm a mother myself and
throughout the community, a lot
of time I think what this is,
um, going back is not, we're not
looking at it in a holistic
approach. When we look at just
the parent blaming them or not
looking beyond that.
But the group of students that
in this lawsuit are indigenous
students.
If we understand how our our um
education system was first
established, that generational
trauma that our parents,
grandparents have gone through.
My parents, my grandparents
never went to school because of
the boarding school era. They
knew what was, what the purpose
of that was. So they hid into
the mesas. And then my mom,
Although my grandparents told
her don't go to school. She went
to school, got her college
degree. She became a teacher and
she became very involved in the
community. So there's that
whole, and then also to really
think about my schooling and her
schooling, how the school is
still public school, especially
is the institutionalized
setting.
Like we don't offer our students
a lot of these things that um
the gentleman had asked, um,
talked about growing up. We
don't have music, we don't have,
um, drama. We don't have
cooking, those type of classes,
you know, a lot of that is
missing, so I think it's just
that whole keeping the students
in and it's not so much of not
having the parents' involvement,
um, a lot of times the feedback
that I get from our community
parents is that even if they
were to have one concern to get
retaliated against.
the school, 11 concern they make
their title don't know, don't
come back, you can't. And just
like um Larry Foster said
earlier, a lot of our parents
try to sign up for these school
board meetings, and they're shut
out. They're not heard. They're
not, um, invited all those says,
you know, public comment,
whatever, none of that. So, a
lot of time, I think it's just
going back to that and then I
just want to also just uh say
thank you to Senator Mannoz
about
Um, the issue of a legislator
having me having my children
being rehobus, which is a
private school.
Which is so irrelevant because
um my kids were in public
schools since they were small. I
didn't get them to rehole with
until the last two years of high
school, and that made a big
difference, big, big, big
difference, because the setting
there and the way the public
school system is set up is so
different. Um, so just going
back to that, yeah, um, I know
that we can blame all the
family's parents, and I hear
that a lot, but it really has to
go back down.
To, I think, because basically
the US or not US, but the New
Mexico constitution states that
all children should provide an
equitable sufficient education
and that includes all the
children, although this lawsuit
focuses on the 4 who have been
neglected. We have
Share the experiences we've seen
it ourselves, now our children
are seeing it. So just, just
going back to that, I just
wanted to kinda, um, you know,
if we're gonna talk about um how
do we solve this? How do we
solve this and all of that. Have
a more open, broader view and a
holistic approach of, um, you
know, the problem itself, what
was the cause of it? What was,
you know, how did it come to be
there, um, if we had that
thought, I think, and then just
working together as well, you
know.
Um, a lot of times, um,
Parents are humiliated or
retaliated against or just, you
know, because of that English
barrier too, and a lot of our
parents that come from the um
reservation, they don't have no
schooling, so when they try to
speak, you know, they're
Some of them are literally made
fun of, um, just going back, so
then, you know, that's where I
think a lot of barriers are. So
just, I just wanted to just
touch base on that, but um I'll
go ahead and hand it over to
Elisa.
Yeah
Uh, Ms. Yazi is uh always a hard
act to follow, um, because I
couldn't have said any of that
better myself, uh, Madam Chair,
and, um, to the members who
shared concerns, uh, I really
appreciate the, um, your
feedback, and I think to me with
this illustrates is how all of
these things are so deeply
interconnected.
And we can't address any one of
them in isolation, um, I think
we can all agree that parents
love their children and want
them to do well, period. So what
is the state's role in making
sure that both students and
families are then engaged in
school and see themselves
reflected in what they're
learning and see teachers who
look like them and understand
them.
How do all of those pieces
happen? Because from a base
point, parents love their kids.
Um.
Senator Munoz, I wanted to just
respond very briefly to your,
your, um, feedback on the, the
nine components of the plan and
understanding that there are
not um concrete hard numbers,
uh, attached to those goals, but
we really see that as part of
how the plan needs to be built
out and to Pinto, to your point
of how there has to also though
be room for individualized needs
of students and districts and
communities and areas of the
state. Um.
And we really, uh, will continue
to hold PD accountable in the
plan that it puts forward that
it does all those things and
also understanding that some of
that is their job too. As you
point out, we're not education
experts, you know, well,
Willelmina might be, but Melissa
and I are attorneys. We are not
trained to do this, which is why
we very humbly understand our
role in this, which is to listen
to experts and families and
stakeholders and experts and get
their input into how education
can
really be transformed in New
Mexico. The last thing I'll say
is that we do not make money
from the state of New Mexico. We
have no financial incentive to
continue litigating this case
and quite frequently we say
often that rather than be like a
state like North Carolina that
has had a similar lawsuit for 40
years.
Melissa and I will celebrate the
day when this case is settled.
If that means that our kids are
getting what they need in
classrooms across the state. We
make no money from being
involved in this case. There are
private attorneys that are paid
by the state of New Mexico with
taxpayer dollars to defend PED.
None of that comes to us, just
to be very clear. Thank you.
Thank you, thank you for that
input.
I weigh in here a little bit
because we were over in
Tohatchie the other day and at
the BIE schools and then with
the public schools in that
differentiation and how the
schools are run, but the school
boards are where our community
is supposed to have that, um,
the, um, voice in that sense
with their vote and whoever it's
going into that position.
But we also see that.
The shutout that the voices
still are being shut out and
suppressed in those entities.
And when you look at those
schools in those areas, when you
say private school, charter
school, they have to have the
student enrollment to continue
operation. They have to have
that communication with those I
know we're using parents, but
guardians too, because at some
of the schools, most of my
students, the, the grandparents
were the ones that were there.
They're the ones taking and some
of them did not go to school.
They don't know about this
special education. They don't
know what are the, the level of
performance, there's their,
their grandchild's supposed to
be at a lot of it was unknown
and we'd like to think we're in
a generation that um,
But you know, with all the
technology and everything, it's
not the case. My mom was born on
the ground, she went to boarding
school. It's very ironic that my
dad went to private school, but,
um, those two coming together,
uh, and moving forward and
trying to say, well, it's just,
you know, the parent, we have a
parent right here that is
advocated and putting this for
who has the capacity.
Other parents, they don't have
the capacity to come forward.
They didn't know this was going
on. They didn't know that those
levels have to be there when we
are in IEP meetings, we had to
have um an advocate come in so
that the school would really
take our parents and
grandparents seriously about
what they were saying or what
how they needed help for their
Grandchild or student our child
because they were having their
own hard time too, especially at
the adolescent age when you talk
about attendance.
Having those role models within
their families who's one of the
core things we saw with the male
students was that they were
being overpowering uh once they
get to that age, to their, to
their mothers, to their
grandmothers because there was
no role model in the family. How
do we get those programs out
there? How is it addressed? It's
not easy to get a program out
into the rural area. Farmington
School District is one small
district. I mean, we saw some of
the problems with APS
Albuquerque Public Schools.
And to me it was because they
were so large. You talk about
trying to bring a parent or
guardian to come in and advocate
for their student, but yet you
have 30 students and you're
saying, oh well, we're doing
teacher, parent-teacher
conferences, you get 15 minutes
now. You have to sign up for
this time, and I understand
about them trying to do that
time say, well, this is when you
were allotted, but if they show
up late, if something else
happens, well, guess what, this
is the time we have allotted for
you. It's during the time you
have to be at work from 8 to 5
o'clock.
Because we're not going to go
beyond that in some sense,
because it's gonna cost our
school to pay the teachers more
to be there longer.
It's, it's a lot when you talk
about students moving, the
bullying, the discipline within
the schools. If it is not just,
you will see students leave to
another school and start all
over again, even with their IEPs
having to be evaluated over and
we didn't have a shot clock on
it. They would be sitting there
when they know they needed
services when they know they
needed to have this extra help
to perform, but yet they were
sitting in the classroom. The
school didn't know, it didn't
follow him. The records didn't
can't follow unless somebody
advocated for them, but if you
have a parent and something
happens and the grandparents
take over the students at, um,
their grandchild's education,
they don't know, they don't know
the history of the student to
move them forward and keep the
progress going to make it
better. And in some of those
cases, um, depending on the age,
it is very difficult, um,
because when we talk about
trauma, uh, in the luggage our
students carry with them to
these schools.
And we're fortunate with some of
the schools that and then some
of the parents, but the
population has grown too, it
has, we did not keep up with it,
just like the doctors, OK? We,
our population grew, that needs
more healthcare. We have more
people in the population that
need to go see a doctor, but we
were not turning out the
doctors. And I think that's one
of the things that happened with
education. We had more students
come in. Now our classes are
overloaded. We don't build them
to house our
have our classrooms where we
were supposed to be meeting that
criteria to have so many
students and we know the
evidence is there to keep this
many students and that's what a
teacher can handle, but what we
do, we have a waiver for them.
We make these exceptions to
allow them to conduct classes
with 30 students with no
substitutes. I had classes where
I had, I had two classes in my
classroom for a whole day
because someone had to.
call in the school refused to
have a substitute on call and
we're sitting there, how do you
teach 60 kids who there's no
desk for them, they're on the
floor, they're on the chairs,
and you're over there. Um, and
during your prep you're having
to go over to and be the
substitute for other teachers
that needed a break. You're
there all day. You don't even
get to go to lunch on your own.
You have to be with your
students during lunch.
And escort them and you are
responsible for their discipline
and knowing where they are, not.
The, the, the administration,
the technology was not there. We
want to say, well, we want to
see, well, this is a, it's not
about taking this away. It's
about how do you incorporate it
and teach them that this is a
tool. This has a unprecedented
amount of knowledge and I mean
they can look up anything on
here and learn how to do
something. I've learned many,
many, many things. I mean, I've
changed the brakes on my truck,
do my oil exchange, uh, Greece
and all of that from this, but
yet we
want to hinder it instead of say
embrace the education that can
come in the knowledge that is
here at your access, but if they
don't have internet, if we don't
have those conversations with
him if we don't implement it in
our curriculum through our
teaching, um, and adapt and be
flexible. We are stuck in the
past.
And when we want them to go to
work and have a career. We do
not have the workforce after
that because they did not learn
about the technology as we move
into robotics, drones, and to
space our students, you know,
how many astronauts have we
turned out here from New Mexico.
How many of those up there, have
we been able to, um, say this is
where they're from, this is how
they're, but we do on the
nation, there are some that are
there and we hold them high and
it's bigger, better.
So we know it can be done and
that's why I don't understand is
when we do not have that
conversation and that dialogue
to share some of this I've heard
over and over and over since
I've been in the legislature and
um we got to get past it and
move forward. I don't expect you
guys to solve it. I don't expect
us to solve it, but as a per
changing a person's behavior as
a teacher, as an administrator,
as a superintendent, even as a
school board member.
I, I think one of the hardest
things to change a human being's
behavior when we talk about
addiction and all of that that
is out there. So, it's a long
story, that's my little rant
after having er and not speak
all this time and go on her her
time there. I thought I figured
it was my turn. I do have
representative Royal Caballero
and Representative Thompson.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, and
thank you for your statement
because um I was going to
address those two things. One,
it's not an issue of taking away
the technology, but to, um, I
believe set the set the rules of
of standards or whatever it is
that we need to do because of
what you just said, we don't
want to go back in past. We
don't want to go back in time,
but we need to acknowledge that
because of the condition
that are um tribal families have
been living with little to no
access to broadband, little to
no access to basic necessities
such as just water, um, those
are all things that have set our
populations back and education
is not one of those areas that
we need to continue setting us
back on. We need to be advancing
forward and in this day and age,
I'm happy. We, I just, we just
uh gave the old two older.
grandchildren just passed on
their initial little laptops,
the 9 the 11 year old and the 9
year old passed on their laptops
to their cousins who are now 3
and 2.
And the very first lesson that
they're gonna learn, one of them
is gonna be 4 and go to school,
is how to appropriately use that
little learning laptop in his
class, believe it or not, in
preschool wherever he's going
right now, and there'll be rules
of, of how and when to, to use
those, but in fact, they're
using them already in the
classroom at that age. So thank
you for that. And the second
point I want to uh bring up is.
that
And it has to do with
Parents, and I, I've been
hearing it.
Um, now for 56 years.
I'm sorry to say it's been that
long. The blame.
The game has been placed on
families and parents, but I want
everyone to understand and to
remember.
That education is a core value.
A core value for our people.
For our populations for our
families, ask any parent at any
time, what's the number one
goal, Madam Chair? You ask them
what's the number one goal that
they have for their children.
And that is to attain the best
education that can be provided.
That's their number one goal.
The second one is so that they
then can move on and have the
career.
Or the job of their choice, but
mostly career of their choice
because anybody can get a job,
but a career is professional
development and it means
sustainability and it means a
good, uh, income, which means
they can stand on their own.
So you and and then we can just
ask them to prioritize
thereafter and it's housing, um,
there's all the, the basics but
education comes out over and
over again as the number one
core value.
So we cannot blame the parents.
We cannot blame the teachers. It
is and it will and it has to
take a holistic approach, um, as
has been stated.
And um so I have a few questions
just real quickly, but I wanted
to also say that the key
components of the action plan
are just that key components.
They're not the plant.
And if I were to begin with the
key components, I would start
with number 3, which is
transforming curriculum and
instructional approaches.
And uh why I would do that and I
would even change the word
transform and even changed the
word reform and say
revolutionize because it means
breaking down what hasn't worked
for generations and rebuilding
on what we know will work for
our present and future
generations. We know it already.
We have the capacity in our uh
we heard it in yesterday's
presentations alone.
In the in the um overview that
was given to us by the Dana uh
the Northwest New Mexico Teacher
education program that was
fantastic and their overview,
they talked about um providing
education, teacher education
based on innovative
multicultural bilingual teaching
strategies and methods for
diverse learners, and I asked
the question, Madam Chair, what
did, what, what does that mean?
What, what, how do they
incorporate um the this and.
Came back to reincorporate the
philosophy.
Of our Navajo belief system.
And based on 4 principles that
are embedded.
In the curriculum.
Embedded in the and aligned with
the standards.
That's so very important and
that's why I asked that because
that is revolutionizing our
educational system to make it
work based on successes that we
know.
That we already have the
capacity and I agree PED does
not have the capacity. If they
had the capacity, we wouldn't be
where we are today and we
wouldn't have been where we were
10 years ago and having to file
a lawsuit. The second point I
would, I would take on in the
component is the cultivating of
multicultural and multilingual,
multilingual education because
it addresses just this, the
overview of why that's
important. The 3rd I would
proceed with the strengthening
the capacity of the public.
Department. Why?
Because by they are charged.
This is a public institution. We
are a government. We are first
obligation is to the public in
all that we oversee our
oversight, our constitution
dictates, public education,
public transportation, public
utilities, public and go on and
on and on, that's our charge as
a legislature. Our charge is to
ensure that the public remains
in the.
the interests of the public in
all that we have the oversight
to, to, to be responsible for,
so I, I really
Feel important for us to
understand that it's gonna take
breaking down the systems that
haven't worked in order to
rebuild the systems, but we have
to also acknowledge and honor
that we have the capacity.
And PED hasn't had the capacity,
nor does it have the capacity
and so we have to give them that
capacity and if they don't have
it, we need to step up and
become the PET.
We really need to stand up and
become the PED.
Um,
so I'm, I'm concerned a little
bit with the the reporting and
thank you for it, but I'm, uh,
I'm questioning.
Um, if we know, I know you're
the legal and.
Component of all of this,
however, you all have all been
expert in terms of reviewing the
original judge's, uh, I mean,
the judge's original court order
and the subsequent one, but I'm
curious as to why, um, do, do
you know and maybe Miss Yazi
might know what the foundational
philosophy of Lano and Wested is
and how does it align with um
attaining what our goal is and
that's educational equity.
as we are seeking it in this.
court case.
Can someone answer that cause I
am mystified.
Um, I, I feel quite frankly that
it was an easy fix, an easy
response. Um, however,
You know, and doing my research,
I don't find where either one of
them have the capacity.
To align with what we're seeking
in the Yay Martinez lawsuit. Can
you answer that one? Thank you.
Um,
Madam Chair and Representative
Roel Caballero, thank you for
the question. Um, I think that's
a question that you could ask
PED uh tomorrow, um, but
certainly we advocate as the
Yazi um plaintiffs that this
plan comes from that equity lens
that we are promoting um
education that um is culturally
and linguistically relevant to
New Mexico diverse uh students
who are blessed with language
and culture and the diversity
around the state.
So, uh, I need to, you know,
make sure that this plan um
incorporates those core values
that you mentioned that are
important to our community, our
tribal and community leaders,
parents and families, so, um, I
would offer that you provide
that question. Thank you to
Pete.
I anticipated your response, and
I do have it down and we'll ask
that for sure because I'm um I'm
bothered by that, uh, and again,
in doing my research, I didn't.
See where I could hold them to
that accountability. So one
other question, uh, real quickly
is, can you indicated that
you're working with um
Transform.
And, and they are working in the
pulling together the
stakeholders.
And so those stakeholders will
include the students, families,
educators, tribal nations, uh,
all that we have identified. Is
that correct?
So, in doing that, are they will
um.
So the educators could
conceivably be or the models
could conceivably be what we're
this type of model that's been
under, OK, so I, I just want to
make sure that we're monitoring
that, um, because
Otherwise, we're gonna just
continue to replicate what
hasn't worked and, and to answer
the questions that the chair of
um
Chairman Munoz brought up about
the money being thrown out. It
has never been about the money
being thrown out, Madam Chair,
never. It's always been about
creating systemic and policy
changes that's going to create
an equitable education, period.
But I don't think people
understand what that means. And
so we're the ones that have to
incorporate that. That's why I
say I think we have to
revolutionize the system because
we're the ones that have to
define what that is. And, and
they, on the other hand,
We
And they have to accept the fact
that we know what that is and we
know how to self-determine in
that arena as well, um, and so
The other cautionary note I
would, I would say that we need
to monitor is that um somehow we
have to find the um
The way, the manner in which we
can best respond.
To why just throwing out the
money.
Is not the sole answer of why it
has been ineffective. And uh in
our response in our legal, I'm
seeking that in our legal
response because um that is for
sure gonna be one of the
pushbacks, um, by PED and by us
as a legislative body, um,
because we've seen it, I sit on
LESC. I sit on the House
Education and all I've heard
since 2014 or 2015 when this
case was unraveling was
Um, after that, after the first
initial, uh, what was it? 2018?
the initial port order was we've
thrown out.
$435 million. That's enough.
To address at risk, which I hate
the word at risk, but
We have to deal with it cause
it's in the language, but, um,
and, and now we're throwing out
over $2 billion to education and
nothing's working.
And
Somehow we have to find a way.
To have
All of us understand what
creating systemic and policy
change means.
What does that mean? And the
only way I can think of
demonstrating that is
Our response
Or October's um.
Is that the first date, um.
To establish what we know are
our goals.
Our objectives, our timelines,
are measurable outcomes.
Ours, not the current systems or
the current institutions.
All of those, but ours.
And that's why I'm real
concerned about who's sitting at
the table in terms of the
stakeholders because unless
we're the ones identifying that,
speaking it, writing it,
incorporating it in the
response, then
Then we're just gonna continue.
Spinning our wheels and our
children will continue to be um
We're, we'll have a.
Total disservice to our future
generations. And so that, those
are things that I would just
caution in terms of um
Of how from the legal standpoint
and one final um
Uh, question. Hold on, I think I
may have already addressed it.
So it goes back to um.
YPED is not the best to be able
to do this and why they
acknowledge they're not the best
because then they went to this
outside source and then this
outside source is not the best.
So, uh, that in my view right
now at this point, so it goes
back to we have to have a
complete change of mindset to
change the approach in order to
do the changes that are
necessary for systemic and
policy change and we do have an
obligation as legislators.
That should not be taken away
from us. We have an obligation
as legislators to uphold the
Constitution because we're sworn
to uphold it ourselves and we
must uphold it and ensure that
what we have in place in terms
of policy in terms of statutes,
in terms of institutions in
terms of systems are
constitutionally protected on
behalf of our students across
the board. So without that, and,
and I'm not gonna
give up my, my obligation as a
sworn legislator, but
Either as a as an educator, I've
been an educator, um, and all of
the hats that I've worn in all
these years. So I commend you, I
thank you, um, I think we just
need to continue pushing hard
and fast and not be not hold
back. This is not the day.
Nor is it the environment,
federal wise environment nor
state environment that we're
under if there's a time for us
to push back, stand strong.
Stand firm, stand committed.
It's now because if we're not
gonna see it, we're, I mean,
we're, we're not gonna do it,
um, unfortunately we're gonna
continue to be preyed upon.
Institutionalized and
Wherever there were
disappearing, um, and go back
and revert to, you know, my
father and grandfather and great
grandfather were uh products of
Indian schools, um, boarding
schools.
Uh, we're boarding schools in
this in this state, and so the
damage.
And the generational trauma that
they experienced.
I still experience an
unfortunately my children
experience because you have no.
way of breaking it, it's, it's,
it's so embedded.
And um,
I'm only hoping that it's broken
at my grandchildren's.
Generation. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Thank you, Representatives
Caballero. Representative
Thompson, then I have uh Senator
Charlie. Thank you, Madam Chair.
So, um, I will leave what you
all know I'm talking about till
the end, uh, but I, I spent
decades in schools. I'm not a
classroom teacher. I'm a
physical therapist working with
kids with disabilities, and I,
my home school in Albuquerque
public schools was close to
Carlisle and Montgomery, and if
you are familiar with
Albuquerque, all those
apartments and so we had an over
100.
0 % turnover rate at that school
annually. We had kids who would
come and go.
6 or 7 times in a school year
because they would be in an
apartment, they wouldn't be able
to meet the rent.
They'd get kicked out, they'd go
couch surf elsewhere, go to a
different school, gather some
more money, come back to an
apartment on Montgomery, so to
try and teach those kids, I mean
it was it it wasn't fair to
anybody, first and foremost, the
kids, so I think poverty, we
really have to talk about
poverty. People say, oh, you,
you, you, you know, you need to
show up for your kids.
Baseball game, if the choice is
I work 2 jobs and keep a roof
over our head and keep noodles
in my kids' tummies or I go to a
meeting, it's not really a
choice. We're not really giving
those families a choice. So
until we start paying people
enough to live and to be able to
be parents and not slaves to, I
mean, minimum wage hasn't been
raised in 40 years. I mean, it's
in New Mexico it has, but.
But you know, we're, we're
putting so much on the backs of
of people and rents have gone so
high and food is high and
transportation is high and, and
it's not just about the families
not having the parents
guardians, whoever not having
the time to invest in their
kids, it's all, it's also that
they don't have the money, they
can't take their kids to the
museum. They can't take their
kids on a trip to, to the rocket
camp in Florida. They can't buy
them.
The books, it, it, it's poverty
hits, hits everything and I'm
hoping that our investment in
early childhood will help with
this in that, I mean, I had a
nephew.
He was adopted. He had a baby
and I said, Josh.
Are you reading to your baby. He
said, she doesn't understand.
Why would I?
And it's like, oh my God, coming
from early childhood that broke
my heart, but there's so many
people who haven't had the um
Luxury of having parents, you
know, who had the time to raise
them and to teach them how to
be, they are always going to be
their kids first and best
teachers, and if we don't teach
the parents how to do that.
We're shooting ourselves in the
foot. Luckily we've invested,
it's taken us too long,
hopefully that will make a
change, um, but what I really
want to talk about a special
education, um, it's, it's been,
uh,
It's been broken. I got my first
job in special education 39
years ago and at that time I
thought this system is broken
and 39 years later, that system
is even more broken.
Um, I, I used to do something
called focus monitoring with, it
wasn't PED, it was the
Department of Education or
whatever it was before and we
would go and site visits to
schools that had high um.
rates of kids with IPs and what,
what school board members come
up to me and tell me is we got
money for special ed, they spent
it on a bus for the football
team.
They spent it on turf for they
spent it on band uniform and my
my point in saying this is that
when we give the money to the
school districts to the LEAs,
they can do whatever they want
with it.
That it, it's, and I have been
begging for a long time to have
special ed money set aside. It's
a separate pot. It's gotta be
used for the appropriate things,
not for the superintendent to go
to a conference in Hawaii with
the whole school board, not for
band uniforms. So the and
And I've, I've been on both
sides of the special ed table,
many more times as a, as a
professional, but many times as
a parent I have an adult son
with severe autism.
And I fought for him and I know
that I got things that other
families didn't get.
Because of what I know and who I
know and and this was before I
was a legislator, but they knew
I knew my rights. They knew that
I, but I would, I would hear to
me and to other parents.
If we do this for you, everyone
will want it.
So please don't tell anyone.
And that broke my heart.
For my kid
And for other people's kids
especially because special ed is
a whole, I mean, it's a foreign
language to most people and, and
many of my colleagues just are
like.
I mean, we have so much to deal
with, so, so I think special ed
really needs to be a focus, um,
families are afraid to complain
because the professionals at the
school hold your kid's future in
their hand, literally, even more
so than typical students, you
know, my son could have ended up
in, in prison, I mean he's, he,
he has, he's developmentally
delayed. He's intellectually
disabled. He's also half African
American, 6'7.
strong as a horse and has
intermittent explosive disorder.
So it.
They could have made, but
because of who I was, it was
easier for me and I'm saying
that shouldn't be the case, it
shouldn't be because of what you
know, who you know, how much
money you have or what basic
knowledge you have that your kid
gets, I mean, he didn't get
everything he needed, by far,
but he got much more of what he
needed than other kids that I
worked with when the parents
were didn't have the, the time
or the knowledge base, so I'm
just throwing it out.
as I do every time we talk, Yazi
Martinez.
Let's not forget our special ed
kids and that that is a really,
really tough nut to crack, but
it's, it's old and it's time to.
I mean, I'd say nuke the system
and start over cause it's not
working, but I haven't gotten
many people to jump on board
with that, so thank you Madam
Chair.
Uh, thank you, Representative.
Did you want to respond? No.
Oh, OK, Senator Charlie, and
then I believe I have
Representative Garcia, who do
you want it to be? So we got 2
more. Thank you, uh, Senator
Charlie.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, and
Wilhelmina, thank you for your
wisdom and your foresight.
have brought this forward.
Thank you for your courage.
And your fortitude to keep it
going.
Um, but especially thank you for
the love that you have.
For the people.
all of the little ones.
I, I deeply respect.
This fight
And I'm on your side. I'm on our
side, our community side.
Um, you know, when we talk
about, we, we had a whole
conversation yesterday about the
alcohol alleviation.
Acts.
We got to a point in the
conversation where we were
addressing structural
And societal racism.
And that is really where we need
to get to and
A public consciousness.
And in a in our role in the
legislature.
To have those same characters
that you've brought forward, and
I'm not saying we don't.
But to really reimagine what
these systems look like. It's
not just revolutionalizing, it's
decolonizing because when we
talked yesterday, we know the
things and when you're from
these communities, you know what
we need. We need access to our
language. We need access to our
cultural practices. We need
access to our elders and our
stories and our songs, and that
is how we make our communities
well. and I want to go back and
and talk about the disparity
between
How a Los Alamos.
It's gonna how how they have
those, those numbers and we want
to reward that system. It is not
going to work and that is deeply
unfair and unjust because Los
Alamos has job security. Los
Alamos has parks and
extracurricular activities for
their students. Los Alamos has
grocery stores.
We don't have those things in
Indian country and our rural
communities, and until we
address those.
We will never push this forward.
So when I talk about systemic
structural racism. We have to
get to the roots. We gotta get
further upstream.
Um
Because of those socioeconomic
disparities that we feel so
deeply. We live through them so
deeply. Um, and I, I just want
to remind us about the, the
presentation that we had before.
From 6 Directions.
ELA proficiency, 6% to 56.6%,
100% of seniors graduated and
applied to post-secondary
programs in 2025. They combine
academic success with a deeply
decolonial indigenous centered
model centering ancestral
knowledge.
Critical consciousness and
multiple epidemiologies along
high performance. That is the
way forward. It is by
remembering where we come from,
who we are and championing that
the entire way forward. Thank
you, Madam Chair and Vice.
I read that I come in, I
representative Garcia.
Uh, thank you, Chair, and, uh,
members of the legislative uh
committee here and thank you for
the presentation. It takes
people like yourself that really
cares about an issue.
To bring it forth and
To not let go of it and to
Find a solution or whatever we
are seeking that
That's the way it would work.
Otherwise, if we give up and
then a status quo and somebody's
making it status quo in front of
us, but we're not going to allow
it. So when you continue with
the work you're doing, you're
going to go very, very far.
I come from a background where
education uh was no longer in
our community.
We went back and asked um the
state, the public schools to
reopen the school for us. They
said, no, there's not enough
students to do that. The
buildings are condemned.
We went to the Navajo Nation,
they said, no, we can't help
you. We don't have any money. We
went to the Bureau of and.
Uh, affairs at the time and they
said no, we won't be able to
help you. We'll just have, we
just have a dorm that we built
for you and we won't be able to
build a school for you. So what
happened was the community got
together and said we're gonna do
it ourselves.
And they got the school board
together and uh they have a a
philosophy that they went on and
that was that. We want to
provide education for our
students because the situation
we're in is a totally despaired
it um
And they got the school board
together and uh they have a a
philosophy that they went on and
that was that. We want to
provide education for our
students because the situation
we're in is a totally despaired
it uh
situation everywhere we look, we
want our students not to be
involved in that. We want them
to be strong as a Navajo. We
want them to be strong when they
go out.
From this education that they'll
have education uh from both uh
the main society and our own
and, and for them if they go out
wherever they go, that they will
endeavor, and that was uh a
philosophy that was uh developed
and uh by our elders and the
school board members.
Three of them had no education
at all.
And uh only one had a high
school education, and another
one had an 8th grade education
coming out of Rehoboth. So based
on that, when you look at that
and you
You think that people that have
education are the only ones that
should be board members. No,
they were elders when they went
in and they made it happen. And
that philosophy, that vision,
that mission still stands today
after more than 50, 54 years.
And based on that, what happened
is that um you had to instill
that every year to the new
teachers, to the administrators,
to the students, and they follow
that and
And uh when we talk about
parents.
And hearing um Senator Mannoe
talking about.
We put millions of dollars to,
to uh public education
department.
And what is happening, he didn't
know what was happening with it.
Where is it being sent? What,
what, what is happening with
that.
Maybe it's time that we as
legislature began to say, OK,
we're going to put this money
into education, but this is
where it's gonna be spent where
you're gonna spend it this way
and that's where it's gonna go.
One of the, when we talk about
parent involvement under this
program or under the education
that uh where
My community has gone, is that
They have, uh, the school has
established.
A parent
Center, a parent lay on that was
open to all the parents, and
they have established a parent
committee every year.
And uh it's been very effective.
Uh, some years they were uh it
would go down, but then it would
come back up and what I've seen
is that when parents are
involved, that students do
succeed. I've seen a parrot that
had a very limited education,
working with their students and
the students make a national
magazine, but they wrote their
poems. So that's how effective
it is to work with the parents.
So one of the things that I
would like to see is the, the
public
school, wherever it is, I know
McKinley County has a number of
schools, uh, that, uh, McKinley
County overseas, they should be
having these um parent lay on.
Centers and uh teachers and it
brings the teachers and the um
And the uh parents together and
the students and it works, um,
one of you have to be creative
how you do that.
Uh,
we weren't getting a lot of
teachers that parent-teacher
conference, and when is the same
suite that it was, uh, students,
when you go home, tell your
parents they have to come here
and this, the, the classes that
have the most parent, you're
gonna have a pizza party.
Well, we've had to throw about
maybe 6 or 7 pizza party because
just about every parent came.
And 111 class at 110% because
they brought their grandparents
along with the parents, so.
I, that's gonna, that it's
slowly building up to that, but
it has to be a united front, and
it's really also on the
leadership. If you have a good
school board member that truly,
truly cares about the education
of the children, and they, uh,
advocate for that and they
stress that and they make sure
that the administrators are in
line with it and all that, then
you will be very effective. I've
seen a couple of.
where our administrators, our,
our school board members, uh,
did not have the capability to
promote that and we've seen a
lot of turnovers that had
happened and we put a stop to it
and said that, you know, we need
to put uh people that
understands uh what this whole
school is about and what this
community wanted and so slowly
that changed back around and
now, uh, the students are
performing and
Uh, it's under a
Community control type school,
so the uh the test scores and
all that has risen, the 1st,
2nd, and 3rd grade went above
the, the, the proficiency line.
I mean, in fact, when class went
above the national level, so
they were able to do that. Now
everybody wants to know how did
you do it, so I don't know how
they did that. I've been off the
board for over a year now. So,
um,
So I know there are effective
ways of working with, with the
parents without saying you're
the one that's to blame, you're
the one that's uh not doing a
lot of parents really do need
help, especially with today's
students, they don't want to go
to school, they want to do other
things.
We had a principal, no, we had a
superintendent there and the
parents came to her and said,
you know what, my child does not
want to go to school. He's still
sleeping, he's still in bed.
And so she says, well, let's go
to your house. I'll go with you.
She went over there, found the
child sleeping, uh, a young man
threw the covers off of him,
says, you know what, your class
is almost over. Let's go. You
need to go get to your next
class. You need to do that, go
wash up and get dressed and
let's go, and she was very firm
about it and, and uh he, he
started going to school and says
if you don't do this, I'm gonna
be here every morning.
to wake you up and take you to
school.
And that's the uh that's my plan
for you, but I guess he was
pretty much embarrassed that he
started coming to school on his
own. So those are the kind of
things that do happen and uh you
and when a parent comes to the
school, they, uh, the teachers,
especially the administrator
needs to listen to them and help
them find the resources that
they need. If we're throwing
money at the schools and at the
education, then the resources
should.
be there. Uh, we are operating
our school on only 6000 per
students every year. That's way
below what New Mexico offers
them, and we try to match that
and.
We, we failed to do it, but
we're very fortunate that
teacher wanted to stay and uh
work with them. The other one
was grow your own. We had
teachers from the community that
uh well students that went on to
school and came back and they're
teaching there, and that's their
home and they care about the
students, their own students,
and that makes it work, so
there's a lot of um
Alternatives that are out there,
but it has to come from the
community, and I'm just thinking
maybe gallop should be its own
district and the rest of the
county become their own
district, maybe that would work,
and you would have a different
set of scoop or to uh that truly
cares about the community, so
there's a lot of things that you
could do.
Uh, because if that's what the
parents want, then go with it.
It has to come from the
grassroots. What do they want?
Where do they want to go?
And I've seen where you, uh,
they have produced some very
fine outstanding young people,
and they're doing very well
professionally, but then what
about those that were at risk or
what are we doing with them?
What has happened, and, uh, you
have to encompass all of the
students in order to be
successful in whatever way you
can, so, uh, that's all I want
to share with you. Thank you and
keep going at it.
Thank you. And so one of the
things I want to with my new
members and some of our older
members that this our, our
presenters here and they have
the key components of the plan.
OK, some of what we're saying
here is not really something
they have the responsibility of
implementing. That's where Lano
and the West E,
so what you're kind of saying
too, it's probably gonna have to
be repeated because they are,
they came up with the key
components. This is their ask of
the the plan to, to address, um,
and you know we're trying to put
all this um other things into
context there, but are they
really the ones that need to
to hear the message. It's PED.
It's who we have control over or
we should have control over and
influence over and make sure
that these this strategic plan
come very familiar with it, that
that is the track they are on,
OK? Um, thank you for your
presentation. I know there was
not many questions directly for
you. Um, it was more of an
update of where you guys sit and
um thank you for the work you
do. I don't know if you have any
closing comments.
Thank you, Madam Chair and the
members of the committee on
behalf of the New Mexico Center
on Law and Poverty, we really
appreciate your leadership in
the education space, um, your
time and your commitment to not
just this case for educational
justice and equity, but your
commitment to New Mexico
students overall is commendable,
and I, we also wish you well.
Um, so thank you and if you have
any questions after this, we are
always open to coming to meet
with you on Zoom or in person.
and answer your questions. Thank
you.
Yeah
Um,
yeah, oh
in Chicago, he had a they also
uh the on and um
um keep a old um e naepejo
has aya.
I'd say, I'd say East Ai.
A on the.
Aroseen
are called in the area um yeah
umnoshihaanonteato um oh I see
yeah.
Uh, Madam Chair, members of the
committee, I just echoed
Melissa's gratitude for inviting
us here today and all you do for
our students and all of the
state and, um, thank you so much
for your time and we look
forward to speaking with y'all
shortly. Thank you. I, I think
we took more of your time than
you took of ours.
But thank you very much. We, um,
to those members that are here
on your per diem form the um I
think some of you probably put
Tohachi, somebody put Pine Hill,
we're in Pinedale, so make sure
you um decipher that on your uh
form so that our accounting
department doesn't have to
contact you to, uh,
To say where were, where were
you, or we didn't have a meeting
there.
We have an update on the Navajo
Gallup Water Supply Project. So
you have a presentation to your
members, and I know this has
been an ongoing project.
So as they move forward.
Um
We will have all 3,
Mr. Bart Demming, uh, Mayor
Bonnagui and city manager
Chaetti up at the, and they will
go through their presentation of
a see fit, um, you know, you can
all read but keep your, if you
have questions, keep them
concise as we are really pressed
for time and um you know, we
still have tomorrow too with PED
so make sure you're up to that
point.
So this is your short minute
break and um Mayor, thank you
for joining us, Mr. Demming and
uh Mr. Chapetis back there
having a conversation, but you
may begin your presentation, I
think, um, you have an idea with
the microphone, how to, so when
it's red and we try not to have
two mics on at the same time so
we don't get feedback on the
webcast and if it turns off, I
probably turned it off for you,
so thank you and you may begin
whenever you're ready.
Now we're on, OK. Thank you,
Chairman Pinto.
My name is Louis Bonagui, and I
am the mayor of the Fair City of
Gallup. Uh, I did bring with me,
uh, two gentlemen, basically, if
there's any questions that we
can answer them all for you, so
that's why I brought extra help.
Right next to me is, is, uh,
Frank Scipetti. He is our city
manager, and I also brought, uh,
uh, Mark Dipali, Mark Dipali is
the engineer that has been
involved with, uh, this project
probably almost to the from the
beginning.
Uh, before we get into it, I'd
like to give you a little bit of
history about myself.
Because
There is history, Muhammed.
I was elected to the city
council in 1988.
I left city council in 2003.
I was on city council in 1988
with Mayor Eddie Munoz.
Who is Senator Minosa's father.
But it was at this time,
basically, we realized that we
were in trouble in the need of
water. I'm sure you're all
familiar with Gallup. Gallup is
a high plane. We're a high
plains desert.
We don't have any rivers that
run anywhere near us.
So we, we, we have at that point
we had 16 wells. We've gone
through, I think, 45 wells in
the 100 years of of the the city
of Gallup. But our wells are
different than most wells. Our
wells are 3000 ft deep.
You don't just take a regular
water drilling well to drill
that use of an oil drilling well
to do that.
But the other thing about it is
that uh the water that we're
getting is mind water. It's not
replenishing itself.
So like I said, 1988, we
realized there was a problem, so
we actually had a study done.
And of course, realize that we
got to do something. Wells
aren't working, and that's when
we started looking at basically
uh the San Juan River.
The first task that was sent
basically to the, the uh
Northwest New Mexico Council of
Governments.
was to find uh resources and
support.
To get that, you know, get the
water for gallop.
Now this is 1990, you know, I
mean, you can imagine, this is
36 years ago.
Well, I am now the mayor of
Gallup. I became mayor of Gallup
in 2020.
And when I took office,
They told me that, well,
the pipeline will be in place by
the year 2024.
And I'm thinking, great, uh, you
know, during my term, this is
good, you know. But by the end
of 2020, they informed us it was
not going to be 2024. It's gonna
be closer to 2029 and then later
reports, it sounds like it might
be even later than that. So
that's our major concern. I
personally have made 5 trips to
Washington to, to, to meet with
our congressional people.
Representative Wanda Johnson
went with us one year for one
meeting for sure. I mean, that
was probably the most productive
meeting that we, we have all the
meetings I've been in
Washington.
But we, you know, back, in fact,
giving, giving some more history
in 2 1988, Peter McDonald was
chairman of the Navajo Nation.
I guess you way back. We don't
have chairmans anymore, we have
presidents.
But anyway
We did get the support of the
Navajo Nation probably around
1998.
And I think most of that
pressure came from Senator
Domenici and uh and Congressman
Bill Richardson and Binghamman.
They're the ones that put
pressure on the Navo nation.
The president of the Navajo
Nation at that time was Kelsey
Begay.
And he was very generous and he
gave us all the support that he
could, that, that we could get.
That's when we started getting
more and more pressure. They
said we need to get, make sure
that there are more people
involved in supporting this, so
they started a scoping project
and I think we basically worked
with 14 chapters all the way
down 491, all the way including
Fort Defiance, uh, Saint
Michael's, and of course
chapters past Gallup on the red
rock or Rock Springs. So there's
like 14 or 15 chapters involved
in it and also there was
The second part to that, which
was the uh Carter cutter, uh,
lateral, which is completed,
that's up towards, uh, Crown
Point.
So anyway, this is the pressure
that I have been putting on
there. In fact, uh, Mr. Demming
here, I have met with him
probably a number of times over
Zoom. This is the first time
I've seen him in person, you
know, which is really great.
Anyway, I, I've told him I don't
know how many times, you know, I
want to see it. I'm, I'm gonna
keep coming to Washington till I
do see the water.
Now, I'm more concerned, am I
going to live long enough to see
water.
So with that being said, I'd
like to again introduce
Frankiapetti, our, our city
manager, and let him go from
there. Thank you.
OK.
Frankpeti init
Frankpeti inita
Bale Italian boss's chin. I
wrotetahache Sage family from
Comaro.
Uh, Italian Dainnali uh petty
clan from.
Heat and mine just outside of
Gallup. My grandpa was born in a
coal mine.
So, uh, City of Gallup, uh,
banana uh city manager
initially.
So I am Frank Geppetti, uh, city
manager of Gallup, actually 4th
generation of Gallup, so I have
a passion for Gallup, as I said,
my grandpa was born in a coal
mining town just outside of
Gallup, um.
And and very passionate about
what Gallup is.
Um, Mr. Deming's going to tell
you about the schedule and where
we're at and how the great
things are doing and, and I'm
gonna be critical here, but I, I
do want to emphasize that I'm
not being critical of the Bureau
of Reclamation. They're, they're
doing a wonderful job. They're,
they're doing, you know, getting
the contracts in place with the
money that's been given to them
or ensuring the contractors are
doing quality work. They're,
they're getting the laterals in,
they're getting the pump
stations in they're, they're
breaking ground on the plant,
so, so, you know, if I'm
critical of anything on this
project today. I, I want it to
be known that it, it is not
towards uh the Bureau of
Reclamation.
It's more to how this.
The project has changed and how
it's affecting Gallup.
OK, so, so I, I did do have this
PowerPoint handout that I'm
giving to you today.
Um
You know, we contracted way back
2011.
For, uh, our portion, uh are
allocated cost was going to be
$57 million.
We've put in special taxes on
our water users to raise money,
so our
Taxpaying citizens in Gallup
have been paying a surcharge on
their bills every month since
2011.
Um, they're becoming very
critical of it because they've
been paying since 2011.
And haven't seen a drop of
water.
From the project, so they're
getting very critical of it. Um,
the way the federal law is
written, it says that we will
pay. Gallup will be responsible
for anywhere from 25% to 35%.
Of the project that is allocated
towards Gallup. There's some
parts of the project like the
cutter lateral has nothing to do
with gallop. We don't have to
pay for that.
So just what's allocated to get
the water to Gallup, distribute
to Gallup.
25 to 35% is the way the law is
written based on our ability to
pay. They're going to study.
Our finances and, and see how to
pay to date.
We've paid $58,619,0742.
OK, so we've paid more.
In what we originally contracted
for are ready to date.
What have we received?
It's got a beautiful pipe.
We've got some wonderful pipe
but nothing inside it.
2019.
Um
Just the change of of climate.
Politics, uh, green.
They decided to redesign the
system.
And extended the time when they
were able to take over the power
plant up off the San Juan and
and redesigned a pond, um.
Gallup was opposed to this.
One, it was going to extend the
time out. We weren't going to
get water.
2, it's going to add costs.
We're, we're already paying more
than what was gonna be there.
Well, we didn't have a seat at
the table to say no.
They said we're not part of the
water rights settlement.
So Gallup, you don't have a say
so.
But then
State of New Mexico the day they
received it.
The
Water
Interstate Stream Commission,
there we go.
The group that that controls
water in New Mexico the day they
got the new agreement.
Signed it, sent it in.
Yay
Federal government, yay.
Navo Nation, yay.
Gallop, Sam, don't do this.
Stop, please.
You're extending the time,
you're raising the costs.
We don't think we can afford it.
But we didn't have a say so.
Even though we have a contract.
Doesn't matter.
So with this we're looking at
right now our minimum cost, our
minimum cost to gallop, being
$136 million.
That's based on 25% ability to
pay.
We're right now at 35%.
If this keeps going, it could go
up to without any future designs
or delays, $176 million.
This is before we've even
negotiated how much is the water
going to cost us?
This is before we've even
negotiated how much are we going
to have to pay the Navo Tribal
Utilities Authority to transport
the water from the San Juan,
purify it, and get it to gallop.
This is before we've even
negotiated the cost to NTUA on
how much is it going to cost for
up uh maintenance of this plant.
So, so we're in a pickle.
We're in a pickle. We're, we're
looking at.
Possibly another $100 million.
The 3rd poorest county in the
United States.
The third poorest county in the
United States, and we now need
to raise $100 million more.
To get water.
Due to this extension, we're
having to drill wells.
Again, we're mining the water.
Our, our, we're, we're doing
great on conservation.
We, we've done away with lawns.
Um, we're, we're doing great on
low flush, uh, toilets, turf,
we've gone to all turf fields,
gotten rid of grass.
We're watering our golf course
with affluent water from the
sewer treatment plant.
So we're doing, we're doing a
great job of reducing, but to
keep up with the demand, we're
having to drill more wells. So
we've had 7s wells in process.
We've drilled 3 already. We're
outfitting them. We have 2 more
being drilled and we have 2 more
planned.
We're looking at $6 million per
well.
To get the water produced.
The wells are so deep.
The cost of steel.
It, it's scary, it's taking us
two years just to get them
online because to order the
electrical switches.
You buy it today, give them the
money today, they'll start
producing it. You'll get it in 2
years.
It is, it is raising the cost of
what's happening. We can get
somebody in New Mexico recruited
to do economics to start
manufacturing switch gears and
such.
It'd be a great business for
somebody in Gallup, I mean for
anywhere in New Mexico.
But once we do get the water,
we're gonna be blending that
water, surface water from the
San Juan River.
With
Groundwater from our wells.
Groundwater has different
minerals and such. The surface
water doesn't, so we have to
blend that water together.
Well, in doing so, I have to do
away with all my cast iron pipe
in the city of Gallup. I've got
over 20 miles still left.
We're way behind on replacing it
because
We're spending our money
drilling wells.
These cast iron pipes, some of
them look like Swiss cheese.
We're being reactionary.
We're replacing what we can when
we can, when they break.
And is quite often.
We're paying damages to flooded
basements.
We're paying for the water that
we're losing running down the
real Perco.
Um, it, it's, it's, it's very
scary.
But we're gonna have to do it.
So I've talked about the, the
water we have to thank the
Hickorya tribe. They've been
being very patient with us. We
contracted with them for
A lot of water, a lot of acre
feet of water that they could be
selling to somebody else right
now.
But we're locked in with them
and we're paying them each year
just to hold the water for us.
So they're being patient. They
could be making a lot of money
right now selling their water
instead they're making a little
bit just holding it for us when
we can use it, so we have to
thank our, our brothers and
sisters to the north, the ya for
just holding the water rights
for us.
Because without the water
rights, we'd have a good pipe
and then you couldn't buy water
to send to us.
OK
And then on the other note, I'd
like to talk about safety
concerns. I'm not just city
manager, I'm also a firefighter.
I volunteer with McKinley
County.
And I've brought up many times.
We need water suppression
systems.
In the county on the Navajo
reservation.
We report to a fire 1520 miles
out of Gallup.
We're bringing water with us.
When we run out of water,
We're driving 20 miles back to
Gallup to fill up.
Fire doesn't wait for water.
We're losing houses. We're
losing other structures.
Because there's no water
suppression out there, and I'm
gonna use the Oak Ridge fire as
an example right now.
My daughter was one of the first
firefighters. She's with the
Navajo Scouts.
She was on that fire when it was
10 acres.
And they were mobilizing
personnel.
Over $9 million later.
Of firefighting
personnel, equipment,
helicopters.
And why?
They struggled with water.
Galopad 4 Sky crane helicopters
at our airport. We had a Chinook
helicopter at our airport ready
to haul water.
They would fly out there, dump
water.
They'd go to Gennado Lake.
It's only 18 inches deep right
now.
Their strainers are 18 inches
deep just to suck water into the
helicopter, so they're on the
bottom of the lake sucking
water, uh, sucking mud and sand
into their pumps.
They went to Red Lake north of
Navajo. Same thing by the time
they broke through the weeds,
they're on the bottom.
The recourse was we got some
ponds right in here, Saint
Michael's Fort Defiance, so they
start a hauling water from those
ponds.
After dumping it, they realized
it was cesspools.
They had to land their
helicopters and disinfect. What
about the firefighters that were
getting sewer water dumped on
them.
Up there fighting the fire.
So we started putting water for
him at our airport.
But it's not cost effective.
Too far to fly from Gallup to
that ridge.
So they would fill up with fuel,
fill up with water, and go dump
it, but then scavenge for water
out there.
$9 million.
Not counting the natural
resources the Navajo Nation
lost.
Lot of lumber.
A lot of animals, structures.
Fencing
They need water, and I'm told
we're not gonna put fire plugs
anywhere around there because
people might steal the water.
Are they going to steal $9
million worth of water?
No.
So I'm, I'm hoping we can get
some voices from Santa Fe
talking.
With the NTUA, the Navajo
Nation, McKinley County, saying
put some fire suppression in.
We're fighting fires like I
said, a lot of times we're going
to save other structures while
we watch the original one burn.
We're just trying to prevent the
fire from spreading because we
don't have enough water to do
both.
And that's upsetting to those
people. You're here spraying
water on this propane tank in
this house over here. This one
mine's burning.
Sorry
We can fight this one, but then
we're going to lose those two.
They don't understand.
It was hard for me to understand
the first time I went.
Chief, Chief.
The fires over here.
Yeah, but look, look at the, the
paint on the propane tank
starting to blister.
If it blows up, we lose the next
two houses. We lose the whole
trailer park.
So I, I just wanted to bring
that, that's not part of the
Gallup's problem.
But it is part of
Our brothers and sisters outside
of Gallup's problem.
And, and
Being, being
Uh, superintendent on, on the
Navajo reservation for 7 years
before this, you know, those are
my kids. Those are my families
that were losing some of their
houses and, and it scares me.
So what, where does Gallup go?
Here's the question. Here's the
question. We are trying to get a
cost cap of $76 million.
Cap our total expense at 76
million we can afford that.
We'll be happy to pay more than
the 57.
There's presidents precedent set
with the animus La Plata
Project.
Where they were building water
for the San Juan Valley up
there.
Where they were putting in a
pump station off the animus to
have water for when their
systems got low.
And there was a huge cost
overrun.
So they changed the bill that
says
The
The Department of Interior, the
Secretary of Interior could
forgive any amount of money over
the original agreement.
We would love to see that
because in our original
agreement was 57 million.
We're asking Congress to put a
cost cap in the bill right now
instead of saying 25 to 35%
Gallup will pay $76 million.
Unfortunately it did not make
the house appropriations bill
yesterday in the waters and
natural resources subcommittee.
So we're praying it starts on
the Senate side now.
So again, we're out trying to
get our 76 million. So what else
can we do?
Do we sue?
For breach of contract?
We signed a contract $57 million
and water last December.
Do we sue the federal
government?
And I'm going to hate to say
this, don't throw stuff at me.
When we sue the federal
government, do we also sue the
state of New Mexico?
They negotiated the change in
our contract.
That Gallup has to live with.
That contract was with Gallup.
Not New Mexico.
But they signed it saying, OK,
Gallup will pay.
New Mexico got out cheap $50
million to settle the Navajo
Nation water rights settlement.
New Mexico got off cheap.
50 million.
Gallup is paying already $57
million. 58.
So do we go legal? Do we go
nuclear? That's my nuclear
option.
We go nuclear and say, hey,
we're done.
Give us our money back
We're out of the project.
Then how are they going to
finish the project?
Somebody said, what are you
gonna do for water after that?
Well, when they finished the
project, I'll buy my water from
NTUA.
It'll cost a little bit more,
but it's not going to cost $170
million more.
So we hate to do that. They
don't give us our money back, we
now own the pipe.
So do you want to send water to
Yayambato?
Fine Dale.
Red Rock chapter, Redd Springs.
Mannuitto Lupton, you gotta go
through Gallup's pipes now.
Maybe we can raise money then to
buy water.
But we don't want to do that to
our brothers and sisters of our
surrounding communities.
And then we have the
unthinkable.
Do we go ahead and try to pay
the $177 million.
And to do that
That means Gallup is not getting
any capital improvements.
In the near future.
Probab greater than 10 years.
Forget building roads.
Forget upgrading sewer treatment
plants for get parks.
Or do we pay for those things
and for
Go default on our bill to where
we have to be.
Filing bankruptcy.
The Federal government forces
Gallup, New Mexico to declare
bankruptcy. The great headlines.
So this is what we're here for
you today to think about how
Gallup is.
Just trying to pay for this. We
appreciate it.
We appreciate the water coming.
It is our future.
We just annexed almost 5000
acres.
For an industrial park.
We're applying for the trade
port bill. Thank you all that
voted yes on House Bill 19.
last year
We're in the process of forming
our trade port.
We are talking in in the
industry coming in right now,
we'll only sell you affluent
water.
We're not gonna sell you our
drinking water.
Until we can get the Navajo
Gallup water pipeline.
Once we do, we'll have enough
water.
To feed fresh water to the
industry.
To see gallup grow even bigger.
So, so we're excited about it
and as I said we appreciate DOI
keeping everything going.
We are on our last lateral that
gallop has to put in.
Just went out to bed.
January. January we'll be going
out to bid on the last lateral.
The rest of the infrastructure
Gallup has, we're ready.
So we're gonna let Mr. Deming
give you the better news of
where we're at on the project.
I'm the downer.
He'll, he'll get, he'll, he'll
get everybody clapping,
but, but thank you all for
listening Eliqua.
I don't think we have any Zunis
here, but Aliqua.
Uh, I don't know any other
languages, sorry, folks.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, uh, we really
appreciate the opportunity for
the bear reclamation and, and
our project participants, uh,
the City Gallup here today to,
to be able to, to update you on
the status and Avo Gal water
supply project. Did you heard
from, from Mayor Bonnaguti and,
and Frank Geppetti. Gallup is
all in, uh, there, everyone has
huge stakes in this project and
uh uh we're so close to getting
there, but there's so many
challenges that still remain,
uh, including
This project being affordable,
especially for the city of
Gallup, uh, this, this is the
Navo nation's, uh, water rights
settlement.
Naval Gallop is basically the
cornerstone of that navigation
water rights settlement. So the
Navajo Nation's costs are
forgiven.
Gallup has a cost share, Hickory
Apache Nation has a cost share.
Um, so this, this project was
intended primarily for the
navigation, but, uh, uh, Gallup
is a huge partner in this, is
they've talked about, uh,
Gallup, uh, uh, conveys water
from Navo Gallup through the
Gallup Regional system that
they've nearly completed and
then it goes to other uh Navajo
communities that surround Gallup
and Gallup's been supplying
water to them for years, so
it's, it's a big collaboration,
it's a big partnership and uh
and it's so important.
that we completed. We also need
to find ways to help the city
gallop.
Um
I've got quite a bit here in my
slides, but due, due to the
time, I want to be sensitive to,
to everyone, uh, uh, because we
have been running along here
this afternoon. Um, I turn your
attention to the map here in the
slides that uh that.
The color coded one that uh it's
got the blue and the red,
yellow, green on it. It's about
6 pages in.
And I, I want to update you on,
uh, on project status. Uh, so
the beer reclamation has overall
responsibility uh for design and
construction, but, uh, we're
working with the City Gap, we're
working with the Nava Nation,
we're working with Indian Health
Service. We're working with the
Western Area Power Authority.
It's, it's basically an all
hands on deck approach because
this project is so massive, uh,
the latest estimates 2.2
billion. It takes the resources
of all these parties working
together to be able to uh to
complete it.
Now we've completed uh and if
you look on the right side of,
of that map, the cutter lateral
along US Highway 550. Uh, it's
all in green. We've completed
that portion. Uh, water's been,
uh, being delivered since, uh,
uh, late 2020, uh, there's uh
6200 people and 8 Navajo
chapters that have been getting
water from this project.
Um, that, that portion of the
project's been a success. That
was the easier portion of the
project to build, uh, it's
shorter, it's about 100 miles
long. It's smaller. It's a, it's
uh equivalent of a 24 inch
diameter pipe.
It's got the capacity to serve
50,000 people, and right now
it's serving 6200 people, so
it's, it's got plenty of
capacity.
Um, that, that part of the
project's been a huge success.
The Hickory Apache Nation
started taking water, uh, just
last uh fall there at TP
Junction, so.
We're essentially done there.
Now all the focus has been on
the San Juan lateral and, and
we're, we're making significant
success there. We're, uh, we're
more than 70 70% complete on
Navo Galpo. Overall,
Uh, which equates to about just
over 60% complete on the San
Juan lateral.
Uh, we've got essentially from
uh the San Juan Loudwater
treatment plant up there at the
top where the red meets the
yellow on the map. That's where
the water treatment plant is
being built, we broke ground on
that in April.
Um, and how to have a blessing
ceremony, uh, uh, in April,
uh Cup joined us for that.
Um
From there all the way down
through the Gallup Regional
system is essentially done.
We're, we're, we're tying up
loose ends, but, uh, but
essentially the pumping plants,
the pipeline, is all in the
ground. Uh, and, and you could
see on there the dates of when
some of the latest projects have
been completed. Uh, so I won't,
I won't go into all those
details.
Now the focus is turning to
what's still in yellow on there,
um, that's what's uh still in
design.
Uh, that's where, uh, the work.
The main work still remains and
where the, the risks still.
Um
Still, uh, um, apply to the
project that, uh, um, because we
have not did that work out for
construction so that the cost
risk there is something we're
we're closely uh managing and
closely working on to, uh to
ensure that uh we minimize the
cost this project as much as we
can. We had an industry day
where we invited contractors
from all over the region, from
Utah, Arizona.
New Mexico, Colorado, we had
folks from California, Texas
there as well. In April to drum
up interest in this, uh, the
remaining work on this project.
We got 10 remaining contracts
left, so there's still a lot of
construction to go. You could
see we've, we've, uh, we started
in 2012 on that San Juan
lateral, that west lateral and
uh it's taken us uh 13 years.
To get that main part done.
We've still got, uh, uh,
Roughly 3.5 years left.
Uh, to complete that, the rest
of what's in the yellow there
because we want to be complete
and we're, we're working to be
complete by the end of 2028,
and, uh, and delivering water,
uh, beginning to deliver water
to Navo communities in the city
of Gallup in early 2029.
Now, there, as I mentioned,
there's a lot of challenges
there, um, we, we, uh, we need a
lot of interest in this project,
uh, we need a lot of bidders so
that we get good cost
competition and uh and so we're
working hard to uh to get the
word out when we've got projects
out to bid.
Uh, but we do face, uh, we do
face a lot of challenges, uh, so
there's some, some photos in
there showing progress. You can,
you can flip through that and
see some of the work that's been
done.
But I wanted to redirect your
attention.
Uh, first to this project
details map.
That uh is focused on that, uh,
That area north of the water
treatment plant, the water
treatment plants at the bottom
there.
And that shows you all the
different uh uh portions of the
project that are, that are still
to be built.
Uh, and that that's where I said
that Kara still lies, um, but
Because that's all that remains,
we've also significantly reduced
the, the, the risk that we are
gonna exceed our latest
estimate, uh, and our latest
estimate is an FYI 24s and then
we are.
Uh, very close to finishing an
FY 25 estimate and we'll be
releasing that here within the
next month. Um,
We have had some, some, uh,
benefits from the, the San Juan
Loud water treatment plant, for
instance, came in under budget
and so that's been a benefit to
the project, but, um, but we've
also
We're concerned about the amount
of work here and, and, uh, the,
that's got to take place for the
next 3.5 years and all the
contractors and all the labor.
That needs to be brought in to
get this work done, so there's
still, there's still cost risks
there.
So that, that's one of our
challenges.
Uh, the next map on there, uh,
details all the community
connections.
And, uh, uh, these are all the
Navajo community connections.
In our authorization, the beer
reclamation is charged with
building the main transwater.
Transmission portion of the
water system.
The distribution systems we
don't have authority for and
the, and the connections from
the transmission system in those
communities, we don't have
authority for, so we're working
closely with the Nava Nation.
They're gonna be, uh, they,
they've got some funding from
the state.
Uh, we're, um,
There's also money in the Naval
Gal amendments that could help
them, but it's important that
each one of these community
connections get built so that
when
We're ready at the end of 2028
to begin delivering water that,
uh, uh, we're able to deliver
water to each one of these
communities along with the city
of Gal, so that is an important
critical aspect of this project
and uh there's still additional
funding the, the nomination does
have some funding of their own,
but
But, uh, they, they still have
some challenges with uh with
getting all the funding
necessary for this work.
Um, and it, uh, in the future
next time we're asked to, to
address this committee would be
great to have the nomination.
Join us, they're, they're, uh.
One of the key partners uh that
makes all of this work.
So, uh, the next slide in there
is the Navoga funding status.
Uh, we've been, we've been very
fortunate. Congress is very
supportive of this project. We
had our ceiling, uh, which was
1.5 billion. That was where that
comes from is that is the
inflation indexed amount from uh
2007 brought up to uh
$20.24 dollars.
We had our ceiling last year
and, and Congress and the
Department of Interior made sure
that we had, we met.
Uh, we had all the funding
necessary to uh to get to that
point, but
One of the, one of the biggest
uh challenges we face and the
reason why there is pending
legislation in Congress is, uh,
that ceiling is short of what
the actual estimate is, so, uh,
in, in FY 24, that was 1.5
billion, our, our estimate was
2.2 billion when you factor in,
uh, the prepayment we received
from City Gallup, uh, the state,
Hickory Apache nation, we're
looking at roughly a $600
million funding gap.
So we need congressional help to
finish this project. We, we
undertook a value planning uh
study.
Several years ago, about 5 years
ago.
Um, when much of this work still
hadn't been put in the ground
yet to see was there
Was there the ability to somehow
resize this project to uh uh
make it work within that, that
ceiling so that uh we could keep
the cost down. Unfortunately,
the answer was no, not without
asking the nation to um live
with much less water than what
they agreed to in their water
rights settlement and, and of
course, uh, that was a hard
fought settlement.
The nation wasn't going to do
that, so the navigation, the
city of Gallup.
The Hickory Apache Nation and
the state made the decision,
let's go back to Congress. Let's
find the additional money. Let's
get this project done as it was
uh authorized back in 2009 by
Congress.
So uh this, this fiscal year.
Congress, uh, authorized to have
our ceiling raised, uh, an
additional 145 million, and
that's thanks to the New Mexico
delegation, uh, uh, Senator
Lujan, um,
Um
Uh, Congresswoman Ledger
Fernandez, Senator Heinrich went
to bat for this project and made
certain that we had additional
funding that kept us on
schedule.
Um, so we're, we're now back to
a, to an increased 1.64 billion
ceiling still short of that $2.2
billion estimate and uh and like
I said, we're, we're gonna be
updating that estimate, so, um,
We anticipate that funding gap.
Well, we'll, we'll stay around
600 million, but uh, but, uh,
we're not gonna see a decrease,
so there's still a challenge
there.
So, uh, the next slide on there,
the Navo Gal remaining
challenges, um.
We've still got the additional
funding needs. Congress can, can
go ahead and appropriate funds
for the project, and that raises
our ceiling. They did that here
in this last year, uh, we're
gonna need him to do it again in
FY 26. Reclamation can't lobby
Congress as an executive branch
agency. We can't lobby Congress
to do that, but, uh, but our
project partners can.
Uh, that's needed to keep this,
this project on track. We're
getting to the peak construction
period that uh
That area that I, that I
mentioned, the raw water supply
for the uh for the project.
We're getting the peak
construction period and so what
we've got, uh, over 250 million
right now in funding available
to go towards new construction
projects.
We've got well in excess of that
in uh in those 10 contracts, the
value that we've estimated in
those, so we need additional
money next year to keep this
project on track and to meet
our, our obligations.
With uh with fulfilling this
project, uh,
Uh, by the end of 2029.
So managing the cost of that
upcoming construction I
mentioned, that is, that is a
big challenge.
Helping out the city with their
uh making this project
affordable, uh, is another key
challenge. Uh, we're working
right now with the city. We're
providing an update to their
ability to pay study. Now, this,
this is not gonna bring the
benefits that uh the cost cap in
the, the amendments would that
76 million um is, is a huge
reduction from what
Frank mentioned what the city um
is looking at having to pay.
But
Until that gets passed by
Congress, we've, we've got to
look for other ways to help. So
we're working on that ability to
pay study, um, working with the
city.
Taking a re-look. This was
originally done in 2011 when the
beer reclamation and the city
signed the contract.
Uh
There's a lot that's changed in
that time, Gallup has, uh,
obviously it's paid a lot into
this project, has a lot of
capital improvements.
Um, we're hopeful that, uh, when
that's reanalyzed, uh, it will
lower the Gallup, uh, repayment
uh amount, but uh until we get
through that process, uh, we
don't know.
And then as I mentioned, uh, uh,
the community connections are
another key aspect, uh, we're
funding an additional help is
needed. And then lastly, uh, I
don't have to tell you all this,
but, uh, um.
The beer reclamation Department
of Interior.
Due to the, the voluntary losses
we've had during, during this
administration and, and with
Doge, uh, we're challenged with
the resource we've got,
fortunately, this is one of the
highest priority projects for
the Department of Interior and
the Bureau of Reclamation. Navo
Gal is getting the resources we
need, but uh.
But we are right at that limit
we're uh um.
If we have additional losses,
um, it is gonna impact our
ability to deliver, so that,
that is another challenge. you
wanna, wanna make you aware.
So the, the next couple of
pages, uh, just go over the
details or what in the Navo Gap
Amendments Act, uh, that
appropriation ceiling raised.
Now that, that doesn't actually,
uh, that gives us the ability to
get money. It doesn't actually
give us the money, so there
needs to be a separate act by
Congress, such as the
Appropriations bill that
Frank mentioned that would give
us the money, but we need, we
need both.
Uh, uh, $250 million trust fund
for the Nava Nation to uh
Uh, for their allicable.
Uh, Operation maintenance and
replacement costs to make this
affordable for them to operate
this, this is gonna be, when
we're all said and done, this is
gonna cost $20 million to
operate each year. So, um,
obviously the Navajo Nation
customers, uh, don't have the
ability to pay that.
So this trust fund is uh is
important for the Navo nation.
Uh, the Hickory Apache nation
also has a trust fund in that
legislation, uh, for up to 2
million, that is subject to an
ability to pay analysis.
Uh, of course, the Gallup cap is
obviously critical to uh to
making this affordable. There is
7 million in there for
Uh, for BIA to, to administer
for the conjunctive groundwater
program that will allow the
navigation, uh, to assist the
city as well as to uh do some
additional wells, reclamation
has, uh, given the city uh just
under 17 million of WaterSmart
grants to assist with
groundwater well development in
the last 4 years, so.
We're doing what we can, but uh,
but, uh, it's Frank and, and the
mayor said, uh, it's, it's not
enough right now. There's,
there's too much.
At stake and, and the costs are
too high.
The na nation wants to extend
service to the Rio San Jose
Basin, so Mariona Lake, uh, the
Smith Lake.
Uh, Thoreau Baca Pruitt
chapters.
Um, and the Upton, Arizona.
There's no additional money in
there to do that. They have that
in a separate settlement.
There's a language in there
would extend the construction
completion deadline to uh 2020
to the end of 2029. That has
already been done as, as Frank
mentioned, uh, that was done by
the settlement parties that was
allowed under current law.
And as he mentioned, uh, Gallup
was.
Had a voice but not, not a
decision in that final, uh,
agreement to, uh, to extend the
project. Now that they're, the
reason why, obviously this has
huge impacts on Gallup.
But the reason why uh the state
in the United States and
nowation
decided to extend that, uh, the
deadline was so that the San
Juan generating station
acquisition, uh, could be made,
uh, reclamation.
Uh, did it, did an extensive
study over a couple of years.
Found that it was in the best
interests of uh of the parties.
To incorporate those facilities
in the project, the, the main
part, Frank Gwietta Reservoir
that we, uh, that we named and
commemorated back in 2023. That
gives the project the ability to
store water that was not going
to be there with uh how the
project was originally
authorized. We were gonna have
a, an intake right off the river
and that was gonna pump up to
the water treatment plant and
that that put the project at
risk and so this, the ability to
incorporate that uh sand
generates.
really lowers the operational
risk, there's some significant
benefits for the navigation, the
city gallup, they come with uh
Comes with a cost obviously, but
uh but uh it should be much
easier and lower risk to
maintain this project because
we've got 2700 acre feet of
storage.
That allows when there's a
monsoon rain or if there's, God
forbid, another Gold King mine
spill. There's the ability to
not take water into that
reservoir and into the treatment
system and pump clean water.
Uh, to the water treatment
plant, so that's.
That was part of it, uh, the
other part was.
The system we were gonna have to
build to pull sediment out of
the water, out of the San Juan
River sediment laden rivers as
you, as you know.
Uh, it was going to be very
expensive and uh believe it or
not, the uh incorporating San
Juanerry station is cheaper than
uh
Than what we were looking at for
a cost for for building an
intake directly off the river.
In terms of that capital cost.
Now, obviously, because we've
had to extend it, there's
additional costs that the factor
in there.
But uh that that's the reason
why that decision was made.
Gallup was consulted.
Uh, they told us they, they
didn't agree, um.
The, the rest of parties decided
it wasn't in the best interest
of the project and move forward.
Um, that, that's done, obviously
we're, we're past that now. Now
we've got to work with each
other to
To find ways to help each other.
Uh, there's also just a couple
other amendments in there. Uh,
one that would allow the
navigation to store, treat, and
convey, uh, a small amount, but
2000 acre feet of uh of their
Navajo, Utah settlement water
through the Naval Galp water
supply project, uh, through the
Sweetwater pipeline, they get
that water to, uh, to Southeast
Utah, so there's a benefit to a
now a nation there.
And then there's a provision in
there, the Bureau reclamation
and our contractors have been uh
Uh, double taxed, and this has
affected the overall cost of
project.
This affects Gallup's ultimate
repayment obligation, so they've
got a big stake in this. We've
been double taxed, uh,
Um, on the San Juan lateral, uh,
on navigation land uh by the
state and the nation, and so
the, the, this provision would
eliminate that ability for
either naviation or the state to
tax on each other's lands, so
that that's an important
provision.
I like, I'd like to mention
that's a big issue with your.
Sorry, it's driving up the costs
of building schools in this area
also, when you build a school,
On, on Navajo Nation land for
the public schools.
You pay Navo Nation tax, you pay
state tax.
And then the state of New Mexico
says well the first tax isn't an
operational expense for the
state, so we're not gonna give
you that money.
So then you build smaller
schools in this area because you
can't afford the additional tax.
There's that inequity piece that
the first group was talking
about.
Of course, Frank, no, no, no
problem.
So just in closing, I want to
emphasize that the beer
reclamation, the Department of
Interior, our secretary are
committed to completing this
project and, and completing the
United States obligations in the
navigal water supply project and
then the Naviation water rights
settlement on the San Juan
River. We've got a lot of work
to do. We need additional help
from Congress to get there, but
uh
This is an important project is,
uh, as I noted, we've, we've got
the, the resources committed and
uh and you have my promise that
we're gonna continue to work
hard to uh to meet our
obligations.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
I have representative Hernandez.
Thank you,
thank you, Madam Chair. Um,
presenters, uh, my question is,
is towards uh
We reclamation is a Pat Page
still involved in this.
I'm sure.
He's retired now. I'm, I'm, I
took his, uh, his position and I
just realized I forgot to
introduce myself.
My name is Bart Demming. I'm
the, uh, construction engineer
for the beer reclamation, Four
Corners construction Office. I'm
also wearing two hats uh right
now because of, uh, resource
issues I mentioned. I'm, I'm the
acting area manager for the
Western Colorado area office as
well, but yeah, Pat was my
mentor and uh and I learned a
great deal from him.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um, I
was, I was a club seat president
at Gudi Aha to uh chapter when
uh Pat Page would be, uh, uh,
helping with the, with the
education outreach on this
project back in 2010, uh, 1
thing that is missing out of
this, um, that I got verified
through uh
NTUA is that um my, my community
gotty aha uh substation is gonna
be powering the uh
The pumps is, is, is, is this
correct?
That is correct.
And that requires the will that
require new, new transmission
lines through the Gari Aha Tokon
community, Madam Chair.
Yes, uh, part of this project is
building the ele electrical
transmission system. Uh, the
beer reclamation has an internet
agency agreement with Western
Area Power Authority, and in
turn, they have a contract with
uh NTA to build 100 kilovolt
electrical transmission line.
Actually, construction is
starting this summer on, uh,
Highway 491, you'll start seeing
the the large transmission poles
go up, but that also includes
upgrades, uh, to the Carrier,
uh, uh, substation in
Also theanazat substation.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and um
And uh Mr. uh,
Deming, uh, you know, I, I, I
did see that the, the picture or
of, of the of the reach 3, I, I,
I would like to get more
information on the Shiprock
connection, uh, to get, to just
have a more better
understanding, uh, Shiprock is
the largest community on the
Navajo Nation, um, a lot of, uh,
my relatives in, in a,
uh, don't know that that.
There's gonna be a transmission
line that's gonna cut in front
of our front yard. And so I, I,
I know that because I, when I
talk to my chapter president,
Madam Chair, uh, he, he's aware
of it, but there's just, uh, uh,
again, you know, I don't know if
it's NTA that's doing outreach
or is it Bureau of Reclamation,
but I remember Pat Page was
really consistent with that. And
so, uh, I just want to flag
that, you know, if, if, if that
construction work is going to
start.
I, I, you know, I, I would like
you guys to come back and come
to the chapter meeting at Gudi
Aha took on chapter because
we're gonna be supplying the
power, electricity for this huge
project and uh I are Madam
Chair, um, Mr. Deming, have you
guys secured the right away for
this transmission line?
So NTUA is is responsible for
building that and uh and
actually we're meeting with
their uh electrical uh manager
tomorrow, so I will relay that,
uh, that request, uh, NTA is
also responsible for obtaining
all the right of way for that
uh.
For all that infrastructure.
NTA will own the power line
when, when it's complete.
Thank you, Madam Chair, that,
that concludes my questions.
Thank you, Representative
Hernandez. Representative
Johnson.
Thank you, Madam Chair,
committee members, and thank
you, Mayor Bongui and gentlemen
for your presentation. I just
have a question on, uh, it's, I
know it's a basic question on
your map with the color codes
when you have operational
completed under construction and
in design. Can you be more
specific and particularly for um
reach 10.1 through 10.3.1.
Um, what exactly entails.
Operational.
Like, are people drinking water
and then completed what is
completed.
Thank you, Vice Chair Johnson.
Uh, so first with, uh, with
Reach 10.1, 10.2, or 10.3, the,
the local community and uh and
the nomination calls that the
beacon B I N 9 lateral.
Uh, it will, it will serve a
standing Rock and Crown Point
and uh many chapters along uh uh
Navajo Route 9 there.
Uh, the nomination is getting
ready to start construction on
that portion of the project. As
I mentioned, uh, we took an all
hands on deck approach.
The beer reclamation as a
financial assistance agreement
with the Navonation and so they
will be building, uh, that
portion of the project.
Uh, they are set to be
completed, uh, in early 2029.
That's, that's your goal.
In terms, uh, in terms of your
second question, in terms of
operations, so the, the green
water is flowing on the cutter
lateral and has been for, uh,
Uh, over 40, well, almost 5
years now.
Um
In the uh Gallup Regional
system, you also see green there
and, and, uh, the beer
reclamation, City Gallop and NTA
have been working together to
use the Twin Lakes well to
supplement groundwater supply in
the Gallup Regional system,
especially during the summer.
We're all set to go there. Uh,
we've we've coated it as green
because it's uh it's got
approval and we're ready to
start using the pipeline for,
for water delivery. Thank you
for, for that, and then the red
under construction.
just
What it says under the
construction.
Under construction means it's,
uh, it's under a construction
contract and, and work is
active, uh, in terms of the, uh,
the Navajo code talkers, we,
we've completed that. We're just
wrapping up the loose ends on,
on that project, but essentially
the Navaotak, there's uh
A 24 inch pipeline in the ground
north of uh uh Highway 234, um,
all the way to the Arizona state
line. The nomination is working
right now on the design to
connect to that line and uh and
bring water into uh or bring the
pipeline into Fort Defiance, uh
Saint Michael's.
Uh, the Wind Rock area.
So the, but the bear reclamation
is essentially complete with
what's in red there, um.
The, uh
The red that's just below the
reach 10.1 is uh the uh Coyote
Canyon turnout.
And that will bring water to the
Coyote Canyon chapter.
That, uh, uh, denomination out
of Navo blessing ceremony on
that in October, broke ground in
January and, and our, uh,
working towards completing that
later this year, so that, uh,
that should be done soon.
And then the last uh red line
down there towards the bottom,
uh, that's reached 14.1 and
14-2.
We have a uh interagency
agreement with Indian Health
Service.
And Indian Health Service is
working with the Navajo
Engineering Construction
Authority.
To, uh, uh, construct that
portion of the pipeline. Uh,
they have broke ground on the
tank at Church Rock, uh, folks
may have seen that construction
start here just in the last
couple of months, so.
So there's work going on all
over the San Juan lateral right
now.
Alrighty, thank you for those
specifics, uh, and, uh, just,
um, we'll continue uh working.
To the best of our abilities.
Thank you for that update.
Any other questions, uh, Senator
Charlie.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, um, presenters for
all of it.
For this, all of this
information, um, I'm, I wanna
dive into the um
The amendment a little bit more
and so I hope you might be able
to answer these questions. Um,
are there any provisions on how
the trust funds for Hickorya and
Navajo Nation will be
capitalized.
No, it actually would uh if if
the the Navo Gallup amendments
passed, Senator Charlie, uh,
that the Navo Nation would then
be, uh, would be given authority
over that money and it would be
their money to invest and to
manage.
It is necessary to uh to fulfill
their, their operation and
maintenance costs, uh.
The the basis for that 250
million was approximately 15
year estimate of what uh what
their cost may be.
Thank you. That's helpful, Madam
Chair. Um, and then what
methodology?
is being used to determine a
community's ability to pay.
Thank you, uh, Senator Charlie.
The, uh, the ability to pay
study, uh, it's, it's different
in, in many cases. So in, in the
city of Gos case, it's based on,
on their requirement to have a
cost share of the capital costs
in the project, so the beer
reclamation has a process where
we, where we analyze their
expenditures and their revenue
on their water system and that
determines their ability to pay.
In terms of the naviation or
hickory Apache nation for, for
Operation maintenance. It, it
It comes down to, uh, uh, the
end users' ability to pay. So we
look at uh the customers'
ability to pay. And in the case
of Navo Nation, uh, we've just
finalized the study showing that
the end user does not have the
ability to pay, does not have
the ability to pay $20 million a
year, so.
Yeah, absolutely, Madam Chair,
and thank you.
Um, can you?
Talk a little I'm, I'm, I'm
trying to wrap my head around,
um,
The, the tax jurisdiction that
you mentioned, so, um, if you
would go into that a little bit
more because I, I really want to
think about the tax
implications, um, that might
happen as a result of this. So
could you just go in a little
deeper there.
Yeah, thank you, Senator
Charlie. So uh in, in the Navo
Gel ceiling and then avo out
budget, there's one set tax
either Navonation or state tax,
depending on where the project
was built. That was the
assumption used by uh used by
the Reclamation and and uh what
Congress authorized back in
2009.
In the case of uh the San Juan
Lateral where uh the bear
reclamation as contractors
working on Navo Nation land, uh,
it hasn't been.
Across the board, but on some of
those contracts, the Beer
Reclamation and our contractor
have been charged uh double tax
for both the state and the Naval
nation.
The thought there was that uh
with this on nomination, land
should only be taxed by the
Navination, not by the state.
Uh, what the provision in this,
in the Navo gap amendments would
do is would not allow the state
to attacks on Na Nation land and
wouldn't for this project only.
And would not allow the nation
to to uh have a nation attacks
on state land either.
So it, it would not allow either
party to, to double tax.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um.
Is it a practice of and you
might not know the answer to
this, but is it a practice of
Navajo Nation to tax on projects
that are not on trust land it
is.
It, it is a practice to to tax
on trust land, an example that
Chua, we used our, uh,
Our CARE Act funding to put in
HVAC, so we hired a contractor
out of Gallup to do that.
Since it's on trust land, um,
they had to pay the Navo
nation's tax and
New Mexico wanted their share
too.
But if it's off of the trust
land.
The Navo Nation doesn't have a
practice of taxing.
So it's just, just on the trust
land or actual BLM land even to
where both are being taxed.
Thank you. um, thank you for
helping me untangle that, Madam
Chair, I wonder, has there been
any study on the economic
implications either to the state
or to Navajo Nation for just
particular to this project.
Thank, thank you, Senator
Charlie, um.
There could have been, um, and I
wish Mr. Shindo didn't step out
of the room because I know.
Back when I was a public school
superintendent, we were having
the same argument with the state
of New Mexico, you know, we're
we're building a school in
Navajo, New Mexico, it's 100%
Navajo Nation, we will pay the
Navo Nation tax and the state
wanted it and they did do a
study and, and when it came out.
That the contractor was liable
for both.
So when they were bidding the
jobs, it, it just.
Added an extra 6% to
The job that that the school
district had to pay.
So I think there might be one, I
think if you checked with LFCRs,
our, our group, there was
studies back.
2010 to 2015, 2016, where they
were discussing it.
But that was on the school side.
I think with the reclamation
side, they haven't looked at
that at all.
Thank you, um, and thank you,
Madam Chair. I don't, I don't
disagree with it. I'm just
curious and want to know, um,
and then my last question is
about the spending rules and
commercial investment protocols.
Could you just share a little
bit more about what that looks
like.
Um, I was, I was researching the
bill online and want to go a
little bit deeper on those
protocols.
Uh, more specifically on, on the
Navo Gal amendments or?
Yes, madam chair.
Uh, yeah, thank you, Senator
Charlie, so, um, in terms of
the, uh,
The reclamation estimate.
That is
The, let me get, actually take a
step back and give you a little
bit of history to help explain
cause that's a great question.
The, um, so Congress authorized
the project back in 2009 based
on a very preliminary what the
Bear Reclamation, uh, calls an
appraisal level estimate, and
it's before we get out and do
any investigations out in the
field.
It's before we know what the
geology looks like. Reclamation
actually testified to Congress
back in 2007 and said,
Well, while we understand
there's a need for the project,
we don't agree with the this
cost because we think it'll be
higher.
And, uh, and so that is
obviously come to fruition.
Um
Now we've got all of that
geology information. We've got,
uh, um, everything is through is
in the final design. So now we
have a much
Lower risk of knowing what the,
the final cost will be, so that
that estimate takes into account
all the work that uh we built so
far.
The work that's currently under,
under, uh, construction
contract.
And those, there's no risk that
those are going to go higher. We
know what those costs are and
then the remaining design work.
Um, that, that's where the risk
still lies in that 2.175
billion.
Does, does that answer your
question? It does and I think
it's, it's not particular to
this project. It's happening
across.
All construction projects in New
Mexico and, and so I'm just
interested in this mechanism to
kind of uh mitigate risk.
So thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair, those are my questions.
Thank you, Representative
Charlie. Senator,
representatives are more.
Senators are more.
I think everybody,
Madam Madam Chair, I think, I
think that everybody's tired and
we've been sitting here a long
time.
Work through lunch and
everything. Presenters, thank
you for the presentation.
What, what, uh, Madam Chair and
and presenters, what?
Is the cost of water to the
consumer today, and what, what
will it be when the
When the lines done and water's
being consumed.
I can do this.
You guys hear me OK?
Mark to Polly Poly engineering.
Um, so right now our, our cost
for, for the well water for the
city of Gallup is about $4 per
1000 gallons, um, we anticipate
that with the project when the
water gets here, it's going to
be probably closer to 8 to 10.
So we are looking at a double,
doubling the cost of water. Um,
of course, there's a lot of
things that need to be optimized
when it comes to operation, um,
and of course, the, the
maintenance of the of the system
and the water line, but it, it's
gonna probably.
double the cost of the water.
OK, thank you for that answer,
and, and Madam Chair, and
presenters, so.
Does the PRC control that cost
or is it, is it up to you guys
what you're gonna charge for it
or how does that work?
Um, I'm not a lawyer and I'm not
and I know how the PRC works,
but the city of Gallup was a
homer community.
So when they increase their
rates, it's strictly going to be
it's presented to the residents,
um, mathematically and
theoretically, so they'll see
the cost and they'll see what
the price is, um, of that water,
and then it's made with an
ordinance or a council uh city
council ordinance, um, motion
to, to raise the rates. OK,
thank you for that. And then
what, uh, what is the price per
foot for the line?
Has anybody broken down to that,
but it's
Price per foot, I could give you
price per mile, uh,
representative Samara. OK,
that's good. Um, it, it varies
depending on the diameter of the
pipe. Um, so, uh, the, the most
recent work we've been doing uh
up near the San Juan Li water
treatment plant, that's a 42
inch diameter pipeline. Uh, it's
approximately 1.5 million per
mile to $2 million per mile,
depending on how deep it is and,
and what kind of uh geologies in
that particular area.
So we're gonna say
foot per mile then on or do you
have an average cost for the
whole line from
From, from the water source all
the way to the end user, an
average per mile.
I don't have that number off the
top of my head. I, the 2 million
is in the rough ballpark, but I
could, I could get that for you.
Um, because we do keep track of
that and Madam Chair.
So
On those places where it's hard
to bury and stuff. We were there
any?
Uh
Was there any investigation into
why it couldn't be put on top of
the ground.
Good question, uh, uh, excuse
me, Representative Samoa. Uh, so
we, we did, uh, in the very
early stages of this project,
uh, we did look at, uh,
different alternatives for
building the project at a very
preliminary stage.
Putting it on, on top of the
ground was something that was
looked at, but trying to secure
large infrastructure like that
and, and, and, and protect it,
uh, and, uh, and
Basic, you know, just
Manage that kind of
infrastructure what's on the
ground is so much more costly.
It's, it's much cheaper when you
get to the operation and
maintenance site to have it uh
in the ground.
Mark anything you'd like to add
to that.
Yeah, um, representative, the,
uh, a lot of the times too
because of the uh there's
vandalism, but also the freezing
is a consideration. So this,
this pipe is put below the frost
level. So if it was put above
ground, the studies we looked at
would have been it would have
had to been insulated, and you
could imagine 100 miles of 42
inch pipe insulated would be
very expensive.
And, and Madam Chad, presenter,
so.
I've worked with water my whole
life on ranches and farms and
everything. And if we move
water, it never, it doesn't
freeze. Moving water doesn't
freeze, so to me, if
This line seems like water would
always be moving through it.
And, and it wouldn't stand a
chance of freezing.
Yeah, so the, the way that the
line is designed because it is a
portable water line that's
chlorinated water. um, there'll,
there will be times in the line
won't be the flow will not be in
the line. Um, there'll be water
tanks, so what Bart's talking
about is the pipelines, but
there's big pump stations that
pump up to a water tank. When
that water tank is full, it
turns off the pump stations
because we want to maintain a
velocity of at least 2 ft per
second in the pipe to make sure
everything's moving correctly.
So that, that, that might be,
there's potential that could be.
off for 8 or 10 hours in the
middle of the night, and that's
when the freezing considerations
come out to be.
OK, thank you for that. And,
and, uh,
Mayor, uh, Madam Chair and
Mayor.
I, I think we need to be a
little more optimistic.
I, I feel your stress. I can see
it in you.
Uh
But, but I think this, this
country has a lot of potential.
And, and
There's a lot of things going on
at the federal level that we
don't understand right now that.
And, and the reactions I think
are sometimes.
Uh
stronger than they should be,
maybe.
Uh
We, we will hope and pray that
that the federal government
comes through and
and put some money into where it
needs to be and
And this line being the
priority.
Just like the line in eastern
New Mexico.
Being one of their priorities
and in the future of New Mexico
depends on these lines.
Uh
Where, where and how will we?
Be used water in the future is,
is a big question and
And you're doing something very
important for your community and
I commend you for that.
Uh
Thank you for the presentation.
I, I really appreciate learning
and getting the update on it and
Madam Chair, that concludes my
questions.
Thank you, Representative
Zamora. Mo are more comments
than uh for our new members here
because the transmission lines
in some instances in some
places, the leases are up and
the communities that the and
it's really about the land use
that they should also be getting
some benefit from it. If this
fund is set through the Navajo
Nation, well, we see our local
community see any of that money
in that sense and back in the
day when those negotiations were
made, it was pennies on.
the dollar and these companies
made billions of dollars
supplied power, not to our uh to
our Mexico residents, but out of
state.
So be aware of that because like
I said, those leases are up. Any
new leases coming in is, is our
people being informed. Um, is
that collaboration really
happening when you talk about
project coming forward and as we
move some of this and it became
highlighted, we had a lot of
opposition and it was because
there was not much public
outreach. It was like, oh, we're
just gonna do the line go from
here to there. But all these
guys don't, it doesn't matter.
It's not for Navajo nation, it's
not for the people there. We're
moving the.
to gallop.
And that's where all these
laterals came in once they
learned about the project, the
Navajo Nation weighed in on it.
So those costs too will be
covered by the the bill payers,
you will have an increase to
your bills. This water is
chlorinated water. You cannot
use it for livestock. You cannot
use it for farming. It's really,
I guess in some sense,
commercial use are for domestic
uh consumption in that manner,
so don't think we're.
really kinda solving the water
problem because this is all
treated water, the groundwater
is what you use for your
agriculture, what you use for
farming. That's what is very
different from this, but we are
lacking it and there's still a
need.
Um, as far as tax agreements
with the tribes, I understand
the state of New Mexico has
legislation or statutes in place
that the tribes, nations, and
pueblos can enter into those
agreements if they so do wish um
with those MOAs or IGAs,
whatever it is, um, there, but
it has to be um done together
and back in the day, there was a
gas tax which are uh businesses
on the reservations that we're
going to sell gas, even if they
were not.
a home we're double taxed and
that put them all under, so now
you see these other gas stations
that in some sense are not
Navajo owned, um, because that,
that was an issue they couldn't
stay afloat because they were
having to be double taxed.
Um,
there was a comment made of do
we still tax education projects.
I think there was some
discussion about that. I don't
remember exactly what the
fruition came of that
with
it right now still we pay.
Yeah, I think we still pay, but
I think that was a proposal that
was made in this past session,
very short discussion, other
stuff took over.
Um, and you, it's probably the
only question I have for the
Bureau of Reclamation. There is
not any new money or extra money
coming into this fund just to be
clear. So that's why we're
saying there's a shortfall in
that sense.
Thank you, Madam chair. Correct,
uh, the, the, we're at the
ceiling right now. We need
additional funding to, uh, to
get above that ceiling or to get
closer to the uh the ultimate uh
construction estimate.
So the budget that was passed.
No, no increase.
The, uh, uh, and the FY 25
budget, yes, we did get, uh, we
got an additional 145 million
and we have put that money to
use, uh, we fully funded the San
Juan Loud water treatment plant,
uh, and we've got a new Reach
one, improvements project that
we're doing on the pipeline that
we purchased from uh P&M as part
of the sound generating station
that, where that money also
went, so it's being put to use
right away.
OK. Thank you. and NTUA will be
taking over this, um, for
maintenance and operations. So,
so I had some community say they
didn't want to be tied into this
line, um, that is something you
have to take up with the nation
because right now they're just
building the bigger part of the
line, the smaller lines that tie
into your local wells which
inform some of my people, the
taste of the water, it will
change when if they tie in to
your um local wells in that
sense.
So just want to make sure
because we're in Pinedale, that,
uh, my community members and
those listening online do
understand that, um, and that
needs to be taken up with the
nation. Thank you for your
presentation. Thank you for the
work you do, and we know water
is uh a big one, Senator Shindo
thank, thank you, uh, I'm sure,
thank you for the presentation.
Just real quickly as we're
talking about the
600,000. I know the yellow in
design are still in design, so
the cost of the 600 million,
does that include?
All those in yellow as well.
Thank you, uh, I can't see your,
uh, senatorendo.
Thank you, Senator, Senator
Shindo. Yes, that, that 600
million does include uh the
entire uh transmission portion
of the project. So everything
that you see on the map there,
and I, I did just want to add,
getting back to a question,
Senator Charlie raised in terms
of the cost of project, uh, you
know, the very preliminary
appraisal level was part of the
reason why, why this project
costs more than uh than it was
originally uh authorized. The
other
part is the pandemic and uh and
the inflation that we saw, um,
especially in Indian country,
uh, where it was, uh, it was
double, sometimes even more than
double what it was uh across the
rest of the country, so the
impact uh from COVID, not only
with what what we learned with
how important water is for
public health and sanitation,
the ability to fight that
disease, but uh, but the impact
it had on the budget.
been significant. It's added
hundreds of millions to our
overall cost as a result.
I have one more question, so how
much of the pipe is imported
that we do not produce here in
the US.
We have, uh, it's all got to be
compliant with the Buy American
Act. Now, we do have agreements,
free trade agreements with uh
Mexico, so there is some pipe
that is uh fabricated in in
Mexico, but uh most of the pipe
is fabricated and uh is uh US uh
product.
So, so even though it's coming
from the US, it's not getting
cheaper.
No,
thank you, unfort. Thank you for
your presentation.
And we will move on to the human
trafficking in the transit
industry as we have Bernadine
here with us and Mr. Louis
Greek, so please bear with us.
It's more this presentation is
more just of FYI for the
committee on what's available
out there, um, for your local
entities as far as um the
missing and murdered indigenous
persons, um, issues we have, so
I, I think it'd be very
informative and um most of it
probably can be taken offline
and um just connect with them.
Please take your conversations
aside as we move forward with
our last item.
Take it outside. Thank you.
Go ahead and press that.
Yeah
Hello.
Yeah
Thank you, Madam Chair and
committee members, uh, Bernadine
Bel Yitia.
Toriini in the slakia
Anibashachin betani Ada
khoneatnielle.
Uh, my name is Bernadine Biel. I
am the founder for Four Corners
Canine Search and Rescue.
Um, we are based out of
Farmington, New Mexico, um, I
started search and rescue in
2016 with the state of New
Mexico. And then in 2022, I
formed this organization, um, we
have canines on our team that
are trained to find a live
people and deceased people and
we've come across quite a few
families on tribal lands that
are out looking for their loved
ones on their own, and
That's why this, uh, I formed
this organization.
Um, I'm just here to inform you
of an event we did, uh, in the
Four Corners area, uh, we
partner with uh another
nonprofit called TAT Chruckers
Against Trafficking and um Louis
Greek is a uh specialist that
works with that organization and
he's online and
Um, I'll give him a few minutes
to talk, but how this all came
about is, um, this is Tamika
Platero.
She went missing in November of
2019 from Casamero Lake, and
she's still missing today. Uh,
she went missing on Thanksgiving
Day.
Um, we did a few searches for
her and in reviewing the places
we search for Tamika.
They were areas on tribal roads
near inner near I-40 and near
Grants, New Mexico, where there
are truck stops.
So in reviewing her case, we
started looking at the
possibility of what she
trafficked because she would fre
frequently make trips to Grant
or she would hitchhike along the
interstate.
And so I started looking around
on the internet at
organizations that specialized
in it and one idea came to mind
was, can we somehow do a
campaign uh within the transit
industry of hitting all the
truck stops that are on tribal
lands or around tribal land. So,
you know, starting at Route 66,
making our way to Laguna, going
to Grants,
pointed to Gallup, going out to
Flagstaff, going back in through
Tuba City, making our way back
into the Four Corners area. Um,
so looking online, that's how I
came across truckers Against
trafficking.
They haven't done a campaign
like this when I reached out to
them, but the education and
training they do is to people
who work at truck stops and to
the truck drivers in the
industry on training them about
what to look for in a victim
that's uh being uh trafficked.
So that's how I met Louis Greek,
but we started this a year ago
with hopes of, I reached out to
quite a few leaders in trying to
get a partnership on doing this
campaign, but never got phone
calls back, so we decided to
just take this upon ourselves
and we, uh, four corners and tap
put this event on in Farmington,
New Mexico. Um, so, and I was
very grateful that we still
needed someone in a leadership
position to participate in this
to see the value in it and to
show that
that we do have buy-in from
someone in leadership. So I want
to thank Senator Pinto for being
a part of that and coming to the
event and speaking at it and
speaking of the importance of
our missing people.
Um, Louie, I want to give him a
few minutes. He's online.
All right, Louie, are you there?
I am here, yes, thank you.
Yes, uh, again, thank you,
Bernardine, for the
introduction. My name is uh
Louis Greek. I'm a training
specialist with truckers Against
Trafficking or tatt, and again,
Senator Pinto, thank you for um
uh participating in our event in
Farmington where we brought our
mobile exhibit, which is a a
travels around the United States
and is a um interactive exhibit
uh that talks about human
trafficking, and so, um, during
that day, we had about 50
different individual.
rules, both law enforcement,
government, community members,
and energy truck transportation
members attend this event, uh,
to learn more about the issue of
human trafficking, and what we
can do, uh, as a collective
community to combat this, and
so, um, from that event, uh, we
have really, uh, seen a lot of
momentum and next steps. Um, so
as Bernadine mentioned, we are
doing um truck stop outreach, so
this means, uh,
providing flyers, training, a
brochures to those employees
that work there, as well as
those that are stopping at the
truck stops.
And then in 2026, um, out of
this event we just had last
month, next year, we are looking
to expand that, um, to not only
the transit providers, so a
number of the transit agencies
in the four corners, um, as well
as the energy industries. We
know that our partners like
Philip 66, marathon, some of the
energy companies, um, sometimes
can be challenges or bring
challenges to the communities,
and so our goal next year is to
commit to
Training the trucking and energy
industries in the Four Corners
area in New Mexico. Um, we have
a, a couple of events already
scheduled. Uh, one is in
January. This is with the New
Mexico Oil and Gas Association,
um, where we're gonna come
together for an event, um, in
January. And then in May of next
year, um, we would like to
replicate what we did in
Farmington, um, by holding
another event there in Gallup,
um, New Mexico, bringing our
mobile exhibit trailer there.
Um, and then again, with the
focus on providing training and
resources, um, not only to the
truck stop and energy
industries, but this is also to
focus on transit. So, especially
our youth on transportation. Um,
we have a, a training, we have
materials, um, that could be
implemented into the transit
systems, uh, specifically
transit systems that transport
youth in the Four Corners area.
And so, um, there are more de
details to come as we are on the
initial planning phases, but um
we appreciate the opportunity
to, to speak to the committee
here in this group, um, because
we'd love your participation,
uh, your buying and your
collaboration in this effort,
uh, next year to really target
uh the transportation, trucking,
and truck stop industries in the
four corners with the resources
and materials that we have.
Thank you, Louie.
Um, so, again, we're just here
to highlight this event and the
importance of it, uh, especially
with human trafficking, it, uh,
trafficking always seems to fall
as a silent subject. No one
really talks about it, and it's
an area we do need to bring to
light more, especially in our
four Corners area, so, um, we,
and no one's really targeted the
transit industry lately in our
area, especially with a lot of
energy projects happening, uh,
across tribal.
in, so, um, this is just another
angle that I haven't seen taken
and um it's very important, um,
that we tackle all these angles
in trying to find our missing
people and educate the community
about it. So I want, I
appreciate all of his time and
Senator Pinto.
Thank you. Thank you for your
presentation. If we don't have
any questions from committee
members, uh, uh, Representative
Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Very
good to see you this afternoon.
Um, we've both serve on the, uh,
missing and murdered indigenous
people's Task Force. I'm really
glad to see you here and to hear
about this, um this effort. Uh,
I'm wondering what the status of
your organization is in terms of
uh um.
I'm wondering whether, uh, Madam
Chair, they might be eligible
for state funding and that's a
question.
Uh, yeah, we, we do not have any
state funding at all. A lot of
what we do is fundraising or
reaching out to businesses in a
community to to help us and with
this event,
everything, um, Louie reached
out to the community for
sponsorship. So that's how you
were able to put this event on
and but to do a whole campaign,
we're going to need more help in
that.
And if I'm not mistaken, that
law enforcement search and
rescues all voluntary. We do not
fund them. We, um, but in order
for them to receive funding,
they need to find an entity to
go through in order to receive
it even through the CBRC and
through the, I think it should
really probably through the AOC
maybe with um some of the
behavioral health aspect money
that that um is this is one of
the things I think that should
be covered under that, um, I
don't know if you have any other
questions from members.
But um they do need, um.
Like equipment, all our search
and rescue needs some equipment
to, to do some of this,
especially in with our great
state here and how large it is
in the land mass. I
representative Royal Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you so much. This is a
wonderful um other way in which
we can assist with our murdered
and missing.
Persons and um this is why we
need to change the
anti-donation.
Uh, laws in our state because
this is one of those areas that
is so incredibly important and
it's saving lives directly and
if we can set up the mechanisms
to help thank you Representative
Little for that uh question
because that's what prohibits
us, um, multiple levels from
being able to support. So yes,
you would need a fiscal agent to
go through, but I think there
would be a lot of worthy fiscal
agents, I think if we get to
spread the word out more um.
Madam Chair, I have one, just
one question. I'm just curious
as to the dogs, what breed of
dogs, um, are trainable and do
you use? And so when I started,
uh, search and rescue, I had a
black and tan German Shepherd.
His name is Trigger, and you
have a pamphlet, um, he's uh
On the, the, uh, in the middle,
yep.
The one on your left side that's
trigger, uh, unfortunately we
lost Trigger last year to, uh,
cancer, um, but he served on
over 100 missions and assisted
over 40 families when we started
this work, um, with him being
gone, Gunny our black
Czechoslovakian shepherd had to
pick up the slack and we were so
busy every weekend when we lost
Trigger that we had to fundraise
so much to get another dog.
So, last year in June, we
received um Moby. He's a black
British lab. He comes to us from
Alabama out of a donation and
fundraising, and he serves as
our cadaver dog on our team, so
we currently have 22 canines.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, I, I
asked that question because we
had a a a beautiful um American
German shepherd and um he was in
the process of being trained
when we, when we were told that
he has, uh, he had epilepsy and
um didn't he lasted with us only
a few years and then now we have
a blue healer, and we were told
by the vet, um, did we ever
consider donating him it's for
to be trained.
Because this particular boo
healer has some really special
gifts and part of his gifts is
just that they're intelligent
and they're very um like German
shepherds, very uh intuitive and
excellent to train. So it brings
me to the final recommendation
or point and that is that since
It's a, it's a task to help.
fund um.
Your efforts.
And I just went blank, but I can
let the chair know um there is a
philanthropic
Group
I can't remember it right now
that actually um provides the
funds.
To not only train.
But um for um
The um Amber Alert system and
for the senior alert system, so
they're particularly designed
the funding is is um
particularly designed to assist,
train and assist in the search
and rescue.
Excuse me, of those two
populations, so this would be a
great way to um connect.
This effort, um, with that
philanthropic group. And as soon
as I recall the name, I'll give
it to, I'll share it with the,
with the chair, but um I want to
commend you and thank you. I've
been part of the
Um,
I don't want to
Tear up, um.
But in my district we have in
Albuquerque the uh park that's
been dedicated. Um.
To our missing women.
And um
The way we found the first
fighting was because of a dog.
Um, and had that dog not sniffed
out the initial um
Bone fragments we would not have
been able to identify.
The many lives, um.
That were lost in that
particular area.
So, um, this touches very
deeply, uh, we visit that park
regularly in prayer and in the
hope that um we can continue to
um search and um.
Give solace to the families. So
I, it's a wonderful effort.
Thank you very much.
Thank you, Madam. Thank you,
Representative Mejia.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Bernardine for your
presentation, um, and thank you
for your, uh, commitment to this
program. My question is, um,
What's this success of this
operations? How many successful
rescues.
Have you, um, encounter?
here
So there'll be a difference in
that, um, and I'm gonna explain
to you why I was part of a state
response team from 2016 to 2021.
Um, and then I started this
organization in 2022. So in the
past 3 years, we've done over
150 searches, um, and out of
those 150 in regards to fines,
it could be we found the person
alive. We found remains. We
found partial remains or we
found evidence belonging to the
missing individual and that
number is at 12 right.
Now.
So when you look at it, when we
were part of the uh state rescue
team. We had more fines and more
successes, meaning we found
people alive because we were
called faster in those
situations when someone went
missing through the state. But
now that we're on tribal lands,
I don't get those calls fast
enough. We're getting them too
late or getting them days,
months, even years later. So a
lot of my time is with my
cadaver dog working on.
cases. So there's a big
difference there in response.
Thank you so much for that.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
Thank you and thank you for
coming forward and also those uh
with our legislatures, um, do
keep the the canines in mind
because even with our Gal fire
uh police department that's just
been built, there's no facility
or area for dogs if they're
helping our law enforcement or
even helping our search and
rescue or even, uh, I don't
think we even buy that kind of a
um if you see them, they're in
the, the regular vehicles, but
there are vehicles where they
can be a little more comfortable
to transport the
the animals, so, um, please keep
that in mind as we move forward
and uh thank you if you have any
closing comments.
I just want to thank you all
again for your time today and I
just in closing, I just want to
recognize a family here today,
um, we got this call actually I
reached out to them to do a
follow up on their missing
brother, um, but the family who
the first turquoise alert went
out for Eric Cleveland, his
family is here.
In the back and I'm hoping that
uh representatives that were in.
Support of that turquoise alert
takes some time to talk with
them because there's still some
gaps in that bill that needs to
be addressed and that's why they
came here today so I could meet
them, but fortunately, the call
was to assist them in searching
for him, but fortunately,
because of their resilience and
their love for him.
They found him yesterday.
So, uh, in close, I just want to
recognize them.
Thank you, everybody. Thank you
and thank you for coming so far
because you're up in the four
corners and I'm coming down and
um to those that um advocate
for.
For this issue that we've been
um working on all these years I
thought representative Fernandez
was raising his hand for a
question, um, but we will move
on to public comment, um, those
in the audience who are here for
public comment, please raise
your hand. Thank you. I'm
Bernadine. We have one. OK,
would you please come up and um
give your public comment.
And uh please state your name
and your entity.
Yates a Robbie Loretto Yenie
twitter and sani bus chain sit
on Jenny duche deanelle.
Hello everyone, my name is
Robbie Loretto. I am from
Gallup, New Mexico. Thank you,
Madam Chair, for allowing me to
present this. I am here on
behalf of
The Johnny Smiles Incorporated,
um, just to talk about our
expansion of trying to raise
awareness for our oral
healthcare, um, that's really
affecting a lot of our community
members starting from a young
age and resulting to some
inabilities as they try to live
a successful lifestyle.
So we are, I'm actually a
pre-dental student, um, and I
applied to dental school this
past, actually last on Sunday, I
submitted my application.
I do have a mentor, um, Doctor
Darlene Sorrell. She is the
first Navajo dentist, and right
now she serves as the president
of the board for Najoni smiles
and she's also a provider
offering services, um, so we are
going to be hosting a community
health fair in September, so
September 20th, we're gonna be
located um in Shiprock, New
Mexico at Najone Smiles, and
we're going to be offering some
uh free sports physical.
medical screenings, dental
screenings, vision screenings,
and just raising awareness, um,
for diabetes education and
there's going to be a lot going
on, so I do invite, um, all of
you who are interested, um, tell
your community members about it,
and we're hoping that we can
expand and raise awareness for
our oral health needs and also
living a quality of life.
Yeah. Thank you. Do we have
anybody else for public comment.
You may come forward, please
state your name and your entity.
Hello? OK.
Uh, good evening. Uh, my name is
Melissa Cleveland. I'm the um
oldest and daughter of Magdalen
there and then my younger
brother did go missing. um, he
was reported missing on the 9th
of last week and um
So
We reported it and then um
The next day we had there was a
turquoise alert, um, you know,
being put out.
And I didn't know what it was. I
didn't know what a turquoise
alert was. I did a little bit of
research on it and I, you know,
was curious of and then it made,
you know, KOB, um, news.
And you know, and for them to
mention this, he was the first
missing person to go under the
turquoise alert.
And, you know, I, for me and my
family, we, you know, I, I, for
myself, wanted to know what it
was. I wanted to know how is
this different from any other
alerts, you know, um.
So, so I did my research and,
you know, come to find out, you
know, I guess we were supposed
to be alerted through text
messages. Um, it was, you know,
But unfortunately we didn't get
there was no text messages, you
know, sent out through the
phones, um.
So
We were constantly in contact
with, you know, the police
department and
The way, you know, I
Unfortunately, it was.
Kind of pulling teeth.
With Gallopey.
And other
Um, the sheriffs and, you know.
So we didn't give up.
We
You know, continue to look for
him.
But through, through faith and
through
Through prayers through the
support.
You know, we were able to find
him.
And
I feel like, you know,
I just felt like with this
turquoise alert, it was being
worked backwards.
And being that it was the first
case of, you know, my brother
missing. I felt like, you know,
why wasn't it?
You know, the testing, why
didn't they go out and
You know, make this alert.
Known
You know, ASAP just like
Bernadine said, you know, they
get notified days later, weeks
later, months later.
I never thought, you know, I
would go through something like
this.
And
You know, it's something that
you don't think about, but when
it happens to you, it's a lot.
It takes a lot of toll on you,
you know, it's very stressful,
anxiety.
And
You know, and you think about
the individual and you think
about everyone going, you know,
those who go through this, you
think about them. What are they
going through? What is
What are they, what are
organizations or, you know,
social services doing.
Aftermath. Are they keeping in
contact with the families. Are
they doing follow ups with the
families.
You know, to
You know, cope with this.
You know, and
I'm very thankful and we are
very, you know, thankful that.
You know, that we were able to
find him.
And
Thank you.
And, you know, and, and I really
do, you know.
Hope our leaders take this into
consideration.
You know, to make this known and
to make this alert, you know, to
be.
Known and to have it run in a
positive way.
And that's all I want to say.
Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you for
sharing.
Uh, Representative Johnson.
Thank you for sharing.
Um, I have an announcement.
A little birdie told me that
there is a birthday.
If you guess whose birthday it
is, you get a prize.
I believe it's representative
Abada's birthday.
Here we go.
Some sugar for you guys on your
way out. I don't know if you're,
um, would like to entertain our
um
Madam Chair.
I believe you ought to lead us
in singing Happy Birthday to.
I, I,
OK, yeah. Oh, we have one more,
do we have anybody else.
Right after this.
That person, yeah.
OK. Good afternoon.
Uh, my name is Mark Allen
Johnson. I'm a representing
myself here as an independent
journalist, but over my career,
I've worked for every major
publication world, National
Geographic, Time Magazine,
anything, everything between, I
cover um stories around the
world for people who don't have
a voice, a marginalized, uh,
groups, individuals, etc. I'm
here working on a project, um,
and that's how I met Bernardine,
but I'm investigating indigenous
missing people, etc. I'm looking
for active stories, trying to
track.
down and see where the pitfalls
are in real time.
I've only been investigating
this story maybe a couple days
and, and in doing so, I, I like
to give analogies. When we look
at something that potentially
happened like 9/11, they say
there was a breakdown in
communication between
organizations, um, all of us
have loved ones, we dial 911, we
want somebody to show up. And a
couple of stories that I've been
following since I've been here
trying to chase active.
Um, uh, missing people that have
been entered into the NCIC.
They're supposed to have BOOs,
etc. etc. Every single one of
these has been a breakdown in
communication. Uh, there could
be something on a website, there
could be something on uh whether
whether it's Navajo PD, whether
it's on state PD whatever it is,
but when I stop and ask any of
the local officers, whether
they're PD, I went to state and
I went to sheriff, and I said,
do you know who this person is?
They were very quickly to worry
that I was
trying to get a gotcha moment,
which it was not. I was more
concerned with, no, I just want
somebody to be able to see this
person. So really quickly in the
short time that I'm here, I've
seen a complete breakdown and
lack of communication, a lack of
the dissemination of information
about missing people and I, we,
we can get to the national
debate on why people don't care.
That's a, that's a bigger issue,
but just in this atmosphere and
in this area where probably a
lot of people have been affected
or afflicted by a missing
individual or they have a
family.
family member, if 911 can work,
sharing information can work
just so in the very brief time
that I've been here, I've seen a
complete breakdown of
information. So it's not a
finger pointing, it's more like
how hard is it to reach out to
the people that you know and go,
why does the plug not fit in the
wall, but they're selling it at
Walmart. Like that wouldn't fly,
right? So like, it's my only
point I want to keep you working
on my story. I hope whatever I
do makes a difference. I love my
time here, but just in the short
time I've here, I'm on Facebook.
Trying to get people to connect
to figure out who a family
member is so somebody can help
somebody, and I mean,
Sending smoke signals in the
day, time of days when we have
cell phones, it just doesn't
make sense. So I appreciate
being able to make that comment,
but that's been my experience.
Thank you. Thank you.
And what we will do is recess
and then we will sing. If
there's nothing further, um,
we're back here at Pinedale
tomorrow. We will and the
