And the highlight is specific to
American Indian, Native
American, um, students, faculty
staff. So you'll see that in the
state of New Mexico, which you
probably already know, that
11.2% of our population in New
Mexico identifies as American
Indian. Um, and then you'll see
with our undergraduate students
at 2.6%. Keep it in mind to
become Native American serving
non-tribal institution. We need
to be at 10%. Our tenure track
faculty are just recording in
progress.
And so Recording in progress.
I want to thank the state for
the support that they have
provided for NMSU Goldbo, um,
Doctor Sherry Coleman, thanks
you. And so does the
institution. What this means,
particularly for American Indian
students, is that NMSU Global is
actually reaching rural
communities, um, to bring folks
back into education. And so this
is an incredible, incredible
feat that NMSU Global has been
able to accomplish. And I also
want to acknowledge, um, Doctor
Sherry Coleman's.
Team, um, in this achievement.
And then, um, as part of the
work of the task force in a
retreat this summer, we
identified 6 areas of focus. Um,
so those six areas of focus
again are informing the
recommendations that we're going
to be completing over the course
of this next academic year,
those areas include community
needs, student success, outreach
curriculum and teaching
resources and services increase
representation and government
relations. And what we also did
is that we didn't want to create
a linear infographic of those
needs, but instead of culturally
responsive infographic. So I'll
turn it over to Doctor Badoni to
explain the infographic.
And, uh, like Doctor Schultz
has, has expressed, we didn't
want to put this on a timeline
because we see this work as
continuous and ongoing, and it's
very much integrated and we
didn't see an end to it because
when we work with tribal work,
it's always ongoing and there's
always changes that need to be
made. So this is definitely um
ongoing work that we see, so we
put it in a very, uh, fluid, um,
infographic image.
OK. So now we're going to
transition into, um, some, uh,
specific examples of ongoing
engagement. Um, of course, we
highlight our tribal extension,
um, office, um, here in New
Mexico, but I also want to say
that um many of the tribal
extension, many of the, uh,
cooperative extension offices
also engaged with tribal
communities, cooperative
extension programs are very
committed to engaging with our
tribal communities, and they've
done fantastic work.
Uh, and then I'll turn this over
to, to, uh, Michael.
Madam Chair and committee, uh,
one of the things we looked at
when it comes to engaging with
the muscular Apache tribe, as
mentioned before, they are our
closest tribal community to the
northwest of us, northeast of
us, so we'll go ahead and talk
about a community listening
session that we had and I'll
bring in Doctor Bertoni for that
portion.
The community, the community
listening session, um, started
in, in May and it was a faculty,
um, some, some colleagues from
other uh departments including
Michael Ray, but we, um, the
idea of a community listening
session came from the work that
um professor or provosthoho had
engaged in with, you know, the
tribal work that he initiated
and, um, as a Native American
studies professor,
Um, I was wondering like what
relationships um needed to be
rebuilt. So I reached out to
Muscalero. We reached out to
Muscalero and we engaged in a
daylong uh listening session
where we had created, we were,
we were, um, up in the tribal
lands for a day and we had these
um opportunities, 3
opportunities, the first session
was mostly, uh, the tribal
leadership, uh, tribal council,
school board members, um.
and we just sat and engaged in
conversation of what uh what
NMSU, um, what we can provide uh
for student services from to to
Muscalero and the afternoon and
the evening sessions were open
for the community, including
parents and teachers because we
really wanted to hear from
everybody, um, and what their
needs were specifically, and the
takeaway from those um some
meaningful, um, meaningful.
conversations was, um, they
wanted the ties revived with um
NMSU. They also needed NMSU
representation at schools and
within their community needs.
And lastly, this was the this
was the the big takeaway is, um,
the leaders believed students
needed NMSU faculty and staff
that look like them and to show
up, and I will pass it on to
Michael Ray. Thank you.
Madam Chair and committee, so
what are the takeaways we also
received from that, like I've
mentioned before, is to be in
the community. So when the fires
of South Fork and Salt came
along, we definitely stepped in
when it comes to seeing what
relief work we were able to
participate in so ourselves
along with the College of
Agriculture Consumer
Environmental Sciences, had some
donation drives where we were
able to take donations directly
up to Muscular Apache, a visit
with the community. There's a
picture of some of the ladies
that were checking us in and of
course, you know, what we know
we go into our tribal
communities, we make sure
And talk to our elders we talk
to, especially our lady, a
matriarchal societies and make
sure that they're doing OK. We
introduce ourselves that they
know we're coming in and
assisting, but we also were able
to talk with our education
director up there, Kelton Starr,
and said, you know, we heard
what you were saying and this is
where we want to be in
community, make sure that
community sees us, but also that
we are being good neighbors as
the institution, being that we
are so close, but yet sometimes
so far when it comes to making
that distance, making that
drive, um,
Overcross the way. So we wanted
to make sure and be there and be
helpful as much as we could. Uh,
additionally, as things were
going along, we tried to do
another, um, trip up there to
volunteer, uh, due to a huge
amount of support that came on
through. There was a surplus of
items that were available, so
the area of storage came into
the factor. We were wanting to
go and help out when it comes
to.
Organizing that storage, but
unfortunately the rise of COVID
did come up again as well, so we
held back a little bit. We want
to be mindful of going into
tribal communities when
something like that way was
happening and being, you know, a
little bit more respectful when
it comes to when we are able to
go on in and when
recommendations to come back are
coming and going through.
Um, I, I do actually want to
take a moment to acknowledge
Michael, uh, Michelle Lanassi,
who's the program coordinator
for American Indian program. All
of the faculty and staff, um,
who donated, um, for in the
relief program, it was pretty
incredible how the NMSU
community came together. Um, so,
and, and Michael is definitely a
leader in that work, so I want
to acknowledge that. Um, so
transitioning now into specific
engagement with students,
faculty.
And staff, so I will turn it
back over to Michael.
Madam Chair and committee, uh,
one of the things we often want
to do is, as mentioned before,
welcome and not only greet our
students but have that sense of
belonging, as we saw on the map
with some of our tribal
communities are clear across the
state when it comes to hickory
Apaches. Some patients at the
Navajo Nation. So we want to
make sure that we have events
that bring students together to
help create that sense of
community because sometimes when
we try and have to have it
organically happen, it may not
happen as fast as we want to be,
so being that sometimes students
will go.
Continually go back and forth
home on the weekends and that is
something that we don't
necessarily want to happen. We
tell parents, we don't know how
you feel about this, but we want
the students to start developing
their network again, as many of
you all know, these are the
networks that will develop and
be with them for the rest of
their lives. So we want to make
sure and we foster those ones,
um, in particular, last night we
had a country line dancing
lessons through our Miss Native
American and MSU. Uh, she is a
kinesiology major, so her act of
getting people moving, getting
people engaged, was one of
the things that she wanted to
bring through her strengths. Uh,
next week we'll be having an
open house for not only our
Native American students but for
the entire campus being that we
are called the American Indian
Program. Our building is called
the American Indian Student
Center. We try and make
everybody know that does not
limit the scope of our carrier
and our scope of our services.
We are here for all students,
all Aggies throughout the NMSU
system. We also embrace
indigeneity in various ways when
it comes to working with Latinx
uh American Heritage Month when
it comes to looking at
indigenous Mex.
communities and their tribal
economic knowledge, but also
indigenous ways of knowing, and
when it comes to other when it
comes to we are screening the
movie The Eagle Huntress when it
comes to indigenous peoples day
slash week as we look to
continue celebrations when it
comes to indigenous communities
not only here in the United
States, Canada, Mexico, but
across the world as well.
And
And uh as the Native American
studies, uh, professor and, um,
director, some of the things
that we do offer in our program
is, uh, courses and uh this is
one of the examples. This is a
flyer uh from my colleague and
relative, uh Doctor Catherine
Montoya, and uh the course that
she's teaching this uh semester
is Native American education,
um, which is, of course, like
open to to all students, um, but
also it is part of that meeting
that Yazi.
Martinez initiative, um, and,
uh, really.
Reinforcing that sense of
belonging here at on campus, um,
Native American studies hosts
speaking series and the flyer
right here is um from last from
last year, we hosted Dr. Amanda
Trecini uh D professor, um, and,
uh, we, she highlighted her
book, which is Native presence
and sovereignty in college,
sustaining indigenous weapons to
defeat systemic monsters. And
what was inspiring about her um,
her talk in particular
is, uh, it addressed not only
students in the higher
education, but also, um, you
know, for, for faculty too, to
be inspired. Um, and one of the
events that we, we co-host along
with American Indian programs
and director Michael Ray is, um,
Piccadilly events and like he
had said that our native
communities, some of them, some
of our students are, are far
away from home, um, you know,
you, where we know you can get a
Piccadilly and gallop, but you
can't get a Piccadilly here.
In Las Cruces. So we, so we, um,
make that event happen and it's
providing that um sense of
belonging for our native
students, but also it introduces
our non-native students to this,
um, you know, native res
delicacy, um, and one of the
other, um, projects that I like
to work on is indigenizing NMSU
by using language um from and,
and humor uh from our native
communities. So you have the
word geego up on top.
have these posters, um, but
Yego, of course, is translated
as go, you know, but with
perseverance and power. It's
really inspiring, um, it's
really an inspiring statement to
share with our, with, with our
students. And uh another um
another uh rezism right here is
it's OK to feel somehow, you got
this. So this is just uh ways
that we like to indigenize our
NMSU campus.
Thanks, BSP.
And
And going on is, um, the RPSP um
initiative here. And, um, we
We hear, um, the Yazzie Martinez
was uh was a is a landmark case,
and we have heard those tribal
remedies and we implemented them
here on campus and some of the
projects that were involved in
in meeting the Yazi Martinez
initiative is we have created um
a Southern New Mexico curriculum
writing project, um, which was
funded by Kellogg Foundation and
also the PED, the New Mexico,
um, public education department
where we create
lesson plans, um, to, uh, to, to
address, um, those, uh, uh,
critically responsive,
critically linguistic, um,
needs, um, for New Mexico, but
in one particular lesson plan,
we had a Muscalero teacher, um,
up in, uh, Muscalero, uh,
Spencer Coho who created um
developed and delivered, um, a
lesson plan um on missing and
murdered indigenous women.
And he presented this to the
Muscalero schools and um with
the and and to the
superintendent, um, and it was
uh very much welcomed and um
celebrated event. So that was,
um, those are some lesson plans
we worked on. Also, what the,
what the funding has been able
to do is provide and build
capacity here at NMSU. Have you,
uh, you have seen the data, the
presence of Native American
faculty, tenured or non-tenured.
I, um, is that 1% and below. Um,
but with the funding, we have
been able to secure 210 year
track positions, um, one is, uh,
in, in Borland and ethics
studies in Native American
studies, and that is Doctor
Catherine Mintoya, and she's
Dane. Um, the other, um,
The other 10 year track position
is with Doctor Natalie Martinez,
Pueblo of Laguna, and she is in
curriculum and instruction and
teacher preparation,
administration, and leadership.
Mm
Um, so as I transition into the
preliminary recommendations,
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, um, I want to also
take an opportunity for also a
quick thank you, um, to, to you
all and the state in supporting
funding, um, that makes our PSB
projects such as the one that
Dr. Bodoni is involved in
possible. So thank you. Um, so
transitioning now into the
preliminary recommendations.
There are 3 that we're currently
sharing. There will be more
coming from the task force.
Um, but we want to convert the
task force to an actual
committee or a council. And so
as a standing committee, that
means that there will be some
consistency and continuity, and
you'll see the repetition of
consistency and continuity,
right? Um, and that'll also make
the work sustainable. Again,
going back to our EID goal about
a sustainable foundation and
support of our native students
but also all of our students
too. Secondly, the creation of
an NMSU liaison position.
Um, so of course, we will seek
funding, um, for, for that
position and that individual
will be focused on relationships
with business, with system
partners, and then also building
relationships with tribal
governments.
Those are just two bullets among
the many, many other duties that
that that this individual will
have. And then lastly, um,
really, uh, creating
opportunities for leadership
visits to tribal communities.
And when we talk about tribal
leadership visits we're talking
about the NMSU leadership, the
president, the provosts, deans,
vice presidents, and so on. And
that's also a way of creating
consistency and continuity in
that relationship building.
However, all of these
recommendations.
What is really needed is
resources and funding, um, to
ensure that sustainable, um,
foundation, so infrastructure
and part of that those resources
and funding, of course, will be
focused on recruitment and
retention of students and
faculty. Um, you saw some of the
data already, so we're wanting
really to retain and recruit
faculty and students. And then
also MOUs and tuition waivers,
and I'll ask Michael to explain
those briefly.
Madam Chair on the committee, as
you know, many of our higher
education institutions have
memorandums of understanding
with our tribal communities that
will include a tuition waiver as
you all have seen probably from
other institutions that is
getting harder and harder to
award being with the
opportunities scholarship
already taking on the lump sum
of tuition, we're looking at how
to revamp these that will go
towards their housing, their
board their dorm, their books,
so that way we can make sure
that the other side of the
equation is also taken into
consideration when students are
looking at their financial.
Packages when attending our
higher education.
And then lastly, in terms of
resources and funding, um,
that's going to help with
ongoing tribal, um,
relationships. Uh, so, um,
enough from us, um, we would
actually like to now have a
student spotlight and I'm gonna
ask Doctor Bodoni to introduce
our student.
Um, I've had the pleasure to,
um, meet, I, what I was saying
is the, the tallest Navajo that
I know, um.
Um,
Last year and um it's been
wonderful, engaging and seeing
um this athlete, this
inspiration on our campus, um,
because like I've said before,
you know, um, as a professor, we
also need people to look up to,
and I look up to this guy.
Um,
so, um, I'll have a Shiaj Pete
introduce himself in his, in his
language. I don't mean to put
him on the spot, but I'll have
him introduce himself, um.
She
Yeah,
it's initially say this
Norwegian bush chain.
Good morning, Madam Chair and
committee. My name is Sia Pete,
and I'm a senior here. I'm a
student athlete here at New
Mexico State and I am your left
tackle.
Uh,
happy to be here. Thanks, thank
you for having me. This is my
first committee, so but yeah, a
little bit about myself. I came
here in 2021, came in as a
preferred walk on.
Um, a bit of a culture shock
here, but I have adjusted well
and deeply invested my time here
at New Mexico. They they've
granted me numerous resources
I've met phenomenal people who
helped me alongside my journey.
I am.
Uh, acknowledging that I am
preparing myself for life
outside of college, outside of
football, and um.
Yeah, I just gotta say thanks,
thanks for having me and uh the
video that we're gonna present
has been, we've worked on this
earlier this year and we visited
a lot of places in Las Cruces
and in Riodoso and I am very
honored to be a part of those
communities, be part of Las
Cruces and New Mexico State. It
is a deep honor for allowing me
to have my story portrayed, but
OK.
And with that, um, we, uh,
again, thank you, um, Madam
Chair and members of the
committee, and we'll be happy to
take any questions.
Thank you. I have Senator
Rodriguez.
Thank, thank you, Madam
Chairman. Uh, good morning to
everyone. Thank you for your
presentation, for your work, and
most importantly for your
education of us. We get educated
by you all the time, and we need
to do more.
Uh, thank you, um, Madam
Chairman, for the opportunity to
just mention a couple of words,
but, uh, at least two things
caught my mind, my heart, it
moved me, and I say at least
because most of what you said is
very important,
but
One thing that came across in
the film to me was the initial
words that said that, and maybe
I'm not exact. I wrote them here
and my best fastness that I
could. And this is we are only
as strong as we are together.
And to me that was major because
it's very true, just like us
here, we alone, we can't get a
lot done, but when we stand
together, we certainly can move
mountains, right? We do a lot.
And so,
Uh, I really appreciated that
mindset of yours, um, another
thing. Second, Madam Chairman,
um, is the final, almost final
words in the, in the film also
when the gentleman said that um.
About an indestructible mind and
to to have how important it is
to in working towards an
indestructible mind. That is so
huge because as we know, that is
what happens to every one of us.
Our mind gets somehow it's, it
changes with pressure, with
strain, and with the
difficulties and trials in life,
right? And so we tend to deviate
and we get derailed in different
places and, um, I just thought
that the
Indestructible mind was so, um,
so important and pivotal by the
Chairman. So thank you for that,
but I do have just one question
and I'm gonna move on so others
can speak. But I, I like the
fact that you're doing the task
force that you're talking about,
um, and, and that's wonderful
because the more people
together, the better as we
talked. But I do have a
question. How are you fitting in
with the tribal collaboration
Act that happens hopefully every
year
The governor, um, and the
executive and the legislature
supported and passed this tribal
collaboration act for tribes and
all natives to get together and
discuss collaboration efforts
and how to better a tribal
communities. Uh, but I see that.
You are, you're looking at
changing from a task force in
transition to a commission or a
council you said or a committee,
uh, and my first question in my
mind was, I wonder how you are
working now or intend to work in
this tribal collaboration Act
because one thing, Madam
Chairman, I'll let you answer, I
promise. One thing I find, Madam
Chairman, is that, uh, sometimes
we have task forces, councils,
committees.
And, um, groups of different
kinds, and they all are in their
own little world. And so we want
to make sure that there's that
collaboration so that we can
have one result that's good for
the whole and for everyone. So
thank you, Madam Chairman, if
you can answer that.
Um, Madam Chair and, uh, Senate
Senator Rodriguez, thank you for
that question. We have not
talked about the tribal
collaboration Act, um, as a task
force. So thank you for that
because actually I'll bring that
to our next meeting. Um, I do
want to ask Doctor Booni or
Michael if they wanted to
respond to that question at all.
No. OK. Um, I just want to make
sure, um, so this is something
that I'll bring to our next
meeting, which I believe is, um,
next Tuesday. Thank you. OK.
Thank you very much for that. I
know that tribes do
individually, uh, participate. I
don't know if all of them, but I
think a good amount do
participate. I don't know, I
think it's done annually or if
not every two years, but I think
it's annually. And, um, they get
together in one place in New
Mexico and, and it's a pretty,
um, you know, pretty good forum
for
want to talk and hopefully get
some results and
recommendations, um, but, um,
and, and one important word,
Madam Chairman, that I see needs
to come out of this whole
scenario that we're talking
about and I'm gonna leave you
with that. And that is
meaningful consultation. What
happens is that we communicate,
we consult, we collaborate, but
is it really meaningful to
anyone? I mean, what does it
mean in your, in, in native
culture, um, do we truly
understand that?
obviously,
many times we don't, and that's
why, uh, we need to ensure that
it's meaningful and not just
communication or collaboration.
Thank you so much. I've taken
too long, Madam Chairman, I
appreciate your time. Oh, I do
have one quick question I
promise. I'm gonna let you go,
uh, on another matter, um, uh,
Doctor, um, uh, Schultz. Yes,
um, you mentioned you're gonna,
you may have a tribal, a liaison
for an MSU. I wondered if that
liaison is going to be specific
for tribal needs.
Or is it going to be general and
include tribal needs.
Actually, the way that we're
developing the different, um,
duties of the position. It's
going to be specific to tribal
needs, I would say Michael and
and Doctor Bodoni.
Yeah, OK
Did you want it?
Yeah, yes. So yes, to answer
your question, yeah. Thank you.
And I know state departments do
have a liaison, a tribal
liaison, but I don't think
universities have had one that I
know of in the past. So this is
a good, a good move and I'm
happy to see that it's specific
for tribal needs, because what
happens there is that we put
together a, a tribal liaison for
state, statewide or state
concerns and tribes get lost
there. It's a piece that it
never reaches them. So we need
to make sure. Thank you, Madam
Chairman and thank you.
And, and some universities
actually do have um liaisons,
um, and so we're modeling what
we would want to do here based
on examples from other
institutions. Wonderful. Thank
you so much.
Thank you, Senator. Next on the
list I have Representative
Roybel Caballero.
Good morning, Madam Chair, Vice
Chair committee, um, and thank
you very much, uh.
All of you for your
presentation. I have one, I have
several questions, but to start
off, um, I'm
I've been, I've had the honor
and, and, um,
The honor of being part of
UNM's, uh, Native American
studies and Chicano Chicano
studies, uh, departments, they,
they work together.
Uh, on a multitude of, um, in a
multitude of ways. And so I've
gotten to know very well, um,
the programs and I'm a PhD
student there, so I'm I'm trying
to complete it. It's taking
forever, but trying to complete
it. My first question is, and I
wasn't here for the beginning, I
apologize. Um,
Is Native American studies a
program or department here at NM
missile.
OK
Thank you for your question. It
is a it is a program we are in
the department of Borderlands
and Ethnic Studies, um, and, uh,
I, I, I don't know if you were
here, but um so far I, we have a
recent hire, um, I had shared
that we were able to hire on uh
Doctor Catherine Montoya. So now
I am a program of two native
faculty and Native American
studies and um
you had spoke that you are uh uh
uh from the UNM Native American
Studies program, which is um
which is a wonderful program. We
collaborate a lot with UNM
faculty, and we've had actually
it took um Dr. Tiffany Lee, um,
of Native American studies to
really push for um Native
American studies to move into
borderlands and ethnic studies.
So we, we've had the, we've had
their support, um, the idea, of
course, is always to expand.
the infrastructure, um, we need,
uh, more, more faculty, of
course. I, that's, that's what
we, we would like and to expand
our program. That's the vision.
Thank you.
So it is, uh, thank you very
much, Madam Chair, is it
anticipated that you will remain
or are you going to begin the
process to establish officially
a department?
We, um, have been in Borderlands
and ethics studies for 2 years
and we are still um building
that program. We're still
building within that program,
um, but yeah, thank you.
Thank you. I appreciate that. I,
I think that, um,
My opinion, having been an
ethnic studies involved so many
years is that we need to
institutionalize our departments
and that, um, strengthens our
ability to recruit and retain
not only students but faculty
and staff and so beginning that
I know is a very laborious
process. I've gone through it
already with Chicana Chicano
studies, uh, we got
We went from program to
online.
certificates and graduation, BA,
MA, and then finally, PhD, um,
which was a real laborious
process, but it's well worth it
because now both departments are
thriving, and the only pitfall,
and this is my question to, um,
Doctor Schultz has been that you
and them um has not in again in
my opinion, done.
Well in removing
Um, these ethnic departments
from the or placing them in the
RPSB process, did I say that
correct? And so consequently for
years suffered many setbacks,
financially because, again,
uh the institution,
Has failed to recognize it as a
priority. So what is NMS uses
plan, I saw that, um.
On your, uh, research and public
service project page, um,
I made a note to ask whether I
know I heard that you had
funding from Kellogg.
And other sources that you've
been able to leverage but is
NMSU begin going to place.
Native American studies into the
RPSB process as a priority.
Uh, thank you for that. And
that's probably something I
didn't make very clear in
speaking about it is, um, I am
the Native American studies uh
director. So the funding for the
RPSP um was able to, uh, not,
uh, so the, the
the the part that I spoke about
like creating of of lesson plans
and working with Southern New
Mexico educators that was uh
Kellogg funded, but because the
curriculum.
Implemented um uh tribally
focused, um, CLR focused.
Curriculum, but we, we had, um,
highlighted that, but it wasn't
funded by the RPSB the RPSP
funding was able to start um
building that infrastructure,
start building our program in
Native American studies, um, so
that we were able to not only
fund two tenure track positions,
but also what we didn't include
on here was the the program
manager. We definitely want to
hire a program manager, and
that's, that's coming soon.
That's coming soon, um, to be
able to take care of the funding
but also to be to have someone,
um, be a little bit more in
charge of, of that, that
component part of it, but
I would thank you, I would
strongly suggest Dr. Schultz
that we that we institutionalize
all of these efforts and that
way you don't have to struggle
as much as other institutions in
the state have. Uh, in terms of,
and thank you for talking about
the writing project on lessons
plans for PED because that's
very, very important to begin
our uh process into
institutionalizing ethnic
studies from K through 12. And
we're gonna, Senator Lopez and I
will continue to
Introduce those bills and
anticipate your support for
that, but in terms of higher
education department, have you,
um, established a relationship
to to begin developing
curriculum.
Um,
Not just curriculum but assist
in the development of curriculum
in the higher education within
the higher education department
processes to and it's also part
of the Yazi Martinez attempt to
begin, not attempt, but
Order for us to again
institutionalize culturally and
linguistically relevant
education all the way through
higher ed. So is there, is there
a relationship with higher ed
department as it relates to, um,
Bilingual education,
multilingual, cultural, uh,
curriculum development.
I'm not sure,
yeah, um, I can speak a little
bit about that just because I'm
in, um, Native American, uh,
Native American studies. So, um,
the work that we've done is
creating courses like, um, you
know, native, Native American
education, which of course
covers um, you know, pre-contact
education all the way to even
contemporary, um, even
contemporary, uh, issues and
policies that are happening in
Indian country, including, you
know, especially here in the
state. My vision, of course,
would be to um
You know,
Have it be part of the teacher
education program to get a
certification, um.
As part of like a Yazi Martinez,
um, understanding, you know, the
CLR certificate like would be
would be great or even being
native education certification
would be ideal for me, but
again, that would be uh a
teacher preparation, a TPal
question. Thank you. Yes, thank
you. That is the direction and I
failed to be specific about
that, but thank you. And
finally, Mr. Pete.
In my household, we have a
rivalry. I am a UNM graduate,
and my son is NMSU. Wait till I
tell him about Mr. Pete, because
he is incredibly involved in
sports has been, uh, he played
football, track, uh, and he has
continued except now he's a dad.
He's a little bit older and so
his focus of her two children,
but I think he would love.
To come and see you.
And visit with you and I think
I'm gonna lose out on the
rivalry from this point forward.
So thank you so much. You are an
incredible inspiration.
to your communities.
Uh, and I, I just can't thank
you enough, and I wish you the
very best in all of your
pursuits. I know just from
seeing you, hearing you and.
On film as well that you will be
successful in all you do. Thank
you and thank you very much.
Thank
Colleagues I have representative
Little, Representative Zamora,
and Vice Chair Pinto, and we are
getting a little behind
schedule, and we have E K. So
Representative Little, thank
you.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Members
of the committee, good morning.
Thank you for the presentation
this morning and so good to meet
you. Um, I have a couple of
questions. I hope there will be
uh rather quick. Would you
please, um, describe the
relationship, um,
that you have with the tribal
education program directors in
each of the communities. Um, and
I'm interested in, uh, finding
out what the relationship is in
reaching those students as well.
In the either the tribally run
schools, BIE schools, um, such
as, uh, Santaan School, Navajo
Prep, NACA, and the others that
are in the state.
Madam Chair, uh, Representative
Little, thank you for the
question. Uh, we have a really
great relationship with our
travel education directors. Um,
one of the things that I usually
get to do pre-pandemic was go
out into the communities during
the summers and meet
specifically with the education
directors talk about what the 5
year, 10 year plans of the
tribal community are and how we
can meet those needs. One of the
things we often talk about is
the pathway building for tribal
communities and what they are
looking for when it comes to how
they want to have their students
return to the tribal community,
but also even address some of
the things that.
Maybe be inhibiting the students
returning when it comes to
potential housing when a
potential um where, you know,
how they are going to be working
in the community being that
sometimes our tribal communities
are um house using uh housing
and urban development monies,
and unfortunately sometimes
they're priced out when it comes
to being a professional in the
community and not being under
that income requirement to be in
those residences, so we often
talk about a lot of different
factors when it comes to
students coming to NMSU and
returning back in
To the tribal communities. Uh,
we also work with the higher
education commissions, um,
Native American liaison, Nathan
Macchino, when it comes to
finding out who is the new
person, as we know,
unfortunately, um, turnover is
high when it comes to those
positions being that they often
wear multiple hats, so we always
try and keep aware of who are in
those different positions um
when we do go into the tribal
communities when it comes to
college and career fairs, I
would usually do that, but more
recently we hired a Native
American recruiter when it comes
to our missions, so that way.
That individual, um, right now
they're embedded in Crystal, New
Mexico where they have that Four
Corners area as a really close
knit community that they're
available to go to, but we also
help supplement with that, like
you mentioned NACA, um, uh,
James Montoya is the person that
we work with over at NCA and you
know help out when it comes to
creating that relationship with
the students, letting them know
again that it's not just come
down to NMSU and find the
program is No, my name is
Michael Ray. I'm the director of
the American Indian Program.
You have questions, you can come
directly to my office. You know,
that sense of personal tension
that we have, but also I'm
seeing more and more of the
people who I went to high school
with their children now becoming
of college age and they're
saying, oh, my mom told me I had
to come see you because we went
to high school. My dad told me
or my uncle told me, so again,
that developing the
relationships that we've been
talking about when it comes to
the networks we hold. We now see
our students are seeing that, oh
wow, my parents actually know.
People or you know, you know my
family, you know, that type of
awkwardness when we get to see,
yeah, we've been in your
community, we know we're the
library, we know all the
resources so that way when a
student is having difficulty
when it comes to we probably be
brought up later on broadband
issues. We know some of the
remedies that can be done when
it comes to visiting the library
or visiting those particular
areas where cell phone service
is available because again that
additional um attention to
detail helps us out in creating
remedies as opposed to, OK,
let's see what we can find out.
And we'll get back to you in 10
amount of days or hours.
Thank you very much for that
response, Madam Chair. One more
question or two more questions,
but, um, you mentioned you
briefly mentioned it, and I know
just what you mean when you're
talking about, um, your, um,
contemporaries.
Classmates and their kids and
grandkids sometimes in my case
are who are getting ready for
college, um, but I'm curious,
when you mentioned that and
talking about the parents, uh,
more parents are now either
wanting to complete a degree in
undergraduate degree, or
actually now that the children,
their children are older, may be
looking at opportunities for
graduate degrees. How do you
work and when I was going back
and I asked because I was also
Madam Chair and, um,
was termed then a
non-traditional student, uh,
coming back into the college
area.
How um, how are you, uh, have
you, and can you describe how
you're incorporating, um,
reaching those, um, potential
students.
Madam Chair and the committee,
um, when we go out into
community, we talk to everybody,
um, as representative, uh, Chair
Johnson knows I'm quite
loquacious when it comes to
talking, um, but one of the
things, uh, we do mention when
we have a family, you come to
the table, I usually ask, OK,
how many of you are coming down
to NMSU or how many of you are
going to become a naggie because
we talked to families when it
comes to are you ready to also
get that next degree when it
comes to either be a master's or
a PhD.
Utilizing our intimacy global.
So for those individuals who are
placed locked, you know, we know
some of our community members
are working with our tribal
community and they can't take 4
years off, 3 years off and
expect to have that job back
when they're ready to come back
into the community. So this is
where they're able to utilize
the power of our NMSU global
community to advance their
careers when it comes to going
to that master's or PhD or the
bachelor's as well. So we often
talk as well as we will take the
whole family.
No, just as community when it
comes to again this the Aggie
family, but also when it comes
to educational opportunities as
well. So we definitely do talk
about that because we are able
to utilize NMSU Global's reach,
easier than it was in the past.
Well, thank you for that, um,
response. I appreciate that. Um,
yeah, I think that there are a
lot more people who with the
opportunities that are also
created have been created for
continuing education, uh, CTE,
um, also opportunities. Um,
Madam Chair, my last question is
to director I'd like to direct
to Mr. Pete, um, I am really,
uh,
Really happy for you. I'm happy
for your success. I think you've
worked very hard to get to do
what you're doing. And, um, one
question that I'm curious about
is, uh, how do you envision
using your, you've got a long
career ahead of you, but how do
you envision using your
communication degree because
that's not a degree that's, um,
as me and my friend in the
audience now, that's not a
degree that many people, um,
work towards.
Specifically Native American
students as well, but I'm
finding that there are more
opportunities for inspiration as
well, so.
Would you mind ment I think we'd
all like to know what you're
planning to do. Thank you.
The reason why I'm studying
communications is I feel it's
kind of like a superpower with
today's, you know, in today's
age, people don't really, people
tend to disassociate themselves
with a lot of things and that
lack of communication is rather
unhealthy.
So I want to bring that back and
shine some light to it, but you
know, what I plan and focus on,
you know, for this semesters,
uh, being a part of uh multiple
communities is stepping outside
my comfort zone and.
Being of use of anywhere I can
when it comes to, uh, career
wise I'm.
Looking out for internships and
whatnot see where, where I can
be blessed, best applicable, so
to speak, but.
That's my my plan so far. Right
now I'm just taking it one day
at a time, getting stronger,
getting smarter.
As you should. Um, so thank you,
Madam Chair. That's all, uh, all
my questions. Thank you.
Representative Zamora.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
And I too want to congratulate
Mr. Pete for your
your goals that you're setting
and and what you're
accomplishing and.
It's very apparent that God gave
you a gift.
And, uh, I did think that I
heard you say that you had.
Inspirations or plans to do
something outside of football.
It was that, is that, did I hear
that in your interview, in your,
yeah, of course, uh.
First off, I'd like to see how
far football can take me.
And what not and uh.
If anything, I'm
I'm a
How do you, how do you mean?
Can you reset your question?
So, so I wondered if you had
other plans to, to excel in some
other career other than
football, I'd love to be.
Anything with the environment,
environmental science or whatnot
with an ecology, that's what I
first came here wanting to do.
And I, I'd love to be a
participant and activists, so to
speak, in that regard.
You, you have something about
you that really stands out.
It's, it's, uh,
Just you have you have a gift,
you have a gift and
Maybe, maybe you can be a
representative or a senator
someday,
you know.
So, so one of my other
questions, Madam Chair, is, uh,
More to
To the doctor, uh, shows is on,
on this page where you showed us
the
The numbers on on what's been
going on.
What do you expect those numbers
to do now in 2024, uh,
I was, I was particularly
interested more in the
doctorates.
Will we see that go quite a, go
up quite a bit in numbers or I'm
waiting and that
that's data, so the doctorate
data is from NSF, um, the
National Science Foundation, and
in October, they're going to
come out with their 2023 data.
Um, I, I hope I see it go up
because in, um, 2021, the number
was actually 30% there had been
100, um, earned doctorates on
individuals who identify as
American, Indian, or native.
Um, so, so within a year the
numbers dropped by 2, so I'm,
I'm anxiously awaiting for the
current NSF data coming out in
October. I'd like, I'm hoping to
see it go up. In terms of, um,
faculty, um, for NMSU is Dr.
Bodoni shared, um, we're at
least seeing some increase in
faculty representation. Uh, so,
so we're monitoring those
numbers, uh, pretty, pretty
closely.
So does that help to answer your
question? That's that's good to
see and good to hear those,
that, that kind of, uh, report.
And is this kind of work going
on like uh in, in Albuquerque,
New Mexico, uh, University of
New Mexico or, or just this just
happening here in Las Cruces?
Um, in terms of the native work
being done in the, you guys
like.
Uh, promoting more native
education and all that, I'm not
sure that they have a task
force, but Dr. Badon interacts
more with you UNM faculty, um,
do you know?
I think that they definitely
have more opportunities just
because of where they're
located, but um, I can speak for
the Native American studies at
UNM is that they are like
heavily involved in all levels,
like, you know, native
education, native activism, and
they work from anywhere within
the urban areas also to um uh
like native communities
specifically too, so I know, but
those, those are areas I can
speak to. Also the the education
department is also
Um, pretty much involved. I
mean, they have a native
education programming. I don't
know if they have a doctoral
program, uh, within that, but I
know that they, um.
are are involved not only in
research but also in practice as
well. Thank you for that
question and thank you for your
answers and thank you for the
great presentation. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you
Representative Alcon.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I just,
um,
I want you to know that I have
been a Cowboy fan for over 40
years.
So, uh, if you get uh drafted to
another team, I might change.
Uh, I follow you. One thing I do
want to know is, can we get your
autograph before you leave.
All right
Thank you. That's my question,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Madam Vice Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair, members
of the committee, thank you for
your presentation and I think
that tribal collaboration is
very important because there are
some gaps in there that unless
you're at the table with them,
especially when we talked about
the graduate level, so keep
those in mind, especially when
you come back before us about
how, uh, how the funding is if
it's adequate or not. And our
young men here, I think, um,
first I met you, you were a
freshman.
And uh the man of few words, but
now you're actually at the table
with us here and, you know, it's
great to see where you are right
now and to see you grow and uh
it's been really, um, every time
we come down, it's always a
curiosity of how you're doing
and uh thank you to the staff
and faculty and, you know, as we
move forward, if there's
anything we can do for our
students down here or even
throughout the state. Any ideas
or even for you, don't hesitate
to reach out to us because I
feel like I was.
The recruiter in some senses for
NMSU after I met you, I was
like, there's Josh Py's down to
you and, you know, to
to a lot of our, our young
athletes out there at the, the
possibility to go to college and
um, you know, get a, get an
education and play sports too is
is is something that's possible.
So thank you for being an
inspiration and, uh, you know,
uh,
anything you need uh on your
blessings on your next endeavor,
and uh thank you for getting an
education and uh being before
us, I think this says a
to have you here in our
committee before you decide what
you do next. So thank you very
much.
Thank you, colleagues. Thank you
for your questions and your
comments and your encouragement.
Thank you for your presentation,
uh, each and every one of you,
I'm proud of you. Thank you for
the work that you're doing on
our behalf. Thank you for taking
care of our children. As a
result, look what you have
produced, so thank you so much.
Shia Sage.
So proud of you.
I'm touched.
Because back home we're, we're
raising boys.
And this is what we want.
So I'm just so proud of you.
Keep going, yeah go and.
Thank you. So with that, we'll
see you next time. And yes,
please, uh, come visit us in
Santa Fe, come visit our offices
and let us know how we can help
you.
Thank you.
So moving forward on our agenda.
Agenda item 11, workforce
solutions department and I think
I saw the secretary.
All righty, colleagues, let's go
ahead and move on to agenda item
number 11. Welcome, Secretary,
and you may begin.
OK
Thank you. Am I on the mic? OK.
OK, great.
Thank you, um, Representatives,
senators, Madam Chair, for
having me here today. It's my
first time before this
committee, so, um, always happy
to be here at New Mexico State.
My daughter is an Aggie, um, and
she's gonna see that interchange
and that roundabout and be like,
why didn't they have that when I
was at school here because it's
really nice. Um, but I have a
short presentation today on the
energy Transition Act followed
by a few other initiatives that
we're doing, um, with some of
our tribes and pueblos.
So, um, I'll start with, uh, I
don't know if the presentation
goes up there or no?
No, I, I don't need it up, but
if you have it, OK. Um, so I'll
just say when I'm moving to the
next slide. So moving to this
first slide, slide number 2. I
always like to start with a
little overview of our
department because a lot of
people don't know, um, what we
do. Uh, so we have 3 big legs to
our department, unemployment
insurance, uh, employment
services, which below it has,
uh, the WOA Workforce Innovation
Opportunity Act as well as, uh,
we have business outreach, we
have the state apprenticeship
office. We have Ame.
Uh, we have the H2A, which is
the agricultural visa and the
H-2B program, the migrant
seasonal farm worker program,
and, uh, a number of others and
then under labor relations,
that's our enforcement arm. We
have Wage now. We're human
rights, paid sick leave, public
works, um, enforcement and then
sort of underlying that all is
the economic research and
analysis Bureau, where you get a
lot of data and we work closely
with the legislature, um, in
providing that data. And then I
always just remind people we're
not.
Workers' compensation.
So, um, moving on to the next
slide, slide number 3.
Uh, as everybody here knows, you
know, we had the mass layoffs up
in the Four Corners region when
the San Juan Generating Station
closed in the Westmoreland mine.
Um, actually, I believe they
demolished the stack was it last
week or last two weeks ago. And,
um, so, uh, we've been engaged
as the layoffs were happening.
We conducted rapid response
sessions and provide job search
assistance. We worked with the
employers to create a
standardized process for
unemployment claims, and then we
created a bridge program with
San
On college to have workers come
in, um, right after the layoff
and and start to get used to
what a trading environment might
environment might look like. A
lot of folks had never been to
school or hadn't been to school
in a long time. So we wanted to
kind of get him back on campus
just to see what it would feel
like.
Moving on to the next slide.
Uh, so I,
We got a check from uh P&M.
And I think late July 2022. I
started here, uh, August 15th,
2022, so one of my first orders
of business was to figure out
what's going on with the energy
transition, uh, displaced worker
assistance fund, and the slide
shows the breakdown of the money
that PNM provided. Um, I noticed
we have Mr. Lucero from P&M in
the audience here today. They've
been great partners throughout
the energy transition. Um, I
also want to point out that I
have my colleague Raquel Gomez
here today from the uh she's my
special project.
Coordinator give you a wave
there, and she is, um, doing all
things energy transition. So if
you can't find me and you need
to talk energy transition, she's
the one.
Uh, so the first, uh, phase of
the Energy Transition Act is
placed worker assistance fund
was informed by the work of the
community advisory committee.
Uh, they had been meeting for
some time, but we held another
meeting, um, after the money was
in place and what we heard loud
and clear from the workers is we
just need help to get through
the next couple of months. It's
expensive to lose your job. Um,
for a lot of people, they were
losing health care, not just for
themselves but for their entire
families. And so, uh, we settled
on a path of doing
Direct assistance to those
folks, um, and we also had, of
course, tribal consultation
prior to making the decision,
uh, President Nyren's office
came, uh, council Speaker Curley
from the Navajo Nation has been
very involved, as was, um,
may he rest in President Varde
from Hickory Apache was also
very involved in those
consultations, and we were very
grateful for that. Uh, so we'd
sat on this, um, path of doing
direct assistance payments, but
we'd use the opportunity to
meet.
with every single participant
who met, who, um, received one
of those payments and we were
able to connect them to social
services, to EOA. We had some
fairs where we had everything
from how to set up a bank
account to, um, help with all
different kinds of social
services. And it really gave us
a sense of what we thought the
workers would need going forward
and who these displaced workers
are. So the next few slides are
about the demographics of this
population. So moving on to the
slide that's numbered 5.
You'll see some of the
demographics, um, the graph is
an age pyramid that shows the
age range of the folks that came
in having lost their jobs. Um,
we also, there were 89% male, no
surprise, given the industry.
Um, and almost half Native
American and of the Native
American population, 97% were
Navajo. We also saw people who
self-identified as Chickasaw,
Choctaw, Potawatomi, Southern
Paiute, Southern U, U in Ud
Mountain. Uh, so there was a
good representation of regional,
uh, tribes.
As well. Uh, 53% of them were
union members, 25% of them had,
had just gone straight into
retirement because they were
eligible.
Moving on to the next slide.
This one is a tree graph of the
worker's locations and, um, you
know, Farmington, of course,
having the lion's share, but
Kirtland, um, other New Mexico
locations, Bloomfield,
Fruitland, Shiprock, all the
places you would expect. 96% of
the workers lived in San Juan
County.
Moving on to the next slide,
slide 7, this, uh, shows the
education levels, so, um, and
then also whether folks were,
uh, in school or not in school.
So whether they had already
started training or not. You'll
see that the, the most number of
of
People who lost their jobs were
high school diploma, um, but
there were quite a few people
with associate's degrees in
technical school, and, um, then
mostly on the PNM side, some
folks with higher education as
well.
And then moving on to the next
slide, um, staying with
demographics here, this shows
who was working, who was in
school, and, um, sort of who was
doing neither. That's what those
three graphs are. So the first
graph is the first bar is who's
working the red or the folks who
were not in school, the blue are
the folks who were in school,
then we have that middle column
again red working part time,
blue working part-time and
attending school. And then in
the third column, working full
time, read, working
time, not in school blue, uh,
attending school and working
full time. And what we heard
loud and clear and what this
data really reflects is that
people really did not have the
option to just take time to get
retrained. If we were going to
offer a retraining program we
needed to offer living stipends
as well because these were uh
primary breadwinners who had to
go back to work full time, even
if it meant making a lot less
money. So in the 2023 session,
um, was it 2023?
2020, yeah, 2023. I don't know,
the years blend together. Um, in
the 2023 session, I believe, uh,
we were able to do two great
things. Um, the governor gave us
$15.4 million from her part of
the set aside, uh, to invest in
phase two of the displaced
worker assistance program. And
then we were also able to pass a
bill that kind of cleaned up
some of the language in the ETA
which had originally limited um
our ability to help people, to
people who had lost their job
within the previous 18 months.
And, uh, it made sense at the
time, I'm sure, but what we
learned through this process is
that
A, the roll-offs are not usually
all at once, so keeping track of
that rolling timeline is
complicated. Um,
There's a lot of trauma
associated with the mass closure
of this nature that's so deeply
and profoundly affects the
nature of the economy.
And uh so we know that people
aren't going to wake up the next
morning and say, you know, what,
what can I do next? There's
going to be a period of grief
and trauma that we just have to
make sure that when we're
funding programs, that money
sticks around. So it's wonderful
that the legislature created the
displaced worker assistance fund
as non-reverting. Um, and it's
also great that we were able to
reauthorize and then extend that
money and really um
Representative Allison took the
lead in, in getting the
extension of that money, and he
was joined in this.
sponsorship of that bill with
the entire, um, San Juan County
delegation, so we're grateful to
Representative Montoya Lane and,
and Duncan also advocated for
that change. So slide 9 shows
you what the phase two program
really looks like. Um, we knew
that there were folks who were
working full time, they were
happy where they were, but they
were making a lot less money
than they did at the plant or
the coal mine. And so, um, also,
you know, some of the folks who
had been involved in the
original Energy Transition Act
felt like there had been a
Promise made to those workers
that we would make up those
wages, at least for some period
of time.
And so we offered what we called
a wage differential payment, um,
and that was just a $20,000
one-time payment. You had to
come in, you had to show us your
pay stub before the layoff, your
pay stub after, and if you were
making less, um, we, you were
eligible for that payment, of
course you had to still be
living in New Mexico.
And we've had 236 applications
for that differential payment.
Um, and that's good news because
it means that they're working
full time and they're still in
the area, um, not as great news
as if they were making as much
more money as they were before,
but still good news. Um, another
path in phase two is direct
training. Um, there's no
one-time payment, but we're, we
pay your training costs up to
$30,000 and we pay a living
stipend while you're in your
training of $2000 per month.
up to $36,000 so 18 months. Um,
and that one is the one that
seems to really be taking seed.
Um, people are interested in
this because they can afford to
go to school when they're
getting that living stipend.
And then the third path is
apprenticeship. It's, uh, the
same deal in covering training.
It's the same deal in covering a
living stipend, but we also
would reimburse employers for
one half of their higher base
wages up to 12 months because
there is actually a shortage of
employers who host
apprenticeships in that area.
Um, we actually have had no
takers on the apprenticeship
program yet. Um, so we're
continuing to talk about it. Um,
and I'll talk a little more
about our continued efforts, but
Just moving on to the next
slide, uh, which is number 10.
This is the data that we have on
wage differentials. We're still
validating and cleaning it, so,
um, don't be surprised if this
looks a little different if you
see it in the future, but, uh,
what you'll see, this is in
$5000 increments, and you'll see
that many, many people make
almost what they made before,
under $5000 of a wage
differential, um, 62% make more
than $20,000 less than.
before. So, um, that we, that
felt like it was good
justification for the amount we
had set on the wage differential
payment. Um, and then again,
just a reminder, this was not
just PNM, um, employees, this
was Babcock and Wilcox
Construction, Midway Railway
supply aims, MJ Electric Savage
Services, Suritas, um, just a
number of employees represented
here, but as you can see, there
were some really significant uh
losses of wages in that area and
we're hopeful that those folks
will still consider, uh,
pursuing.
training.
So, uh, slide 11, next slide.
About, um, this, this shows sort
of where folks are now, and
you'll see that about 38% of all
the, the folks that we worked
with, um, are working and
they're eligible for the
differential, about 24% as
expected, were retired. Um, and
then we've got about 8%. There's
a, I think 51 workers who are
still working in reclamation.
We've set aside their $40,000
one-time payment, um, so that
they can get that whenever they
separate service, about
Uh, 5% are either in training or
will be receiving, uh, training
soon, um, either in late fall or
the spring semester, and about
2% are already retrained, uh,
because we started that
immediately with the we owe him
money. Um, but then we got about
22%, um, about 120 some people
who are not in any of these
categories. So they could be
employed in making more than
they were before, which is
great. They might have moved,
which we don't love, but it
happens.
But they also might just not be
aware of this program yet. So we
have um entered into a
partnership with San Juan
College. We actually just
launched it last week, um, and
they are partnering with all of
the area educational
institutions, um, including, uh,
Navajo Tech and Dina College to
um really promote this program.
We have offices now on their
campus and, um, hopefully doing
a good job of aggressively
marketing the career pathway.
They are also providing support.
wraparound services for
everybody regardless of whether,
where they actually attend
school. So that means if you
need help connecting to other
social service programs
enrolling in free childcare, all
that stuff. Um, they're going to
provide that support and
hopefully we'll be able to, by
the next time I talk to you,
this chart won't have another
column and it'll have a lot
bigger column for, uh, in
retraining and in
apprenticeship.
So, um,
that's the end of my slides
about the ETA, but of course
when we get to questions, I'm
happy, happy to answer, uh,
other questions, but I wanted to
also take this opportunity
before you to talk about some
other initiatives that we're
doing with New Mexico's nation
tribes and pueblos. Uh, we've
got a partnership going with the
Native American Workforce
programs and to be honest, I
didn't even know that this
coalition existed, um, but
thanks to the Lanel Foundation
who gave them startup and um
Stephanie Poston, who's here in
the audience and also
works with us on tribal
consultation and tribal, uh,
issues. We got connected with
these folks and they're
absolutely amazing. I mean,
there are, um, quite a number
of, uh, tribal training, uh,
tribal workforce programs
receiving money under weow our
other related programs. And so
what we've been working with
them on is co-enrollment so that
our participants get the benefit
of the programs, both tribal and
and state, um, braiding funding
for those participants and also
training each other so the
picture.
You see there is um some of the
folks from NAWP Bernadette
Panttea from ZUNY, Rosemary
Reano from Kea, and Tara Frank
from the National Indian Youth
Center, which is now called the
Native American Native
Professional Advancement Center,
and they were training our staff
on how to better work and
coordinate with the tribal
workforce programs, but they
also stayed for our full day of
training and so they got the
training in all of our WOA
programs and, and, uh, I'm just
excited about that being a true
partnership. Uh, we've also
been able to take the Bro be
proud. Hopefully you've all seen
that. That is a semi truck that
has virtual reality career
stations in it to help get kids
excited about careers in the
trades. Um, we've taken that to
Sandia Pueblo, um specifically
for women in the construction
industry event to aleta Pueblo
in conjunction with the trucking
association Dr championship. Uh,
we were at Navajo Prep for G2G.
Uh, we were at CA and Sippi and
San Felipe and Z SUNY and Zuni
did a really
thing they had not just a day at
the school, which is what I went
out there for, but they had a
community day, um, where they
had people of all ages coming
through and what we found is the
kids are, they, they pick up the
VR, they know how to do it,
they're learning about the
career, but the people my age
are learning about the VR and
they're putting on the glasses
and they're having their first
virtual reality experience, and
that's what it was like in the
community day. But, you know,
increasingly that's going to be
a core job skill. So we're,
we're really excited about that
piece as well.
And then, uh, moving on to the
next slide, numbered 13 if my
vision is correct, um,
We became aware, we always the
workforce innovation Opportunity
Act. It's currently been in the
process of being reauthorized by
Congress for years. Uh, but we
became aware that there were a
lot of concerns, um, from Native
American tribe and tribal
workforce programs. And so, uh,
our friends at NAWP shared with
us a letter signed by 73, um,
grantees under WIOA and Native
organizations stakeholders that
really clearly explain their
concerns.
And it was originally issued in
response to the House version of
the we are, we are
reauthorization bill.
What we, um,
Mm
We reviewed it and agreed with
their concerns and the top three
concerns, uh, were really that
there were a lot of limitations
on how much money could be spent
on administrative costs and when
you have a $60,000 grants and
you're telling people they can
only spend 10% or 20% on
administrative costs, you're
basically saying you cannot
spend this money. Um, and so we,
we agreed with that concern. Um,
we agreed with the, the some of
the data sharing requirements
because they were unfunded
mandates and none of us
None of our systems are set up
to share data with each other.
And also there was a real uneven
treatment of the two different
types of tribal workforce
programs, um, and it's a little
bit in the weeds, but, um, we
also agreed that really there
hadn't been anything close to
tribal consultation or um
engagement with tribal
communities anywhere in the
nation with before they made
these changes. So, of course, we
support that. So we were able to
get all of these concerns into
the Senate Health Committee and
also to become
Part of the National Association
of State Workforce Agencies, uh,
positions on we reauthorization
and of course, reached out
directly to our senators and so
hopefully, um, together with all
of our voices, we've also shared
that letter with Montana, which
has a number of tribal workforce
programs and had no idea about
these concerns. So hopefully we
can all together amplify those
concerns and see, um, what comes
out of the Senate.
So, um,
That's my presentation and I'm
happy to take questions. Um,
there's some pictures on the
back there of just some, uh,
great programs that we've seen
in our travels, the Tehatchie
High School combat robot team
is, um, absolutely fun if you've
never done combat robots, um,
it's, it's an experience and
then uh the Gallup McKinley
County High Schools have amazing
pathways programs. One of them
is the health program, and that
is, uh, to young native students
telling me that my blood
pressure is too high.
So with that I'll stand for
questions.
Thank you committee members,
Representative Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Madam Secretary. It's
so good to see you. I appreciate
the information that you've
brought forward. I have a quick
question on whether, uh, taking
a look at the, um, chart, uh,
uh, slide 9 on the worker
assistance, um,
Um, opportunities. I was just
wondering, uh, did I miss or
would you let me, um.
Let the committee know whether
there's a timeframe associated,
um, with the direct training
stipends, the stipends that go
along with them, is there a
timeframe? Are these open-ended
until they finish, uh, uh, um,
Complete their training, um, it
ends up, um, Madam Chair and
Representative Little. Uh, it
ends up being 18 months at $2000
per month because we have a cap
on it that you have to, you
know, evidence that you've
remained in training, um, but
there's no time limit on when
you can start. Um, so we're
still taking new enrollees, and
again, that's thanks to that
fund being not reverting, we'll
continue to seek reauthorization
because we know it's going to
take some time for people to
find these programs.
Thank you very much. That's
helpful.
Representative Royal Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
thank you, Madam Secretary. Nice
to see you, uh, I have a couple
of questions that they may just
be clarifying questions, um.
But I lost my space, so if you
give me just a moment, uh.
On page 4.
Um, under the phase one, there's
direct assistant payments.
And it shows $40,000 571
participants and 51 and reserve.
What is in reserve?
Uh, Madam Chair, Representative
Royal Caballero, um, there are
51 folks who are still doing
either reclamation or wind down
at the plant and we thought it
was unfair to exclude them just
because they hadn't lost their
job at the same time as everyone
else. So that's what the reserve
is. That's absolutely, um,
great. Thank you so much because
that is often the worry, uh,
when things are in the works and
then they were going to be lost
somewhere. So thank you for
that.
And um.
Then
On page 12.
Um,
The pre-apprenticeship
participation.
Can you kind of, I maybe you
described it, but can you
describe it a little bit further
and just um
Or maybe in the description,
talk about if we have
participants and how many and
what fields or areas that is
absolutely, um, Madam Chair,
Representative Royba Caballero.
I skipped it entirely, so thank
you. You didn't miss anything.
Uh, so the pre-apprenticeship
program is a work-based learning
program through our department,
and it's, it's a little unique
because the pre-apprentices
actually become employees of our
department. and so what
does is it removes a lot of
barriers for employers,
especially small employers who
even just take one person on and
payroll is a big pain. Um, we
also cover workers' comp, so
this has opened the door,
especially for 16 to 18 year
olds to be on construction
sites, which has always been the
fear. Um, that's always been the
barrier to folks getting into
the construction world. And, um,
it also pairs them each with a
career consultant. So we all
remember that first job, and
there were things we didn't know
and we were scared to ask our
boss. Um, that's what they
career consultant is therefore
they can help them. Uh, and if
you happen to be at the tribal
summit this year, um, we got to
hear from just an amazing
participant who had been at San
Juan College as part of our um
pre-apprenticeship program. Uh,
but we've had, we're close to
650 participants, um, by this
time completed and, uh, we're
very excited to say that 10%
have identified as Native
American, so it's about
reflective of the state's
population. Um, and that is
Just thanks to to really strong
partnerships by all of our
fields team. And, um, the, the
variety of industries is pretty
broad, but we see a high
concentration in construction,
and that includes our
partnership, um, with the, uh,
MC3 program which it's, uh, 120
hours of classroom instruction
on the three master crafts that
are sort of the common
foundation for all
apprenticeships, and then they
get 280 hours of work experience
and then they transitioned
directly into an apprenticeship
program. So that's, uh, MC3, so
that's why construction is
really well
presented, um, we had a lot of
folks early on in hospitality
through the Level Up program
which has now wound down. That
was really a pandemic response.
Uh, we had a lot of folks in new
media, um, IT, that whole world,
um, especially up in Taos, Tao's
Kids won, uh, program is
absolutely amazing and they've
been a great partner. Um, but we
have folks doing everything.
We've got folks in pre-vets, um,
all over the place, banks and
and there's no limitation on
industry.
Well, thank you, and you, you
definitely have to be commended
because this is an incredibly
innovative approach to
Pre-preparing.
Um, are, uh, for, for the
apprenticeship because we want
to build on the apprenticeship.
Uh, approach.
To everything. I think that's
going to be our pathway to
ensuring that, um, we have
sustainable long-term
employment. But not just
employment, but career.
Also readiness and so I just
really want to commend you
because this is an approach that
we've seen, I've seen
nationally, uh, internationally,
uh, be implemented and
successful in other countries.
Other states, very few other
states, but, um, one in which
It is absolutely innovative and,
and it works. It really works.
So thank you. Thank you, Madam
Chair.
Representative B block.
Thank you, Madam Chairman. Thank
you, Madam Secretary, for being
here today. I had a few
questions for you just based on
the presentation. I'm on page
11, talks about, and I'm sure
you could just recite this from
memory because you made the
presentation, but 22% are going
out of state, I believe, and
Uh, or moved to make more
salary, is that what I'm
understanding?
Page 11, where are they now?
Madam Chair and Representative
Block, know, um, 22% are just
other in the sense that they, we
don't know where they are, but
they're not participating in any
phase two programs. If you flip
back to slide number 6. That's
the workers' locations. It's the
same kind of graph, but, um,
that shows that 96% of folks
were still in San Juan County as
of the end of phase one.
OK, perfect. Thank you so much
and that that leads to my other
question. So regarding these
folks that are in the area, is
it mainly from the San Juan
generating station's closure, or
is it also the four corners
power plant. What's the, what's
the majority of the folks who
are utilizing this uh
department's program, Madam
Chair.
Madam Chair Representative
Block, it's all folks, um, whose
layoffs resulted from the
closure of the San Juan
Generating Center, whether that
was they worked at the station
itself. They worked at the
Westmoreland mine or they worked
at a contractor that provided
services primarily to that
operation and then when that
operation closed, they lost
their jobs as well.
Thank you, Madam Chairman, and
that, that helps a lot to know
who exactly is impacted, where
are they and what can we do as a
state to help alleviate
The pain of losing a job because
some of these people, they,
their whole life, they've been
working here and now they're
saying, OK, gotta find something
else to do. So I think that's
super important. At least we
have some kind of.
Um,
Blanket to help.
With the blow of doing that. So,
Madam Chair, you said that there
was a lot of folks going into
Was it construction or what is
the biggest new employer of a
lot of these skilled workers
now. What are they leaning
toward? Because I think that
question would help for our
higher education system to know
exactly what we need to do to
produce more graduates and have
more programs to help those
people, Madam Chair.
Chair, that's a great question.
We saw a lot of people try to
stay in the industry, including
kind of going across the street
to the, I think it's the Arizona
Power facility that's right
across.
The street. But now the closure
of that is on the horizon. And
so we're actually seeing some of
those workers come in and say, I
was laid off from Westmoreland
or I was laid off at at San
Juan, and then I went there and
now they're, and those folks are
still eligible for this original
program. Um, we're seeing a lot
of folks in construction, um,
commercials, driver's license
programs are popular. Uh, what
we're really trying to
encourage, oddly enough, is
healthcare because we didn't
employer summit back in
December, um, as we launched
phase two.
And we said, we brought the
employers together and it's like
employers in in the places where
all of you lived. They said,
what I need is someone who will
show up for work on time every
day, and I can teach them
everything else they need to
know between training and what
we do on site, we can teach them
everything we need to know. And,
and the hospital, the regional
medical center, as well as AMI
Kids, some of the behavioral
health facilities where the
major employers there. And so,
uh, you know, our response was
that's great because I got a
bunch of people who know nothing
about the healthcare, but I
promise you they've shown up
every day for 20 years in a job
that was a lot harder than
whenever you're gonna ask them
to do. And so we're really
trying to open up that pathway
to folks, um, even though it's a
sort of unlikely combination,
not maybe not the first thing
you would think of, but I, I, I
have a lot of optimism for that.
Thank you, Madam Chairman. Thank
you, Madam Secretary. And that's
good to hear because healthcare
and the health committee were
always crying about where are
the doctors? Where are the
nurses, where are the?
Name it. Yeah, we're always
looking for all the staff to
help us in in hospitals and
those settings. So that would be
great if they could come even
down to my neck of the woods, we
we need as many healthcare
professionals as we can get. So
thank you, Madam Chairman. Last
question is uh how much left is
in the fund? Because you said it
was non-recurring, so what is
the balance and how, how many
folks can that help? Because I
know some of these plants have
not fully closed yet, so I'm
sure when they do that that need
is going to be exacerbated by
that, Madam Chairman, Madam
Secretary.
Sorry
Uh, Madam Chair and
Representative Block. So we have
about $800 left, so we spent the
whole 1st $12 million and then
if the 2nd 15.4 million, we have
unencumbered, um, still about
half of that. So, um, there's,
there's plenty of room, and the
budget was based around really
full utilization of the program.
Um, and right now this is the
only closure, the San Juan
Generating Station is the only
closure covered by the Act and
the and those related employers
as well. If there were to be
another closure,
Energy Transition Act would
provide for that employer to
then pay additional money into
the fund that we could use for
those new workers.
Thank you so much, Madam Chair.
Thank you.
Thank you, Representative.
Representative Alcom.
Thank you, uh, Madam Chair and
Madam Secretary, uh, thanks for
being here. I just have one
question for you. Who is your
contact person when you're not
around. Usually, uh, I have
found in my years of experience
that uh
Get into the main person. It's
hard to do, but there's always
somebody that that main person
has that you can contact.
I will make sure you get my
message. Who is that in your
department?
Madam Chair, Representative
Falcon, I'll give you two names
and then afterwards I'll give
you their numbers. Um, my deputy
secretary Marcos Martinez, he
has been with the department for
30 years. He started as a spread
the summer employment program in
Taos. Uh, he is always there
when I'm not, but then also, um,
as your, your council as your
committee staff knows my
assistant Evan Sanchez is
amazing and he can always find
me, um, if he can't answer the
question himself, so I'll be
happy to share both those
numbers and emails with you.
Thank you, Representative
Senator Rodriguez. Thank you.
Thank you, Madam Chairman, and,
uh, thank you, and I, I really
don't have any questions, um,
we've heard, um, with Secretary
Nayer's presentations in
various, um, committees or
different times and I've always
been very appreciative since day
one, Madam Chairman, Secretary
Nayer hit the ground running
and, um, I just want to thank
you for always being well
prepared for the questions that
we ask.
The concerns that we get because
we have our constituents
constantly calling us and every
time I've gone to you, you're
there. So thank you very much
for being so approachable and
hardworking, and I don't have
any questions, Madam Chairman. I
just want to say thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Senator,
Vice
Chair Pinto.
Oh, you're good. OK.
OK, thank you, thank you,
colleagues for a good
discussion, good questions, and.
Thank you, Secretary for
presenting, uh, in advance with
all of the questions that we had
at our prior meeting. So we
thank you very much. Thank you
for traveling here to meet with
us. We appreciate that. We know
you're busy, so with that, we
will move on to agenda item
number 12.
Connect New Mexico office of
Broadband Access and expansion
broadband on tribal lands. We
have, uh.
Drew Loveless.
Stephanie Poston.
Victory Quintana, Valerie.
OK, whenever you're ready. Thank
you.
It's a song? OK, there we go.
All right. uh, Madam Chair, uh,
I have a, uh, about a 25 slide
deck presentation. I'll not read
every word for word, but there's
a lot of information in there
and so if there's questions
afterwards, we'll be happy to
answer. Uh, and just let me take
a moment to briefly introduce uh
Victory Quintana, uh, who is our
tribal coordinator. She works
across all of our programs with
all of our other program
coordinators, uh, so I'm gonna
be talking a lot about the
funding that we're doing here,
but her role is
Instrumental in connecting the
tribes to all of those various
funding sources for broadband.
On my left is uh Steph Poston.
um, Steph has been with the
office basically since before
the office existed, uh, and, uh,
she's been instrumental in being
our tribal advisor, making sure
that we have the right tribal
consultations and get connected
to the tribes. So just very
appreciative to have her here
today.
So on our uh slide deck, uh, let
me just start by reminding
everybody that the Office of
Broadband Access and expansion
was created in legislation in
2021. Uh, we got our first
director in July of 22. I was
the second employee in September
of 22, so I'm coming up on my
two years with the office. Uh,
this is my longest stint with
any one agency in state
government in about 6 years. Um,
but as far as the office goes,
just pointing out that we've
come a long way in 2 years.
We've gone from 2 employees, uh,
to recently 25.
Employees. So we've done a lot
of hiring to make sure we can
meet the programmatic
requirements as well as our
legislative requirements to do
things like technical
assistance. So looking at our
discussion points, I want to
talk about the ARPA CPF funds,
which we call the Connecting
Mexico pilot project. Uh, we
have a Connect New Mexico fund
as well, that's state funding,
uh, and part of that is the
grant writing engineering,
planning, and then we're going
to discuss uh BE, which is the
biggest program out there and uh
is $675 million for the entire
state coming
Out of the federal government
and the bipartisan
infrastructure law. And then we
have some additional updates on
the digital equity funds and
some additional upcoming
opportunities for tribes to
apply to.
So, uh, with that, let's go
ahead and head over to slide 4.
So in our federal funds that we
manage the American Rescue Plan
Act, Capital projects funds.
This is a little different than
the state local fiscal recovery
funds that can kind of be
broadly used. This actually has
to be programmed and so we work
with Treasury on the
programmatic guidance. We have a
notice of funding opportunity
that went out for this, uh, in
2022, uh, and all of the
programs have been awarded out
of that. Uh, there were 5 tribal
awards to him as Laguna.
Nambe, Santa Ana, and Santo
Domingo. Uh, that was
approximately $60 million.
Additionally, on top of that,
there was a uh an internet
service provider that had a a
tribal resolution out of Rama,
New Mexico, for Navajo Nation
that also had a $50 million
award. So in total, there's
about $65 million with $117
million being utilized on tribal
lands to build connectivity. And
so that's a, that's a pro in
progress, many of these projects
are either uh started
Digging now or are in the kind
of final stages of engineering
and planning and keeping in mind
that this program, the CPF funds
have to be expended by the end
of 2026, December 31, 2026. So
that'll be the end of that
program.
So while there may not be
connectivity now in these
programs, they're building it.
Uh, as far as you know, state
funding that OI manages, we have
the Connecting Mexico fund and
if you guys recall back to that
2021 legislative session there
were actually two agencies
created a council, the
Connecting Mexico Council that
actually had the original
appropriation of $100 million
7700 million dollars of it was
allocated to infrastructure. 25
million was dedicated to schools
and 5 million was dedicated to
grant writing, engineering, and
planning.
So out of those, uh those funds,
uh, the two that were set up as
grant funds are going to be the
$70 million and the $5 million.
Now the council was not able to
move on on that quickly and
during the 2023 legislative
session, the legislature
re-appropriated the funding for
the Office of Broadband to be
able to expand. And that
expenditure authority goes
through the end of June 30th,
2025. So basically the
expenditure timeline on it is
coming up. The fund is a
non-reverting fund, the Connect
New Mexico.
fund. Uh, so as we've gone out,
we actually just announced some
recent awards, about $40 million
of the 70 we're getting ready to
do some additional awards. Uh,
many of the applicants on this,
this, uh, fund have expressed an
interest in seeing that
expenditure deadline extended a
little bit because right now
we're kind of on the, the edge
of being able to complete these
projects in a timely way. Uh,
but out of that Connect New
Mexico fund we're excited from
the the $40 million we awarded,
we also announced 5 awards for
New Mexico.
Tribes, which 20 million, which
was a total of $20 million going
out to New Mexico tribes. The
grant writing engineering
planning funds, uh, is, you
know, basically a $5000 fund.
There are multiple allowed uh
applicants, so New Mexico's co
op's electric and telephone can
apply to this, the county,
cities can also apply to it as
well as the tribal entities. And
so out of the 15 awards so far,
we've had 5 awards, uh, so we
have $500,000 going to Mexico
tribes for.
Grant writing engineering,
planning for uh future
deployments.
If we move on to the next slide.
I want to update you guys on the
broadband equity access and
deployment. So this is the
biggest fund that the Office of
Broadband manages. And this is a
program that's designed and
dedicated to
Connect the unserved, which that
definition is a specific
download speed and upload speed
that's 25 download, 3 upload.
There is an underserved category
in this, which is going to be
between 25, 3 and 100 download
and 20 upload. And then you're
allowed to spend money on
community anchor institutions,
and then you're allowed to spend
money on low income
multi-dwelling units. Out of all
those 4 funding priorities from
the National Telecommunications
and Information Administration.
New Mexico was awarded only
enough to get 3.
The unserved, that first
priority. So unfortunately, this
was a statutory, uh, you know,
funding formula based on
population. I think many, you
know, of you guys understand
the, the rurality of New Mexico,
uh, where the 5th largest state
and 36th in population and so
this has been a big opportunity
and a part of why we have a
funding gap and getting to a lot
of those other priorities. Out
of that program, we had to do a
lot of hoops to get through what
was required by the National
Telecommunications and
Information Administry.
In the last two years, we've
gotten through a required 5-year
strategic plan. We've gotten
approvals on an initial
proposal, Volume one, which was
a map challenge process. We also
just recently received award on
initial proposal volume 2, which
is the grant writing phase. So
once we actually got received
that uh approval, July 26th,
we're on a one year timeline to
do the grant making. At the end
of this next July 26th, we have
to submit a final proposal to
NTIA.
Before we can actually get the
money and put it back into the
community. And then this program
is a 4-year timeline to get the
projects built, OK. So this
impacts not only tribal
entities, but across the entire
state $675 million to get to the
unserved.
So looking at it here on slide
6, we kind of are walking you
through uh some of the things
that are in the the next phases.
So we just completed the map
challenge project process.
Make sure that we identified
every location that is allowed
to be unserved.
This was a long, like 90 day
process. uh, and then we had an
additional 30 to kind of do some
cleanup.
The project areas.
are going to be boundaries in
which can be bid on during the
grant making. Right now, we
actually have it out for public
comment and uh we'll talk about
this on another slide. We have a
kind of a little map for you
guys to to show how kind of some
of this works. We're taking
public comment on this project
area because we want to make
sure we get the bids right. It
doesn't benefit New Mexico to
have a grant that no one will
bid on and so we want to make
sure we, we have providers who
are willing to uh to bid those
areas and serve those areas.
Uh, we also have a
pre-qualification process where
we're taking all of the the
people who would like to be
applicants for this funding,
making sure we go through their
financials ahead of time. This
is actually kind of reversed
from a lot of other programs
that we've run.
Uh, and making sure that we
don't have to do curing and let
there be like,
uh, thank you forever, whoever
did that. So there's a, uh, you
know, the process and making
sure that we can, uh, once we
award somebody that they are
financially capable of deploying
internet.
Uh, and then the last, uh, the
last part of it is that we're
going to go through uh the
actual application process and
approve the projects and send
those approvals off to NTIA for
for their final approval as
well.
So on the next slide, slide 7,
you've got our website, uh, I
kind of talked a lot about this
challenge process already, uh,
just kind of on the high level.
I'll leave it there for you guys
to, to read through and ask
questions on slide 8, in the B
challenge process, we were very
thoughtful about making sure we
approached all of the
necessaryies and especially in
the tribal area. We actually put
out uh 9 different, uh, you
know,
individual events around the
state as well as we.
online, uh, you know, webinars
on how to do the challenge
process. We even hired two
contractors that ran
independently of the office to
help support tribal entities and
counties and nonprofits, making
sure that they had additional
support outside of the office to
to work their way through this
kind of federal federally
required challenge process. Um,
in that we received 58 tribal
challenges, and each of those
tribal challenges could have
multiple locations, so
10,000,243 locations were
challenged in that?
Uh, of that 7 tribes and 2
internet service providers who
were challenging on behalf of,
of tribes were part of that
process. So a pretty
significant, uh, you know,
turnout and the the tribal
community to make sure that
their locations were deemed
correct.
On this next slide, I'm showing
you the uh project area design.
And so in this process, we
looked at a couple of really key
things, uh, we had a lot of
conversations in the development
of initial proposal volume 2
with tribal entities.
Uh, we did tribal consultations
that were also required by NTIA,
so we met with all 23 tribes in
that process, and we talked
about kind of the design.
And so in building these, we
looked at things like, is it a
high cost area defined by NTIA,
the federal agency, we looked
at, is it a tribal boundary
because tribal consent is
required for these project
areas. And so we made each
tribal land, its own project
area. And in the case of Navajo
Nation, we've actually divided
up into a couple of different
project areas based off of uh of
uh council districts.
Uh,
additionally, we looked at some
things like school district
boundaries, uh, geographic, and
where some wire line where
actual physical infrastructure
exists. So it's a very
thoughtful process. We worked
with internet service providers,
worked with the tribes, we
worked with the communities, we
did all the stakeholder outreach
and we kind of, you built this
process. We even put it out for
public comment and, and this
this kind of design off of that.
Now that we actually have the
design and the approval and
initial proposal volume 2, we're
putting these designs out for
public comment again, again.
Making sure that it's correct.
So in total right now there's
165 project areas and
I think uh on the next slide,
slide 10, uh, wanted to just
highlight, you know, a couple of
the big things out of this, the
program requires a 25% match for
each of the projects that can be
a pretty hefty uh sum of money,
but it's important to note that
the high cost areas are allowed
to be a $0 match by NTIA. So
that's part of why we actually
made them their own project
area. One of the other uh
requirements in this.
Program is that uh every entity
that applies has to get a letter
of credit.
And so I'm going to just kind of
gloss over slide 11 for the sake
of time. It has a link if you
guys want to go look at the
public uh project area comment
period. You guys can go look at
that.
Uh, so slide 12, um, same, same
thing. I'm gonna gloss over
there for the public comment
just for time and I wanted to
point out on that letter of
credit, uh, this issue is a big
one for tribes, and this is some
of the, the information we got
back in uh in our, our outreach
and our tribal consultation. And
I'm sorry, that's on slide 14.
In that letter of credit.
If you have $1,000,000 and you
are a tribal entity, and you
want to go to a bank to get a
letter of credit from them, you
have to have $1,000,000 in cash
to hand them.
And then they're going to give
you a a letter of credit for
$1,000,000. So this is a really
unfair, you know, disadvantage,
right? And so this is one of
those areas where taking all of
that public comment and all that
work, we actually pushed back
with NTIA in our, in our initial
proposal volume 2, and it
actually got approved that we
can give a waiver, a waiver to
tribes on this letter of credit.
Uh, other, other entities will
still have to follow there's,
there's a couple other
mechanisms if they can't go to
the bank, they can also go to
like a credit union. They can do
some performance bonds and some
other things, but
The tribal entities, if they
have the cash available and they
can show that they're
financially, you know, capable
of deploying these projects,
they are welcome to be bidders
on it. So this is going to be a
really useful tool for them.
Moving on to slide 15 in the
pre-qualification, uh, process.
This is going to be, um, you
know, first step again, looking
at whether it's a tribal entity
or any other entity making sure
that they are qualified and
capable of deploying the
internet, uh, out of this
program to the unserved. Slide
16 has a timeline of this one
year and kind of all the steps
that we're going to have to go
through. So you just have a
visual of kind of everything we
just talked about.
And then uh as we move into
slide 17, I want to talk about
digital equity. So if we think
about
Getting the internet and
building the infrastructure to
it. It is, you know, a
multi-year process. We have to
hook up a house. We have to hook
up a school, a library, right?
That connection is important,
but at the end of the day, this
device, right, or this device or
your television to stream, you
know, your favorite streaming
service, you have to know how to
use those. And if you do not
have a device and you do not
have to know how to use those or
you know how to use it safely,
then the internet doesn't even
matter if you have a
up
And so in the bipartisan
infrastructure law, there's a
separate program that is
dovetailing with the BE program,
and it is called digital equity.
So, uh, there's a subsection
called the Digital Equity Act.
This is truly about devices,
knowing how to use it and using
it safely. There are 3 programs
that came out of this. The
Office of Broadband was uh
signed the first part, right,
developing a state digital
equity plan. We developed that
and we actually received
approval and the and it was in
the end of May.
We actually received the
approval on the plan. And with
that, we were allowed to apply
for the second component, which
is the state capacity grant and
much like the bead program, the
allocations were already
determined in the statute, and
unfortunately, it was not a lot
of funding. We were allocated
$8.6 million to do this.
There is a potential for
Congress to fund 2 additional
years, but we will be expecting
less money out of it, probably
about 3.5 if it does get funded.
So we're looking at a
substantial gap on this digital
equity component into the
future. However, we're going to
run forward and make the best of
it. So out of this, we have a
digital equity program
coordinator that that Victory
works with closely. We are
dedicating all available funding
to go out to bid for the.
Communities, there was an option
for us to go direct to contract.
We did a survey into the
community, we have a very good
working relationship with the
digital equity working group
from the Connecting Mexico
Council and
we uh surveyed them. We had $11
million worth of asks, $8.6
million worth of funding and
we're again required to do some
administrative requirements over
a five-year period of time. So
we're putting about $7.1 million
when we get the final approvals
from NCIA on uh on the capacity
grant into a notice of funding
opportunity.
And letting you know any anyone
who wants to bid on it, uh, to
be able to bid on on a program
of their choice that fits in
within the state digital equity
plan.
So as, as uh, you know, I think
as much doom and gloom, you
know, uh, that we don't have
enough money. The good news is
we have some, uh, you know, do
we need more? Absolutely. Do we
need to advocate for more?
Absolutely. I do want to
highlight one very cool thing
out of this program though, uh,
and it will be on our last slide
and I'll just kind of preface it
is that there is an opportunity
for every tribe, nation, uh, in,
in New Mexico to apply for their
own digital equity funds. And so
I'll preface that and I'll talk
about it kind of at the end.
Uh, in this digital equity
program, uh, there are, you
know, some criteria kind of
around this. It's not going to
be for replacing the affordable
connectivity program, which I
think most of you guys are aware
of. This was the $30 subsidy for
the across the state of New
Mexico for low income households
to receive a subsidy on their
internet bill in tribal
households, it was $75 and then
there was also a $100 allowance
for for devices. That program
was unfunded the last month was
May.
And now it's roughly $700
million a year program, $70
million coming into the state of
New Mexico from from that
federal program. So that's a
significant loss and uh and
being able to make the internet
affordable.
Uh, so unfortunately, the
digital equity funds have a cap
on how much is allowed. Only 10%
of that can go to it, so
$860,000 over five years is
really a drop in the bucket. Um,
doesn't do a whole lot there,
but it can be used for some
really effective, you know,
things like uh skill
acquisition, you know, being
able to use those devices again,
technical support, uh, and, and,
you know, things like
cybersecurity uh to uh to help
people understand how to use the
internet safely.
On slide 19, you have, uh, what
are the, the covered populations
in the state of New Mexico and
as you can see 91.4% of the
state of New Mexico falls into a
covered population for
Uh, for this digital equity
program, we're amongst the
highest in the nation for how,
how much of our population
qualifies. So, um, you know,
there's a significant need, like
I said, and not enough money.
Some of the things that we've
also done in uh in tribal
communities is that we've hosted
tribal consultations led by
Victory and Steph,
um, you know, we've been able to
get out to 100%. We've of the
nations, we continue to have
ongoing dialogue with them over
infrastructure and digital
equity. Uh, we send out our, our
monthly newsletter.
alerting them to opportunities.
Uh, we have a lot of uh a lot of
communication with their direct
technical staff uh doing
technical assistance as well as
with their leadership, we make a
point of going to APCG, and I
also meet with like Navajo
Nation and uh and Hickorya and
uh
And uh Mescaler Apache
representatives on an ongoing
basis. So we're very much trying
to be connected to the
community, understanding what
the needs are out there and
there's a big variety of of
needs. Some are doing great.
Others need, need some support
and assistance, and that's where
we come in to help and what they
need.
Uh, and then I do want to
highlight that over the last
couple of years we've done a
couple of different, uh, bigger
statewide broadband summits. The
first one was done with NTIA and
we actually had the largest
participation of any state, uh,
with 372 participants. Uh, we
also ran a supported Mexico
Chamber of Commerce did, did one
on our behalf and did a lot of
the uh
The agenda this last year in
December, and we're going to run
another one again this year.
So just I think in the interest
of time and letting you guys ask
some questions, uh, I do want
to, you know, highlight that
digital equity, you know,
continues to to have these extra
plans. I do want to just talk
about the last slide, uh, second
to last slide, slide 24, and
upcoming opportunities. So with
digital equity, the uh state
capacity grants have a
subsection within the notes of
funding opportunity that allows
every tribe in New Mexico to
apply for their own digital
equity funding and it's between
$500,000 and $2000.
And so the point I was making
about how we do not have enough
uh digital equity funding. This
is a way where 23 tribes can
make a really big impact in
going after their own funding.
And so to help along those
lines. Victory's been doing a
lot of outreach. We've actually
been setting up, uh, some, some
discussions around how can we
help better and I think some of
the early feedback is, you know,
everyone's kind of tapped out
with, with how much is going on
in broadband, you know, I just
talked about deploying $400
million of Connecting Mexico
grants, and we've got this be
Challenge process, right? And
we've got, you know, 20 other
things happening grant writing,
engineering, planning. So
there's a lot happening and
that's just the offices of
broadband. There's a lot of
other federal funds that we
don't manage from USDA from uh
FCC that are coming in, there's
just not a lot of capacity. And
so I think this is one of the
areas where we have identified,
you know, there probably needs
to be some extra help in this
grant writing uh area for
digital equity which the grant
writing engineering planning
funds are not eligible for.
They're only eligible for
infrastructure deployment. So
we're looking at
How to identify and and help
tribes with, with this element
because this is going to be a
huge leg up for New Mexico and
where we don't have the
population to get the funding
in. We have a lot of tribes and
we could actually do, you know,
make a big difference here. So
that's going to be 11 big area.
The other area is uh another
competitive grant from NTIA that
um that is again outside of
Oba's control, but it is $1.25
billion. They're really looking
at it from a national level.
And how do we help support and
encourage tribes to apply for
that. That deadline is kind of
fast approaching here and so
we've been, been trying to
engage on that as well. But
there's some opportunities to
get additional funding in ways
that that's outside of the state
capacity grant. Uh, and then the
last, the last program that's
also run by NTIA directly uh two
tribes is the tribal broadband
connectivity program. They're in
kind of the final stages of
round 2 right now. Um, this has
been phenomenal to watch, you
know, multiple tribes out there,
figure out how to, you know, put
together.
the package of different funding
sources, um, and there's been a
couple that are really
successful, and I think that
that we've done a pretty good
job across the state of New
Mexico in leveraging things like
TBCP trying to dovetail bead
using some state funding to
connect the stuff in between
that doesn't really fit those
other programs. And so, um,
that's kind of a fun one that
that's coming up. So those are
upcoming federal grants, and
again, I'll, I'll stand for
questions and I've got victory
and Steph here who do a lot of
the tactical day to day and we
love.
I would love for you guys to
also ask questions of them
because they are the phenomenal
workers who do it.
Thank you, Madam Chair.
committee members,
representative Roel Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, um,
thank you, Director and, and uh
panels, all of you. Nice to see
you. So I'm, um,
There are a lot of deadlines, a
lot of opportunities and as you
said, you're ready, you're
preparing the tribes to um
To respond to these grant
applications, which is really
important. A large part of your
report and what we anticipated
was how do we
Outreach effectively in order to
get
As close to 100% response as
possible. So my question is, how
is this office, uh, complying
with the language Access Act.
Which was meant to facilitate
these processes of outreach, but
also um communicate,
um,
What, what is of dire need and
to get those responses, can you,
um,
Answer that. Thank you. I can
answer a couple of high level
things and then I'll probably
turn it over to to Steph to to
respond on the kind of more
tactical level, you know, one of
the the things that we focus on
is, you know, communication
frequently and often and also
making sure that we hit
different levels of, of the, you
know, the tribal, you know,
entities. You know, there's a
lot to be said about there are
people who are working on the
technical side, right? There's
the leadership, you know, level,
and then there's kind of this
other
Kind of grant writing more
humanitarian area and we we
really try to get out to events.
We take advantage of, you know,
Department of Health, um going
out and around the community and
and victory, you know, goes when
Department of Workforce
Solutions, you know, has events,
we, we also try and go um we
again attend APCG Navajo Nation
has a an advocacy group for
broadband Nava Navajo Nation
Alliance for Broadband. Uh, we
attended their events, uh, you
know, pretty regularly in force,
we talked with the state broad
the broadband office for the
Navajo Nation, you know, on a
monthly basis, um, and, and we
actually do that along with Utah
and Arizona, so we do it
collectively and so, you know, I
think that's going to be kind of
one thing to the point about,
you know, the language access.
This is harder, you know, uh, we
don't speak every, every, you
know, dialect or um language,
um.
But making sure that we are
available to to help uh has been
one of those mechanisms and then
secondly, I have a relatively
new PR person that I've
challenged with going on the
offensive and getting out there
and he's actually put me on the
radio,
on Dene radio where someone
could translate for me and talk
to the elders and so making sure
that, you know, we are out into
the communities is of utmost
importance and I just want to
point out again that, you know,
I was employee number 2 and
we've scaled to 25 employees.
Um, I am around the state a ton,
and I try to make myself as
available as possible and my
staff available as possible to
be in the communities and
especially with the tribes.
Just to clarify real quickly,
part of the, if you can answer
the, the main question which
thank you did, um, but what
tools are you using to in
reference to um language
interpretation or translation
that's appropriate in the
outreach effort.
Madam Chair, uh, representative,
I think in that area there
stands to be a little bit of a
gap and we could do some
improvement there, um, there are
many dialects and many tribal
languages here in our state,
which I am very, very proud of,
which is beautiful, um, I think
in working with our rebaled
programs, it's really important
with our tribal librarians and
looking through our digital
equity planning that we could
look to do a better job in that
area. And I appreciate you
pointing that out.
Thank you, and that's exactly
the second part of your answer
was exactly what I was trying to
get at is that um
Researching those tools at the
national level, federal level,
because they're required to be
up to date on language access
and so if we can find a way to
tap in there and of course I'm
assuming that this is going to
be part of your regular ongoing
budget, um, requests because
it's gonna cost money. Uh, but
it needs to be appropriate to
what you mentioned all of the
languages and the way we
communicate more than
importantly, it's not so much
the translation or interpreting
it.
The way we communicate and I
understand that the Fed's
Department of Commerce, I would
look at um have resources
available in that manner.
They're working on it on a
regular basis. So thank you for
your response and thank you for
accelerating all the work and
demands and getting us to this
point. Thank you. Thank you,
thank you.
Thank you, Representative
Little.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you all so much for being here.
It's good to see you.
Uh, my question is in reference
to slide 17. As you were
describing the, um,
Madam Chair, as the description
was being made about the funds
that were available and you were
describing, um, that you had uh
$11 million worth of proposals
of applications, but $8 million
available leaving a deficit of 3
million, according to my math.
Madam Chair, I'm interested in,
um,
How understanding how this
shortfall might be addressed.
Uh, Madam Chair representative,
you know, I think this is where
the state is best positioned to
to step in.
You know, that there is going to
be an ongoing need for digital
equity and, you know, once we
really have good connectivity.
Once we have devices.
I mean, how many of us have
upgraded our phone every 2 to 3
years.
How many times is there a new
social media something coming
out?
You know, some sort of new
program, right? The reality is
that for, you know, even, you
know, my generation, which, you
know, is that kind of first
online, you know, generation,
we're going to get to a point
where, you know.
Gen Z behind us is going to
invent something else, and
there's going to still be a
digital equity need. And so, uh,
I will tell you that I think the
state's going to have to step
into some of this void. I, you
know, as much as I would love
the federal government to have
an ongoing program, uh, I think
we, we all look at the national
landscape and know that that's
probably not going to be, be a
reality.
So Madam Chair, if I could just
get some um clarity. Are you
planning,
is there, um, are there efforts
to make a formal request, um, to
the legislature and if so, um,
might it be?
I'm not sure that I'm
formulating this question in the
right way, Madam Chair, but
well, that requests come back to
this committee for, um, uh, uh,
endorsement at a later time.
Madam Chair,
representative, I have a
proposal in front of the
executive right now and so I
kind of I'm not, I'm not quite
ready to to to discuss at this
moment, but, um, you know,
Anything that can be done to
address this ongoing need. I
would, I'd be very appreciative
of any sort of endorsement from
this from this committee into
the body.
OK, thank you so much. Um, thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative.
Madam Vice Chair.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Members
of the committee and thank you
for your presentation and the
work you do. I don't know if you
would be able to answer my
question, um, because it's more
about a certain project. So in
the Gallup area, I think it's
what, 3 times now we've lost uh
connectivity and then it
devastates our, uh, because you
can't buy gas.
have to have cash. It's, uh, can
you comment if there's anything
in the works on that or is that
out of your heads, Madam Chair,
and Senator, thank you for the,
the question on that. I quite
literally yesterday I left Santa
Fe at 7 a.m. I drove to Gallup
yesterday.
And I met with a couple of
providers in the area as well as
the county, and this is follow
up from a public comments that I
attended two weeks ago and, and
the chair was there.
There is a solution that's
readily available and this is
really a communication problem.
I think between a couple of
providers and making sure that
they purchase the required.
Connectivity from one another to
ensure that services remain
intact.
So this is, you know, something
that's outside the scope of the
authority of the office, but we
were able to to convene the
right parties, right? Uh, we
were able to sit down with them.
They are committed to and I owe
the chair an email actually on
this. I just haven't had time
with the drive, and I apologize,
Madam Chair,
but there is an ongoing dialogue
that's happening between the
providers because it really is a
a contract to contract, you
know, type of, of situation
between two entities. Um,
there's also a longer term need.
as well for that resiliency
redundancy and uh the the
provider that had the outage,
uh, is looking at working with
NTUA as well as uh Sacred Winds
in that that area and talking
about not only the short term
fix, but what's the long term.
Um, so I'll be getting a
biweekly updates from those
parties as well as the uh the
mayor and the county
commissioner, uh who uh who's
very interested in in hearing
about what's happening, so we'll
be passing that information.
back along
So, Madam Chair, so it's not
really a having to put any lines
in kind of thing. It's, it's.
Just getting the legal whatever
that.
here
I have a feeling this batteries.
Going away, Madam Chair, uh,
sorry, um, Madam Char the and uh
Senator, there are two existing
locations where um, you know,
sacred Wid interconnects with
with Lumen. One is at Sacred
Winds, uh, you know, uh, central
office in Tajli, uh, that they
have there, uh, and Sid W buys
backhaul services from Lumen.
Uh, Lumen does not, not
currently buy backhaul from
Sacred Wind.
Uh, the other location is at our
state education network node
over at UNM West, uh, and that's
over, you know, in Gallup at
campus, and they're both in the
same building and they
interconnect there as well. Uh,
again, it's about purchase of
services is, is the, the
discussion between the two
providers there.
OK, and Madam Chair, members of
the committee, because there was
also talk of the loop that
needed to happen from hiprock
down to. I don't remember which
one was which, but, um, but
thank you for the work you're
doing.
Thank you. Thank you,
colleagues, and thank you, Vice
Chair for asking that question
and thank you for providing us,
uh, your excellent presentation
and thank you for your work and
um.
I was just thinking about uh how
this broadband initiative was
unveiled in Washington DC in
2004.
And uh we're still needing to do
a lot of work and it still
continues, so we have a lot of
work to do and just, uh, keep
plugging along and we'll be
connected solidly someday.
So with that, I just wanted to
thank you for traveling down
here, providing your
presentation and updates in your
work. Do you have any comments,
um,
Uh, Madam Chair, I'm gonna turn
it over to Victory and see if
she has any comments that she'd
like to provide and then, and
then step afterwards, uh, again,
these are the, the women who do
the amazing work tactically on
the ground.
Madam Chair, members of the
committee, no, thank you for the
opportunity to present that was,
um, pleased when we got the
call, if we could, uh, turn
around and get two cruises
really quick, so, um, thank you
for your questions. Thank you
for knowing what's happening in
our tribal communities, um, I
believe as I started to work
with O by, I said in order to
solve the broadband issue for
the state statewide, it will be
essential to center the tribes
in this solution, and that'll be
a solution.
For all New Mexicans.
Uh, Madam Chair, and legislative
body, thank you so much, uh,
yes, for inviting us and uh just
some things that popped up while
our acting director was sharing
our presentation is that when
you're thinking about the
language and and access.
There have been some interesting
conversations, uh, with, um, I'm
sure others, but what I was a
part of is Santo Domingo Pueblo
and how they're trying to figure
out how do we carry on in our
language, utilizing the internet
and still protecting it and how
can those digital equity funds
help.
So not that we have a solution
yet, but those conversations are
there about how do we continue
our traditional ways.
While stepping further into the
future, and I think it's, um, a
beautiful dance that we're um
happy to help facilitate those
conversations, not lead, um,
just be a part of to to share
where they want us to be a part
of and, uh, another area is, um,
I think there's potential for uh
workforce growth with community
health workers and community
health representatives, um, in
that if we're, and I've been
talking, um, with the director
of Office of Community Health
Workers
about how can we get a track.
A specialty track in, um,
digital navigators. So that way
if they're already in the home
as CHR's, uh, community health
representatives or community
health workers, then they can
automatically just be like, did
you know you could use your
phone to turn on your light, you
know, a flashlight, if anything
happens or call your provider
with the video call. So there's,
um, very nuanced ways of getting
people more comfortable with
interacting with digital.
devices, um, with people that
are already trusted from their
community, so there's a lot of
ideas. It's just a matter of,
um,
Talking to the right people,
finding the time and getting it
done before deadlines, but, um,
it's, it's been a, a blessing to
be a part of the journey, and
I'm grateful to be here. Thank
you.
And Madam Chair, I'll I'll just
say is thank you for the
opportunity to tell our story,
um, you know, broadband is going
to be the future of New Mexico.
And you know, I'm raising my
kids you know, here in New
Mexico. I've been fortunate
enough to marry into northern
Mexican family.
I want to make sure that New
Mexico is not 50th in broadband.
So thank you.
Thank you. Again, thank you very
much and uh we look forward to
our continued work and support
with you. So thank you again.
And with that, we will move on
to public comment, and I believe
we have 2.
Carlos Lucero.
Carlos, you're in the hot seat.
Did you ask the price.
Did you want to do public
comment or were you signing in?
OK.
Anyone on Zoom
All right, do we have anyone on
Zoom for public comment?
No, OK, we have.
OK, we have no one for public
comment. However, before we
adjourn, we'd like to thank and
appreciate and recognize, uh,
the hickoria.
Apache tribe for their
installment of their, uh,
Oncoming president, we could not
be there, but we were there and
thought, spirit, and wish, wish
our, uh, relatives very, very,
very well and good luck. So with
that, we'll adjourn our meeting
and uh safe travels, everyone,
and once again thank you to New
Mexico State University. It's
been a pleasure to be here on
your campus and also Burrell
College and in the community of
Las Cruces.
Everyone here in this community
well and we look forward to
coming back and doing our work
here. So thank you very, very
