Um
we
Paul, do we have a quorum?
Yes, yep, meetinging purposes.
We can take attendance once
year.
Mm, yep, you can. OK, I'm gonna
start um with introductions with
uh
Representative Patricia Rial
Cavi.
Good morning, Madam Chair, Vice
Chair, members of the committee,
those in the audience and those
viewing, um, my name is Patricia
Roybalcaballero, and I represent
House District 13, which is the
far southwest quadrant of
Albuquerque and and um
I'm very happy to be on this
remain on this committee and uh
I was for many years on this
committee and
chair and vice chair with uh
with uh Senator Bobby Gonzalez.
So I really love this committee.
Thank you very much.
That's OK.
Thank, thank you, Madam Chair.
Uh, the Senator Ant Thornton,
um, I'm a rep represent the East
Mountains of Albuquerque, and
that's also, uh, where the
wheels, Sandoval, torrents, and
Santa Fe Counties, um, new to
the committee. I'm proud to be
here and uh actually I'll be
presenting later today, so I'm
looking forward to that.
Um, I'll go back to, uh
Senator Antoinette Cedilia
Lopez.
Good morning. Um, I'm
Antoinetteidilio Lopez and I
represent District 16, um, in
Albuquerque, which is the
CNM UNM, uh, Southeast Heights,
and Northeast Heights in that
area.
I'm happy to be here and I've
been on this committee
I think 4 years. Is that about
right, about 4.
4 years. It's an important
committee, and I'm glad to be
here.
Senator Woods
thank you very much, Madam
Chair. My name is Pat Woods. I'm
from Senate District 7,
Burrique Union, and Harding
Counties.
Um
one of the most
important committees we have
right here.
We, uh, talk about the tensions.
I don't know how many people we
have.
on pensions out of the state of
New Mexico, but
very important comedian
and Mr. John Clark, or state
investment officer. I talked to
him a little this morning
I'm very confident that we're
gonna make
money again
Thank you, Madam Chair
Thank you, Senator. Um, our vice
chair Ro Roberto Bobby Gonzalez.
Good morning, Madam Chair. Good
morning, committee members, um.
state senator Roberto Bobby J.
Gonzalezriba Santafe and Taos.
I, I do feel that it's
a very important medicine.
in our structure, you know, with
our legislative part.
So again
happy to be here
Um, Senator and former
Representative Natalie
Figueroroa. I think I said that
right.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I am
Natalie Figueroa. I represent
Senate District 18 in the
northeast heights of Albuquerque
and since we seem to have
started a trend. This is my 7th
year on this committee. I enjoy
it very much.
Thank you.
And Senator, did I say your last
name correctly?
You go to Figueroa.
OK, and now we go to a
representative, Sarah Silva.
Hi everyone, good morning, uh,
Representative Sarah Silva,
House District 53, Donana Notero
Counties, um, which the
highlights there are Las Cruces,
White Sands Missile Range, and
Chaparral, New Mexico. Uh this
is my first year on this
committee.
Thank you and uh Representative
Mark Duncan, uh, former mayor as
well.
Yes ma'am. Uh thank you, Madam
Chair, Mark Duncan. I serve
Northwest New Mexico, San Juan
County, and glad to be here.
And I'm representative of
Cynthia Borrego. I served for
Albuquerque's west side on the
northwest Mesa. So, uh, folks,
we're gonna just go ahead and
jump right in. And I just, I
wanna say I look forward to
Senator Anthony.
uh Aunt Thornton's presentation
today on Bitcoin because I don't
know anything about that, so I
think that's gonna be really
interesting. Just a couple of
housekeeping items, um, I just
want to make sure that we're
following as closely as possible
our work plan, and Paul, who is
our staff, Paul Estock, and then
um can you also introduce
yourselves in the back, please.
Um,
Ails and so we are trying and oh
there's two other people.
Lisa Rivera Morrison. I'm with.
And so I just wanted to mention,
um, keep your work plans handy,
and we can get you additional
copies of those because I, I am
trying to follow the work plan
as closely as possible, um,
because that's what we all voted
on and that's what we agreed to
and Paul and I have talked about
that, to try to make sure that
and and you know, we can deviate
a little bit, but I just, I, I
mean, that's kind of our
expected uh marching orders. So,
um, the other thing is
since we have quorum in case
people have to leave. I would
like to have a motion for the
July 18th minutes.
It's so.
there's a motion 2, and there's
2 seconds.
Thank you so much. And that was
from Antoinette and Mark Duncan.
Antoinetteidologist
Senator and representative.
I'm, I'm, uh, I just wanna kind
of joke a little bit because at
our last meeting, I called you
guys board members, and what I
was running, when I was the
chairman of the Perra. I called
everyone board member and it
just so happened that Senator
Figueroa came up to me and said,
Cynthia, this is not the para
board, so I, I kind of joke a
little bit about that, but uh,
you know, after so many times
you get used to saying certain
things, um
so we have our minutes are
proved and uh I think that's the
the main, um, action item that
we have today, um, I just want
to mention that at some point we
are going to be going to Taos,
um,
we kind of fought, uh, vice
chair and I fought a little bit
to make sure that this committee
traveled at least once because
this is not a traveling
committee, from my
understanding, but we wanted to
make sure that, you know,
everybody gets a sort of a
different perspective on on
things, it's always good to look
at life
from a different perspective.
And so this morning we have uh
an update from the state
investment council, John Clark,
um, would you like to go ahead,
Mr. Clark?
Thank you very much, uh, Madam
Chair, Mr. Vice Chair, members
of the committee, I appreciate
you having me here today, uh, to
give you an update on the state
Investment council, the
permanent funds, uh, and the
benefits that we're providing to
our schools, our pre-K kids, and
the revenue uh and budget
stability that we're providing
to you as policymakers. Uh, with
me today, I'd like to also
recognize my chief investment
officer and deputy SIO Vince
Smith.
and my chief communications
Officer Charles. Uh, I'm going
to be presenting from this
packet in case you don't have it
in front of you.
If you go to slide 2
you can see that uh we are now
managing a portfolio of over $64
billion and this makes us the
2nd largest sovereign wealth
fund organization in the
country, just behind Alaska. Uh,
it was just last year that we
surpassed Texas to become the
2nd largest sovereign wealth
fund organization.
Last session, uh, you all
considered about 15 different
new funds to potentially give us
to manage. Uh, you ended up
passing too. They were both
signed by the governor. Uh,
those were the Medicaid Trust
Fund and the Behavioral Health
Trust Fund. So with those two
new ones, we now have a total of
14 funds that we manage.
And in addition to that, we
manage funds for 24 different
governmental clients. Uh, some
of them having multiple
accounts. So in total, probably
about 50, 60 accounts for those
24 clients, uh, that totals
almost $2.7 billion.
We also are distributing money
back to the state each year. Uh,
I think this is something that
we don't, uh, talk about often
enough is what we provide back
to the state. And you'll hear
throughout this presentation
that we're going to do a better
job of telling our story, and
part of that is that this fiscal
year we're sending about $2.6
billion back to the state to aid
in funding for education and all
of your other priorities.
Uh, this is significant because
it's an increase of about $500
million year over year, and it
was not that long ago in uh
fiscal year 2020, uh, that we
crossed the 1 billion mark. So
we've been sending significantly
more money back to the state
this year, just over the last
several years.
Uh, and then also our total
asset growth was about $8.5
billion last fiscal year.
If you go to slide 3
Here's a breakout of what makes
up that $64 billion. Uh, and you
can see obviously the land grant
permanent fund, the Sea
permanent fund, in the early
childhood childhood education
and care fund make up the vast
majority of that. Uh, about 90%
of our actively managed funds.
Uh, we decide how to invest for
all of those funds. The only
thing we don't determine how to
invest, uh, are the third-party
client funds. Uh, they, uh, meet
with experts and uh tell us how
they want us to invest their
money
Uh, for, uh, the third-party
clients, they can invest in a
wide variety of funds that we
offer, uh, including, uh,
stocks, both US and
international, large and small
cap equities, fixed income,
including core bonds and credit,
and then for our larger and more
sophisticated clients, some of
them choose to also invest in
private market assets like
private equity, real estate, uh,
and real assets.
If you go to page 4
the next 3 slides are intended
primarily for reference. Uh,
they show each of the 14 funds
that we manage, uh, and along
with basic information on what
the spending policy is for each
of them. Uh, I'm just gonna go
through some highlights. So on
slide 4, you can see that, yeah,
our primary mission is, is of
course to manage and invest the
state's permanent funds.
Uh, these are, uh, obviously of
critical importance to the
state, but we also have had a
newer mandate in more recent
years to also manage some
additional reserve funds that
you all have set up.
Uh, the first page here covers
the largest funds, the land
grant, uh, permanent fund
severance tax, uh, the early
childhood education and care
fund and the uh tax
stabilization reserve, which is
also known as the Rainy Day
Fund.
Uh, the tax stabilization
reserve, if I want to call out
specifically because I know
there's a lot of concern about
the federal budget cuts.
And this fund was specifically
set up as a rainy day fund if
you need to turn to it in order
to help make up gaps in the
budget. This is there for you as
you look to address uh federal
cuts to healthcare and
education. Uh, the other three
funds are set up in statute and
set up in the Constitution to
provide ongoing revenue back to
the state each year. And that's
really where you're getting the
vast majority of that 2.6
billion that we're. If you go to
page 5
this slide covers the same sort
of information uh regarding some
of our older, uh, but slightly
smaller funds, uh, like tobacco
and water, uh, as well as newer
targeted endowment funds created
by the legislature over the last
5 or 6 years.
Uh, this includes things like
the rural libraries, endowment,
the Conservation legacy
Permanent Fund, the Oreoid, uh,
settlement Restricted Fund and
the Workforce Development and
Apprenticeship Trust Fund.
These funds are basically
endowments that have been
created at some juncture by
revenue windfall, where it was
determined that that windfall
couldn't be spent efficiently in
one single year, but where there
was a desire to invest that
money, have us give it back to
the state over a period of time
for you to continue to invest in
ongoing programs.
If you go to slide 6.
these are the last of our funds,
and you'll note at the bottom,
the two newest ones, the
Behavioral Health Trust Fund and
the Medicaid Trust Fund.
The Behavioral Health Trust Fund
came with $100 million
appropriation out of this last
legislative session. The
Medicaid Trust Fund is slated to
see its first inflows from two
different sources later this
year, one from Capital Outlay
reversions and one from Federal
Oil and Gas Royalty payments.
Uh, these more recent funds have
various levels of permanence.
Uh, some of them are set up
really to uh be a permanent type
fund. Others are set up to be
more temporary.
like the higher Education Trust
Fund has a very specific, um,
end of life projection.
However, it is important to note
that the two largest funds that
we manage, the land grant
Southern, the Land Grant
Permanent Fund and the severance
tax permanent fund our
constitutionally protected, and
they can only have their
spending, their outflows
adjusted through a
constitutional amendment and in
addition, the largest of the
two, the a the land grant
permanent fund would also
require uh a passage of a law by
Congress, uh, because it was set
up with the intent of the
federal government giving us
those lands for management for
specified beneficiaries. So if
there is ever a desire to do
something different with the
outflows, it, it needs to both
have the Mexico constitutional
amendment, and then also
Congress needs to pass an act.
If we move to slide 7, I just
want to give you a quick
overview of how we manage these
funds. You can see, uh, at the
top there, uh, you can see
whether funds are more growth
focused or more preservation
focused, and it really is a
scale. And then on the left-hand
side, uh, you can see, you know,
what's being invested in, and,
uh, and then right underneath
the growth trajectory, uh, you
can see all of the different
funds that we manage.
Uh, different allocation
exposures to different asset
classes, allow us to really
target uh different levels of
risk, different levels of
capital preservation for these
different funds based on how
they were set up and what you as
the legislature told us in
enabling legislation was the
purpose of the funds and
expected permanence of the
funds.
Going on to slide 8. This is
where we're really starting
getting into the meat of what we
do. And so you can see here,
projections for our
distributions, total
distributions back to the state
out through 2050.
What we hear a lot of is people
hearing that uh we have uh over
$60 billion but not really
understanding what's happening
with it. And some people
incorrectly assume that it is
sitting there, that is not being
used, and I want to let you know
it is constantly working for
you. Uh, the power of compound
interest is allowing us to
generate significantly more
money to give back to you each
and every year. And I think this
graph demonstrates that very
clearly. You can see where we
are in 2025 that, uh, will be
distributing about $2.6 billion
back to the state, but then by
2050, we're projecting to
distribute nearly $10 billion
back to the state in that year
and years thereafter.
And that really is because of
the power of compound interest.
Uh, this compound revenue engine
is how we are currently paying
for a lot of essential state
services, but it is increasingly
going to be a significant part
of how you pay for everything
moving forward.
Uh, on the, and I'll go into a
little bit more detail on that,
but we'll hop to the next slide
on slide 9.
Uh this is another way to, to
look at it and this is over a
shorter time period. This is
over the next 10 years. And this
is the growth of our net asset
value, our, our total fund value
that we manage, as well as our
fund distributions.
And
you can see that just in the
next coming decade, we're
expecting significant growth.
Uh, we're expecting, uh, in less
than that time to surpass $100
billion in total funds under
management, uh, and that within
less than 10 years, we will pass
the mark of providing $5 billion
back to the state every. On
slide 10
just want to give you a quick
snapshot of performance. Uh,
this is a snapshot of all of the
funds currently managed by SIC
over various time periods,
because we manage 4 long time
horizons, it is most important,
uh, in general to look at, uh,
say the 7 and 10 year periods.
Um, we don't invest, uh, for a
very short time frames. Uh, that
is more the work of, uh, the
treasurer's office.
Uh, also important to note is
that
it was just 6 years ago that we
were only managing 4 funds, uh,
rather than the 14 that we're
managing today.
Uh, I would like to draw your
attention to the uh lines for
the severance tax permit fund
and the land grant permanent
fund.
because you'll note that the
land grant permanent Fund
outperforms the severance tax
permanent fund across all time
horizons by at least 1% if not
more.
And the reason for that is while
they were both invested in the
same way by us
the severance tax permanent fund
also has carve-outs for
economically targeted
investments.
and economically targeted
investments have differential
rate goals, and that is, is what
has been uh providing a drag on
the performance of the severance
tax permanent fund versus the
land grant permit fund.
Now those uh ETIs, there are a
variety that are allowed in
statute. Uh, there are also some
that are required by statutes.
So for example, uh, we are
required to provide 2% of the
year-end value, um, of the
severance tax permanent fund to
the small Business Investment
Corporation, the SBIC, who
you're getting an update later
from today.
I in no means want to infer that
that is money not well used. I
think they are providing some
very valuable services, but it
is important to note when you
look at our returns, that that
is part of the reason why the
severance tax per uh permanent
fund performs lower than the
Land grant permanent fund. It's
because the SBIC has a very
explicit target of providing
below market uh loans and other
support programs for New Mexico
businesses that aren't
at the same level as the rate of
return that we're targeting for
the funds overall.
This also, this historical
underperformance led to uh the
Legislative Finance Committee
sponsoring a bill this last
legislative session to try to
address uh an economically and
targeted investment program that
we had run historically. Uh, it
was the, the New Mexico Private
Equity program, very
specifically venture capital
program.
There were very reasonable
concerns about uh the past
performance of that fund and uh
or started that program, and
I'll show that in a couple of
slides. Uh, but we, we heard
those concerns and we have made
significant changes to the
program, uh, which I'll go into
here in a minute.
If you turn to slide 11, uh, I
want to go through the history
of our investments in Mexico
just a little bit.
And you can see here that our
ability to invest in, at a
differential rate, lower than
the rate that we would
ordinarily target. Uh, was first
authorized by the legislature in
1990 and again it, it was
created as a venture capital
program with the thought that
we should try to encourage jobs
and economic development here in
New Mexico and that if we're
encouraging jobs and economic
development, we should be OK
with receiving a lower rate of
return. And that's the this
differential rate. You, I'm not
going to go through all of those
details there. You can take a
look at how the program is
revised over time, but the long
and short of it is that the way
the program was originally set
up, it was fundamentally flawed,
and there were attempts over the
years to try to work around that
fundamental flaw to try to make
the program
work anyway
But after 35 years, the program
just was not working as
originally intended. The
fundamental flaw was the thought
that you can charge a
differential rate for venture
capital.
You can do that for loans if you
want. If the market rate for
loans is 6%, you can charge 4%
and if you operate the program
well, you get 4%, and you have
your differential rate, great.
That doesn't work that way for
venture capital. Venture capital
more than any other asset class,
has an extremely wide dispersion
of returns. The companies, the
venture capital funds invest
into are
startups that have extreme
capacity for growth, but also
extreme risk. They either
succeed or they fail
and the venture capital
companies as well have very high
dispersion of returns, much more
so than anything else we invest
in, and they largely also either
succeed or they fail.
So if you go in with the
objective of being OK not
working with the top tier
venture capital groups, you are
unfortunately going in with a
plan to lose money, not simply
to make less money.
And that was the fundamental
flaw in thinking that we could
have jobs and economic
development, but get those lower
returns. The problem is that if
the companies aren't doing well
and aren't providing us the
financial returns. That means
those companies are also not
providing the jobs and economic
activity that we want. If
they're failing financially,
they are also by definition
failing economically.
If we want economic development
and job creation in New Mexico.
We have to work with top tier
venture capital groups that know
how to pick and mentor the top
tier founders to get those uh
projects to succeed.
If we move to slide 12.
you can see what our goals are
now. So we are both investing in
building an ecosystem here in
New Mexico.
And
one of the things that we're
doing is we're investing in
company creation engines in a
way that we hadn't before. We're
specifically focused on venture
studios, accelerators and
company creators, and we're
working with those groups to
both have a local presence, but
also have a tie to national
groups, because one thing that's
really important for these
founders is not just to get that
initial funding, but also to be
introduced to in a critical
business network
around the country
It's also critical for them to
receive the sort of mentorship
that we need, because we know
that we don't have a wide and
deep bench of experienced
entrepreneurs in New Mexico. So
these company creation engines
are critical in helping provide
that mentorship.
We are also focused on being
able to provide capital across
all stages of growth. That was
something that historically was
really problematic for New
Mexico. We had what were called
valleys of death, where when a
company reached a certain stage
of the funding cycle, they
wouldn't be able to find funding
here, and they would have to
leave. And over the years there
have been numerous reports in
newspapers about exactly that
happening. So we have now
invested in uh venture funds
that are providing funding
across the entire
uh growth cycle from preseed,
seed, uh, to Series A, B, and C.
And this, this bottom main
bullet
the we
have now officially adopted a
strategic venture capital
program. It is a reimagination
of what this program should be.
And it starts with saying, we
need to charge uh or expect
market rate returns, and we can
also get economic benefits in
New Mexico. We can do both, and
it's because tho those are
intrinsically linked. If we are
working with top tier venture
capital groups, but requiring
them to work with uh uh projects
in New Mexico companies in New
Mexico
or bring outside projects to New
Mexico.
These are the groups that have
the experience to know how to do
that and to do it well. We also
spent a lot of time leading up
to this in a change, researching
how other places, both around
the country and around the world
have done this successfully. So
this was very research-based
data-based, and we're excited
that there has already been a
significant change.
On slight 13, you can start to
see that change.
We have separated out
the New Mexico program uh from
2018 and before and 2019 and
after.
For 2018 and before, you can see
that we've lost $117.9 million.
It was clearly a financial
failure, and it was also an
economic failure. It resulted in
very few jobs. So we got very
little in return for that loss.
And again, it wasn't just a
differential rate. It wasn't
that we were getting a lower
return than we expected. We
literally lost money on that
program. In 2019, we started
making changes to improve the
program, uh, started, uh,
working with uh higher and
higher caliber venture capital
groups, but also started making
sure that we were investing
in funds that would provide
funding across the business
cycle that had national ties.
But in espe and you can see the
result is that now we're in the
black. Now the returns are
positive.
and with the changes that we
have made this year, we
anticipate that those results
will become market rate, that it
is becoming a program that will
both in uh provide investment
into New Mexico, but also give
us the returns that you all have
said that you need us to provide
back to you to be able to
provide $5 billion back to the
state in 8 years to provide $10
billion back to the state by
2050.
On slide 14.
I just want to highlight a few
recent successes.
So the first is ubiquity. Uh,
this was supported by 3 SIC
investment funds, uh, builders,
scout, and Phoenix Venture
Partners
and it is scaling up its
operations for its quantum dot
technology, which was developed
at Los Almos National
Laboratory.
The second on the list is Xge
geothermal. You've probably
heard about their announcement
that they made in partnership
with Meta, which is the owner of
Facebook.
And
XGS geothermal, uh, originated
its New Mexico interest after uh
SIC partner AnzU invested in the
company and suggested that New
Mexico would be a great place to
look for its geothermal
opportunity. And so now XGS and
energy has announced this $1.2
billion geothermal plant that's
going to go into northwestern
New Mexico as a result of a $15
million investment that was made
through SIC. This is a perfect
example of the sort of return
that
we can expect out of the new
vision of this program, both
getting significant financial
returns, but also leveraging the
state's money and getting
significantly more investment
and good jobs here in the state.
And then finally, I, uh, just
because it's a different type of
investment want to cover uh
harvest IQ.
SIC fund manager Builder is
moving its portfolio company
HarvestIQ, uh, which is an
agriculture technology and
insurer for the ag industry, uh,
to New Mexico for better
proximity to customers. So we
are working with a wide variety
of companies through uh more
than 20 different venture
capital fund managers.
Uh, we also expect some very
large announcements in the next
few months. Uh, so please stay
tuned. We are also going to be
doing a better job about getting
the word out when we uh are part
of these major announcements,
uh, so that you can understand
the SIC funds helped to bring
these projects to New Mexico.
On slide 15
uh, I want to go back to, uh,
our importance to the state
revenues state budget.
And really at the crux of how
we're able to impact the state
today and moving forward was
Senate Bill 26 from 2023 that
was sponsored by Vice Chair
Gonzalez, and this bill is
absolutely transformative for
the state of New Mexico.
It is hard to overstate the
importance of this bill, and he
was legislators and the governor
do not get enough credit for
enacting this into law.
When I was at the economic
development department, we saw
the projections that the oil and
gas industry would gradually
provide uh less revenues over
time to the state. We, we took
those numbers and we decided to
see can we uh diversify the
economy quickly enough to offset
those revenue losses.
And unfortunately, the answer
was no. We had just come off of
two back to back record-breaking
job creation years for the
department and the numbers that
we calculated were that we would
have to do 10 times that every
year for the next 10 years in
order to be able to offset the
revenue losses from the oil and
gas industry.
And the reason for that is oil
and gas, as you clearly know,
represents about 1/3 of the
state's revenues, but it only
represents about 2% of the
state's employment.
New Mexico does have a bit of an
economic diversification
problem. But it's not really
economic diversification away
from oil and gas. New Mexico is
more reliant than other states
on the retail sector and the
public sector.
But for oil and gas, it's not an
economic problem, it's a revenue
problem. And so we needed a
revenue solution, and that's
exactly what Senate Bill 26 is.
And you can see in the graph
there on the left, uh, that it
is providing significant
additional inflows to the
severance tax permanent fund.
Uh, now and in the future, after
it has provided a significant
amount of inflows to the early
childhood education and care
Fund.
On the graph on the right, you
can see what this means back to
the general fund. The, uh, the
light gray line on the bottom is
what we would have provided back
to the state from the severance
tax permanent fund minus this
bill if it hadn't passed, and
you could can see that it would
have essentially flatlined. But
because of this one bill, the
amount of revenue that we're
going to be able to provide back
to the state jumps dramatically
in the coming years. So, again,
it it is
impossible to overstate how
critical this bill was to the
future of New Mexico because now
instead of looking at a looming
financial crisis where every
year you would come back and
have less money to spend every
year, you would have to decide
what do we cut? Now you have a
bright financial future, and
you'll have more money every
year to decide how do we want to
either provide tax cuts to our
people and our businesses, or
how do we want to pro uh provide
funding for new initiatives to
tackle critical issues like the
economy, healthcare, education,
and crime.
And that's all possible because
of this bill.
If you go to slide 16,
you can see what we are doing
for the state today. We are
already paying for 28% of all K
through 12 education in the
state of New Mexico.
We are already paying for 78% of
Earl of all early childhood
programming.
This is already happening today
in those numbers are just going
to rise significantly over time.
We need to do a better job of
telling our story because so
many New Mexicans don't
understand this. They don't know
what we're providing for the
state today and what the
projections are for the future.
There are ideas out there uh
about the possibility of taking
money out of the permanent
funds, and
I, I really, I take ownership of
why those ideas are out there,
because we haven't done a good
enough job of explaining this.
So we are going to be much more
proactive in explaining this to
Policymakers such as yourselves,
but also to the general.
We have heard some people
advocate for taking as much as
half of the money out of the
permanent fund to spend on
priority, priority investments
including infrastructure.
I, I can't tell you both uh how,
how disastrous that would be for
our ability to pay for education
next year, as well as our
ability to pay for everything
else you want to do in the years
coming down the road, but also
what I think we have not done a
good enough job of conveying is
the magnitude of the funding we
will already be providing you in
the coming years. If you were to
take half of not just the
permanent funds, but how to fill
the total value of funds that we
manage, uh, out from under our
control, which again, can't be
done entirely without changing
the constitution, things like
that. Uh.
half of, uh, you know, $64
billion is $32 billion. So if
you were to take half, you'd
have 32 billion.
Well,
already our projections are that
over the next 10 years, we will
be sending back to the state $38
billion. $38 billion over the
next 10 years.
If you took out half of the
funds next year, you would
immediately start having to use
that to fill budget holes
because uh we would suddenly not
have the capacity to provide the
same level of funding for K
through 12 education and other
things. So it, the idea here is,
if you take out a huge amount of
principle. It's severely
interferes with our ability to
generate compound interest. If
you leave it in and leave the
existing schedule for us to
provide interest returns
back to the state. We can
continue generating compound
returns.
There's a quote often attributed
to Einstein that uh compound
returns are the eighth wonder of
the world. There's a debate
about whether or not he said it,
but it is true compound returns
are phenomenal. And one thing
that we need to do a better job
of as well is explaining really
what that means. It's hard to
think of it when you're talking
about billions of dollars. So I
think an easier way to think
about it is to imagine two
individuals who are saving for
retirement. The first individual
starts saving at age 25
and at $1000 a year.
and invests for a period of 10
years.
The second individual starts 10
years later. He starts at age
35.
He invests one, the same $1000 a
year but invests for 30 years
instead of 10. So over that
time, that 2nd individual has
contributed 3 times as much
money towards retirement.
By age 65, the first individual
will still have $35,000 more in
retirement because of the power
of compound returns.
That's the difference between
taking money out of the
permanent funds now versus
letting that money compound and
letting us give it back to you
on the set schedule that already
exists in statute.
And on slide 17, again, I just
want to bring home how important
these funds are going to be in
coming years.
You can see on this graph that
right now or in the prior year
in FY 25, permanent fund
distributions represented about
13% of the state's revenue
stream. Uh, severance and uh
taxes and rents and royalties
represented about 23%.
By FY 50, it's projected that
severance taxes and rents and
royalties will be 7%, and our
distributions back to the state
will have grown to be 32%. We'll
be a third of the entire state's
revenue stream, follow eclipsing
all personal and corporate
income taxes combined.
That's phenomenal. And again, I
just want to drive home that we
are not a policy institution,
but this provides US
policymakers with dramatic
opportunities over time to
either invest more into new
programs or to provide
significant tax cuts for our
people and our businesses.
And
finally, on slide 18, I just
want to end with a quick note of
where we have come as an
organization.
We have seen our assets more
than triple in value over the
last 10 years and double in the
last 5.
Wheat, however, still have
almost the same number of staff
that we had in 2010 when we were
managing $12 billion. I know
this is not a finance committee,
but I just want to alert you all
that we will be uh submitting a
pretty significant increase in
our budget request, uh, to the
legislature for this coming year
because we are very understaffed
I hear all the time that
agencies are understaffed. When
I came into this agency and
everyone told me we were
understaffed. I thought, OK, but
everyone is. But we hired some
consultants who took a look at
our staffing compared to the
staffing of public funds
elsewhere, and we're
understaffed by more than 5%
compared to public funds
elsewhere.
and we're at the point where
members of our investment team
are responsible for managing on
average more than $4 billion.
The average for our peers is
less than 2 billion.
At $4 billion it is hard to get
the money out the door fast
enough.
And
these consultants that we hired
looked at our returns, looked at
our staffing level, and
estimated that being
understaffed is costing the
state $300 million a year.
I am planning to ask for a, a
pretty significant budget
increase, but it is going to be
in the single digit millions
with the intention that that
will return an extra $300
million a year.
We also need to invest heavily
in new technology infrastructure
that in many cases has not been
updated in decades.
As of today, we still have some
systems running on tape backups.
If you remember cassette tapes
from the 80s, that is
essentially what we are still
using for portions of our server
backups. So we need to uh to
undergo some dramatic changes in
our budget because we have
undergone a dramatic change in
the amount of funds that we're
managing. This is not the same
sort of minute adjustments over
time that that so many agencies
face.
This is a dramatic shift, and we
need a dramatic shift in our
budget, and I would welcome all
of you the support that we can
get, uh, for a right sizing of
our budget. And again, we are
completely self-funded. We use
no general fund. If you fund us
properly, it just means that we
will be able to generate more
revenue to pay for everything
else you want to pay for.
And with that, Madam She, I'm
happy to answer any questions.
Thank you, Mr. Clark. Um,
obviously you guys are doing
great. Um, we have a couple of
questions, but before we go to
our questions, I would like for
Senator Stefaniks and uh.
Representative Lujan to
introduce themselves.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'm Liz
Steanic, Senate District 39,
representing uh parts of four
counties, San Miguel, Santa Fe,
Torrance, and Valencia. It's a
pleasure to be here. Good
morning, Madam Chair. Committee
and guest, Representative Tara
Luhan. I represent House
District 48 here in the capital
city, and I, I'm just.
I love this comedian and I love
all the information we're
learning today. Thank you.
And before we go to our
questions, um, Mr. Clark, could
you tell us who, who sits on the
state Investment council.
Of course, Madam Chair, so we
have 3 elected officials. It is
the governor, the land
commissioner, and the state
treasurer. And then by statute,
we also have, uh, the Secretary
of the Department of Finance and
Administration, and we have a
CFO of a higher education
institution selected by the
governor.
In addition to those two
positions, which are essentially
appointed by the governor. The
governor is able to make two
other, uh, selections, and then
the Legislative council has 4
selections. Uh, the great way
that our council is set up is
that uh members other than those
elected officials are in 5-year
staggered terms, uh, and that
provides for continuity and cost
administrations.
Thank you, Mr. Clark. OK, so,
uh, the people that I have
signed up so far or um
representative uh Rogal Javiero,
uh, Senator
Senator Gonzalez
If anyone has their, their
turn it off
Um, we're gonna take about 2
minutes.
All right, um, if there's no
further interference, um, OK, so
let me read this order again,
uh, Representative Royal
Caballero, Senator Stefaniks,
uh, Senator Bobby Gonzalez,
representative Lujan, and then
Senator Sidilia Lopes in that
order. And then silver.
um, Thornton
Duncan?
Silva, Thornton, just about
everybody then, and then would.
OK.
All right, we'll start with uh
uh Representative Redwall
Caballero.
Thank you, Madam Chair
and thank you. uh, Mr. Clark. I,
I call you John, but Mr. Clark
for today. Uh, you're enthusiasm
and your presentation is
contagious. I'm very excited.
because I came in at a time in
2013 when we were really
struggling.
and one of the areas, um, Madam
Chair, that I
bring to the experience and
skills that I bring and
expertise to this is in the area
of investments.
uh, budgeting and um
all of that area arena, and so
it struck me that we were, we
had an investment portfolio that
was just in not working.
and I had a lot of um
improvements to be made. And so
your history on page 11 is
really important for us to
understand how that has
transpired throughout the years
because
struggle and the and your uh
comments about doing a better
job of informing and educating
us as legislature, but the
general public about how
investments actually work, and
the whole area of um principal
and interest compounding returns
and how we best benefit from
them in our entire uh
processes of investment is very
important, uh, people for the in
the general um arena do not
understand, nor do we have a
clear understanding as a
policymaker. So in our town
halls and how we reach out, it's
more information you provide to
us is uh best in ways in which
we can convey that in the most
educational way for our lay
populations to understand, so I
look forward to that.
So, um, I do have a couple of
questions and the first question
I go to um
in reference to page 15 in oil
and gas. I am, um, for the new
Medicaid and behavioral health
funds.
I want to know when they will
reach or when you project they
will reach distribution
thresholds.
and how will the SIC manage
sustainability if oil and gas
revenues drop before
Madam Chair and Representative
Warbo Caballero.
So for the
for, let's go back to, let's
see, I want to turn to slide.
6. So for the behavioral Health
Trust Fund.
it received a flat $100 million
appropriation, and so there is
currently um also uh an ability
for it to receive an uh 50% of
the excess oil and gas revenues
from the oil and gas school tax
that would otherwise flow into
the early childhood education
and care fund, and that's set to
run for 3 years for FY 26
through FY 28.
And then the Medicaid Trust
Fund, again, it currently has no
funding at the moment, but it
also is going to receive 50% of
the excess of federal royalty
payments that would other fly
otherwise flow into the early
childhood education and care
fund for FY 26 to FY 28. It also
will receive
any uh amount of agency
reversions over $110 million.
And so we don't know in advance
exactly what agency reversions
are going to be. But when DFA
confirms that amount, uh, later
this year, uh, any amount in
excess of about $110 million
will also flow into that.
Um
as for how the outflows occur.
Charles, do you have any
information on how distributions
occur out of those two funds
because I, I apologize, I don't
remember off the top of my head.
Um, you would need to step
forward and speak into the mic,
please.
Yeah, Madam Chair
Representative, we'll get back
to you on the outfit.
Thank you. It was my microphone
that was causing that issue. So
hopefully this new one will
work. So I have, um, thank you
for that, and it's so the the
managing of the sustainability
is worked into how we're going
to distribute and we'll get that
information later. OK, thank you
for that. So, um, on going back
to, I can't remember what I
think it was your opening page
on page um 2.
uh where you indicate the 8.5
billion in asset growth, which
is extremely um good, and it's a
very positive. Um, just within
fiscal year 25, I might note
that was the growth. So how will
SIC or how is IIC managing
rebalancing
and liquidity needs.
without overexposing funds to um
market volatility drawdown, more
so drawdowns.
Madam Chair and Representative
currently we are in a high
liquidity state, uh, in large
part because uh of, of two
things. One is the understaffing
situation I noted earlier, where
investing into private markets,
uh, takes a lot more time than
just uh putting money out into
the stock market, for example.
And so we are behind our targets
on where we want to be for
investments into private
markets, and holding on to more
money in cash and bonds right
now.
Right now, interest rates are
on, on the high side and so
that's not a terrible place to
be, uh, but it's still below
where we want to be for a
private markets. What it does
mean is that both holding it in
cash and bonds or putting it
into private markets, uh, helps
insulate us from the volatility
that you see in day to day in
the stock market. We have a lot
of funds invested in across all
possible asset classes and we
are invested, when you look at
public equities and stocks,
both nationally as well as
internationally. So we are
actually very well insulated
from uh day to day up and downs
of the stock market. We do
rebalancing every month, um,
but, uh, we didn't see nearly as
much of a drop at the lowest
point in the stock market, a
couple of months ago, as I think
people would have suspected. We,
we are largely insulated because
of how we invest for the long
term.
Thank you, and that is very
important. One last point just
related to that, uh, question.
So,
so how do you stress test
portfolios
for a severe market correction,
especially those funds with
short-term distribution
obligations because that's
also uh a way for us to provide
oversight and ask the necessary
questions when those things
happen.
So Madam Chair Representative,
we're projecting that we are
going to essentially have excess
liquidity for at least the next
5 years while we work to try to
hit our long-term private market
targets. So being able to meet
our distri meet our
distributions just is not a
current day concern. We do some
in-house stress testing though.
Uh, both, uh, midterm and
long-term, uh, but again,
because of our high liquidity
situation, that we currently
have no concerns about our
ability to meet our required
distributions. Uh, that is just
not an issue because of the high
liquidity state. Um
when we hit our targets for, for
long-term investment.
We will need to do more frequent
stress testing. That's probably
something we will want to be
reporting on more and more so
that you feel comfortable. But
again, right now, we, we have so
much liquidity, it is just not
an issue.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and
that's it. The only caution I
would say is that because we
have such high liquidity, we do
not lose sight of having the
systems in place to
stress test at the correct time
frames, cause that's really,
really important in terms of the
rebalancing and everything else
that has to happen with our
investments. Thank you, Madam
Chair, that's all. Thank you,
Representative. Um, we'll go to
Senator Stephonics. Thank you,
Madam Chair. My questions go a
little bit different.
that way. I hear you saying, Mr.
Clark, that we should um
be prudent in our use of some of
these funds, which we understand
but many of us, um, not all
I don't even know if it's 50%.
Believe that the early childhood
uh trust fund is a little too
high and could be used for
various purposes
So I want to weave that into my
conversation.
So I'm asking if there's any new
funds that you would recommend.
That's a policy.
issue question, and uh in the
past couple of days, we've been
in economic and rural
Development Committee.
And yesterday we heard a
presentation by Spaceport
and one of the questions had to
deal with whether or not
Spaceport had um
shown any return on investment
by the state.
and I see in your report that
some of our funds have gone to
aerospace.
I'd like to know if any of that
aerospace investment from you
all.
have gone to the spaceport
activities.
and that's it, manager
Madam Chair and Senator,
so
let me uh try to tackle this one
at a time. So you asked about,
are there any new funds that I
would recommend.
And unfortunately, I'm going to
have to pass the football on
that one because we, we just
very much do not want to be
engaged in, in policy. We want
to be a trusted source of
financial information for you.
And
uh what I will say is that you
all have had the foresight to
create a lot of additional funds
over the last 6 years. Again,
uh, 6 years ago, we had 4 funds.
Now we have 14. We are happy to
work with anyone who wants to
create a fund, because what we
have noticed over time is, uh,
some bills that get brought
forward to create funds, um,
there are not always structured
correctly. Uh, we ask that if
you are planning to introduce
legislation to create a fund,
please reach out to us. We will
work with
you to make sure that it is
structured to do, to do what you
want to do. Um, and, you know,
we won't weigh in on policy, but
we want to make sure that it
gets structured correctly.
In terms of the early childhood
education and care fund, uh,
certainly, I think we can all
agree that it has more money in
that fund than anyone originally
projected. Um, the, the numbers
are much higher than people
thought. What I would note
though is if you go to slide.
let me find it real quick
If you go to slide 15.
you can see that the funding is
one is winding up for, or sorry,
winding down for early childhood
education and care fund. Uh,
those are the light blue lines
that you see here. That's the
windfall to that fund. That
windfall is ending. It is now
going other places. Um, it's,
it's going partly to the new uh
behavioral Health Trust Fund,
Medicaid Trust Fund, and then
also to the severance tax
Permanent Fund. It, it's not
going to the early childhood
education and care fund anymore.
So,
yes, it got more money than
people originally projected, uh,
but it's not projected to get
more in the coming years. It's
already been allocated
elsewhere.
It, it is certainly a policy
issue that I won't weigh in on
as to what you want to do with
the money that's already in
there, but there won't be more
money going to it. So there's
not an issue that needs to be
addressed of
trying to figure out what to do
with more money that would have
gone to it.
Uh
and then as for the spaceport,
we are not directly uh invested
into the spaceport, uh,
aerospace and defense along with
uh deep tech and climate tech
are our target investment
industries for the New Mexico
program. Uh, but, uh, I don't
believe we are invested in the
spaceport or any company
currently active at the
spaceport.
Yeah, that's correct. Um.
and
um, again, New Mexico has a
relatively strong history of
research and development and
some manufacturing in the
aerospace industry. That's why
it's one of our targets, uh, for
our targeted industries, we
needed to both choose industries
where New Mexico had a right to
win, where we have a presence in
that industry already, where we
already have some skilled labor
where it makes sense for that
industry to be here, but then
also where it makes sense for
that industry to be funded
through venture capital. So
that's how we selected those
three industries segments.
Thank you. And Madam Chair, that
reminded me of one other
question. Do we have any funds,
um, Mr. Clark, on the books that
have no balance and that we
should delete.
Madam Chan, Senator, so if
you're talking about of the 14
funds that we have, uh, no,
there, there are
there are no funds that are
essentially zombie funds. We, we
have some, some little zombie
funds hanging out there, uh,
that we call funds that have,
you know, some dollars left in
them that we're still hoping to
to get over time. But when
you're looking at the 14 funds
that we manage on behalf of the
state, uh, no, they all have
money in it to some extent.
OK, so, Madam Chair, the reason
I asked that question is a
couple of years ago in this
committee, we actually had a
list of some funds that had
a flat or a zero balance. And we
went, oh, look at those. Either
we could use that, you know, or
take that title that purpose
and influx it with some funds to
use it for a new purpose. So
that's the reason I'm asking the
question. If we have some things
that are already established
that we could repurpose.
that would be a good idea. So
if you wanna get back to me
later on that, I'd be happy to
talk about it. Thank you. Madam
Chair and Senator, yeah, we
don't have any of those at the
moment that all of our funds
have some level of funding in
them and advocates for that
funding, uh, to continue in its
current disbursement cycle.
OK, our next uh question is from
Senator Gonzalez.
Thank you, Madam Chair, and, uh.
John, good morning and to your
staff.
uh, for, uh, a fine, fine,
excellent presentation.
Thank you on that. um, I was
gonna ask you, um,
uh, just out of curiosity, how
much, how much does Alaska have?
Mr.
Vice Chair.
76. 76.7 billion.
And what about Texas?
Uh, Madam Chair, Mr. Vice Chair,
uh, the last I looked, Texas had
about 54 billion. It might be a
little bit higher now. That was
towards the end of last year,
early this year.
OK, thank you for that. So that
puts us in our
the second position that you
were talking about. Good, great.
Um, the other part that uh, I
wanted to mention is um, uh,
thank you, uh, you know, for
referencecing uh to
Senate Bill 26.
But, uh, to the members, uh, I
just want you to know, uh.
this was not a, a short term.
I've been working on this for
like about 4 years and uh
probably even more.
but uh a lot of credit also to
uh our economists from
LSC to a lot of discussion with
the late
Jerry Sande and also with uh
John Arthur Smith.
So a lot of uh feedback, but um.
you know, I'm glad that uh we
were able to uh be comfortable
enough to present it.
and for about 2 years, we talked
about.
presenting the bill and, and I
always felt like we weren't
quite ready and uh finally, you
know, we, we worked with, with,
we wanted to make sure that
we would have a, a very fair
chance of uh the passage and
also with the
um also with the
support of the governor's
office, you know, to, to work
with that, but, you know, I
could see, you know, what this
would do for the state.
Now, um
coming back a little bit to to
part of your presentation.
is so
I fully support
you know, I really support you,
your department, your office,
and what you're doing. And uh
you mentioned about coming in
with a budget.
and I don't know if you're at
the position now that you can
mention that to us, but I
definitely would definitely
support you on that, and I would
like to start a
you know, get a jumpstar in in
working with that if, if it's OK
with you.
Madam Chair and Mr. Vice Chair,
so I am planning to ask for an
additional $6 million in our
200s in the personnel funding
category. Uh, so that is on top
of the, I believe, 7.9 million
that we currently have. That is
obviously a big jump, but again,
these experts that came in and
looked at our fund, compared it
to other funds, said that given
the amount of money that we're
managing today, we should have a
staff of 57, not a staff of 3
0
And the problem just gets worse
each year. We're projecting to
hit 100 billion over the next
six years. At that level, if we
stayed flat with staffing, each
person would be responsible for
managing about $7 billion
instead of $4 billion. At that
level, it doesn't become so much
an issue of not being able to
get money out the door fast
enough. And that level, it
becomes an issue of, are we able
to even manage it properly? Are
we able to make sure that we're
not making series
errors. That's something we need
to avoid. We both need to make
sure that we are getting money
out the door properly, but we
also need to make sure that we
don't end up in a situation down
the road where we are so
severely understaffed, that we
can't properly provide oversight
for the money that we have. And
so based on that, I, I'm, I'm
asking to add $6 million to our
$7.9 million funding in the 200
category. I will also be asking
for a pretty significant
increase in the 4
00 s uh, to provide for
additional technology upgrades.
Uh, I believe we currently have
about 1.1 $1.2 million in that
category, and we're probably
going to be asking to about
double that.
Oh, John, thank you for that
information. Uh, I, um, I
definitely support you and I
know what's happening and see
how it's working.
And uh, you know, definitely uh
see the.
the value of it
but also, you know what it's
doing to our state.
And uh you know, definitely will
be there to work with that on
the second part, um, I had a
question which you addressed a
little bit. Yeah, so, how much
work are you doing with AI?
So, uh, Madam Chair, Mr. Vice
Chair, uh, currently we have
some investments in AI across
the board. We have investments
in some of the major AI groups
or through our public equity
investments, uh, but we also
have some smaller investments in
AI in terms of our office's use
of AI.
Again, I would say that's
something at the moment we are
struggling to find a way to pay
for. We are struggling to find a
way to pay for a lot of
technology improvements that our
office desperately needs. We are
in the process of switching away
from those tape backup systems,
but we are essentially on hold
for a lot of other things until
we can process a budget transfer
request, uh, coming up next
month.
Oh, thank you for that. Uh, uh,
Madam Chair, just the, the last
part.
is um
um, I've been in this committee
for quite a few years.
and uh I recognize and I
understand, you know, what it
takes to.
you know, uh, the work that's
being done and uh how important
he would be to.
have that kind of information
to.
the 112th legislators plus, you
know, the administration to.
see what where our state is and
how a small mistake or.
a few mistakes, you know, the
the
the what it does to our program,
you know, for the investment,
but.
something that uh that I feel
that is very important.
is uh we are the policy
and then you have your part.
but
we have to keep them close
together as much as possible
because otherwise we don't have
the, the information from the
grassroots from your part, you
know, of the safeguards and
what's needed. And uh in our
part, you know, and I'm, I'm
pretty sure that all 112
legislators, all on this
We have a lot of requests out
there, you know, from fire
departments to the education to
just going and it's tempting,
you know, they see the budget,
they see the amount that we
have, but understanding what
it's doing, you know, to try to
work with that.
you know, so in that part, we
have to.
develop a stronger strategies to
understand we didn't get to 2nd
place.
without doing the right things,
you know, and so with that, um,
you know, Madam Chair, thank you
and thank you again to the staff
and to everyone.
within your department.
Thank you.
Thank you, um, Senator, um, so
we still have 6 people wanting
to speak and um uh I just need
to ask Senator Thornton, um, are
you, I know you're gonna present
on Bitcoin bitcoin, but are are
you gonna need the entire hour,
do you think? OK, um, well, we
may have to interrupt our lunch
a little bit. Um, because I want
everyone to be able to ask their
questions. Uh, so we're gonna go
to Representative Lujan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, um, director, for being
with us today. This has been a,
a.
full week of, of economic
development and and talking
about venture uh venture
capital, uh.
funds that we have for the state
with NMFA yesterday for the
oversight committee, um, and
today, um, and then in economic
developments in Valencia, we
were talking about, you know,
some of the the.
the groups that are coming in um
help uh put things together uh
for ventures and
uh.
growth, economic growth for our
states. Well, I look at SIC
Madam Chara, like the hub for
all these things and we create
as the legislature, all these
other types of funds that go
into these into NMFA MFA, and
rightfully so. So yesterday we
had a discussion on the venture
capital program Act that goes to
NMFA.
And under the parameters that we
gave them, they are to focus on
New Mexico's small businesses,
and they, they have hired out
um
uh, a group to come in to manage
the portfolio. So with your
needs
and I'm hearing them really as a
uh as a member of
appropriations. So how's
appropriations? I'm hearing that
if we gave you uh uh a certain
amount of money, then we can
have a huge return. We can have,
you know, $300 million is what
you, uh, you said, which we are
looking.
to place our money in the right
places, and we, but we have all
these different types of funds
and all these different types of
ways of managing these
portfolios. So you mentioned
that you're working with MFA.
How are you working with these
entities to make sure that, you
know, um.
or how are you working with
them? Essentially, I think was
one of the questions we had
yesterday to make sure you're at
the table. We understand how
everybody is working towards the
same goals, where I understand
an enemaha in this program with
their venture capital program is
working specifically for New
Mexico's small businesses
inherently, but as I see you're,
you're more diversified.
in your portfolios and your
approach, can you
expand on how you are alike, how
you're working and how we are
mitigating risk in all those.
endeavors, Madam Chair
Of course, uh, as a Madam Chair
and Representative, uh, we're in
frequent communications with
both NMFA and the Economic
Development Department. In
Maha's venture capital program
does have uh in a local impact
intent and focus to it, uh, that
ours where ours differs. Uh, we
are going after um
creating both an ecosystem and
working on big projects to get,
uh, you know, significant job
creation and economic
development in the state.
NMFA's program is more targeting
smaller groups that historically
have been bypassed, uh, by
the, the financial indu
industry.
Now
those are often emerging
managers, uh, managers that,
that don't have prior
experience.
Working with emerging managers
carries higher risk. Uh, it also
requires a lot more time to
review their, their documents,
uh, a lot more time to do the
due diligence. It, it is part of
the reason why we have not done
as much work with emerging
managers because we are so
severely understaffed, we have a
staff of 3 right now that are
wholly responsible for all of
national private equity and the
entire New Mexico program.
That is an enormous
responsibility and their staff
size should be a multi as of
now, we simply do not have the
staff resources to be able to go
after an emerging manager
program like that, but also
the program the NMFA has was set
up with the intent of being
willing to take on more risk,
whereas the severance tax
permanent fund.
Senate Bill 26, which made an
adjustment to it two years ago.
And then the LFC legislation
that passed the Senate
unanimously but didn't make it
through the House last year.
All told us, we want you to be
focused with the severance tax
permit fund first and foremost
on generating the returns that
we need for our schools tomorrow
and for the state as a whole in
the future.
So we have found a way to get
significant economic impact in
the state while doing that, but
it means that we are working
more with projects like XGS
geothermal, which simply
wouldn't fit into the type of
project, uh, the NMFA would do.
But we are operating in the same
ecosystem. We sometimes want to
pick each other's brains about
what does this investment make
sense? And so we meet frequently
to discuss that. Uh, as well, we
worked hand in hand with the
economic development department
on a lot of these. Uh, so XGS
geothermal, that wouldn't have
happened but for the combined
work of the economic development
department and SIC's partner
Anzu.
and it's really the work of both
entities that resulted in that
$1.2 billion dollar project
being announced. We are also
actively working with the
Economic Development Department
on a few other projects that
we're hoping can be announced in
the next 2 to 3 months that I
think in combination with these
examples I gave will really
demonstrate what New Mexico can
achieve because we're seeing
momentum that I have never seen
in the state before. Uh, I've
been involved in economic
development. We
uh functions in various ways for
the last 20 years, and I've
never seen the state have
momentum like this. It's really
exciting to be part of this.
Thank you. And I'm gonna just
end it there, but, but to say
thank you for your service to
New Mexico and what you've
brought to us and really um.
I've I've called you many times
and asked you many, you know, I
had a couple of meetings with
you, but you're, um, you're
streamlined focus and
understanding of this and
understanding that we, uh, we
need to be educated better, and
that's why I delivered this
question to you because
it is an ecosystem and how that,
how you, how it all in their
works and how it all
interrelates is really
important, you have such a.
a really um
profound understanding of that.
I would say in a way that you
can, uh, you can relate it to us
and and and educate us, so thank
you for that and the state is
lucky to have you. Thank you.
Um, next, uh, question is from
Senator Sidio Lopes.
Thank you, Madam Chair, um, and
thank you for an excellent
presentation. It was really well
done, um, and just uh as an
aside, I think now's the time to
double the size of your office
cause for, from what I'm
hearing, there's a lot of uh
disruption in New York and DC
with um with this type of
financial managers, so maybe we
can catch some, some good ones.
Um, I had a, and there they're
probably small questions, um.
and this private equity fund
that we invest in
I guess I should start by saying
I love that we have this venture
capital fund that you're just
talking about and, and that
it's, you're looking at, at how
to really grow the state with
it. I, I think that's fantastic.
But private equity has been
disruptive to this state in some
cases with regard to hospitals,
specifically and with regard to
housing, uh, coming into
hospitals, tearing them apart,
and, and then they have to
close, um.
same thing with housing coming
in, not making improvements,
raising the rents, getting rid
of old tenants. And so how do
you ensure that the private
equity funds that we're
investing in aren't these same
funds that are um really being
disruptive to the state and our
economic health.
Madam Chair and Senator, so one
of the things that we do as part
of our due diligence is both
review what their portfolio
currently looks like? What are
they investing in, how's that
working? But then also talk to
the fund managers to find out
what their approach is. We are
currently not investing in
hospitals. We have made some
limited investments into private
equity funds that invest into
housing, but in those cases, we
ask them questions about how are
you doing this? What is your
approach
uh
how is the median price of homes
impacted by what you're doing in
the area. Uh, for example, we
are, doing due due diligence on
a pri a potential fund right now
where we're asking them those
exact questions. Um, private
equity can also generate a lot
of benefits. There are companies
out there that are just not well
run and if a private equity firm
comes in and takes over, they
can help them run more
efficiently.
Um, private equity is a, it's a
double-edged sword. It's not all
good, it's not all bad, but we
do try to be very intentional
about investing with good
managers. That's really good to
hear. Is, is identifying the bad
private private equity funds,
and not investing in them and,
and the, I think in the long run
there's stronger anyway because
I just don't think it's
sustainable to come to
to um
to disrupt an industry
and then sell off the assets for
a short-term profit.
And Madam Chair, Senator, I, I
do just want to note that
through one of our investments,
there's actually um a company
coming here and I apologize I
forget the name of them at the
moment. Uh, but there's a
company coming into New Mexico
that focuses on providing more
affordable housing. When I say
that, it's not the least
possible expensive housing. It's
housing essentially for uh for
working people, for young
professionals. Uh, it's housing
in the lower mid-tier, which is
so often lacking and
they've been successful in
another state and they're now
expanding to New Mexico to try
to create more housing that a
lot of New Mexicans can actually
afford. So that's one of the
housing projects that we are
actually helping to happen here
in New Mexico. That's, that's
exciting to hear. Thank you. Um,
and then this is just another
little question. Harvest IQ, um,
they're moving, growing
operations to Albuquerque from
where?
Uh, Madam Chair, Senator, I
don't have details on that uh uh
off the top of my head, but we
will get you uh some information
and we will follow up. OK, yeah,
I'm, I'm curious because
um
if it's coming from rural
communities. I just want to
understand what, what that is.
Um, and then very briefly, um,
when will the conservation
legacy Permanent Fund, um,
reached this reach, when is it
targeted to reach?
um the states that'll start, um,
uh, providing
benefits
providing the
income
I, I had thought that it was
3 to 5 years, but I don't, I
don't remember.
Madam Chair,
I'm gonna ask my chief
communications Officer, Charles
Woman to come up and help
address that question. Sure,
Madam Chair, Senator, um, so the
conservation legacy permanent
fund,
uh.
has two components and, and so
basically we have the permanent
fund which feeds a program fund
and so the program fund, I
believe, is already making dis
distributions, um, we will not
make another distribution to the
uh from the permanent fund to
the program fund, one, it's not
needed initially. Um,
could you introduce yourself?
Oh, I'm sorry, I'm Charles,
who's speaking
chief here at uh at SIC.
Um
so the, the, the fund is
essentially operating as it was
designed, where we will feed the
program fund, um, we will try to
grow our assets, but actually
it's a mechanical. We have to
reach a certain level before it
will start distributing, but in
the meantime, the program fund
is still operating, it's still
um distributing as, as intended.
As from the very start
that, that's what I remembered
about it. But then I also
remembered that it had that
second piece.
and that was gonna provide a
larger impact in that.
you about 3 to 5 years or, or
you said it's mechanical and I
guess I don't remember the
mechanical part piece of it.
When it reaches a certain number
and then it will.
that you have it right,
essentially, when we reach a
certain level, um, we then
distribute the money to the
program fund or grows the
program fund, and the program
fund is sending money in a lot
of different ways to to several
different recipients and
beneficiaries, right? And then
plus additional distributions we
might make. OK, thank you. That,
that really uh was helpful. And
again, thank you for an
excellent presentation. I think
the investment in your office
will really pay off.
Thank you, Representative Silva.
Thank you, Chair. Uh, thank you
all for the presentation. Um, I,
again, this, this isn't a budget
hearing, but I just wanted to
come back to that, um.
because I think from last year,
from this last budget cycle, we
were able to increase um the SIC
budget.
for the 200s, um, and for
contractual services by I wanna
say 4.something million.
So I wanted to ask how hiring
was going, um, because they know
that that was the same issue
that you brought to us this past
year, um, and, and then the
increase that you're asking for
in 2026. Does that mean that the
contractual services would
reduce or would you keep that
the same or also increase that.
Thank you, chair.
Madam Chair and Representative
Silva, uh, so I was employee
number 22 when I started, and I
believe as of today we're at 31.
We are also on the verge of
hiring about 5 to 6 more people.
So I anticipate before the end
of the year we'll be at 36 or
37.
We did get an increase in our
200 category, uh, funding, uh,
that money was not a pure
increase. It was moved out of
contractual services.
Contractual services for us is
largely manager fees that we pay
for uh public equities. Uh, so
when, when we look at that
category, that is primarily what
that is. And so if we increase
our staffing, it, it's because
we're so severely understaffed,
it doesn't really decrease the
amount of uh uh manager fees
that we have to pay uh for
public equity fund managers. Uh,
so unfortunately, there, there's
no, there's no, no way to just
shift money
around in the budget. It does
have to be a total increase, but
again, that total increase is
necessary because our budget was
really to suppressed
bare subsistence level for so
many years to the point where we
had to ask for a budget transfer
to just be able to uh change out
our systems and not rely on
cassette tape backups. Um, we're
working to become a world-class
organization because we
certainly now oversee
world-class funds. Uh, but to
get there at a bare minimum, we
need to reach the median uh
staffing levels of our peer
groups. And, and that does
require budget increases
not just moving money around
Uh, I hope that answered your
question, Mark. Yes, understood.
Thank you so much. Um, and then
a couple more questions, um,
when you were talking about
venture capitalism, capital and
moving.
into more top tier VCs. Does
that, were you saying that we've
already done that and that's a
choice you made or we have not
yet done that and that we ought
to.
Madam Chair rips into Silva, who
we have already started doing
it. It, it's been a gradual
shift over the last few years
to, to start doing that and then
in April of this year, our
council voted to make that a
very intentional policy choice.
It doesn't mean that we won't
work with New Mexico Venture
Capital Groups. We still will
work with local groups, but the
local groups have to show to us
that they have a chance to
actually succeed and what we're
encouraging them more and more
to do is if they don't already
have a partnership with the
national fund to find a
partnership with the National
Fund and in some cases we're
helping to make introductions
because
uh
just as we know that New Mexico
doesn't have a deep bench of
highly experienced
entrepreneurs, New Mexico also
does not have a deep bench of
highly experienced venture
capitalists. And so our venture
capital funds here essentially
need mentorship from highly
experienced groups elsewhere in
the country.
Thank you, Chair, and thank you,
Mr. Clark. I'm also wondering on
that point, um, would
Senate Bill 162 that I know um
didn't advance this past
session. Would that help or, um,
is that still something that you
all are seeking?
Thank you, Madam Chair. Madam
Chan represent the SB 162, I
would say is no longer necessary
because the policy change that
we made
I, I believe fully addresses the
concerns that SB 162 is trying
to address. SB 62162 was
structured in a problematic way.
We viewed it as potentially
being unconstitutional, the way
it was structured, but we
certainly understood the intent
was
the, the Legislative Finance
Committee by uh sponsoring it in
the Senate by passing it
unanimously were telling us,
please focus first and foremost
on making sure that you are
generating the returns that we
need. The changes that we
officially made in April do
absolutely that and also will
generate more economic benefit
for New Mexico than we were ever
able to do before. Uh, so we are
going to be increasing both
sides of the double bottom line.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thank
you, Mr. Clark. I appreciate
that because that was one of,
one of my concerns as well. If
we're looking at the severance
tax permanent fund as a thing
that's going to provide um
stability and insulate us from
any other kind of volatility
we're seeing at the federal
level, um, and we're putting
things in there that drag on
that fund, um, that was really
concerning to me, so I'm glad
that you're actually really
agile in making that shift, um,
and then my other I had two
2 more questions, sorry. Uh, how
much annualized volatility are,
uh, our investments exposed to
or how much are you willing to
kind of take on in terms of
volatility of products and does
the SIC or the state do we
charge, um, third party client
funds to to manage those client
funds. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Madam Chair, Representative
Silva, so it's hard to give you
a specified number because the
volatility differs across each
of our asset classes. But uh
uh our portfolio is structured
with a conservative pro
investment profile. It is
structured more with a capital
preservation, then a growth at
all costs, uh, profile. When you
look at how we're structured, we
fall a little bit more in line
with uh pension funds than say
with some endowment funds that
take on significantly more risk.
Uh, we are having ongoing
conversations with our council
about what level of risk is
exactly right. We have an
additional conversation with
them, uh, about this exact topic
in over the next two weeks.
We're trying to always make sure
we're striking that right level
of balance. But right now, we,
we do have a conservative
investment profile.
Um, as for those uh third-party
funds, we do not charge them any
administrative fee at all. Um,
it does mean though that um as
we take on more and more
clients, manage more and more
funds for them, that is an
additional burden on our
staffing that then has never
been reflected in additional
budget increases to pay for that
staffing. So it, it has become
quite a challenge at this point,
uh, to the point where the last
few governmental groups that
have wanted to come on as
clients, we've had to tell them
we have to put you on hold. We
just, we honestly cannot bring
on another governmental client
right now. Um, we have to be
able to staff up first. We can't
manage additional client
accounts.
Thank you so much. I appreciate
your time today. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Thank you, Representative. So
we're going to Senator Thornton
and Senator Thornton, we are
going to be working through
lunch because we want to hear
your presentation.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I, I,
I'll be brief because I, I
understand everybody wants to
eat, um.
first of all, uh, thank you, Mr.
Clark for your presentation, and
very, very good presentation,
especially for a first timer
here who's was very interested
in understanding uh what the
state Investment council
invested in. I had no idea that
we've grown from 44 programs to
now 14, so, so that was very
helpful. Just one quick
question. I was, I was curious,
um, I don't know anything about
this opioid sediment restricted
fund? What is that about?
And, uh, Madam Chair and
Senator, I will ask uh Charles
Woman to handle that question.
Sure, uh
Senator, uh, Madam Chair, uh, so
this was a, uh, a new fund last
year, so it's one of the, the
targeted um kind of narrow
endowments that the legislature
has embraced over the last few
years. Uh, it, it will make
distributions to a uh opioid
program fund for lack of a
better term. Uh, we managed the
permanent fund, the per well,
not a permanent fun a long term
endowment.
uh that feeds the program fund,
uh, that's managed by others to
address opioid uh issues. And
so, um, like, like all of these,
it has kind of a basic um
structure where we grow the
money and a percentage of that
is distributed every year.
Um, in this case, I think it's
a, a 5% on a 3-year.
Thank you, ma'am. So that is a
rolling fund is my
understanding. So it is a
permanent fund in a sense, but
it's, it's based on a 3-year
average. Is that correct?
Correct. We have uh certain
funds with the five-year rolling
average at, at various
percentages, anything from 4.7
to about 6.1% for the land grant
fund on a blended rate, and
then, uh, you have some that are
on a three-year, uh, uh, return
cycle, uh, like the early
childhood fund.
Both of those are acceptable
from a, uh, endowment
perspective, uh, one is just a
little more volatile, uh, the
five-year average makes things
very smooth and so it helps with
your planning as policymakers.
Thank you for that
Um, uh, on page 7, Madam Chair,
I, I just, uh, for clarification
for me, there was uh on the left
hand side you have the various
uh portfolio breakouts. I, what
is low duration FI and public
market FI. I'm not quite sure
what Madam Chair and Senator
Sue, those are both fixed
income, sorry, the FI is fixed
income, bonds like bonds, yeah,
so it can be a, a credit or
debt, uh, but, uh, there'll be
low duration and then
public uh public debt.
Thank you for that
clarification. I noticed that as
you're looking, looking down at
the expected compound returns
you, you, you, from your growth,
you go from 7.2% and then all
the way down to the more stable
preserving things that's, that's
down to like 5%.
Um, and my question is going to
your next charts on, on page 9,
and your predictions going
forward with respect to net
asset value growth. Are you
still considering the, the, is
that those 7% growth rates.
forever, basically, uh, assuming
you can maintain that level.
Yes, so, Madam Chair and, and
Rep sorry, Senator, uh, so these
assume the that we hit our
target growth rate every year,
so 7% for land grant, 6.3/75%
for severance. Uh, some years
were above that, some years were
below that, but we, we certainly
try to make sure that we're,
we're hitting that in the long
term or doing better. OK, so at
7% a year, then we would expect
to to double the amount in the
in the subur about 1
10 years. Yes, that's correct.
OK, very good. Actually, this is
really good presentation. Um
let's see, I had a question
regarding the venture capital.
I, I applaud you for, uh,
making, being aware of the fact
that that the current, the, the
old system wasn't working. I
sometimes it takes people a long
time to figure that out and, and
I'm glad you were able to say
that whatever we were doing
wasn't working and let's change
it. And so I'd appreciate that.
I've always been someone who's,
I always thought it was not the
government's responsibility to
pick winners and losers when it
comes to technology, because
we're not good at it.
And and you let the free market
decide that, and so, um, the
fact that you're
you're now sort of going to
venture capitalists who aren't
good at it, to allow them to
make those decisions for you. I
think it's a smart move. So I'm
really looking forward to it and
it looks like you're already
seeing returns on that based on
the current, uh,
uh performance of, of now making
money instead of losing money,
so
good on all of you for, for
recognizing that and, and
changing and going forward with.
I just want to comment that I,
I'm glad we're no longer trying
to make those decisions
ourselves.
So I appreciate the change in
direction. Um, in, in page of
14, you mentioned, you mentioned
that XGS geothermal is creating
a billion dollar power plant in
New Mexico, where, where, what
city is that going to be built
in? Manchur and Senator, they
haven't announced exactly. They
have just said Northwestern New
Mexico. Uh, beyond that, they
haven't revealed a specific
location. Uh, but it would be a
$1.2 billion dollar build out uh
in a couple of phases over a few
years.
And, and it's, it's to feed, uh,
the, the meta Facebook data
center.
Got you
And let's say I think that was
all, um, the compound annual
growth rate again was based on,
so you already answered that
question, and I think that was
all I had, Madam Chair. So thank
you very much.
Thank you, Senator, and we move
on to Representative Duncan.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Um, did
you just call me Senator Duncan?
No, I actually, well, I can do
it if you want. I don't have
that power. I didn't know if I
got promoted or demoted, um,
Madam Chair, thank you, great
presentation, John. Oh, Madam
Chair, I'll take every one of my
questions away except for one,
John, can you briefly, uh, if
they've given you a number on
the reversion for Cap outlay,
uh,
they give me a number on what
they're thinking.
So, Madam Chair, and
Representative, I, I believe the
number that was in the forecast
was the 110 million. So
essentially if anything comes in
above that forecast, uh, then
that's what that fund will
receive. Um, they tend over time
to estimate a little bit on the
low side because it's always
hard to tell. So it is very
likely that the fund will
receive something. It, it's so
hard to know exactly how much,
but likely something in the tens
of millions.
Thank you, Madam Chair. Thanks,
John. I, I, I just, you know, as
we, we have $6 billion in
capital Alley that's not been
spent for 100 years.
and, and we've got to do better
with managing that. Either use
the money or let's give it to
you and invest it and, and save
for the rainy day. Thank you,
Madam Chair.
Our next question is, uh,
Senator
uh Woods, Senate Minority Whip.
Thank you very much
Madam Chair. Madam Chair, I,
I've got just a couple of
questions, and John, uh, you
have mentioned several times
about a September bar. Can you
elaborate on that a little more
for me?
Yes, so, Madam Chair and
Senator, uh, in order to hire
beyond the next.
3 positions, I believe. Uh, we
are going to need to transfer uh
money over from uh uh into our
200s, sorry, not transfer,
increase our budget into the
200s. Again, we're not a general
fund agency. We're entirely
self-funded, so we do have the
ability to increase our budget
by the total 5%. Um, we are
going to need to do that, but
also one thing and I'm going to
be asking for additionally in
this next session is to get bar
authority to be able to increase
our budget as
needed because
if we are limited as to what we
can spend on our budget. It
either means that I'm limited in
hiring for being able to get
money in and out the door, and
money invested, or it means that
we're limited on the contractual
services side as to what we can
invest in uh public equity. If
we're limited as to what we can
invest in public equity and
stocks, then our only two
alternatives are invest in
private markets, but again, I
always said we're understaffed
and we're having trouble getting
money out the door fast enough
there or hold
it in cash and bonds that earns
less money. So having any sort
of constraint on our budget,
just costs the state money.
There are organizations, there
are state agencies that are set
up that are self-funded and do
not have a limit on how much
they can spend of their own
money. When the spaceport was
created, the legislature wisely
said, as long as you have money
to pay for it, you can uh uh
submit a budget transfer request
to DFA and to LFC, and you can
increase your
budget as needed
When the border authority was
set up, they were given that
same unlimited budget authority.
When the state fair was set up,
they were given that same
unlimited budget authority. All
three agencies use their own
money.
We need to have the same sort of
authority because we use our own
money and any money that we are
spending is with the specific
intent of this will get the
state more money back.
And um, Madam Chair, John, just
tell me.
just remind me as to when the
new budget, when the budget year
started.
Madam Chair and Senator, the
budget year started July 1.
So by September 1,
we need to change it from what
we did in July 1.
Madam Chair and Senator, yes,
that's correct. We have been
successful enough at hiring over
the last few months, uh, that we
are going to exceed my initial
expectations.
OK.
I'm not gonna argue with you.
The, uh,
just one last question and, and
Madam Chair, I'm, I'm sorry
about hesitating on this.
Uh, one last question
Our pension funds aren't
managed.
by the investment council.
That's the true statement.
Madam Shanener, that is correct.
We do not manage any of the
pension funds. And
without going into a 30-minute
dissertation.
Can you tell us why we did that?
Madam Chair and Senator, uh, I
don't know exactly why, except
that it, it does seem to be
common for Western states that
created the sovereign wealth
funds to create them largely as
separate entities, not in every
single instance, and Texas as an
example, has 21 sovereign wealth
fund is managed by its own
separate organization and there
are other sovereign wealth fund
is managed by the state
treasurer's office. So it, it is
done differently, different
places, but generally sovereign
wealth funds
are developed as stand-alone
organizations. They have
different
horizons and different liquidity
needs. We have far less
liquidity needs than a pension
fund does. And so that enables
us to take on more risk and
invest in more long-term asset
classes.
And then that brings up the fact
that the, the state treasurer
invest the budget money that we
budget and he makes it a
completely different set of
priorities on high invest that
because of the need to
immediately draw down those at
any time. Exactly. OK. Thank
you, Madam Chair.
Thank you, Senator. Um,
OK, um, I do have a couple of
questions, but before I, and,
and comments before I um get
into that, I just want to
announce that our lunch will be
here at 12:45, so we will be
working through our lunch uh
case anybody in the audience
didn't hear that before. And I
also wanted to announce to the
committee that I had planned to
make an announcement
that in September we will be
considering legislation. So if
you have things that you want to
start bringing forward, uh, we
will put you on the agenda if
you contact Paul or myself, and
um we will start considering
legislation, so I wanna repeat
that. Um, so I.
um
Oh, I'm sorry. Uh, let, let me
have you go before me and cause
I, I was gonna wrap up a little
bit.
Um, Senator Figueroa, thank you,
Madam Chair, and I'm sorry I
didn't catch your eye sooner,
um, Mr. Clark, one of my
questions concerns is about the,
what it would take.
to change the structure so that
you have unlimited budget
transfer authority. Is that a
statutory change, a rule change,
or just something we write into
the budget.
Madam Chair and Senator, the
three agencies I mentioned to
have it in their enabling
statutes, so they were given it
from inception. Uh, we haven't
had that from inception, and
what I would propose is rather
than trust and forget that it's
a uh system of
come back to us each year and
show us what you spent money on.
So rather than asking for this
to go into our permanent
enabling statute, I am asking
for this authority to be bar
authority, and we would then
come back and request that bar
authority from you every year
and every year we would have to
give you justification for how
we've spent our budget and if at
any point you feel like we are
not using the money well, you
can take that bar authority
away.
And just to clarify, Madam
Chair, bar authority is
established in the budget. It is
the LFC Committee and the budget
creation process, where that's
done. OK, thank you. That's one
question. The other one is
regarding page 15, the yellow
portion of the craft. I want to
make sure I understand, which is
the excess over the cap.
that we put on
um oil and gas royalty revenue.
We made the auto correction. We,
we made the correction when
ECECD fund got so large, it
didn't need it anymore. It's my
understanding that that overflow
now is split.
between or will be split for the
next 3 years, 26, 27, 28.
between the behavioral Health
Trust Fund and the Medicaid
Trust Fund. Is that right?
Uh, so, Madam Chanener said, uh,
that is uh largely correct.
There are, there are two sources
of revenue for the Medicaid
Trust Fund and the Behavioral
Health Trust Fund that are
slightly different. Uh, so I
believe the behavioral Health
Trust Fund gets 50% of
one piece of it.
And the severance tax permanent
fund gets the 50% of the other
piece.
or the other component of it,
the uh Medicaid Trust Fund gets
one, gets 50% of it. And the
severance tax permit fund gets
the other piece of it. So
essentially, the severance tax
permanent fund is getting, is
getting half of the total, and
that's what you see in the
yellow on, on page 15. That's
what you see in the yellow, and
then essentially
it, it's not, it does, it's not
exact numbers, but essentially
one quarter of it then goes to
the Behavioral Health Trust Fund
and one quarter goes to the uh
Medicaid Trust Fund. That's just
a huge rounding to try to get to
that. But, but that's
essentially how it works. So
there, there for the next 3
years, there will be money going
into both the Medicaid Trust
Fund, Behavioral Health Trust
Fund, and the severance
experiment fund after the 3
years is over, then it all goes
to the severance tax permanent
fund.
So, Madam Chair, to visually
represent that in this chart.
The current thing that shows
yellow
would be really half yellow.
and then two other colors.
to indicate kind of the split,
not exact numbers, large
rounding, but I just want to be
clear in my head, to explain to
my constituents, as you're
asking us to do to be good PR
for our investment council to
explain where this money goes
and for 3 years.
that's half of that yellow
portion is going to be split
between the Medicaid trust fund
and the Behavioral Health Trust
Fund. Now the other question is,
we've used the term capital
outlay version.
but what's actually printed in
this document is agency
reversion, um, do you see those
as the same thing? Are they both
going into the behavioral Health
Trust Fund.
Madam Medicaid transplants.
Madam Chair, Senator, if I, if I
said Caley reversion, I
misspoke. It is each annual
agency budget reversions that go
into that.
Thank you for that
clarification. I appreciate it,
um, and let us know how we can
support your budget increase.
Thank you.
Thank you, Senator. Um, just a
couple of comments from your
discussion, and
you guys, I mean, you guys are
doing amazing. I would love to
see you in number one spot.
Um, we will get there. We're
we're going to surpass Alaska. I
mean, uh, nationally, that's
just like amazing.
Um, I would also like to mention
that uh
remaining as diversified as
possible.
uh, not knowing what the markets
are gonna do, uh, is so
important and I see that you
guys are doing that, and I think
that that is amazing. Um, and I
say that because I happen to be
the chair of the Paro when the
market crashed in 2009, um, and
I, uh, you know, it was a, it
was an experience of a lifetime,
um, and I, and I appreciate
very, very much that you're,
you're as well diversified as
you are.
I just have to encourage that.
Um, I would also like to
mention um
that
I think this committee would
absolutely support your office
in terms of staffing and
technology. And if you don't
have the staffing and you have
the technology, then sort of
they sort of
make up for each other, but it
would be nice to have both, and
I, and I, I kind of say that,
um, you know,
think listening to everyone's
comments. I think that.
that's why I mentioned earlier
that we will be considering
legislation next month, so I
think you hear that loud and
clear. Um, also, um,
I had a question about the film
industry because I've been told
that some of the film industry
is looking to move out of state,
and so I just bring that up and
I don't know that for a fact.
but I think that it's something
that we need to be considering
as we move forward is looking at
our incentives to keep the film
industry in New Mexico. Um, I
think that, you know, it's
important that we don't lose
what we have to other states, so
I just want to mention that as
well, because someone
little bird told me about that,
and I, you know, I think it's
important that we have a, at
least have that in the back of
our mind is how do we keep that?
that industry in New Mexico, um,
it's great to see the clean
industry, um, uh, groups and,
and venture capital groups
wanting to come to New Mexico.
We just had some tours.
in at Sandia Labs and um we're
able to see some of the uh
venture capital groups that are
expanding in New Mexico, and
you know, if there's any way
that we can invest in our own,
then
you know, just sort of
keep that in mind as well. Um,
and then my last question was
with regard to that list that
you provided of all the
different investments that you
have.
Um, and I forget what page it
was on, but I think it was on
all the funds that you have
Um
on page
I don't see the page
Mhm
7
Um
so did I clearly hear you say
that you can't put anything like
in reserve.
like part of like each of the
funds has to, everything has is
is able to be invested. Did I
hear you say that? That all 100%
of each of those funds
there's no limit. Is that right?
There's no cap. Yeah, so, so,
Madam Chair, um, if I said that,
I, I misspoke or to clarify, we
always need to have some
liquidity because when we make
private market investments, we
don't just give them the full
chunk of money. They call it
over time. And so we have to
maintain a certain liquidity
levels to make sure that we're
able to meet those calls as well
as make sure that we're able to
meet, uh, the distri
bu tion s necessary to the uh
state beneficiary. So each of
those funds has a a certain um
liquidity and certain cap, maybe
that you have to keep a certain
amount in that fund, so it's not
all 1 100% for each one, OK,
perfect. That was my question
then.
um
and if there's not any other
questions from the committee,
then I guess uh we will, we
appreciate you being here today,
gentlemen, and uh we look
forward to uh
your next presentation when we
are in the number one spot,
right? Thank you very much,
Madam Chair and members of the
committee. Thank you. Um, our
next presentation will be, and
we're gonna keep moving along,
if it's OK with the committee.
Um, Senator Anthony Ant.
Thornton
PhD, and he is going to be
discussing Bitcoin as an
investment.
Senator, we're glad to have you
Thank you, Madam Chair. Let me,
uh, get set up here and they
want me to
plug in my computer
Let us know if you need any
help.
Let me know if it's showing up
anywhere.
Here you go
OK, I'll, I wanna thank the
committee
uh, first of all for allowing me
to present uh
about uh Bitcoin, um.
so my intent today is to
demystify Bitcoin and explain
its global traction and positive
development for individuals,
corporations,
and other institutions.
Um.
so it's crucial for our
legislators to be well informed
about this asset class.
So this meeting or this
presentation uh will equip you
with the necessary knowledge to
make informed decisions that
safeguard our financial future.
For those of you who know
nothing about Bitcoin, uh, after
listening to this presentation,
I guarantee that you will know
more than 95% of the people that
are out there.
Uh, however, uh, having a little
knowledge about Bitcoin will not
make you an expert on Bitcoin.
And so, so I'm not gonna spend
any time on the technical
aspects of the security protocol
behind Bitcoin, uh, and the
cryptography and things of that
nature.
Uh, those details are better
left for computer scientists and
engineers who have reviewed the
open source code which Bitcoin
is, upon which the Bitcoin
network is based.
So it is impossible to explain
Bitcoin in an hour, but the best
I can do is give you some basic
fundamental information that
merely scratches the surface of
what Bitcoin represents.
as a new asset class.
So this the 1st, 2nd slide is
just the agenda, kind of gives
you an overview of what you're
going to be seeing and what I'm
gonna be talking about.
Um.
it's built to help you
appreciate and understand what
this is. It's gonna cover some
of the fundamentals.
explore the strengths,
understand the mechanics, and
discuss the opportunity of
Bitcoin.
Um.
so without going so you can see
that where we're headed with the
agenda.
The next slide, we're going to
start with some really basic
fundamentals, but I think this
is critical to understand why
Bitcoin was created in the first
place.
Ask yourself
what is money
So money is truly nothing more
than one's economic energy.
It is conversion of one's work
creativity, and energy that is
given a value by society.
And so when we typically think
of money, we think of it as a a
medium of exchange.
your work for a certain amount
of money.
and it's also a way of counting.
It's a unit of account, um
so it provides a standard by
which we can measure the value
of one's work or or energy or
creativity.
Money is also used for a third
standard.
and that standard is a store of
value.
And so we think of store of
value, we think of something
that you can hold for a long
time and then return it for a
goods or services in the future.
And so money
if it's done right, should do
that.
Money you earn today
you should be able to get goods
and services sometime in the
future.
So in the past,
store value has typically been
things like gold.
and silver
And as we just heard from our,
uh, investment council, they
even use bonds, fixed income
bonds, as a store of value.
Remember the days when you could
buy a a series EE, you'd buy it
at half par value.
You put $50 in 20 years later,
you'd get the full value, $100.
So you're storing your energy
for a long term.
and you were assuming about a
3.6% interest rate over that
20-year period.
And then that's what people
think of as a store of value,
something that will maintain its
value over time.
Next slide. So the current
system we live in, and I, I, the
way to best tell people is that
you think about us living in a
matrix. The current system we
live in is
is we have um a money system
that is broken.
It's broken because we have
currency.
that can be created
by governments, and it's not
just ours, it's every
government in the world and
Crete.
currency
with little to no effort.
So what that means is
when you work for your money
and get paid
they can just print it out of
thin air.
All sovereign governments do
this
every one of them
The dollar has been the best
reserve
currency
for the last 110 years. What
this slide shows is
back in
1913
right before the Fed was
created, but when the Fed was
created in 1913,
a dollar could buy you $26 worth
of goods and services back then.
basically
today, you can only buy $1.
Turn it around
The best way to think about this
is that the dollar has lost 99.
almost 99.9% of its value in the
last 110 years.
And that's the best currency
that's out there.
Others are worse
So
the dollar is not a good store
of value.
because it is a, it is a
depreciating, melting iceberg.
That's what people don't
understand.
So when people talk about
inflation
about prices going up
having a hard time meeting their
price, it's not because prices
are going up.
because the government is
printing money
and devaluing the currency that
you already own.
So going forward, I always try
to tell people
inflation is not prices going
up. Inflation is the dollar
devaluing the currency you
already own. This is the Matrix.
We got to get out of our mind.
This is the trick.
Every government in the world
does this.
So our system is based on
credit.
They expect you to purchase
things.
And so they want you to take
credit, which means money is
created out of thin air. Banks
don't necessarily have to have
all the money in reserve when
you go and get a loan.
Most of it is just made up out
of thin air.
and then you owe them
They may have a 10% reserve for
all the money they have in their
savings account.
The rest, they're just giving
out
But it's new, new money that's
made up out of thin air that you
now owe the bank.
So
there's an inflationary system
built into our current monetary
system. And then finally,
lack of privacy. The current
banking and credit system
transactions are all recorded
and all identities are known.
That's kind of standard.
Every bank has to know their
customer, that prevent the that
the anti-money laundering and
things of that sort. well
understood.
So what is Bitcoin
So Bitcoin first and foremost.
is software
That's all it is, very simple
It's just a software program
It's been released in the wild
It's also a financial protocol.
In other words, there are very
strict rules associated with it.
Just like when you send an email
from one person to the next.
Most of us don't understand how
email works.
But we know if I put an address
in there, my email is gonna go
to that address.
Very similar with Bitcoin
The financial protocol
Bitcoin is also a separate
monetary network.
What that means is
it's outside the current
traditional what I call fiat.
currency network
Bitcoin is not part of the
existing
network that I just talked
about, and Bitcoin, and one of
the strongest aspects of Bitcoin
is it's the decentralized
ledger. I'll explain that.
in more detail in a second
But essentially what that means
is
there is no central location.
where every transaction is
located.
There is no central controller
There is no central office.
There is no one to call
It is a decentralized
ledger. In other words, every
transaction that ever occurs on
Bitcoin.
is sent out to every node
and every, um
every server
that work, that's on the network
And I'll explain how that works
So the beauty of Bitcoin is that
it's software
it's digital
it's a network
and it's decentralized
So it's designed for fairness
transparency, and predictable
value.
So I'll walk you through all of
that
The key thing here is that this
software was written in 2008 by
a guy by the name of Satoshi
Nakamoto.
It was launched on January 3,
2009.
and it was based on sound money
principles.
In other words
the issuance of that particular
monetary network.
is predictable
It's diminishing inflation
and it has a fixed schedule
Um, Satoshi Nakamoto is not a
person, or at least no one's
been able to identify who that
person is.
They don't know if it's one
person
or a group of people
but that person
or persons
wrote the software
developed it, debugged it
and then put it out in the wild
but there is no owner
There is no
central person you can go to and
say, you have to change this.
There is no central person
Next line
So Bitcoin, as I mentioned, is
outside the traditional finance
system and uh
and what it is, it's a peer to
peer network.
In other words, I can send value
to anybody else in the world
who's on that network.
and I don't need any
intermediaries to do that.
I have their address, it's a
wallet. They may keep a wallet
address and I can send them.
a value Bitcoin
anytime, anywhere, 24/7.
These are very low
and the network is completely
secure. I'll, I'll walk you
through that.
Compare that to the existing
system where you
have your bank account
Money comes from your bank
account, either goes through
transfers, either through Visa,
Venmo, PayPal, name your
whatever intermediate you want,
that goes to their bank.
and then the money ends up
somehow in their account.
and there's lots of fees
in between all of that
That's the current system we
live in
So.
it's just when you think of
Bitcoin, think of it as a
separate
separate monetary network.
Do not consider it part of the
traditional finance network.
It's completely separate. So
what are the key characteristics
of Bitcoin?
Um,
as I said before, first of all,
it's virtual.
It's digital
It's borderless, and you can
transfer
value anywhere
There is no single point of
control, uh, as I mentioned, uh,
right now, there are
this is a little old as of
yesterday, there's 22,0828
nodes. So it continually this
its network is continuing to
grow.
22,000 nodes all over the world.
that are running the network
Every transaction
is private
but also publicly verifiable.
So what does that mean
What that means is
you have an address
You have a wallet that can has
Bitcoin.
You can send that to anybody
else's wallet.
They will have a public address
and you can send it to
And unless someone knows who
owns the wallet.
they don't know who's sending
money, but they do know that a
transfer has occurred because
the network would tell you.
Um, I'll get into more details
in a in a few minutes.
So.
this is the key, key issue of
Bitcoin. It is scarce.
There will only be
21 million Bitcoin.
in existence
Right now, about 19.6, 19.7
Bitcoin have already been mined,
and I will explain what that
but there were only ever be 21
million Bitcoin. No more can be
created.
out of thin air
It will always be
a maximum of 21 million Bitcoin.
So what does that mean
Well, let's talk about what a
Bitcoin is.
So the, the smallest unit of a
dollar is what?
Penny.
How many pennies are there in
the dollar?
$100 the smallest unit of a
Bitcoin is called a Satoshi.
How many s Satoshis
in a bitcoin
100, 100 million.
Satoshis
in one Bitcoin.
So what does that mean
So what that means is when the
value of
a Bitcoin
gets to be $1 million.
Satoshi will be worth a penny.
That's a good way of thinking
about it
That makes sense
So, all the transactions on a
Bitcoin network are auditable.
There's no hiding money, there's
no money laundering, there's no
every transaction ever occurs on
the network.
is auditible
goes on the blockchain. I'll
explain what that is.
Before we get to that
I wanted to share with you
if you look at all the total
money global assets in the
world.
Uh.
you'll note that on the bottom
right-hand side, the total
world's money supply is about
$129 trillion.
That includes
dollars
pesos, euros, bond.
any currency you can think of.
If you add it all up, it's about
$129 trillion in the world.
You've got bonds
around the world, $318 trillion
is stored in bonds.
Real estate people store their
long-term value in real estate.
370 trillion
Equities since the stocks.
$135 trillion
stored in stocks
Then people, some people put
their value in long-term assets
like art, cars, collectibles,
things of that sort. 27
trillion, and gold.
is the largest asset in of
itself, $22 trillion is the gold
market.
Today, Bitcoin is simply a small
$2 trillion market. It started
at 0.
16 years ago
It's already a 2 trillion
So if one can imagine
if so we're looking at about a 1
quadrillion.
dollars worth of value and
wealth.
in the world
today.
You can imagine only 1% of any
of that value flows into the
Bitcoin network. Only 1%.
and it could come from any of
these various areas.
That's $10 trillion
That could easily move into the
Bitcoin network, which would
make it a $12 trillion network.
So it's still very, very early.
very, very early in the Bitcoin
network.
uh program and process.
So it's be worth 6 times
where it is even today
And that's with only a 1%
transfer of funds from all these
other assets.
So if no other slide, and you
remember nothing else from this
presentation. I want you to
remember this one.
because I think this is the
critical aspect of why Bitcoin
came into it. So this slide
shows
uh, one of Bitcoin's most
powerful features.
its scarcity in the Fiat
network.
As I mentioned earlier, your
funds in the current set network
is a melting iceberg.
In the fiat world, central
banks, governments, companies,
they control the issuances.
So you're part of that network.
Every one of us is part of that
current network.
So you have your money
divided by
however much money the
governments choose to print.
So I had put the number infinity
because they will continue to
print.
You look at our current debt as
a government.
the US federal level
$37 trillion
How do you think they're going
to pay that off
They're gonna print more money
Why do you think
the current administration is
pounding on the Fed.
because they don't want to have
to keep borrowing at those
rates. He wants the pet to
reduce the interest rates so we
could pay it off with cheaper
money.
He wants to reduce the interest
rates, he's trying, he's begging
Powell.
to reduce the interest
So they're going to print money
no matter who's in office.
The current system is always set
up that way.
Now, you're going to the Bitcoin
network.
your money
the most that can be divided by
is 21 million.
No one can produce more
and um
so if you buy into the if you
buy into the Bitcoin network.
you will always own a percentage
of that network.
So even as the network grows,
you are always on the same
percentage. Imagine if you will,
if you were owning a part of
Manhattan Island.
and you bought a small block
and then all these other people
started coming into Manhattan,
and you got in early.
and everybody else starts buying
into Manhattan. You still on
that block.
Whether you do anything or not
to that block, the value of that
block's gonna go up because you
own a certain percentage of
Manhattan.
So now you think of the
Bitcoin as a cyber cybercity.
the most valuable cyber city in
in the world right now
And if you want a piece of it,
you will always on that same
percentage.
It will never be devalued
And in fact, it would be just
the opposite, it will grow.
So the Bitcoin network is
outside the current monetary
system.
Bitcoin protects your wealth
from inflation.
and it ensures your ownership
stake grows in value.
So think of it as a savings
technology.
So fiat currency, this is not to
put a a a bash on fiat currency,
the day to day stuff we use on a
regulars. It does have a, it
does have a purpose. It's good
for day to day exchanges, it's
good for
uh, goods and services, exchange
for value.
but it's terrible for saving for
the future.
terrible for long term
The up currencies by design are
a bad savings technology.
This is why people save in
stocks.
real estate
gold
those are longer term stores of
value.
Yes, you have the utility as
well.
But people would typically put
their money where they think
it's going to get better return
in the future rather than
keeping it in the bank at a 1 or
2% savings.
So currency
as we think of it, is not a good
long-term store of value.
So this is, I think, is the most
important slide if you
understand why the Bitcoin
network was created.
So
how is, how are bitcoins
created?
Bitcoin mining is how it's done.
So what is mining?
So miners are basically the
backbone of the Bitcoin, uh,
network.
A bundle transactions into
blocks.
And what they do is they add the
newest block to the chain of
prior blocks.
Hence the that's why they call
it the blockchain.
Actually, I think a better term
would have been used as a time
chain.
So every 10 minutes in the
Bitcoin network.
there are transactions going on
People are sending
Bitcoin from one wallet to
another. There are transactions
occurring
just as you would expect any
other
transaction to occur. Every 10
minutes, those transactions are
all compiled into a block.
The miners
in order to the miners what
they're doing is they are
bookkeepers.
and they're a security guards
Essentially what they're doing
is they are, they have to solve
a complicated cryptographic
puzzle.
and whoever
whoever solves that puzzle
first, it's a reward.
This happens every 10 minutes
and that reward
is newly created Bitcoin.
So the miners have an incentive
to protect the network
and to
bundle the transactions
So every 10 minutes, those
transactions are bundled into a
block.
that block
is then rewarded to the minor
that solves the puzzle
then now those transactions are
added to all
historical transactions before
it.
So every transaction that has
ever occurred on the blockchain
network is available and
visible.
That's what we meant by
transparency.
The entire trans the entire
history of the blockchain.
is
co-located and is distributed to
all the nodes.
They all have to agree, first of
all, that that was the correct
correct block to be added.
Then it gets added and so the
historical history from the
Genesis block to today.
is added. That's why it's called
a blockchain.
And that way it makes it
impossible to falsify or move
money around.
because if there's no historical
history of that transaction. You
can't just make money out of
thin air and move it.
The blocks will basically say
that's not a valid transaction,
it won't go. So,
that's how the mining process
works.
So what's this reward I was
talking about? You're saying
Bitcoin, the miners get a
reward.
Well, at the very early phase of
the network, when it first
started off in 2009, 2010
actually.
Um
the uh reward was 50 bitcoin.
every 10 minutes
That's what the miners were
competing for. So when they were
competing for solutions.
they would get, and they called
that epic one. And now every 4
years,
actually, it's not every 4
years, it's after, after 210,000
blocks have been created. 2010
10,000 blocks of transactions
have occurred.
The, uh, split the rewards in
half.
So the first having
came in 2012. So now the reward
for the minors was only 25
Bitcoin.
every 10 minutes
And then in 2016, it got cut in
half again.
So we are now in epoch 5.
in April of 2024.
was the next happening. Now the
reward for each and every uh
every 10 minutes.
of the minors
is 3.125 Bitcoin.
The current price of Bitcoin
today is about 120,000,
somewhere around there for
Bitcoin.
So that's about a 3000
$50,000 reward.
every 10 minutes
That's why they're mining
That's their, that's their
reward for mining this network.
So the program, as you can see.
the reward gets cut in half
every 4 years, approximately.
And what this does is it makes
the Bitcoin more and more
scarce.
and it also says that the um
that the miners have to work
harder to get fewer and fewer
Bitcoin.
But the value of the Bitcoin is
going up.
So there's still an incentive
for them to do that
So this is, if you look at
where we are in terms of how
many Bitcoins have already been
released.
Um
we are, like, this is a little,
actually further along that line
there it says you are here,
we're actually more closer to
that, uh, 2020 or 2025, but
we're over 19
9 million Bitcoin.
have been produced
since the inception
So the very last Bitcoin
will not be mined until the year
2140.
It's over 100 years from now
at which point the miners
will then, you'll say, well,
I'll have no more incentive to
handle transactions because
there's no more Bitcoin to mind.
That's not true
They'll still get the rewards
from the transaction fees.
that go about
on Bitcoin after the year 2140.
So,
so at this rate, right now,
given how many Bitcoin are being
produced. I've told you we were
in Epic 5 where we get 3.125
Bitcoin to produce every two
minutes. So basically that comes
out to be 450 Bitcoin per day
are now being produced.
uh, in the network
450 per day
and those are being gobbled up
immediately.
So I think I've already talked
about blockchain. I'm spending a
lot more time here. Essentially,
uh,
so like I said, every
transaction has ever occurred on
the Bitcoin network, it's stored
in the Bitcoin blockchain.
When the very first Genesis
block on January 3rd, 2009 to
today. So you can see the entire
historical transactions of every
transaction that's ever
occurred.
and it's visible to anybody.
Anybody can go in there and look
at it.
It's, it's shared across
thousands of computers.
Every transaction is verified.
and locked
Once the, once something is
added to the blockchain, it's
immutable.
It cannot be changed
If someone sends a transaction
to the wrong wallet?
and it gets confirmed
There's no FDIC you can call to
get it back.
You send the money to the wrong
wallet, it's gone.
Once it's confirmed on the
blockchain
You have responsibility for your
wall. There is no protection.
There is no third party to go
to.
The network is the network.
The protocol is the protocol.
Uh.
so the beauty of this is that
you have unprecedented security,
transparency, and immutability
with regards to the blockchain.
So
let's talk about its performance
So Bitcoin has had, you know,
like I said, it's been around
since 2009.
In the last 14 years, it's been
the best performing asset in 11
of the last 14 years.
and this is compared to S&P 500
total return index. If you
compare it to the S&P US
aggregate bond index, which is
the AGG
You compare it to the emerging
markets, Dow Jones emerging
markets. Compare it to the high
yield corporate bond index.
to the Dow Jones commodity
Index, and if you compare it to
just gold alone.
Bitcoin has been the best
performing asset in 11 of the
last 14 years.
Now, you see, if you look at
those years 2013, at the very
top, then it went from being the
best to the worst.
Early on, it was very volatile
It would, it would go up 200%
and then drop 70%.
So people stayed away from it. A
lot of concerns about that.
It was early in the networks
Um.
but it's maturing
It's maturing faster than most
of us are realized, and that's
why I wanted to bring this to
the committee's attention.
Next slide
So if Bitcoin were a company
and you compare it to other
companies, you see recently
overtook Alphabet, which is
Google.
$2 trillion asset
and the only companies ahead of
it
would be Amazon
Apple, Nvidia
Microsoft
and of course, GO
Gold is 22 trillion
Some people are referring to
Bitcoin as digital go.
which means there is
anticipation that
it will
overtake
gold as the number one asset in
the world.
If you look at the price of
Bitcoin on its birthday, January
3rd.
first year after a whole year
operating on networks.
Bitcoin was worth less than a
penny
You can see how it goes up each
year.
and in 160 years, it was worth
96,000.
Um.
that's not because
because the network, network is
growing.
People are starting to realize
that this is a place where I can
put my long-term value.
Next slide. So I'll look at the
compound annual growth rate. We
just talked to the uh State
Investment council and, and
they've been running about 7% a
year.
Uh, and I love what they're
doing, but I will tell you why.
it's a fallacy to think they're
doing a great job. They're doing
a good job.
Well, I'll tell you why they're
not doing a great job.
So if you look at the uh
from the very inception of
Bitcoin, it's um
compound annual growth rate has
been 99%, which is almost
doubling every year,
essentially.
Now, again, there was a lot of
volatility early on and not a
lot of people understood what it
is. A lot of people still don't
understand what it is.
However, if you invested on
$1000 in Bitcoin in 2010.
your investment will be worth
$1.07 billion.
but that sink in for a second
Now none of us did that because
none of us understood it, none
of us did. I wish I had known
that.
But even over the last 5 years,
the compound annual growth rate
in the last 5 years for Bitcoin
has been 62% annual.
Compare that to QQQ, which is
the tech stocks.
you know, the top 7
It's 16.47%. They've averaged
over the last five years. You'll
get the S&P 500
14.6%, silver, 14.5%, gold,
12.7%.
and bonds IEF is basically a
a 7 to 10-year Treasury bond
fund.
Those are the same things where
you put your money, so you want
to be safe.
You've actually lost 5%.
annually.
over the last 5 years
And I save thing called a bond.
That's what people don't
understand
So
again
best performing asset in the
last 5 years. I um
I put this quote up by a guy
named Jeff Booth. Jeff Booth is
a, uh,
he's kind of an entrepreneur,
he's an author, and he's a
thought leader. He wrote a book
called The Price of Tomorrow.
Why Deflation is the key to an
abundant future?
And uh basically what he says is
in the natural state of a free
market,
prices come down
When you think about that, and
you think about the technology
that we bring today in our
world.
and you think about the
competition in the free market.
The only way you're going to
beat out your competition is to
make something better.
and cheaper
It's a higher quality, lower
price. If you're going to
compete in a true free market.
So in a really, truly free
market. Prices should always
come down.
and in fact
Death Booth makes the argument
that eventually
the cost of production.
everything should basically go
down to the cost of production
plus a small profit.
in order to stay competitive
Everything.
if you're in a free market
So as I told you before, let's
look at
the current
where we live today
We don't live in a free market
which is why prices are going up
The current fiat system, the
monetary system we live under,
and this is hard for people to
wrap their head around.
It's not a free market
So in 2016, the nominal price of
a home
in dollar terms
was 288,000
back then
it would have cost you 664
Bitcoin to buy that house.
In 2020
the price of the home went up to
$328,000.
Bitcoin
you could have bought it for 45
In 2024
price is $434,000. This is
nominal houses in the United
States.
This is why young kids feel like
they can't buy homes anymore.
They can't compete, they can't
stay in this world.
But in the Bitcoin network, you
can now buy that house.
for 6 Bitcoin
or less
Eventually you'll be able to buy
a house for one day, and maybe.
one day you'll be able to buy it
for.1.
1/10 of a bitcoin
That's what a free market will
do.
That's why the Bitcoin network
exists.
gives people an opportunity to
save their value, to save their
energy for the long term.
and to be able to purchase
things because in the Bitcoin
network, pricings will always go
down.
But governments cannot inflate
it.
That's the beauty of the Bitcoin
network
Now here's
um
a chart. It looks complicated at
first but it screw it up. So the
left hand side is the Bitcoin
price and you see it go down
about 2013 at the timeline
underneath the the timeline.
and you see the price of Bitcoin
was about $100 on the left hand
side.
followed the black line, goes
all the way up to over $100,000
today.
And that's sort of been the
trajectory. So you can see it's
been pretty volatile.
The green, the green lines are
basically what's called the
money supply. This is the
world's money supply. It's a
year over year average. In other
words, year over year how much
money are they adding to the
system?
each year?
And, and then you see in the
2020 time frame for that green
line spikes up really big. That
was the COVID years.
but they were just putting money
like crazy.
They're putting a lot of money
out there
just printing money year over
year.
But if you look at the average
of the year over year money
supply, the interest.
I mean, the percentage on the
right-hand side.
You are sort of afraid on the
average to there. Guess what
that comes out to be.
7%
So
7% inflation rate.
is the true inflation rate
because 7% is what, how much
money they're printing.
on an annual basis
So when our wealth funds tell us
that they're making 7% and their
goal is to
to do 7%. Guess what?
They're just keeping up with
inflation
barely.
7% sounds great
But all that does is just just
falling.
that's just falling the money
supply.
uh inflation rate
That's it.
Nothing complicated. So, um
I think it's important for
people to understand
governments, print money.
pay off debts
They want to print, they wanna
pay off their debts with cheaper
money.
That's the game that we're in
and that's the game that
everybody is suffering from.
So what's happening
Um,
things are happening now, quite
a bit.
Just recently
just this year
3 states have created strategic
bitcoin reserves.
Um, New Hampshire did it
In May, Governor Sunuu signed
bill.
Arizona
did theirs and Katie Hobbs
signed her bail.
Um.
and Texas
create distributed Bitcoin
reserve.
and that was signed just
June of 20, 2025.
27 other states have introduced
some form of legislation.
We were actually one of them
there
I, I submitted a
the card reserve BL
in this uh session
I think I took it to the tax and
revenue Committee.
and it was killed, uh.
partisan about 4-3
When I approached the
group,
Bitcoin was then at $85,000.
for Bitcoin
Today it's 120
It's a 40% return in 6 months.
We already lost out on
But as I said before, we're
still very, very early in the
Bitcoin network. You have a
long-term view, you'll be fine.
What else is happening? You look
at all the
big institutional giants. Um,
Wall Street is now opened the
door a bit black rock, the
world's largest asset, as you
know, BlackRock owns $9 trillion
of assets under management
overall.
All they do is make money
and they influence the world
What they offer, they have the
largest Bitcoin.
uh, ETF
First ETF, by the way
uh, our laws changed in January
of 2024.
were securities and Exchange
Commission led by Gary Gensler.
finally submitted
and allowed
the ETFs to be approved.
That opened the floodgates
because an ETF is nothing more
than a
a stock wrapper around the
Bitcoin network.
because people don't understand
Bitcoin.
what they do understand or
exchange traded funds. They
understand stocks.
so they put a stock wrapper
around a Bitcoin. So these ETFF
funds basically all they do is
you tell them I wanna buy, I
wanna buy into the share of of
Bitcoin.
They go out and actually buy the
Bitcoin. You don't own the
bitcoin, Fidelity does or
BlackRock it or the other ETF
that of existing only. They they
actually own the bitcoin, but
you want a share of it.
and you can sell it tomorrow if
you want.
just like you do a stock
So they put a wrapper on the on
uh Bitcoin to make it easier for
traditional finance to get into
the game.
because they understand ETS.
They don't understand, but as
you can see,
$76 billion asset under
management.
and
less than
um
let's see here
I I have some numbers
It says
took gold ETFs approximately 22
years to reach.
$200 billion in assets under
management.
Bitcoin ETFs
already have $140 billion.
and it only took them 22 months.
not 22 years
So the smartest money managers
in the world understand what
this is.
and they're pouring into it very
rapidly.
Um.
nation states have also entered
into the fray.
things like El Salvador
has made it their national
currency.
Russia has indicated it will
create a Bitcoin reserve and the
Trump administration has
promised to create a strategic
Bitcoin reserve.
Right now, Senator Cynthia Lois
in Wyoming.
has already drafted the federal
legislation
to require the US to purchase 1
million Bitcoin over a five-year
period.
which cannot be used for 20
years.
She's looking at it as a savings
account.
for the long-term value
and at some point maybe using
that to pay off our national
debt.
So governments are moving in.
Wall Street's moving in
public companies now are holding
Bitcoin as a reserve asset as
well.
Um
If you look at uh
the total here, I know, I know
this chart's kind of hard to
read and so I won't go through
it in detail, but just, just to
say that right now over 125
companies.
now hold
Bitcoin on their on their
balance sheets.
worth about $91 billion.
and they have
847,000 Bitcoin, if you add it
all up.
So, almost nearly 4% of the
total Bitcoin supply.
so the adoption is happening.
This is just after quarter 2.
I just report came out just two
days ago, Harvard Endowment is
putting $116 million.
in the Bitcoin ETF.
Brown University has put 13
million.
um, UT Austin, 5 million.
University is trying to
recognize this maybe a good
endowment exercise as well.
And Michigan has tripled its
investment in Bitcoin ETFs.
Finally, there's a
group in Abu Dhabi
Apparently they're uh sovereign
wealth fund.
Uh, it's called
Mubadala, M U B A D A L A,
Mubadala Investment.
They have over $500 million in
invest in bitlod funds as of
quarter 1, 2025. $500 million.
So the world is catching up.
However, this is the interesting
aspect of all this. If you look
at uh
the way the Bitcoin network is
broken out.
57% of network is owned by
individuals.
because they're the first ones
in
They got it.
They figured it out
Approximately 18% of the Bitcoin
that's on the network is lost.
What do I mean by that?
Bitcoin's on the network.
Bitcoin hasn't been lost.
The people who own the wallets
lost their private keys
And like I said, there's no
FDIC.
It's gonna come and save you
You are responsible for your
money.
And if you can't retrieve it, no
one else can.
cause it's only a public key.
You're, you have a public key
and a private key.
and that gets into the details
of technology behind this.
It's Toshikal, whoever Satoshi
is.
is 5.2% of network.
This person that created the
network
created it
early mined it, had things
going, and then left and
disappeared.
It hasn't been touched. None of
the the social law has ever been
touched or any transactions have
ever moved.
since 20
since the creation, since 2010.
So he has a lot of network where
he or that group or that money
has never moved.
It probably won't, because no
one knows who it is.
So now the ETS, which came out
in 2024.
already owned on 3.9% of the
network corporations of about
3.6% and governments are the
last to come in.
and right now represent only
2.7% of the now. That's the
current distribution of the
Bitcoin.
So why we're institutions, the
government's slow to adapt.
to adopt Bitcoin
Well, I think it's
understandable
that, I mean, first of all, when
Bitcoin first came out, it was
volatile.
There was risk
Um
and there was a potential of
large losses.
sudden price swings
There was a lot of regulatory
uncertainty. There was no
regulation.
So the landscape for Bitcoin is
now
evolving and there is
regulatory, and I'll show you
that in a second.
where it could uh where where
it's now legal, and um
and the uncertainty has gone
away
There was there was a lot of
lack. There was a lot of concern
that Bitcoin.
does not generate cash
it doesn't have any dividends.
so it made it very difficult for
traditional finance people to
value it.
They don't understand the value
of it
So some argue that it lacks
intrinsic value compared to
stocks.
or bonds.
It's just a digital virtual
free fake internet.
Well, the value within the
network.
No one would say Facebook, which
is just
is not valuable
It's just a software piece
value. Networks have value.
So there are a lot of security
concerns initially.
Uh, people thought that Dure
could be.
hacked, it could be, you know,
it could be theft.
Um.
you already know you can't lose
your private keys, and if you do
that, you lose your Bitcoin.
custody solutions are now much
better in place. There's a lot
of maturity associated around
that.
Um.
the Bitcoin network has never
been hacked
never.
The network has never been
hacked.
People say, well
people have stolen people's
Bitcoin
So when you go to buy a Bitcoin,
you usually go to an exchange.
and there are several exchanges
out there
Coinbase
packing
river, swan, all of these are
exchanges, just like you go to
Fidelity to buy stock.
You go to an exchange in crypto
world to buy Bitcoin or any
other cryptos.
People who got their money
stolen.
was because they left it on the
exchange.
The exchange didn't protect
their Bitcoin.
because when it's on the
exchange, even though you may
have an account with it on the
exchange.
exchange
had been hacked, and people
stole their bitcoin from there.
The network
has never been hacked
It's important to understand
that differentiation.
So
um
and this was early on.
Those things have not occurred
in the last 5 years.
because uh uh more
attention paid to it, and now
with the regulatory stuff. So
there was also concern about the
environmental impact, and I'll
talk a little bit about that.
People say Bitcoin mining is
known for its high energy
consumption to mine Bitcoin and
I'll, I'll talk to that in a
second.
And another reason why
institutions and governments
were slow to adopt Bitcoin was
because of, you know, didn't
really fit their portfolio.
Uh, I was going to ask, uh, this
gentleman here.
when he was presenting for this,
the Stigmavestment Council, so
there were no commodities.
in their portfolio
No go
silver
wheat, whatever we might call
it. There are no commodities in
there.
And, and traditionally, that's
true because those are volatile.
and they have big market swings
and
they're, he said right up front
we're a conservative investment
portfolio. Understood.
So, um
so a lot of reasons why
institutions were hesitant to
get a lot of bitcoin because
they have conservative
investment portfolios, and they
don't want these wild swings.
They just can't support that.
And plus, you know
someone's gonna get fired if,
you know, they go down 10% cause
everyone's gonna complain. I
mean politician is gonna when
you run it down 10%.
So I understand that
Um.
so it's just not a blame, it's
just an understanding of their
priorities and their and where
they focus their attention.
But now we have market maturity,
um.
you know, at the early stages of
Bitcoin, you know, it wasn't
very mature.
Uh, the cryptocurrency market
was still not very well known.
And people didn't even know if
it was gonna last. They said,
well, governments will ban it.
It'll be done. This internet
money, this internet, well,
that's not gonna happen now.
namely 1 $2 trillion dollar
market that has disappeared.
ever and
anything that's reached $2
trillion is a real ad and it's a
$2 trillion going to $20
trillion.
and then eventually won
So
so we talk about the price
volatility, um.
Bitcoin is a high growth asset
It's uh
so I always tell people, if
you're going to invest, and none
of this is financial advice, by
the way, I'm not a financial
advisor, let's be clear.
This is just economic
information for people.
Um, I always tell people, if you
choose to invest in Bitcoin, put
a 4-year time frame on your, on
your investment.
Anybody who has bought Bitcoin
he own it for 4 years, isn't
very well.
But it's a 4-year time frame,
minimum.
minimum
cause it's a long-term
investment, not a short term. If
you're in for the trade, wanna
play
training games
that's not the place to do it
It's a 4-year minimum
investment. So for it is a good
portfolio or a good thing to
have for a long-term portfolios.
Um.
if it's a large amount of money,
I tell people.
take control of your asset
and largest, depending upon its
relative individuals, how much
is large, how much do they want
to keep on exchange, how much
um.
But if you own your own wallet
it's yours
The wallet is simply nothing
more than a pen drive. It looks
like a
pin drive. Basically, you put it
in your computer, you move your
Bitcoin to that.
you will be given a 24 word
private key.
That's your private
key.
You lose that private key, you
lose your bitcoin.
And you can keep that bit, you
can keep that 24 words in your
head. You can go anywhere in the
world and open it up and there's
your account.
You can transfer that money
anywhere
That's the beauty of the Bitcoin
network
Um.
so now, now that's sort of
explain sort of security
responsibility, self-custody
issues.
portfolios
We're now thinking about dipping
their toes into
Bitcoin.
Some of them are moving in a 1
or 2%, as I said, 1% of all
those different
areas of equity that I mentioned
earlier, start moving in, you're
going to see Bitcoin explode.
We're still early in the
adoption phase.
Um.
so
so the key developments here
is, you know, we've already
talked about decentralization.
I've showed you that the
institutions have gone from near
zero adoption to now almost uh.
full, uh, not full adoption, but
more and more people like
corporations and hedge funds are
moving into it.
The key, the real issue for
Bitcoin though is
all of the United States, people
are saying we don't really need
it here. That may be true, but
it's really helping
underdeveloped countries.
and people who live in uh
who underve economies with
hyperinflation.
Those poor people who are
working in their, their
currencies are being inflated
away.
They're moving, their economic
work into the Bitcoin network
because it's more secure.
and it can't be deflated away
and their value holds or goes up
in time.
So you're seeing a lot of
undeveloped countries moving.
Senator, we have several
questions for you. OK. I'm
almost done.
Thank you
So finally, um, so Bitcoin
represents over 50% of the total
crypto market.
and
people say the crypto market,
there are over 17,000
cryptocurrencies out there,
17,000.
I'm not talking about any of
those. I'm only talking about
Bitcoin.
And Bitcoin ever since 50% of
the entire market.
So that tells you already, it is
the dominant player.
In my mind, it's the only player
There are other, there are other
cryptos that have the utility.
Don't get me wrong
and I'm not here to
say good or bad, whatever
There's a lot where you're just
playing in a casino.
Bitcoin is not that one
So
um, so the last couple slides
here I just want to let people
know that we're talking about.
the regulatory uncertainty is is
going away.
There was a time where the
government
the Federal Reserve was thinking
about creating what's called the
Fed coin.
And the Fed coin was basically
gonna be essentially a dollar.
that was going to be digitized,
but now they could track it and
they can watch every purchase
you ever made.
And also they can control how
you could spend your money.
and basically tell you well you
can't spend it here, you can't
spend here. So basically it
would have been a controlled
currency.
China's doing it
Our, our government is now, um,
fighting against that. I think
it's already past the house. Uh,
it's now on the Senate for
discussion.
I believe the Fedcoin, there is
the Clarity Act, which is also
passed the House.
Clarity Act basically is the
definition of
all these different
cryptocurrencies and there was a
lot of confusion prior to the
new administration coming in.
uh Elizabeth Warren did not want
cryptocurrencies at all.
Carryinsor did not want
currencies at all, and so they
would never define
what was crypto, what was the
security, what was a commodity,
and so there was a lot of
uncertainty there, but they were
just suing companies without
giving them definitions.
So the Clarity Act is to clarify
what represents and put the
guardrails and the guide rails
in there. So that that act is
now being is happening. The
Genius Act has already passed.
uh, which is assigned in July
this year.
by President Trump
And essentially what that does
and the Carthag genus Act, we
sensor that it creates a digital
dollar.
not a fit coin
with the digital dollar that's
based, uh, that's either has
dollars behind it or treasury's
behind it.
I called the genius that really
because it is genius, because
now
countries outside the United
States, people who want their
currents who are having the
currency devalued, can now buy
the stable coin.
representing a dollar
and they could get outside their
own.
uh country's currency, and at
the same time, it allows them to
buy into our treasuries.
because what's happening right
now is
countries like China are not
buying our treasures anymore.
Russia doesn't want to buy
treasures because while we put
all kinds of, we stop them from
getting their money.
So they said we're not gonna buy
your dressing
This genius Act now allows
all the countries
to vie to the stable coin canal.
Bas basically they're actually
buying our, our treasure.
So it's another way of keeping
and maintaining the
joy of the, of the um
um dollar
So it keeps the dollar as as the
universal currency.
And then uh
executive order by by um
President Trump to create a
strategic bitcoin reserve. It's
still in play, as I mentioned,
Fuyloma is working that issue.
Uh.
so the last issue here was the
people think of energy is an
issue. It uses up a lot, it uses
up a lot of energy.
Uh, basically the Bitcoin that
we use is 120 terawatts on the
left hand side.
You see we have 160,000 terawatt
hours for the entire world.
50,000 of that terawatt hours is
wasted energy. The coel uses
120. You look on the right hand
side, Bitcoin's 120 terawatt
hours. Look at what it takes to
my end go and to refine gold.
It's almost double that. You
look at the current banking
system, uh, it's, it's more than
double that. And so you can see
that.
that the Bitcoin network is
actually less energy wise than
current.
Uh, the last threat, and I know
it's gonna come up is one.
quantum, it people are
concerned, well, this is a
digital currency.
There's a quantum threat there
and um and people are really
concerned about what we're gonna
do.
So we got, yeah, so.
coin has two different kinds of
c ry p to cryptography and I
said I wasn't know the details
of it.
But one is the ECC, the elliptic
curve cryptography, is for the
addresses.
Those are encrypted.
and then the minors use this
hashing algorithm.
and um
both are vulnerable to
quantum if they already have an
algorithm they think can can
make it, make him vulnerable.
So they looked at the timelines
of where quantum is, and it
could be as early as 3 to 5
years away.
before quantum can break the
power of Google thinks it's 5 to
10 years away, and a guy named
Adam Beck and Bosch James thinks
it's really 2 or something.
So anywhere between 3 to 20
years away before it becomes an
issue.
However
a lot of people are already
looking at quantum resistant and
quantum proofing the network.
Um.
if quantum does become a
reality.
if it happens
the existing banking system.
using the existing networks.
become more vulnerable
Data centers with private
information will become more
vulnerable.
All information will become
exposed.
It won't be just the Bitcoin
network that's at risk.
As I mentioned before, there's
$129 trillion over here in money
throughout the world.
By now it's only 2 trillion.
Where are they gonna go?
going out to the 129 trillion.
first.
You go to where where the money
is in the banks.
So if quantum becomes an issue
everything's gonna become
vulnerable, including national
security secrets.
So it is in everybody's interest
that they develop quantum
proofing capabilities, and that
work is already ongoing, and I
just found out yesterday that
there's a company in, in uh
Canada, that's already developed
a quantum proofing
way to maintain, to support, uh,
data centers.
protect their information in
data centers. So it's already
happening. So when this occurs,
there will already be uh ways to
protect it. Senator to wrap it
up with that.
So I'm not even talking about
the last one. This is just layer
two, so things aren't gonna be
go on top of the Bitcoin
network, and this is basically
my last slide.
I rolls we eventually to read
the Bitcoin, uh.
and they say the risk of Bitcoin
is not onlying any.
And so I just wanted to make
this available. Uh, I do have a
question and I, I'm thinking
about bringing some legislation
again, I probably will follow
the model that Arizona did.
and essentially they created a
Bitcoin reserve that that.
basically captures um
funds that have been sort of,
what's the term they use? I have
to go back and look at it, but
it's, it's basically
essentially um I'll, I'm gonna
follow Arizona's model and try
to bring that to the Mexico.
We're looking at that. Thank you
for that educational, um,
update.
and um I'm only gonna take two
questions cause we want to stay
on time for our next
presentation, and we have
representative Silva and
Representative Lupo.
Thank you, Chair. Uh, thank you,
Senator for the presentation.
Um, I, I just have a couple of
questions and
um,
perspective
I think my number one concern is
that cryptocurrency right now,
um
doesn't have any legal
protections. So, uh, so much
like Silicon Valley Bank in 2023
when we saw a number of uh
people at that bank lose their
assets because they were not
federally insured. Um, they're
just are so many risks when um
or if a an entity decides to put
in um some amount of capital
into this sort of currency.
that
you know, credit cards and debit
cards have legal protections if
something goes wrong. Um, these
sorts of digital assets don't.
and um for me that that's a huge
flag for me currently. Um, and I
disagree that, you know, that
cryptocurrency and digital
assets were um
more unstable, you know, back
when they first started in 2010.
I think we can look at 2022, 3
years ago, um, there was a huge
crash in digital currency and
the value. And so, um, that
gives me another pause on this,
um.
so that's those things are
really concerning to me and um
and I believe that we're still
in the wild west phase of
cryptocurrency and digital
assets, uh, in, in the world.
I think before the Federal
Reserve was established in 1913,
any bank in the United States
could create their own currency.
So there were like
there's like the silver dollar
uh floating around and, and
other currencies um until the
Federal Reserve was started. And
so I think we're in a similar
phase where you said, you know,
there's 17,000 different types
of coins and um and so to invest
in something that is still
wildly speculative and unstable.
Um, I, I don't think that would
be a wise decision for us to be
doing
Um.
and on top of it, I think the
State Investment council, I
think, already has the ability
to invest in Bitcoin and other
digital digital currencies if
they want to, so there's nothing
that's prohibiting us from uh
investing in those like ETFs and
other things.
So
one, so I have two questions.
What would prevent Nakamoto from
just creating more bitcoins
because that's not a certainty.
And two, what would prevent
these digital tokens that the
value of these digital tokens to
go down to 0 because there's
nothing that's really preventing
these tokens to have zero value.
Gold will never go down to a
zero value because it has other
uses, um, rather than just, um,
a currency value, um, oil has uh
more than just a currency
commodity value. It has
resources because we can use it
for other things. Um, this
digital token has no other value
other than what we're assigning
it right now. And so
in my view there's nothing that
stops it from just going to zero
at any point in time.
Thank you, Chair
Thank you, Representative. I
think Representative Woods was
going to speak, but he walked
out, so, um,
you were gonna give me your time
up to him. I was, do you want to
go there?
see I think I have some, you
know.
I think representative Silva
really covered a lot of the
things that I was thinking of,
and just the amount of
I know we're just talking about
Bitcoin today and I appreciate
that.
But the, but the advantage of
others, and they are, I mean,
there's millions, right? of
thousands at this point. Well, I
looked at a chat GBT and it was
a little higher. It depending on
the source of how many
different, or maybe it was the
potential of those those types
of um cryptocurrencies being
created, which is fine. I
understand the value at the,
the, the latter part of your
presentation and those um
those countries that need
stability and and that's really
where you, you know, it's a
driving factor here.
But there are blurred lines
between public policy and
personal enrichment, um.
drawing support and widespread
scrutiny because of the
political
um.
weight of what is going on with
um the executive, um.
um president we have right now
and some of his executive
decision making
So
I don't want to devalue I and no
means to value devaluing what
you presented today. I think
this was like a professorship
type presentation that was, it's
just far more educational than
anything, and I, I really
appreciate uh you doing that.
The other piece.
Um, and if we're going, I mean,
this is continuing, this is now,
this is present, and that is
your point. What
the, the crypto mining
and I guess particularly with
Bitcoin, they have an advantage
right now. Do they pay, what do
they pay into their productivity
or their
their um
their business as minors. What
do they pay? Do they pay taxes?
Are they taxed in any of these
states. I know here in, in New
Mexico, they tap in, they they
have contracts with oil and gas
and
and, and um
their mind. So when and then my
other point is, in Texas last
year when they were having um
blackouts or brownouts, rolling
blackouts or whatever, and they
needed to reduce their energy
usage.
They actually paid the money,
he's mining, uh, crypto mining,
um businesses to stop
production.
and they benefited from that,
higher than what they would have
done if they would have stayed
uh mining and using the energy.
This is huge. We have a huge
infrastructure issue with our
energy, um, energy
infrastructure and where we're
going with that with data
centers, with all, you know, we,
you know that you and I have had
those conversations, Senator,
Madam Chair, I just wanted to
put that forward. Is there
potential in taxing these
businesses to the point where,
because of the amount of cons of
energy consumption that we draw
some kind of royalty or
tax incentive. Thank you
Thank you for that. So,
let me, uh, first of all
SECS determine that Bitcoin is a
commodity.
And so as a commodity it is
taxed.
You buy a commodity, and you
sell it later. There's a capital
gain. So minors, when they sell
the Bitcoin because they have to
pay for their operating
expenses. Their operating
expenses essentially they have
to go out and buy these mining
machines, these mining machines
are the most advanced computers
available.
They try to go after, so they're
computing network that supports
Bitcoin network is the most
advanced network and the largest
computing network. So they, and
they do take energy, as I
mentioned before.
when they, when they earn a
bitcoin or get Bitcoin as a part
of their mining, and then they
turn around and sell it.
They have to pay taxes on that
just like you and I do
So there's, there's no
there's no free lunch
So they have operating expenses,
they operating expenses are the
electricity that they burn to
run the crypto to run the uh AI
miners, and then they have to
pay taxes on what they earn.
It's like, so that's the, that's
their operating model. So most
companies, most mining
companies, believe it or not,
now.
try to put their money
they try to get their energy
from the waste energy, as I
mentioned, there's 50,000
terawatt hours of waste. They
go, they want to go to like
um
Permian Basin
where they're just doing the
waste energy there, they want to
go ahead and take that waste
energy and convert that to
Bitcoin.
So I'm, I'm gonna cut this off.
This was really just an
educational discussion more than
a debate. So, um, thank you,
You're gonna take a five-minute
break so everyone can get their
